Public Administration and Information Technology 26
Holly Jarman
Luis F. Luna-Reyes    Editors 
Private Data 
and Public 
Value
Governance, Green Consumption, and 
Sustainable Supply Chains

 Public Administration and Information Technology
Volume 26 
 Series Editor 
 Christopher  G.  Reddick ,  San Antonio ,  TX,  USA 
 More information about this series at   http://www.springer.com/series/10796  

     

 Holly  Jarman •  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Editors 
 Private Data and Public Value 
 Governance, Green Consumption, 
and Sustainable Supply Chains  

 Public Administration and Information Technology 
 ISBN 978-3-319-27821-6    ISBN 978-3-319-27823-0 (eBook) 
 DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0 
 Library of Congress Control Number: 2016934042 
 Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London 
 © Springer International Publishing Switzerland  2016 
 This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of 
the material is concerned, speciﬁ cally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, 
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁ lms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information 
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology 
now known or hereafter developed. 
 The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁ c statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
 The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the 
editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors 
or omissions that may have been made. 
 Printed on acid-free paper 
 Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland is part of Springer Science+Business Media 
(www.springer.com) 
 Editors 
 Holly  Jarman 
 Department of Health 
 Management and Policy 
 School of Public Health
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI, USA 
 Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes
Department of Informatics 
University at Albany
Albany, NY, USA 

v
 Acknowledgments 
 This book is the result of the collective effort of a research team that collaborated 
over a period of more than 5 years. The book reﬂ ects our current understanding of 
the importance of technology and governance needed to create applications to open 
public and private data creating public value. This volume would not have been pos-
sible without the hard work and collegiality of the team; the series editor, Christopher 
Reddick; and the staff at Springer. This project has also received valuable support 
from a number of students, Weijia Ran, Nic dePaula, Haixin Liu, and James 
Michaelis. We are grateful to them for their assistance. 
 We want to especially thank Jana Hrdinova and Mahdi Mirdamadi Najafabadi, 
whose dedication and tireless effort have been instrumental for the completion of 
this book. Jana’s editorial support along the development of all the book was critical 
for its completion, and Mahdi’s effort during the last stages of the project was also 
very important for ﬁ nalizing this volume. 
 We are also grateful to all our institutions, the Graduate School of Management 
and George Perkins Marsh Institute at Clark University, the Universidad de las 
Americas-Puebla, the Center for Technology in Government, the Rockefeller 
College, and the College of Engineering and Applied Sciences at University at 
Albany. The in-kind and ﬁ nancial support from these institutions made it possible 
for us to build on the work of the I-Choose team and to continue our productive col-
laboration. The research reported in this book was also supported in part by the 
US-NSF (Grant No. 0955935), CONACYT-Mexico (Grants No. 84082, 117118, 
and 133670), and the Fulbright Commissions in Mexico and Canada. The views and 
conclusions expressed in book paper are those of the authors alone and do not nec-
essarily reﬂ ect the views of Fulbright, CONACYT, or NSF. 
 Editors 
 Holly Jarman 
 University of Michigan 
 Luis F. Luna-Reyes 
 University at Albany 

     

vii
 Contents 
  1  Public Value and Private Organizations ............................................... 
 1 
 Holly  Jarman ,  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes , and  Jing  Zhang 
  2  Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture 
to Support Sustainable Consumption and Sustainable 
Supply Chains.......................................................................................... 
 25 
 Jing  Zhang ,  Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Giri  K.  Tayi , 
and  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes 
  3  Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public 
and Private Actors .................................................................................. 
 47 
 Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes ,  Deborah  Lines  Andersen ,  David  F.  Andersen , 
and  Holly  Jarman 
  4  Labeling, Certification, and Consumer Trust ...................................... 
 67 
 Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Holly  Jarman ,  David  F.  Andersen , 
and  Joanne  S.  Luciano 
  5  Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certification 
and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block ............................ 
 89 
 Joanne  S.  Luciano ,  Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Weijia  Ran ,  Nicolau  Depaula , 
 Holly  Jarman ,  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes ,  Giri  K.  Tayi ,  Jing  Zhang , 
 Jana  Hrdinova ,  Deborah  Lines  Andersen ,  David  F.  Andersen , 
and  Theresa  A.  Pardo 
  6  Privacy, Confidentiality, and Security Challenges 
for Interoperable Data Platforms in Supply Chains ............................  109 
 Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Mahdi  Mirdamadi  Najafabadi ,  Giri  K.  Tayi , 
and  Theresa  A.  Pardo 
  7  Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: 
A Convention-Based View ......................................................................  129 
 Francois  Duhamel ,  Sergio  Picazo-Vela ,  Isis  Gutiérrez-Martínez , 
and  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes 

viii
  8  Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support 
Disclosure of Product Data in North America .....................................  147 
 Holly  Jarman ,  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes , and  Theresa  A.  Pardo 
 Appendix A: Methodology .............................................................................  169 
 Index .................................................................................................................  201 
Contents

ix
 Authors’ Biographies 
 Mahdi  M. N.  Abadi   Mahdi Mirdamadi NajafAbadi is an informatics PhD student 
and a graduate of the MPA program at the University at Albany, State University at 
New York. He has earned his bachelors in software engineering from the University 
of Tehran (2004), followed by MBA from Sharif University (2007), Tehran. He has 
over 8 years of experience working in an information security ﬁ rm and as a manage-
ment consultant for information technology, organizational development, and busi-
ness process reengineering. His research interests include government information 
strategy and management, sociotechnical systems, data analytics, computer model-
ing, and simulation for education and decision making.  
 David  F.  Andersen   David F. Andersen is O’Leary and distinguished service profes-
sor of public administration, public policy, and information science at the Rockefeller 
College, University at Albany. His work centers on applying system dynamics, sys-
tems thinking, and information technology approaches to problems in the public, 
not-for-proﬁ t, and private sectors, especially using group modeling approaches. He 
has served as a technical consultant to public and not-for-proﬁ t agencies in the fed-
eral, state, and local sectors as well as corporate clients in North America and 
Europe. Most recently he has been working on information standards for bringing 
sustainable, fair labor, and environmental friendly products to market in the NAFTA 
region as part of his Carlos Rico Fulbright Award for 2010–2011. 
 Deborah  L.  Andersen   Deborah Lines Andersen is professor emeritus of informa-
tion studies and informatics at the University at Albany, State University of 
New York. She received her PhD from the University at Albany in 1996 and has 
taught statistics, research design, and information science courses at UAlbany at 
both master’s and PhD levels since then. She served as the codirector of the 
Information Science PhD program for a number of years, advising cohorts of PhD 
students in informatics and chairing PhD dissertations in the program. Her research 
focuses on information policy locally, nationally, and internationally and on public 

x
libraries and librarianship. In 2010–2011 she received a Fulbright scholarship to 
study in Canada and Mexico, concentrating her research on information ﬂ ows along 
supply chains and the I-Choose project.  
 Nicolau  DePaula   Nic DePaula is a PhD student in information science at the 
University at Albany, State University of New York. His research addresses issues in 
the area of e-government, information security, and risk analysis. Mr. DePaula also 
holds a degree in geography and urban planning from the University at Albany and 
has worked in multiple IT and research positions for the public and private sector.  
 Francois  Duhamel    Francois Duhamel is professor in the Department of 
International Business in the School of Business and Economics at the Universidad 
de las Américas Puebla in México since 2006. He received his master’s degree in 
research in strategic management in Paris X-Nanterre and his PhD in business 
administration with a specialization in strategic management in 2006 from HEC 
Paris. His main research interests include commercialization of innovations, strate-
gic outsourcing, and international supply chain management. He is a member of the 
Mexican National Research System. His research has been published in journals 
such as  European Management Journal ,  Management Decision ,  Technology 
Analysis & Strategic Management ,  Competitiveness Review , and  Transforming 
Government: People, Process and Policy . He also authored books, books chapters, 
and conference proceedings articles in those areas.  
 Isis  Gutiérrez-Martínez   Isis Gutiérrez-Martínez is a professor in the Department 
of Business Administration at Universidad de las Américas Puebla in México since 
2006. She holds a BS in computer science from Campeche Tech and a MS in busi-
ness planning and regional development from Mérida Tech in México. She also 
holds a MS in management of technological and organizational advancements from 
University of Versailles-Saint Quentin, France, and a PhD in management science 
from the Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers in Paris, France. She is a mem-
ber of the Mexican National Research System. Her research interests focus on 
human resource management and information technology management. She is an 
active participant and contributor at international journals and conferences in her 
ﬁ eld. Her research has been published in journals such as  Government Information 
Quarterly ,  Competitiveness Review , and  Transforming Government: People, 
Process and Policy . She also has authored books, books chapters, and conference 
proceedings articles in the aforementioned topics. Her research has received several 
awards and has been funded by several grants including CONACYT-Mexico 
(Mexican National Council of Science and Technology) and AECID-Spain (Spanish 
Agency of International Cooperation for Development). 
 Jana  Hrdinová   Jana Hrdinová is an associate director at the Ohio State University 
Center for Real Estate. Prior to coming to the center, Jana was a program associate 
at the Center for Technology in Government at the University at Albany, SUNY, 
where she was responsible for project development, planning, implementation, 
Authors’ Biographies

xi
management, analysis, and writing. Prior to entering the academic world, Jana 
worked for US Senator (Minnesota) Mark Dayton as deputy director for constituent 
services concentrating predominantly on immigration issues. In addition to assist-
ing constituents with problems regarding federal agencies, Jana conducted outreach 
to Minnesota’s African-immigrant and African-American communities and advised 
Senator Dayton on immigration, worker’s compensation, and postal service policy 
issues. Jana holds a master of arts in political science and a bachelor of arts in inter-
national relations from the University of Minnesota. 
 Holly  Jarman  Holly Jarman is a political scientist who studies the effects of market 
regulation, particularly cross-border regulation and international trade and invest-
ment agreements, on health and social policies. Within this broad topic, her publica-
tions address questions related to the relationship between tobacco control regulation 
and the world trading system, the regulation of cross-border health markets in the 
European Union, cross-border collaborations to promote innovative public health 
and environmental regulation, and the impact of cross-border patient mobility on 
global health governance. She received her PhD in political science from the London 
School of Economics and Political Science (LSE) for comparative research into the 
use of non-trade issues, including environmental protections and labor standards, as 
weapons and incentives in EU and US trade policy. 
 Joanne  Luciano  Dr. Joanne Luciano is the president and founder of Predictive 
Medicine, Inc., a Boston-based research and development consultancy, and a visiting 
research scholar at the Center for Cognition, Communication, and Culture at 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. Dr. Luciano is a pioneer in the use of computational 
methods in clinical research in psychiatry, the application of semantic technologies 
to healthcare and the life sciences, and interoperable data architecture for certiﬁ ca-
tion and inspection to support sustainable consumption and supply chains that build 
trust among public and private actors. An internationally recognized multidisci-
plinary scientist, her research focuses on social and computational technologies that 
enable the integration and reusability of research artifacts. She cofounded the ﬁ eld of 
Health Web Science, which provides a foundation to study the role of the Web in all 
aspects of the healthcare ecosystem. Luciano is currently working to promote the 
adoption of the Financial Industry Business Ontology (FIBO), which provides a 
common conceptual model to enhance interoperability, transparency, risk exposure 
assessment, and regulatory compliance across the ﬁ nancial industry worldwide.  
 Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes   Luis Felipe Luna-Reyes is an associate professor of informat-
ics at the University at Albany in Albany, NY. He holds a PhD in information sci-
ence from the University at Albany, and he is also a member of the Mexican National 
Research System. His research focuses on electronic government and on modeling 
collaboration processes in the development of information technologies across 
functional and organizational boundaries. His research interests are related to areas 
such as interorganizational collaboration, information sharing, success of govern-
ment-wide Web sites, and information policy to promote economic exchange in the 
Authors’ Biographies

xii
NAFTA region. He is the author or coauthor of articles published in  Government 
Information Quarterly ,  European Journal of Information Systems ,  International 
Journal of Electronic Government Research ,  Gestión y Política Pública , and  System 
Dynamics Review , among others. 
 Theresa  A.  Pardo  Theresa A. Pardo is the director of the Center for Technology in 
Government, University at Albany, State University of New York (SUNY), and a 
research associate professor at the Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy 
and the College of Computing and Information. Dr. Pardo serves as Open NY Policy 
adviser to New York State’s Governor Andrew Cuomo, as a member of the National 
Advisory Committee for the US Environmental Protection Agency, and as president 
of the Digital Government Society. Her work has been funded by the US National 
Science Foundation (NSF), the Social Science and Humanities Research Council 
(SSHRC) of Canada, the Library of Congress, the World Bank, the United Nations, 
Microsoft, SAP, and numerous governments at all levels, among others. 
 Sergio  Picazo-Vela   Sergio Picazo-Vela is a professor in the Business 
Administration Department at the Business School of the Universidad de las 
Américas Puebla, and he is member of the Mexican Research System. He received 
his PhD in business administration from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale. 
His research interests include e-government, e-commerce, information technology 
outsourcing, and social media sites. His research has been published in different 
peer-reviewed journals such as  Government Information Quarterly ,  Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems ,  Computers in Human Behavior , and 
 Competitiveness Review . His research has also been published in proceedings of 
different conferences such as the Annual International Conference on Digital 
Government Research, Annual Meeting of the Decision Sciences Institute, and 
AMCIS Doctoral Consortium. Dr. Picazo-Vela has participated writing chapters 
for books published by Mexican and International Publishers and writing opinion 
articles for digital and traditional newspapers. Finally, he has experience develop-
ing IT solutions to create value at organizations.  
 Weijia  Ran   Weijia Ran is a PhD candidate in informatics at the University at 
Albany. Her research interests include sociotechnical systems, data management, 
analytic-based decision making, modeling and simulation, research methodologies, 
and sustainability. 
 Djoko  S.  Sayogo   Dr. Sayogo is senior lecturer in the Department of Economics and 
Business at the University of Muhammadiyah at Malang (UMM), Indonesia. Djoko 
currently served as the director at the Center for Economics, Business and 
Entrepreneurships Development at the Department of Economics, University of 
Muhammadiyah at Malang. Djoko works on the CTG team that aims to develop a 
proof of concept for global information systems using semantic Web technologies 
based on OWL ontology, called I-Choose. He is a former Fulbright presidential 
scholar from Indonesia. 
Authors’ Biographies

xiii
 Giri  K.  Tayi   Giri Kumar Tayi is a professor of management science and informa-
tion systems at the State University of New York at Albany. His research and teach-
ing interests are interdisciplinary and span the ﬁ elds of information systems, 
operations management, and operations research. He serves or has served as SE and 
AE on the editorial boards of academic journals such as  Information Systems 
Research ,  IEEE Intelligent Systems ,  IEEE Computing Now ,  Decision Sciences , 
 ACM Journal of Data and Information Quality ,  Information Technology 
Management ,  Information Systems Frontiers ,  Information and Management , and 
 International Journal of Shipping and Transport Logistics . He has over 55 refereed 
publications and 65 conference proceedings. His papers have appeared in  Operations 
Research ,  ISR ,  Management Science ,  MIS Quarterly ,  Quantitative Marketing and 
Economics ,  IEEE Transactions ,  Networks ,  Naval Research Logistics ,  EJOR , 
 Journal of Combinatorial Optimization ,  INFORMS Journal on Computing ,  Journal 
of Computer Security ,  Government Information Quarterly , and  Communications of 
the ACM . 
 Jing  Zhang    Jing Zhang is an associate professor of management at Clark 
University. Her research interests focus on interorganizational information and 
knowledge sharing, organizational impact of technology and innovation, and the 
role played by information technology to support sustainable consumption and 
sustainable supply chain. Her work is supported by National Science Foundation 
and Mosokowski Institute of Public Enterprises. Her publications appear in 
 European Journal of Information Systems ,  Government Information Quarterly , 
 Public Performance and Management Review , and  Information Technology and 
Management , among others. Professor Zhang holds a PhD in information science 
from the University at Albany, State University of New York.     
Authors’ Biographies

1
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_1
 Chapter 1 
 Public Value and Private Organizations 
 Holly  Jarman ,  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes , and  Jing  Zhang 
 Abstract   The ﬁ rst chapter of the book introduces our key question: how can private 
actors be incentivized to share their data in a way that promotes the public value of 
the information disclosed? We are interested in whether and how these different 
organizations can be encouraged by governments and other interested actors to 
share the information that they hold. The means by which this might be accom-
plished—particularly how these private actors might be encouraged to collaborate 
among themselves and with governments—is a major focus of the book. The chap-
ter explores the concept of public value in the context of data disclosure by private 
organizations, using empirical evidence from the I-Choose project. We argue that 
while disclosing product information can enhance the public sphere, information 
disclosure alone is not enough to guarantee this. Disclosure must be supported by 
innovative governance mechanisms. The chapter explains why disclosing private 
product data is considered valuable by some policymakers and advocates and con-
siders the barriers to disclosing product information.  
 Keywords   I-Choose •  Public value •  Smart disclosure •  Open data 
1.1  Introduction: The Puzzle 
 As our ability to electronically collect, manipulate, and publish large amounts of 
data increases, making private information available to the public is increasingly a 
viable part of what governments can and should do to fulﬁ ll their mandates. 
 H.  Jarman (*) 
 Department of Health Management and Policy ,  School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan ,  Ann Arbor ,  MI ,  USA 
 e-mail: hjarman@umich.edu 
 L. F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: lluna-reyes@albany.edu 
 J.  Zhang 
 Graduate School of Management ,  Clark University ,  Worcester ,  MA ,  USA 
 e-mail: jizhang@clarku.edu 

2
 There is much current interest in the power of information disclosure to improve 
our lives: calls for “open government” argue that the routine disclosure of informa-
tion about how government works and what it is doing can support more effective 
public oversight. Discussions about the power of “big data”—very large datasets 
that require innovative methods of processing, curation, and dissemination—often 
focus on ways in which big data might be used to tackle intractable problems in our 
society such as crime or pollution. “Smart disclosure”  policies , promoted by the 
Obama Administration in the United States, promise to deliver beneﬁ ts for the soci-
ety by disclosing information held on individual citizens or consumers back to the 
source. 
 These debates have implications for many areas of policy, including healthcare 
and public health, energy and the environment, and banking and ﬁ nance. 
Governments have taken some important ﬁ rst steps by adopting open  government 
strategies and policies ; by fostering research on the management, dissemination, 
and interoperability of big data; and by applying the principles of “smart disclo-
sure” to their own records. 
 But a great deal of valuable information that could be used to solve societal prob-
lems is not held by governments—it is held by private organizations. It is not pub-
licly available and is often held in proprietary systems. It may, in fact, be a 
commercial secret. Collecting this information bears a cost, and revealing it to oth-
ers may be perceived as costly as well. In the case of environmental sustainability, 
for example, governments hold information about emissions and pollution. They 
can disclose information such as which ﬁ rms have broken the rules on emissions or 
pollution, which sites are polluted, and what funds have been dispersed as part of 
government-funded cleanup initiatives. But when it comes to individual consumer 
choices that affect the environment, businesses hold much of the information that 
consumers need in order to make decisions—particularly about factors that con-
sumers cannot directly observe, such as how “green” a ﬁ rm’s production process is. 
 Many argue, therefore, that there are important beneﬁ ts to disclosing privately 
held data. First, disclosure—if done correctly—should allow individual members of 
the public better access to, and control over, their own data. For instance, patients 
would be able to access their own health data, or the customers of energy companies 
would be able to review their energy consumption. 
 Second, it is argued that individuals will act on this new information, making 
their actions more efﬁ cient or valuable for either themselves, the public, or both 
(Sunstein,  2012 ). Upon viewing their health data, patients might have a better sense 
of their own health and choose to make positive changes in their lifestyle.  Energy 
company customers might ﬁ nd ways to reduce their electricity consumption. Having 
access to production practices, consumers may choose to buy products that respond 
to their values related to health and economic or environmental sustainability. 
 Third, it is argued that better aggregate public awareness and scrutiny of what 
governments, businesses, and other organizations do, including public interest 
organizations and the media, will lead to demands for better behavior. On view-
ing their health data more regularly, patients might become aware of a need to 
reduce healthcare costs or to obtain more comprehensive health insurance coverage. 
H. Jarman et al.

3
On monitoring their energy usage, customers might demand more information 
about renewable sources of electricity or regulation that makes it easier for them 
to switch providers. Public awareness of production practices in the food or fash-
ion industries may promote more responsible corporate practices. 
 Finally,  policymakers often argue that disclosure will lead to increased opportu-
nities for innovation and economic growth based on the disclosed data—that new 
industries will emerge to ﬁ lter and process the data on behalf of consumers. This 
can be seen in the many small online services created in 2013 promising to help 
individuals and families in the United States navigate new health insurance portals 
that present the users with large quantities of information about insurance plans. 
It can also be seen in new information intermediaries like  GoodGuide , which offers 
consumers information about product impacts on health, the environment, or 
society. 
 This leads to our key question: how can we incentivize private actors to share 
their data in a way that promotes the public value of the information disclosed? This 
question needs unpacking a little. Our category of “private actors” involves not only 
businesses and industry but also  nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) . We are 
interested in whether and how these different organizations can be encouraged by 
governments to share the information that they hold. The means by which this might 
be accomplished—particularly how these private actors might be encouraged to col-
laborate among themselves and with governments—is a major focus of this book. 
Finally, although we choose to remain optimistic about the potential for information 
disclosure as a policy tool, we also point out weaknesses in the assumptions that lie 
behind such disclosure policies. Disclosure does not guarantee that public or ﬁ rm 
behavior will change, and the effectiveness of disclosure policies is sensitive to the 
governance tools that are employed in parallel. 
 We argue in this book that disclosing privately held data can have a public value 
under certain conditions. In our deﬁ nition, a policy outcome that has public value 
satisﬁ es two criteria. It is (1) in line with what adds value to the public sphere, (2) 
as determined by a fair and transparent consultative process that aligns agency goals 
with democratic mandates. (This deﬁ nition is unpacked further in Sect.  1.3 .) Our 
book explores the necessary and desirable conditions under which information dis-
closure can produce public value—in particular, we discuss the governance condi-
tions and mechanisms required to produce policy outcomes with public value. We 
then explore the potential for connecting this public value with the interests of pri-
vate organizations, explain the roadblocks to doing so, and outline some ﬁ rst steps 
for overcoming them. 
 We approach our core question through a case study of coffee supply chains in 
North America. Coffee is a commonly traded product that seems relatively simple, 
yet has a number of complex supply chains. We focus on coffee that is grown in 
Mexico and sold in Canada and the United States, three countries that are governed 
by a shared trade regime but with very different regulatory environment, governance 
styles, levels of economic development, and patterns of information technology use. 
Importantly for our purposes,  coffee is often connected to key, nonpecuniary values, 
such as environmental sustainability and worker and human rights. Coffee is available 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

4
in many different types—the bag of coffee you buy in the store might claim to be 
organically or shade-grown or might be certiﬁ ed as “fair  trade .” In  practice, there is 
no feasible way for the consumer to verify these claims—they must rely on truthful 
reporting by producers, distributors, retailers, and certiﬁ ers. 
 We use our coffee case study to think about how private data disclosure might 
help make supply chains more sustainable. We explore to what extent disclosing 
information about how coffee was produced using emerging technologies can sup-
port green purchasing decisions by consumers and ultimately change the behavior 
of other actors in the supply chain. We ﬁ nd that governments cannot take a backseat 
in this process. In order for consumers to trust the data that is disclosed, we need to 
formulate new governance mechanisms that are a good ﬁ t with the age of big data. 
Disclosure alone will not sufﬁ ce—creating more sustainable supply chains requires 
addressing classic questions of governance about the independence of organiza-
tions, accountability, and transparency. 
 The next sections in this chapter discuss these core concepts and debates in more 
detail. First, we introduce our case study—the I-Choose project—as an example of 
private data  disclosure with the potential to create public beneﬁ ts. Second, we 
explore the concept of public value in the context of a vibrant scholarly debate about 
its deﬁ nition and uses. In particular, we focus on what  public value means in the 
context of data disclosure and relate it to the use of new and emerging technologies. 
Third, we discuss reasons why private organizations in the supply chain might 
choose to disclose data, before discussing barriers to such disclosure. Finally, we 
summarize our argument and lay out the road map for the rest of the book.  
1.2  The  I-Choose Project 
 The ﬁ ndings and conclusions presented in this book are drawn from a  National 
Science Foundation funded study that examined the coffee supply chain to better 
understand the requirements and impacts of information disclosure on ﬁ rm and con-
sumer behavior. Our interdisciplinary and international research team combined 
lessons from the disciplines of information science, management, political science, 
business, and computer science to address this question. Although this study focused 
on one consumer product, we believe that the lessons we draw from it are broadly 
applicable, with implications in areas such as environmental policy, healthcare, 
trade, ﬁ nance, and food safety. 
 Our project focused on one commodity— coffee that is grown in Mexico and 
sold in Canada and the United States. Coffee itself seems like a simple product—
because it is a commodity rather than a product with parts or ingredients sourced 
from many different countries. A bag of coffee beans bought in your local store 
has a relatively simple set of possible supply chains. Growers cultivate coffee 
plants, intermediary organizations process coffee cherries into green coffee beans 
(in Mexico, growers are often organized into coffee cooperatives), and exporters 
sell green beans to roasters (sometimes through brokers). Roasters—from large 
H. Jarman et al.

5
multinational ﬁ rms such as Nestle to small independent businesses—turn green 
beans into the coffee beans that we recognize, roasting and packaging them and 
selling them to retailers, from large supermarket chains to smaller independent 
stores. However, how coffee is cultivated, produced, distributed and sold raises 
important social and environmental questions, answers to which are often not vis-
ible to consumers buying coffee in stores. 
 Coffee is one of the main crops  in Mexico . Given its production volume as well 
as the income derived from its export, coffee is a strategic crop for the country 
(SAGARPA,  2012 ). Mexico has over 280,000 coffee  producers , of which over 
200,000 are smallholders—small farms producing a mixture of crops for consump-
tion and income (Fridell,  2007 ). The United States is the main market for green 
coffee grown in Mexico, with 70 % of coffee beans being grown for export. Ninety- 
eight percent of the coffee produced in Mexico is the higher-quality Arabica coffee, 
with the rest being robusta coffee (USDA Foreign Agriculture Service,  2011 ). 
 Production for export can  be  damaging, and variations in the world price of cof-
fee can have serious social consequences. Some of the poorest areas of  Mexico with 
some of the largest indigenous populations, such as Chiapas and Oaxaca, are 
Mexico’s most signiﬁ cant coffee producers. Due to more industrialized farming 
methods and planting programs sponsored by major international companies, global 
coffee production  is now often greater than global consumption, causing prices to 
drop. Not only that, but when global demand for cheaper robusta coffee increases, 
the price of the more expensive, better-quality Arabica beans grown by most 
Mexican producers drops. When the price of Arabica drops, Mexican coffee grow-
ers suffer. Coffee  prices can be very volatile, but because of the time, investment, 
and labor involved in creating a coffee plantation, growers cannot easily switch to 
another source of income, at least not without losing their entire investment. 
 The result of this instability  can  be devastating for the communities where coffee 
is produced. Mexico’s decision to sign the  North American Free Trade Agreement 
in 1995 has had the effect of increasing the ability of large multinational businesses 
to establish themselves in Mexican markets. In agriculture, large international agri-
business and processed food retailers often displaced local growers in serving 
domestic consumers. Many coffee growers stopped producing mainly for domestic 
markets and now produce mainly for export. The migration caused by the reconﬁ g-
ured North American business environment—internal, from rural areas to cities, 
and external, from Mexico to the United States—has had disrupting effects on the 
labor supply that coffee growers rely on to harvest their crops. 
 Coffee cultivation raises  environmental concerns , too. The creation of industrial 
coffee plantations can result in widespread deforestation with subsequent conse-
quences for soil quality and the diversity of ﬂ ora and fauna, threatening populations 
of insects and birds. But more traditional forms of growing coffee as part of the 
 natural forest ecosystem , also called  shade-grown , do not involve such deforestation 
and are seen as highly beneﬁ cial to biodiversity conservation in  tropical forest eco-
systems (Rice, Ward, Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center, & Natural Resources 
Defense Council,  1996 ). Industrial coffee plantations are also more likely to use 
large quantities of chemicals—such as  pesticides and fertilizers —in growing their 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

6
coffee. These chemicals can contaminate the soil, further disrupt ecosystems, and 
ﬁ nd their way into the groundwater with real consequences for local communities. 
 Because of the social and environmental consequences of coffee production, 
alternative manufacturing procedures and trading systems have emerged that try to 
address these problems. Coffee can now be bought in several different varieties that 
signal that its production followed certain societal and/or environmental values. 
 Coffee can be certiﬁ ed  as  “fair trade,” meaning that in the least it guarantees a mini-
mum price to producers that is above the price that a completely open market would 
provide, and at most the pledge that the coffee was produced in a way that was 
sustainable and ethical, and invests in the communities that created it. Coffee can 
also be labeled as “ organic ,”  indicating that it was produced without using harmful 
chemicals, or “shade-grown,” meaning that it was produced via traditional methods 
that avoid deforestation rather than industrial farming methods. The stated purpose 
of many of these certiﬁ cation systems is to create a more sustainable coffee trade 
that protects the environment, provides sustainable incomes, and allows coffee- 
growing communities to ﬂ ourish. 
 A signiﬁ cant proportion  of  Mexican coffee cooperatives produce coffee that falls 
under one or more of these categories. Mexico is the world’s largest producer of 
organic coffee, using 10 % of the land to produce this category of coffee (SAGARPA, 
 2012 ). Eighty-ﬁ ve percent of organic coffee produced in  Mexico  is intended for 
export, with most of the organic coffee in Mexico produced in Oaxaca and Chiapas 
(USDA Foreign Agriculture Service,  2011 ). On the other hand, Mexico was instru-
mental in the creation of the ﬁ rst fair-trade seal, Max Havelaar, in 1988, and has 
played a key role in promoting these practices since then through large cooperatives 
such as UCIRI (Fridell,  2007 ). Additionally, there are currently about 37,500 acres 
of land producing  Rainforest Alliance certiﬁ ed coffee (Rainforest Alliance,  2015 ). 
This amount is expected to increase in an important way by 2020 because of current 
partnerships between the Rainforest Alliance and Nestlé as part of the Nescafé plan 
(Nescafe  n.d. ; Rainforest Alliance  n.d. ). 
 These differences in how  coffee can be  produced, and how consumers perceive 
them, lie at the core of the I-Choose project. Customers can now go into most big 
grocery stores and buy coffee labeled  as  fair trade. But the “fairness” of that coffee, 
the criteria required for it to receive its fair-trade label, can vary a great deal. The 
customer may want to know information about how the coffee was produced and 
distributed, but cannot directly observe these product characteristics (see Chap.   2 in 
this volume and also Sayogo, Zhang, Pardo et al.,  2014 ; Sayogo et al.,  2015 ; Sayogo 
et al.,  Forthcoming ; Sayogo, Zhang, Liu, Picazo-Vela, & Luna-Reyes,  2014 ). The 
consumer most likely ends up making a choice based on what they can observe—
the price—and what they see on the packaging. However, a label stating that a cof-
fee product is “ethical” or “green” in some way may just be an assertion  made  by 
the seller and need not come with any explanation as to what the label really means. 
 Coffee production and distribution  in North America therefore gives us a rela-
tively simple product to study, but one with enormous implications for the sustain-
ability of the environment and communities. We use this case to explore our key 
question: how can we incentivize private actors to share their data in a way that 
promotes the public value of the information disclosed? In the context of our coffee 
H. Jarman et al.

7
case study, this main question breaks down as follows: we explore the idea that the 
disclosure of information about how coffee is produced, distributed, and sold can 
inﬂ uence the purchasing decisions of consumers and the behavior of producers, 
distributors, and retailers themselves. In this volume, we are most interested in the 
governance mechanisms that are necessary and desirable not only to promote dis-
closure but to produce trusted data that creates public value. 
 The evidence used in this book comes from multiple sources, including inter-
views and focus group feedback from key stakeholders, government documents, 
scholarly literature, and coffee certiﬁ cation and inspection data. More speciﬁ cally, 
the project started with workshops involving a group of stakeholders in the coffee 
 supply chain . We continued our exploration with a systematic review of some of the 
most important certiﬁ cation schemes for organic and fair-trade products, as well as 
with a series of interviews with many other supply chain participants in Mexico and 
the United States. Finally, our research included building a data architecture proof 
of concept and ontology  development  using semantic web technologies (see 
 Methodological appendix  ). 
 Using the evidence gathered from the I-Choose project, we argue that disclosing 
privately held data can create public value—providing that the disclosure is sup-
ported by appropriate governance mechanisms. The next section unpacks the con-
cept of public value and discusses what it means in the context of new and emerging 
web technologies. 
1.3  Public Value 
 Public value is a term with many deﬁ nitions. We take a broad approach to public 
value that is not just about direct public management of service provision but which 
emphasizes how governments might act to incentivize private actors. This goes 
against narrower deﬁ nitions of public value that envision governments and indi-
vidual consumers in a producer-customer relationship. Instead, we note the value of 
bringing information into the public sphere, where it can be scrutinized, assessed, 
and used to uphold the public interest. We emphasize a range of public, consensual 
“values” that are not just about delivering economic efﬁ ciency or the cheapest prod-
uct (Jorgensen & Bozeman,  2007 ). And we recognize the potential for private orga-
nizations to uphold public values through their own actions. 
 The concept of “ public value ” was ﬁ rst put forward by Mark Moore in his book 
 Creating Public Value (Moore,  1995 ). Designed as a practical toolbox for public 
managers, the book outlined an approach to public management that could be used 
to orient public bodies more ﬁ rmly toward the needs and desires of citizens and 
stakeholders rather than just the agency’s own needs or those of the government 
hierarchy. 
 Moore’s book addresses a core problem that is commonly outlined in theories 
of public administration and public policy: government agencies have a tendency 
to want to deliver things to their own advantage (Dunleavy,  2002 ; Wilson,  1886 ), 
or to the advantage of key rent seekers (Niskanen,  1994 ), rather than to the advantage 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

8
of the public. In the ﬁ rst scenario, government bodies are viewed as competitive 
actors that seek autonomy, prestige, and resources, competing against other gov-
ernment agencies to get them. The second scenario, taken to its logical conclusion, 
results in government agencies that are captured by powerful interest groups, 
designing policies and regulations to serve these groups rather than the interests of 
the public as a whole. Underpinning this scenario is the idea that those who shout 
the loudest have the most inﬂ uence—concentrated interests with access to resources 
are presumed to have a greater impact upon policy decision-making than the much 
more diffuse public interest (Olson,  1965 ; Schattschneider,  1935 ). 
 Subsequent scholarship has shown that the reality of preference formation and 
decision-making in government agencies is far more complex. Bureaucrats and 
public managers have their own preferences, while at the same time, many consider 
themselves public servants with a duty to support the public interest (Paige,  1997 ). 
Moore’s discussion of  public value supports this view. His book examines the ways 
through which public agencies might be incentivized to deliver on goals that repre-
sent the collective, public interest, as well as concrete ways to formulate what public 
value means in different settings and measure progress toward achieving policy 
outcomes that uphold public value as deﬁ ned. 
 After the initial introduction of public value, however, the concept began to be 
more widely used—and sometimes abused—being narrowly interpreted as a kind of 
customer satisfaction criterion for governments. Some scholars raised questions 
about the usefulness of such a slippery concept. For example, perhaps the simplest 
deﬁ nition of  public value is “what the public values” (Benington & Moore,  2011 ). 
But ﬁ nding out what the public values is not easy and what the public values is not 
always coherent. For example, public opinion polls demonstrate that we as citizens 
are capable of simultaneously valuing extensive public services and low taxation 
(Smith,  2015 ). Inﬂ uenced by the media, public opinion can change rapidly, respond-
ing to headline issues rather than long-term problems. And so, following explicitly 
what the public wants at any one time does not necessarily make for stable policy or 
good government. 
 As the concept of  public value became more narrowly deﬁ ned in terms of cus-
tomer service, Bennington and Moore  (2011 ) and Moore ( 2013 ) attempted to 
reclaim it by exploring more fully its theoretical underpinnings. In particular, schol-
ars such as Bozeman ( 2007 ) and Moore ( 2013 ) pushed back against the  New Public 
Management (NPM) paradigm , stating that the core ideas behind the public value 
perspective, particularly public action in pursuit of collective social values, were in 
stark opposition to NPM. In NPM, the individual preferences of citizens are held to 
be very important, with public service improvements driven by the choices of 
citizen- consumers. Although both public value and NPM approaches claim to be 
more “customer facing” than previous public administration paradigms, the “cus-
tomers” in each case are very different. From Moore’s version of the public value 
perspective:
 …the relevant “customer” is a collective public (local, regional, or national) acting through 
the imperfect processes of representative democracy rather than an individual consumer 
making choices about what to buy for personal beneﬁ t. (Moore,  2013 : 3, emphasis added) 
H. Jarman et al.

9
 By connecting public value more closely to representative democracy,  Moore 
therefore envisions a balance for public managers in delivering upon democratic 
mandates and consulting with stakeholders. Finding a balance is complex given the 
diversity of values, which go well beyond the economic ones. Beck Jørgensen and 
Bozeman ( 2007 ), for example, identiﬁ ed seven constellations of public values 
emerging from the interactions among politicians, public managers, citizens, the 
environment, and the society at large. These constellations include values such as 
the protection of minorities, shareholder value, dialogue, governance, or citizen 
involvement, just to mention few of them (Abolaﬁ a,  2001 ; Bozeman,  2007 ; 
Michalos,  2008 ; Moore,  1995 ). 
 Current debates surrounding the deﬁ nition of  public value recognize this difﬁ cult 
balance and build upon this simple deﬁ nition in order to provide a much more 
nuanced description of public value. Drawing from this literature, despite its diver-
sity, we can discern some common elements:
•  Public value is a concept tied to an approach . The process through which public 
value is sought is just as important as the deﬁ nition of public value itself. In 
Moore’s ( 1995 ) original terms, values constitute strategic outcomes that require 
the appropriate operational capabilities and the stakeholder engagement neces-
sary for support and legitimacy of the policy mechanisms. Alignment between 
public goals and policy outcomes valued by the public is credited by some with 
increasing trust in government and therefore enhancing government legitimacy 
(Center for Technology in Government,  2011 ). 
•  Public value approaches are strategic and long term . Benington and Moore’s 
( 2011 ) broader deﬁ nition implies that the concept of public value goes beyond 
any one administration or set of institutions to provide value not just to the cur-
rent public but to society as a whole and even future generations. A public value 
approach is frequently described as “strategic,” meaning that it is a longer-term 
approach that is more than just a series of knee-jerk reactions to public or stake-
holder demands. 
•  Public value approaches should be participatory . In a public value approach, 
what is valuable is agreed upon through a participatory and collaborative process 
as opposed to a one-way process where government is “informed” of stakeholder 
preferences. The idea is that public value should be “cocreated” through a two- 
way process (Benington & Moore,  2011 , p. 50). This participatory process 
should satisfy key democratic criteria. It should be seen to be legitimate, trans-
parent, and inclusive. Bennington, for example, argues that public value under-
pins an emerging paradigm of “networked community governance,” a shift 
toward emphasizing the role of civil society over that of the state and markets. In 
networked community governance, the dominant form of control is not bureau-
cratic hierarchy or market forces but networks and the norms that they propagate 
(Benington,  2011 ; Stoker,  2006 ). 
•  Public value approaches aim to enhance the public sphere .  The process of creat-
ing public value therefore focuses on policy outcomes that the public collectively 
values, takes a long-term view, and is participatory. These features, taken 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

10
together, account for the ﬁ nal characteristic of public value: public value 
approaches aim to enhance the public sphere. The public sphere can be deﬁ ned 
as a conceptual space for public discussion and debate that allows political dis-
course, including critique of public authority (Calhoun,  1992 ; Habermas,  1989 ). 
The ideal public value approach, therefore, attempts to add value to the public 
sphere (Benington,  2011 ). It does this by creating a robust process for the delib-
eration of how governments should act upon democratic mandates—a process 
that encourages participation from nongovernmental organizations, aims to pro-
duce policy outcomes that the public collectively values, and takes a long-term 
approach to delivering on those goals. 
 This discussion of the public sphere is especially interesting when we consider 
the role of new and emerging technologies, particularly web technologies. As many 
scholars have pointed out (Castells,  2007 ,  2012 ; Fernback & Thompson,  1995 ; 
Rheingold,  2008 ), the most utopian depictions of the web view it as extending the 
public sphere—allowing more people access to more information than ever before 
and creating virtual spaces through which we can debate and deliberate key issues. 
Proponents of this view argue that the web increases transparency regarding what 
governments, corporations, or other organizations do and how they do it. It allows 
previously secret information to be available to mass public, allowing greater public 
deliberation and participation in decision-making. Research has shown that the con-
cept of public value is central to understanding how open government policies can 
support a range of desirable social, economic, or other policy goals but that policy-
makers attempting to maximize the public value of open government policies should 
collaborate in order to deﬁ ne what public value means in each context and how it 
might best be achieved (Center for Technology in Government,  2011 ). 
 Critics of this view point out that the reality of the web has turned out quite dif-
ferently—they argue that the scrutiny and participation that web optimists hope 
for will not occur automatically. They raise concerns that the web has become a 
commercialized space where powerful actors can tightly control the messages that 
they send and misinformation abounds. Some argue 1 that the web actually weak-
ens the public sphere, giving members of the public the impression that they are 
being consulted, while preserving existing inequities in power and resources 
(Boeder,  2005 ). Others point out that increased transparency works both ways, 
tempting governments and other organizations to conduct mass surveillance and 
collect large amounts of personal data as evidenced in the surveillance of US citi-
zens’ internet and phone records conducted by the US National Security Agency 
following 9/11 (RussiaToday,  2013 ). See also Fuchs, Boersma, Albrechtslund, and 
Sandoval ( 2012 ) as well as news and comments related to the collection of email 
communication gathered by NSA in the last years (see   http://rt.com/usa/
nsa-internet-terrorism-years-810/  ). 
 What should we learn from this debate for our deﬁ nition of public value? The 
critiques of the web as a public sphere are important because they indicate that 
1  Including Habermas himself. 
H. Jarman et al.

11
 disclosure alone is not enough to deliver public value by our deﬁ nition. It is not 
enough to disclose information about what governments and businesses do. That 
information has to be distributed, ﬁ ltered, analyzed, and ultimately shown to be 
trustworthy if it is to add value to the public sphere. In other words, information 
disclosure has to be supported by a trusted governance process. 
 The next sections explore the use of information disclosure as a policy tool, 
building on our deﬁ nition of public value to consider the contribution of informa-
tion disclosure to the public sphere. Focusing more tightly on our case study, we 
ﬁ rst explain why disclosing private product data is considered valuable by some 
policymakers, advocates, and ﬁ rms, before discussing potential barriers to data 
disclosure. 
1.4  Why Disclose Private Product Data? 
 The disclosure of private product  data is argued to produce three distinct categories 
of beneﬁ t for the public:
•  Citizen empowerment ,  allowing individuals better access to and control over 
their own data 
•  Public scrutiny ,  better public awareness and scrutiny of what governments and 
other organizations do, leading to demands for better policies 
•  Innovation and growth , increased opportunities  for  innovation and economic 
growth based on the disclosed data, with the assumption that this growth will be 
 p assed on in ways that beneﬁ t the wider public 
 Citizens empowered by information gained through disclosure might be incen-
tivized not only to take steps to improve their individual situation, such as decreased 
energy usage, changes in health behavior or diet, or better ﬁ nancial planning, but 
might also be inﬂ uenced to choose products and services that are better aligned with 
their ethical values. Likewise, better  public scrutiny might boost corporate social 
responsibility, not just trust in public authorities. And for private companies, disclo-
sure may enable them to differentiate their products within a crowded marketplace, 
earning them a price premium. 
 The disclosure of product data held by public, private, and nongovernmental 
organizations has the potential to beneﬁ t those organizations as well as consumers 
accessing the disclosed data. When thinking about  product data disclosure , or pri-
vate sector transparency more generally, it is equally important to think about the 
perceived commercial value of the data to be disclosed. The central goal of any 
policy or mechanism encouraging private sector transparency should be to facilitate 
this alignment. This means ensuring that brand value can be maintained or enhanced 
through product data disclosure initiatives and that any such scheme offers value to 
business in differentiating their products within crowded markets. The following 
considers these public and private beneﬁ ts in turn. 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

12
1.4.1  Beneﬁ ts to Public Agencies 
 In raising the  i ssue of data disclosure, policymakers have three discrete but inter-
connected goals: to promote greater consumer access to information which can 
inﬂ uence the goods and services that they purchase; to promote innovative use of 
data in ways that can  increase  proﬁ table economic activity, such as providing ser-
vices to aid consumer choice; and to reduce regulatory burdens and costs through 
greater data transparency and public-private collaboration (Executive Ofﬁ ce of the 
President,  2013 ). 
 Access to Information   First,  policymakers wish to increase consumers’ access to 
information about the products that they buy. Consumers currently have far less 
access to product information than other actors in the supply chain such as produc-
ers and retailers. Outside of the observable characteristics of the product, consumers 
must rely heavily on producers to provide them with information to assist their deci-
sions, resulting in suboptimal decision-making (Akerlof,  1970 ). Information asym-
metries tend to decline over time as markets grow and mature and as information 
about product quality is acquired through repeated purchases (Wankhade & Dabade, 
 2006 ). Some products, however, such as tomatoes, coffee, or beef, are less likely to 
experience such dynamics because they are not frequently linked to information 
other than price. 
 To counteract this information asymmetry, a growing number of consumers are 
turning to new technologies to determine information about product characteristics 
that are not directly observable, such as the distance the item has traveled, the chem-
icals used in its production, or the labor conditions under which the product was 
manufactured. We already provide some assistance to consumers through manda-
tory product labeling which requires manufacturers to list ingredients and calorie 
counts, for example. But there is a growing pressure among consumers to expand 
the range of information that they can access regarding their purchases and increased 
recognition among companies that wish to be “socially responsible” that disclosing 
such information can be to their advantage. 
 Innovation and Growth       Second, policymakers want to promote the creation of 
innovative consumer products as a means of increasing economic growth. It is 
envisioned that making more data public in reusable formats will promote its use 
in a range of new ways, including applications available to consumers about the 
products and services that they purchase. If the data disclosed is of high enough 
quality, it is likely that developers and entrepreneurs will be keen to use it in their 
future projects. Organizations and individuals may well be willing to pay a pre-
mium in order to access the  information in a form that is convenient and relevant to 
their needs.  
 Reduce Costs   Third,  policymakers seek to reduce regulatory burdens and costs 
through greater data transparency and public-private collaborations. In an era 
when public attention is highly focused on budgetary constraints, governments are 
H. Jarman et al.

13
 looking for innovative ways to save money. One way to do this is to change how 
the costs of regulation are distributed among taxpayers, businesses, and individuals 
acting as consumers.  
 At its core, this strategy relies on increasing the transparency of information not 
just about products but about the private sector as a whole. Many authors have dis-
cussed requirements for opening data (Executive Ofﬁ ce of the President,  2013 ; 
Kalampokis, Tambouris, & Tarabanis,  2011 ; Lourenço,  2015 ; Zuiderwijk, Jeffery, 
& Janssen,  2012 ). On the basis of this research,  transparent data can be deﬁ ned as 
data that is (1) publicly available, (2) easily understood by nonexperts, (3) published 
in an accessible format, (4) via accessible media, and (5) released on a timely sched-
ule. The concept of  private sector transparency , which can be linked back to more 
inclusive deﬁ nitions of stakeholder, has been evolving over time, from the confron-
tational stakeholder tactics to partnerships and collaborative approaches where 
technology can play a key role (Baue & Murninghan,  2011 ). In this way, private 
sector transparency can be deﬁ ned as the voluntary adoption of policies promoting 
the transparency of product data and production processes. This is an important 
distinction— private sector transparency is more than just the disclosure of product 
data. It requires that product data be aggregated across organizations, industries, 
sectors, or national boundaries in order to further key policy goals. 
 In other words, private sector transparency requires engagement with the public 
sphere. The availability of transparent data about the activities of private and non-
proﬁ t organizations broadens the range of organizations and individuals that can 
potentially hold these organizations to account. This is not a new phenomenon. 
Instead of engaging in regulatory oversight on their own initiative, which is more 
resource intensive, government agencies often seek to rely more extensively on 
third parties to raise the alarm about cases of noncompliance. This decision is 
referred to in public administration scholarship as a choice between “police patrols” 
and “ﬁ re alarms” (McCubbins & Schwartz,  1984 ). New technologies, combined 
with appropriate data transparency, have the potential to increase the scope and 
scale of “ﬁ re alarm” strategies. In other words, smart disclosure strategies are just 
the beginning of a process that could culminate in the crowdsourcing of regulatory 
compliance. 
1.4.2  Beneﬁ ts to Private Companies 
 Many companies in the private sector already realize the beneﬁ ts that product data 
disclosure and private sector transparency can bring. These beneﬁ ts include oppor-
tunities for market differentiation: by building a brand, label, tool, or system around 
product data disclosure, companies can demonstrate that their products are greener, 
healthier, more local, or more ethical and differentiate them from other products in 
the market (Howard,  2012 ; Thaler & Sunstein,  2008 ). This can be very important 
in crowded markets where products and services can be very similar, particularly 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

14
in situations where consumers can observe little from the product packaging itself 
as to the product’s content or quality. 
 A second, related opportunity for ﬁ rms is to build brand identiﬁ cation through 
customer ownership of customer data. By giving  consumers ownership of their own 
data, companies can build tools that increase consumer identiﬁ cation with their 
products (Thaler & Tucker,  2013 ). They can learn more about consumer preferences 
in this way. 
 For certain companies and entrepreneurs, the disclosure of non-price product 
information can present new commercial opportunities. One of the core beneﬁ ts 
often attributed to online disclosure of data is that other organizations and individu-
als that use the existing data in innovative ways can emerge. In some cases, this 
might mean research opportunities, reducing the costs to a company in developing 
a new product. Releasing product data regarding pharmaceuticals, for example, 
could allow faster development of more effective medicines or cheaper generic 
medicines. In other cases, it might mean the development of secondary information 
ﬁ ltering service or tool that makes use of the disclosed information. These tools 
would be targeted at companies as well as consumers who do not have the time or 
resources to process and ﬁ lter through large amounts of publicly available data. This 
is certainly a key motivation of the US  government’s  smart disclosure policies 
(Sunstein,  2012 ). 
 But amid all the optimism regarding the potential of information disclosure via 
new and emerging technologies as a policy tool, it is easy to forget that many exist-
ing regulations already rely on disclosure to deliver policy outcomes. Research on 
this topic ﬁ nds that information disclosure alone—even mandatory disclosure—is 
not always enough to incentivize ﬁ rms to behave in certain ways. Without addi-
tional governance structures, disclosure can easily fail to deliver expected policy 
outcomes (Kraft, Stephan, & Abel,  2011 ). 
 The following section discusses the barriers to making product data public and 
the governance challenges that these barriers pose. The rest of the volume then 
makes proposals as to how these challenges might be overcome. 
1.5  Barriers to Making Product Data Public 
 Although current and developing  t echnologies make the disclosure and productive 
use of private and public data seem more feasible than ever before, data interoper-
ability and disclosure are not solely problems of technology. They are also problems 
of human interaction. The competing interests of organizations and individuals with 
a stake in the debate over product data disclosure must somehow be managed. 
 In promoting smart disclosure, however laudable that goal might be, policymak-
ers are making several key assumptions, including that private sector organizations 
and public agencies will be willing and able to share their data and that consumers, 
stakeholder groups, and businesses will be able to use and interpret disclosed data 
in meaningful and proﬁ table ways. 
H. Jarman et al.

15
 There are, therefore, several interconnected barriers facing anyone wishing to 
incentivize the disclosure of product data and promote its meaningful use: problems 
relating to the cost of disclosure, problems relating to commercial competition and 
the perceived commercial sensitivity of the data to be disclosed, problems relating 
to the preservation of privacy, problems relating to data quality and interoperability, 
and legal barriers to disclosure. 
 The Cost of Disclosure   The ﬁ rst set of dilemmas relates to the organization’s deci-
sion to disclose data. Data disclosure is not without cost. Organizations may not 
have access to data in a form that is usable or that makes disclosure viable. Data 
collection, translation, or reformatting may have to occur. Checking the data for 
errors also incurs costs, as does managing the disclosure process itself. The key 
question is—do the beneﬁ ts of disclosing the data outweigh the costs to an organi-
zation? It is also important to ask, what is the necessary and desirable level of infor-
mation that can be provided at a reasonable cost? The answers to these questions 
may be different for every organization, but they are also dependent upon what 
others decide to do. An organization’s cost/beneﬁ t calculation might change, for 
example, based on the participation of a critical mass of similar actors or on likely 
 consumer  demand for the disclosed data (Ran et al.,  2016 ). 
 Competition and Commercial Sensitivity   “ Commercially sensitive information ” is 
a rubric that allows organizations to withhold information of many different kinds. 
Some companies, particularly those that compete on price, may see their supply 
chain data as commercially sensitive or as a trade secret and may be wary of reveal-
ing it to competitors.  
 Legal   Related to this dilemma is the fact that laws and regulations are often barriers 
to information disclosure. These legal barriers may be real (enacted to protect con-
sumers or ensure fair competition) or they can be imagined (an excuse not to dis-
close data). 
 Data Quality   Policymakers must consider not just how to promote the disclosure 
of more information, but how to improve the quality of the information disclosed. 
We know that government data often suffers from missing or incomplete informa-
tion. The complexity of regulatory procedures means that there is considerable 
scope for errors and omissions. Government inspections of products might be 
patchy or inaccurately recorded. Compliance reports held by product certiﬁ ers may 
be submitted in hard copy only or in a format (such as PDF) that makes it hard to 
repurpose the information they contain. 
 This problem affects the private sphere, too. Large corporations who outsource 
work to other organizations may not have complete records of the supply chains in 
which they operate. In fact, it can be to a company’s advantage to obfuscate supply 
chain data, hiding any efﬁ ciency advantages (legitimate or questionable) from com-
petitors. Businesses may therefore be unwilling to disclose if they have incomplete 
records. No matter what the provenance of the data, there is a chance that it could 
be fraudulent. 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

16
 Missing, incomplete, or poorly trusted data are problematic and undermine the 
fundamental goals of smart disclosure, open government, and private sector trans-
parency. The poorer the quality of the data, the higher the cost of utilizing it for 
other purposes. Private actors or consumers might be uninterested in product data of 
poor quality. Broker organizations looking to develop consumer tools may well pass 
on the opportunity to use certain datasets if they calculate that the up-front cost of 
making the information usable is too high. 
 Interoperability   Data may also be held in a format or structure that allows data 
from different organizations to be made interoperable. This choice, too, can be 
deliberate. Disclosing data is really only the ﬁ rst step.  Policymakers   must also think 
about how to make the disclosed data interoperable, in order to promote its mean-
ingful use and reuse in ways that promote public value. This is an enormous techni-
cal challenge, and any attempt to solve it must rest on cooperation among the various 
stakeholders. Interoperability requires extensive collaboration between organiza-
tions and individuals, something that ultimately rests on establishing trusted rela-
tionships among them.  
 Underpinning these dilemmas is the fact that policymakers have to make some 
signiﬁ cant predictions about how individual consumers will behave. Smart disclo-
sure  policies imply that better data disclosure will lead to an improved information 
environment for consumers and will impact consumer choice. Producers and retail-
ers are interested in disclosing product data because of the potential to differentiate 
their products within crowded markets, making them more visible to consumers. 
Providing trusted information about the origins of a product to consumers can 
enhance a company’s sustainable credentials against its competitors. But this only 
works if consumer behavior is truly altered by the disclosure of product data. 
 Therefore, consumer demand for  disclosure of privately held product data is cen-
tral to efforts to encourage private sector transparency. This “demanded disclosure,” 
driven primarily by consumer demand for product data and supplemented by gov-
ernment mandates or companies’ attempts to inﬂ uence markets, is facilitated by 
new forms of technology that reduce the costs of exerting social pressure on organi-
zations and governments (Sayogo,  2013 ; van der Laan,  2009 ). 
 We do know that consumers’ trust in the data provided plays an important role in 
whether or not they use a particular system (Luna-Reyes et al.,  2013 ,  2014 ; Sayogo, 
Zhang, Liu et al.,  2014 ; Sayogo, Zhang, Pardo et al.,  2014 ; Sayogo et al.,  2015 ). 
Consumers should be protected from fraudulent use of disclosed product data. Any 
governance system promoting product data disclosure should consider the relation-
ship between collaborative standards for governing product data disclosure and hard 
law remedies against fraudulent use of product data, certiﬁ cations, or labels. 
  Access Versus Privacy   An additional key challenge relating to consumer trust is 
how to protect consumer privacy in an open and accessible system. The difﬁ culties 
associated with protecting individuals’ privacy can form a barrier to disclosure. 
How should individual and commercial privacy be balanced with appropriate, and 
broadly applicable, access to information? In order for them to trust the system, 
consumers should have the right to expect that important personal information 
H. Jarman et al.

17
will be kept private and the right to be protected from organizations that want to 
use disclosed information for direct marketing and scams. It is important to avoid 
disclosing identiﬁ able information—and with multiple organizations disclosing, 
this requires strong consensus on how to handle and process the data before it is 
disclosed, as well as an agreement on enforcement mechanisms.  
1.6  Concluding Remarks 
 Technology is facilitating a revolution in the way we access information about mar-
kets, lowering dramatically the opportunity costs of learning about the provenance 
of the things that we make and buy. Meanwhile, policymakers have stated that they 
wish to encourage the disclosure of product data for a number of reasons, including 
facilitation of consumer choice, product innovation and research, and creation of 
more efﬁ cient ways to regulate markets. 
 We argue that in many areas, particularly those relating to sustainability, this 
process of disclosure can enhance public value by adding value to the public sphere 
through a fair and transparent process. Introducing new information about produc-
tion processes into the public sphere, and creating a space whereby the public and 
other organizations can enter into a dialogue around that information on equal terms 
with ﬁ rms and governments, is something that we believe will enhance public value. 
 This is an ambitious, long-term goal, well suited to the public value approach, 
which emphasizes long-term, strategic action to align actors toward key policy 
goals. It cannot be achieved without collaboration among a range of disparate 
actors—the participatory elements of the public value approach. Collaboration 
between government agencies, private actors, and consumer advocates is necessary 
in order to promote the disclosure of product data and to move toward the long-term 
goals of greater private sector transparency and, ultimately, a more sustainable 
world. 
 To answer our research question, we used a variety of methods and approaches. 
A detailed description of such approaches is included in the methodological appen-
dix to this book, and the results of our inquiry are reported in the following seven 
chapters of the book. 
 Chapter   2 introduces the challenges and issues in developing a platform support-
ing interoperability in sustainable supply chains of food products from the point of 
view of key stakeholders in the coffee supply chain. The chapter is based on data 
from a workshop and a series of interviews with stakeholders in the coffee industry. 
The analysis reveals that to build an interoperable data architecture to support a 
sustainable supply chain, the ﬁ ve most salient issues/challenges are to build trust in 
the data, to develop semantic capabilities as well as standards and protocols for data 
sharing, to design an information policy that balances commercial interest and 
openness, to establish a collaborative governance model, and to develop a sustain-
able business model to push forward the vision of the system. 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

18
 Chapter   3 explores the existing relationships among supply chain participants to 
better understand current forms of collaboration and the role that trust plays in each 
supply chain conﬁ guration inside the coffee supply chain. The chapter results are 
grounded on interviews with supply chain participants in Mexico, including small 
and medium producers, cooperative representatives, large intermediaries, and large 
corporations. We explore the role and evolution of three different types of trust- 
producing mechanisms (institutional, calculative, and relational) in the three most 
common supply chains identiﬁ ed in our ﬁ eld work (large cooperatives, small spe-
cialty coffee roasters, and large corporations). Our results suggest that relational 
trust is more important to facilitate collaboration in both cooperatives and specialty 
coffee types of supply chains, especially at the beginning of the relationship. Large 
corporations, like Nestle, rely much more in institutional trust to start collaboration. 
The main source of such institutional trust is brand reputation and contracts. 
Relational trust in this type of supply chain is built over time through collaboration. 
Finally calculative trust plays a role at the start of the collaboration, but loses impor-
tance over time in all cases. We conclude the chapter with a reﬂ ection on how these 
types of trust could play a role in building a network of stakeholders around an 
architecture of shared product information. 
 Although  consumer trust is solicited through the enactment of certiﬁ cation and 
labeling practices, the rapid growth of certiﬁ cations and labels has decreased the 
amount of trust generated from certiﬁ cations mainly due to the difﬁ culties faced by 
consumers in observing information behind the labels or certiﬁ cates. Chapter   4 
explores the sufﬁ ciency of existing certiﬁ cation and label as part of private regula-
tion for enhancing consumer trust. We evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the 
six major coffee certiﬁ cation initiatives by conducting a rigorous document review 
as well as content analysis of the certiﬁ cation website. Our evaluation found that 
certiﬁ cation and labeling schemes use different strategies to emphasize the legiti-
macy and accountability of their practice to assert their trustworthiness, such as 
openly publishing their standards and principles or getting accreditations from repu-
table national or international organizations. Our evaluation also demonstrates the 
complexities of certiﬁ cation and inspection process in the sustainable supply chain. 
Such complexities challenge the effort to encourage private sector transparency to 
support interoperable platform such as I-Choose. 
 Chapter   5 includes one of the key components of our research program, which is 
a concrete proposal for the creation of a technical architecture and platform to share 
trusted information about sustainability of products among supply chain stakehold-
ers and consumers. We propose the use of semantic web applications and ontologies 
to create such an architecture. In this chapter, we outline what we are calling a 
 Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block (CIDIBB) . CIDIBB 
involves the interaction of at least three interrelated ontologies. The ﬁ rst of them is 
a  Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Ontology (CerTIN) that deﬁ nes at a high level of 
abstraction the main components of any certiﬁ cation system. This high level ontol-
ogy interconnects more speciﬁ c ontologies developed for each certiﬁ cation  standard. 
The second ontology (CiTruST) deﬁ nes the quality of the certiﬁ cation process using 
the main deﬁ nitions included in the certiﬁ cation ontology as mechanisms for trust 
H. Jarman et al.

19
creation. Finally, we include in our proposal the FLO ontology as an example of a 
local ontology. This ontology was created with the purpose of testing ways in which 
CerTIN could be mapped to speciﬁ c certiﬁ cation schemes. Beyond describing the 
ontologies, the chapter also includes an evaluation of the ontology in their capacity 
to assess the levels of trustworthiness of different certiﬁ cation schemes and provides 
examples of ways in which the architecture can be used to create networks of stake-
holders around four different business models. 
 Chapter   6 outlines the privacy, conﬁ dentiality, and security issues that are inher-
ent in the design and implementation of IT-enabled platforms such as I-Choose, 
which was described in detail in Chap.   5 . I-Choose enables the implementation of 
smart data disclosure that requires integration of data from diverse stakeholders in a 
complex sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain. Importantly, we discuss these 
issues from an organizational perspective along three dimensions: ownership, 
access rights, and data quality. To support the arguments we make in this chapter, 
we extensively use data from in-depth interviews with the supply chain stakeholders 
including producers, roasters, exporters, inspectors, certiﬁ ers, and consumer advo-
cates. The challenge to protecting the conﬁ dentiality and privacy of the data and 
information lies in developing effective and transparent security policies and proto-
cols that govern the access and integrity to both proprietary and public information. 
Our ﬁ ndings highlight that these challenges stem from the complexity of the infor-
mation chain and the value propositions of the various stakeholders in the sustain-
able coffee supply chain. As a result, addressing these issues necessitates both 
business practices and governance and not solely technological ﬁ xes. Therefore, we 
propose ﬁ ve management and policy strategies for mitigating the privacy, conﬁ den-
tiality, and security challenges that confront successful implementation of platforms 
such as I-Choose. 
 Concluding remarks of most of the ﬁ rst six chapters of the book point out to the 
importance of ﬁ nding the proper incentives for supply chain participants, as well as 
the key role of governance mechanisms. Chapter   7 concentrates on the discussion of 
incentives and governance. As discussed in Chap.  2 , it is possible to identify ﬁ ve 
different conﬁ gurations in the coffee supply chain in the NAFTA region. As we 
describe in Chap.   7 , stakeholders in each conﬁ guration hold different frameworks of 
reference guiding decisions on quality, means, and ends. We use in the chapter 
Convention Theory to categorize these reference frameworks as domestic, civic, 
market, and industrial worlds. The coexistence of those frameworks represents 
sources of conﬂ ict, in addition to power imbalances in each supply chain gover-
nance mode, posing speciﬁ c challenges when introducing a platform like I-Choose 
into an existing supply chain. Our empirical work shows that in practice, supply 
chain participants can be characterized by a combination of at least two of such 
views and that participants in a single supply chain conﬁ guration tend to share those 
views. We also specify the conditions that make different supply chain conﬁ gura-
tions and set of values more or less amenable to the changes implied in the disclo-
sure of private information that the I-Choose platform requires. 
 Our concluding chapter draws on the concepts and theories discussed in the 
book, particularly the concept of public value creation, the conﬂ icts between different 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

20
types of stakeholders, and the role of trust. The chapter focuses on the practicalities 
of information disclosure by asking: how must this process be governed? A deﬁ ni-
tion of governance as the process of steering a society toward a set of predeﬁ ned 
goals is introduced. It discusses the beneﬁ ts and difﬁ culties of creating collaborative 
governance in the context of our project and presents our ﬁ ndings regarding gover-
nance from the I-Choose project. It evaluates existing experiments in collaborative 
governance that aim to extract public value from data disclosure, drawing on exam-
ples from multiple countries and cross-border contexts, including the I-Choose 
project. We ﬁ nd that information disclosure alone is not enough to enhance the 
public sphere. It must be supported by innovative governance mechanisms that 
address classic problems such as establishing independence among producing and 
regulating organizations and creating procedural transparency. 
 We hope that, through this book, we are contributing to a better theoretical and 
practical understanding of the different technical, organizational, and policy com-
ponents needed to create public value through the disclosure of private information 
inside supply chains.     
 References 
 Abolaﬁ a, M. Y. (2001).  Making markets: opportunism and restraint on Wall Street (2. print). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. 
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3), 488–500. 
 Baue, B., & Murninghan, M. (2011). The accountability web: Weaving corporate accountability 
and interactive technology.  Journal of Corporate Citizenship, 41 , 27–49. 
 Benington, J. (2011). From private choice to public value? In J. Benington & M. H. Moore (Eds.), 
 Public value: theory and practice (pp. 31–51). New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Benington, J., & Moore, M. H. (Eds.). (2011).  Public value: theory and practice . New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Boeder, P. (2005). Habermas’ heritage: The future of the public sphere in the network society.  First 
Monday ,  10 (9). Retrieved from   http://ﬁ rstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1280/1200  
 Bozeman, B. (2007).  Public values and public interest: counterbalancing economic individualism . 
Washington, D.C: Georgetown University Press. 
 Calhoun, C. J. (Ed.). (1992).  Habermas and the public sphere . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Castells, M. (Ed.). (2007).  Mobile communication and society: A global perspective: A project of 
the Annenberg Research Network on international communication . Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.  
 Castells, M. (2012).  Networks of outrage and hope: social movements in the internet age . 
Cambridge, UK/Malden, MA: Polity Press.  
 Center for Technology in Government. (2011).  Open government and public value: conceptualiz-
ing a portfolio assessment tool . Retrieved from   http://www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/online/
pvat/PVAT_ConceptualizingtheTool.pdf  
 Dunleavy, P. (2002).  Democracy, bureaucracy and public choice: Economic explanations in politi-
cal science (Nachdr.). London: Prentice Hall. 
 Executive Ofﬁ ce of the President. (2013).  Smart disclosure and consumer decision making: report 
of the task force on smart disclosure . National Science and Technology Council. Retrieved from 
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/ﬁ les/microsites/ostp/report_of_the_task_force_on_
smart_disclosure.pdf   
H. Jarman et al.

21
 Fernback, J., & Thompson, B. (1995).  Computer-mediated communication and the American 
collectivity: The dimensions of community within cyberspace report as virtual communities: 
Abort, retry, failure? Presented at the International Communication Association, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico. Retrieved from   http://www.well.com/user/hlr/texts/VCcivil.html  
 Fridell, G. (2007). Coffee and the “double movement” (Chapter 4). In  Fair trade coffee: The pros-
pects and pitfalls of market-driven social justice (Reprinted, pp. 135–172). Toronto: Univ. of 
Toronto Press. 
    Fuchs, C., Boersma, K., Albrechtslund, A., & Sandoval, M. (2012).  Internet and surveillance: The 
challenges of Web 2. 0 and Social Media . New York: Routledge. 
 Habermas, J. (1989).  The structural transformation of the public sphere: An inquiry into a cate-
gory of bourgeois society . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Howard, A. (2012, April 1). What is smart disclosure? Retrieved from   http://radar.oreilly.
com/2012/04/what-is-smart-disclosure.html   
 Jorgensen, T. B., & Bozeman, B. (2007). Public values: An inventory.  Administration & Society, 
39 (3), 354–381.   http://doi.org/10.1177/0095399707300703  . 
 Kalampokis, E., Tambouris, E., & Tarabanis, K. (2011). A classiﬁ cation scheme for open govern-
ment data: Towards linking decentralised data.  International Journal of Web Engineering and 
Technology, 6 (3), 266.   http://doi.org/10.1504/IJWET.2011.040725  . 
 Kraft, M. E., Stephan, M., & Abel, T. D. (2011).  Coming clean: Information disclosure and envi-
ronmental performance . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Lourenço, R. P. (2015). An analysis of open government portals: A perspective of transparency for 
accountability.  Government Information Quarterly, 32 (3), 323–332.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.
giq.2015.05.006  . 
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Roy, R., Andersen, D. F., Whitmore, A., & Andersen, D. L. (2013). 
Information strategies to support full information product pricing: The role of trust.  Information 
Polity, 18 (1), 75–91. 
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Whitmore, A., Jarman, H., Picazo-Vela, S., Andersen, D. L., et al. 
(2014). Full information product pricing: An information strategy for harnessing consumer 
choice to create a more sustainable world.  Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 34 (1), 637–654. 
 McCubbins, M. D., & Schwartz, T. (1984). Congressional oversight overlooked: Police patrols 
versus ﬁ re alarms.  American Journal of Political Science, 28 (1), 165.   http://doi.
org/10.2307/2110792  . 
 Michalos, A. C. (2008).  Trade barriers to the public good: Free trade and environmental protec-
tion . Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press. 
 Moore, M. H. (1995).  Creating public value: Strategic management in government . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Moore, M. H. (2013).  Recognizing public value . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Retrieved from   http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674066953  . 
 Nescafe. (n.d.). The Rainforest Alliance – working together for sustainable agriculture. Retrieved 
from   http://www.nescafe.com/rainforest_alliance_sus_en_com.axcms  
 Niskanen, W. A. (1994).  Bureaucracy and public economics . Aldershot, Hants, England; 
Brookﬁ eld, VT: E. Elgar. 
 Olson, M. (1965).  The logic of collective action: Public goods and the theory of groups . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Univ. Press. 
 Paige, J. M. (1997).  Coffee and power: revolution and the rise of democracy in Central America 
(1. Harvard Univ. Press paperback ed., 3. printing). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Rainforest Alliance. (2015).  Our global impact: Agriculture . Retrieved from   http://www.rainforest- 
alliance.org/work/impact/map/agriculture   
 Rainforest Alliance. (n.d.).  Our work with Nescafé . Retrieved from   http://www.rainforest-alliance.
org/about/company-commitments/nescafe  
 Ran, W., Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Andersen, D. L., Tayi, G. K., et al. (2016). 
Supply-chain transparency and governance systems: Market penetration of the I-choose system. 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

22
In J. Zhang, L. F. Luna-Reyes, T. A. Pardo, & D. S. Sayogo (Eds.),  Information, models, and 
sustainability: Policy informatics in the age of big data and open government . Basel, 
Switzerland: Springer. 
 Rheingold, H. (2008). Using participatory media and public voice to encourage civic engagement. 
In W. Lance Bennett (Ed.),  Civic life online: Learning how digital media can engage youth 
(pp. 97–118). Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.  
 Rice, R. A., Ward, J. R., Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center, & Natural Resources Defense 
Council. (1996).  Coffee, conservation, and commerce in the Western Hemisphere: How indi-
viduals and institutions can promote ecologically sound farming and forest management in 
northern Latin America . Washington, D.C.; New York: Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center; 
Natural Resources Defense Council.  
 RussiaToday. (2013, August 21). NSA collected thousands of US internet communications “with 
no terror connection” [News]. Retrieved from   http://on.rt.com/icwoby  
 SAGARPA. (2012).  Impactos del Café en México . Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Desarrollo 
Rural, Pesca y Alimentación. México, D. F. 
 Sayogo, D. (2013).  Incentives to disclose: Private sector transparency to support smart disclosure 
policy (Unpublished doctoral dissertation) . University at Albany, SUNY, Albany, NY. 
 Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Liu, H., Picazo-Vela, S., & Luna-Reyes, L. (2014).  Examining trust as 
key drivers in smart disclosure for sustainable consumption: The case of I-choose , In 
Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Digital Government Research Conference on 
Open Innovations and Sustainable Development in Government: Experiences from around 
the World, Digital Government Society of North America (pp. 137–146). Aguascalientes, 
Mexico: ACM.  
 Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Pardo, T. A., Tayi, G. K., Hrdinova, J., Andersen, D. F., et al. (2014). 
Going beyond open data: Challenges and motivations for smart disclosure in ethical consump-
tion.  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 9 (2), 3–4.   http://doi.
org/10.4067/S0718-18762014000200002  . 
  Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Luna-Reyes, L., Jarman, H., Tayi, G., Andersen, D. L., et al. (2015). 
Challenges and requirements for developing data architecture supporting integration of sustain-
able supply chains.  Information Technology and Management, 16 (1), 5–18.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10799-014-0203-3  . 
   Sayogo, D. S., Ran, W., Tayi, G. K., Luciano, J. S., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Depaula, D., et al. 
(Forthcoming). Ontological modeling of certiﬁ cation and inspection process to support smart 
disclosure of product information.  International Journal of Public Administration in the 
Digital Age .  
 Schattschneider, E. E. (1935).  Politics, pressures and the tariff: A study of free private enterprise 
in pressure politics, as shown in 1929–1930 revision of the tariff . New York: Prentice-Hall. 
 Smith, T. W. (2015).  Trends in national spending priorities, 1973–2014 (General Social Survey). 
Chicago: NORC at the University of Chicago. Retrieved from   http://www.norc.org/PDFs/
GSS%20Reports/GSS_Trends%20in%20Spending_1973-2014.pdf   
 Stoker, G. (2006). Public value management: A new narrative for networked governance?  The 
American 
Review 
ofPublic 
Administration, 
36 (1), 
41–57. 
  http://doi.org/10.1177/
0275074005282583  . 
 Sunstein, C. (2012, March 30). Informing consumers through smart disclosure. Retrieved from 
  http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/03/30/informing-consumers-through-smart-disclosure  
 Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008).  Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and 
happiness . New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Thaler, R. H., & Tucker, W. (2013, February). Smarter information, smarter consumers.  Harvard 
Business 
Review . 
Retrieved 
from 
  http://hbr.org/2013/01/smarter-information-smarter-
consumers   
 USDA Foreign Agriculture Service. (2011).  Coffee consumption growing and producer invento-
ries building (Required Report – public distribution No. MX1039). Mexico City: US 
Department of Agriculture.  
H. Jarman et al.

23
 van der Laan, S. (2009). The role of theory in explaining motivation for corporate social disclosures: 
Voluntary disclosures vs “solicited” disclosures.  Australasian Accounting, Business and 
Finance Journal ,  3 (4). Retrieved from   http://ro.uow.edu.au/aabfj/vol3/iss4/2   
 Wankhade, L., & Dabade, B. M. (2006). Analysis of quality uncertainty due to information asym-
metry.  International Journal of Quality & Reliability Management, 23 (2), 230–241.   http://doi.
org/10.1108/02656710610640961  . 
 Wilson, W. (1886). The study of administration.  Political Science Quarterly, 2 (2), 197–222. 
 Zuiderwijk, A., Jeffery, K., & Janssen, M. (2012). The potential of metadata for linked open data 
and its value for users and publishers.  Journal of E-Democracy and Open Government, 4 (2), 
222–244. 
1 Public Value and Private Organizations

25
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_2
 Chapter 2 
 Challenges to Developing Interoperable 
Data Architecture to Support Sustainable 
Consumption and Sustainable Supply Chains  
 Jing  Zhang ,  Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Giri  K.  Tayi , and  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Abstract   This chapter focuses on the identiﬁ cation of key challenges to building a 
data architecture to improve sustainability in supply chains as well as providing 
consumers with better information for decision support. The chapter builds on the 
trends of sustainable consumption and sustainable supply chain management and 
incorporates the views of key stakeholders in the coffee supply chain that we inter-
viewed. Key challenges relate to accuracy and credibility of data in the system, to 
the availability of technical expertise and infrastructure across the supply chain, as 
well as with legal aspects related to data ownership, privacy, and conﬁ dentiality. 
Finally, ﬁ nding appropriate ways of funding the architecture constitutes another 
important challenge. 
 Keywords   Information asymmetry •  Supply chain transparency •  Sustainable con-
sumption •  Sustainable supply chains •  Smart disclosure 
 J.  Zhang (*) 
 Graduate School of Management ,  Clark University ,  Worcester ,  MA ,  USA 
 e-mail: jizhang@clarku.edu 
 D. S.  Sayogo 
 Department of Economics and Business ,  University of Muhammadiyah at Malang , 
 Malang ,  Indonesia 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany 
 187 Wolf Rd., Suite 301 ,  Albany  NY  12205 ,  USA 
 e-mail: dsayogo@ctg.albany.edu 
 G. K.  Tayi 
 Department of Information Technology Management ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA  
 e-mail: gtayi@albany.edu 
 L. F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: lluna-reyes@albany.edu 

26
2.1  Introduction 
 The issue of sustainable development is not new; the seemingly contradictory goals 
of economic development and environmental preservation have been encountered 
by mankind throughout its history. The well-known argument in  The Tragedy of the 
Commons (Hardin,  1968 ) is based on a nearly 200-year-old observation of shep-
herds’ treatment of common grazing pastures by an English economist, William 
Forster Lloyd. But the history of a concerted movement on the part of governments 
toward sustainable development and consumption is relatively recent, marking its 
ofﬁ cial start with the worldwide adoption of  Agenda 21 at the 1992 Earth Summit 
in Rio de Janeiro. The 178 governments that voted to adopt  Agenda 21 recognized 
the importance of sustainable development and committed themselves to the pro-
motion of more sustainable consumption patterns. 
 The  World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) deﬁ nes  sus-
tainability as “using resources to meet the need of the present without compromis-
ing the ability of future generations” (Linton, Klassen, & Jayaraman,  2007 ). 
A mainstream approach to promoting sustainable consumption consists of govern-
ment interventions to correct prices and provide regulatory frameworks to nudge 
producers into becoming more eco-efﬁ cient (Seyfang,  2005 ). Unfortunately, this 
approach has achieved only limited success, at least in part because of barriers to the 
dissemination of sufﬁ cient product information among all actors along the supply 
chain. In the vast majority of traditional supply chains, consumers have only limited 
access to information about products’ environmental and social impacts and are 
thus forced to rely only on price and information printed on the product package to 
help them with their purchasing decision. This lack of information creates difﬁ cul-
ties for consumers who are interested in assessing and understanding the implica-
tions of their consumption choices (Seyfang,  2005 ). But the lack of integrated 
information about environmental impacts in the sustainable supply chain does not 
create problems only for the consumer, but it also has the potential to disrupt the 
entire system. Importers, for example, need assurance of their supplier’s compli-
ance with independent or voluntary codes of conduct or public standards (Vachon & 
Klassen,  2007 ). As we have seen in many recent examples, such as the  Rana Plaza 
factory collapse, 1 the lack of knowledge about production practices or safety stan-
dards employed by overseas subsidiaries can have serious negative impacts on the 
reputation of major brands, subjecting them to economic and reputational losses. 
 As a result, governments begun to adopt a new approach to promoting  sustain-
ability that focuses on providing access to information to increase market transpar-
ency and efﬁ ciency, which in turn can lead to sustainable production and 
consumption. This new approach is based on the assumption that better informed 
consumers will make purchasing decisions that will provide incentives for the whole 
1   http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jun/10/rana-plaza-fund-reaches
-target-compensate-victims 
J. Zhang et al.

27
supply chain to move toward a more sustainable production model. The smart 
 disclosure  initiative of the Obama Administration is one example of such effort to 
promote innovations that help consumers use their social and environmental values 
to guide their marketplace decisions (Howard,  2012 ; Thaler & Sunstein,  2008 ). 
 The new approach partially stems from recent technological developments that 
have the potential to improve transparency of the supply  chain processes by stream-
lining the information ﬂ ow from the producer to a consumer. Such  streamlined 
information ﬂ ow could reduce information asymmetry in the supply chain (Jarman 
et al.,  2011 ), which is generally characterized by consumers not having enough 
information to verify supplier/buyer behavior (Eisenhardt,  1989 ; Fama & Jensen, 
 1983 ) or by being unable to accurately evaluate information quality and breadth 
(coverage) (Akerlof,  1970 ; Mishra, Heide, & Cort,  1998 ). Reducing barriers to 
information ﬂ ow would beneﬁ t not only consumers but also other actors in the sup-
ply chain, such as producers, retailers, distributors, and certiﬁ ers. Well-known ben-
eﬁ ts include, for example, reductions of costs of coordination and increased 
ﬂ exibility (Clemons & Row,  1993 ; Malhotra, Gosain, & Sawy,  2005 ; Wang, Tai, & 
Wei,  2006 ). Less-studied potential beneﬁ ts include the use of shared information to 
produce knowledge that can be used as marketing intelligence, allowing members 
of the supply chain to ﬁ nd new markets for their products (Malhotra et al.,  2005 ). 
However, governance plays a key role in the distribution of beneﬁ ts, which may in 
turn become one of the main barriers for sustainable coordination and information 
sharing (Clemons & Row,  1993 ; Johnston & Vitale,  1988 ). 
 As described in Chap.   1 , the  I-Choose project aimed at reducing information 
asymmetry by developing an interoperable data architecture that would support 
integration of information along the sustainable supply chain for coffee produced 
and consumed in the NAFTA region. We argue that by allowing for a more direct 
connection between the consumer and the producer, such  data architecture would 
enable innovations and changes conducive to the development of a more sustainable 
production and consumption environment. This chapter focuses on the challenges to 
developing an interoperable data infrastructure for the sustainable coffee supply 
chain from the standpoint of  key stakeholders as well as necessary conditions that 
would make such development possible. Both the challenges and the system condi-
tions were identiﬁ ed through our workshops and interviews with various actors 
involved in the sustainable coffee supply chain. 
 This chapter is organized into ﬁ ve sections, including the foregoing introduction. 
Section two provides a literature review focused on the role of information in sus-
tainable consumption, smart disclosure, and sustainable supply chain management. 
The third section outlines the  key stakeholders of the sustainable coffee supply 
chain, their interconnectedness, and the ﬂ ow of data that is relevant to assessing 
sustainable practices. The fourth section identiﬁ es challenges to developing an 
interoperable  data architecture to share information from the perspective of key 
stakeholders. The concluding section then focuses on the conditions and system 
requirements that are needed for the development of integrated data architecture to 
be possible. 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

28
2.2  Literature Review 
 Over the last few decades, the role of information in supporting  sustainable con-
sumption has been studied by various disciplines, each approaching the topic from 
a different standpoint. In the ﬁ rst part of this section, we focus on reviewing litera-
ture that identiﬁ es information asymmetry as a major barrier to developing the nec-
essary market conditions for further promotion of sustainable consumption and the 
open data movement as an opportunity to address this problem. In the second part, 
we review the literature focusing on promotion of sustainability through a complete 
supply chain approach and how information integration across the supply chain 
could help decrease its information asymmetry (Seyfang,  2005 ). 
2.2.1  Sustainable Consumption, Information 
Barriers, and Open Data 
 Although there is still  no   consensus on the exact deﬁ nition of sustainable consump-
tion (Mont & Plepys,  2008 ), the literature generally identiﬁ es two mainstream 
approaches to promoting  sustainable consumption  : (1) creating eco-efﬁ ciencies 
and “greening” the production processes and (2) changing consumer consumption 
levels and patterns (Fuchs & Lorek,  2005 ; Mont & Plepys,  2008 ; Seyfang,  2005 ). 
Although the ﬁ rst approach, generally characterized by increasing production efﬁ -
ciencies and governmental regulations aimed at lowering environmental impact of 
production, has had a wide acceptance among governments, the second approach 
is regarded as having a potentially higher impact due to the potential for lower 
consumption levels overall (Fuchs & Lorek,  2005 ). The second approach attempts 
 to  improve  sustainability   by setting up policies to inﬂ uence consumers’ consump-
tion behavior (Seyfang,  2005 ) and relies on market forces and signals from con-
sumers regarding consumption habits. In this way, increasing demand for 
“sustainable” products will eventually transform production practices and supply 
chain processes. This mainstream approach, highly dependent on consumer behav-
ior, is thus prone to failure if barriers to  information ﬂ ow are present (Seyfang, 
 2005 ). Having all the necessary information, a consumer could scrutinize the sup-
ply chain, assessing how well practices and processes in it match her personal 
values to make a sustainable purchasing decision (Jarman et al.,  2011 ). 
Unfortunately, in majority of supply chains, consumers and other actors make deci-
sions based upon limited information. 
 Of course the degree of  information asymmetry depends on the type of product 
attributes one is searching for (Darby & Karni,  1973 ; Nelson,  1970 ). Nelson ( 1970 ), 
for instance, distinguished between search and experience attributes. A search attri-
bute (e.g., price) can be known before the purchase, and consumers have the ability 
to search for it and can let it inﬂ uence their purchasing decision. Experience attri-
butes (e.g., ﬂ avor) are only known after the consumer experiences the product 
(Nelson,  1970 ), and thus a consumer cannot use them to help him make the initial 
J. Zhang et al.

29
purchasing decision. However, even though experience attributes are not knowable 
prior to the purchasing decision, the consumer can use this information about his 
experience when making  purchasing decisions in the future. Credence attributes 
(e.g., the use of organic practices), on the other hand, are not detectable to the con-
sumer even after experiencing the product, and he is thus forced to rely on third- 
party judgment or certiﬁ cation (Darby & Karni,  1973 ). 
 The limited availability and unequal access to product information limit the abil-
ity of consumers to understand the environmental and social implications of their 
consumption decisions. In this way, eliminating or reducing  information asymmetry 
is necessary for supporting sustainable consumption (Senge et al.  2008 ; Goleman 
 2010 ). Efforts to reduce asymmetry of information related to environmental and 
social impacts have led to the proliferation of third-party certiﬁ cations and labels 
(Jahn, Schramm, & Spiller,  2005 ), which attempt to help consumers differentiate 
between organizations and products in respect to their environmental and social 
practices. Unfortunately, these efforts are challenged by the ambiguity of what the 
various labels represent and the varied degrees of rigor behind each certiﬁ cation. 
Due to the diversity of  certiﬁ cations and labels , consumers might very well be wary 
of the meaning or credibility of information provided in the labeling scheme. 
Critical voices have also questioned whether the voluntary measures provided 
through labeling and limited product information were not a corporate “greenwash” 
or “bluewash” (Clapp,  1998 ; Fuchs & Lorek,  2005 ). Based on these limitations of 
third-party certiﬁ cations, Jahn et al. ( 2005 ) added a fourth dimension to product 
description, “ Potemkin attributes .” Potemkin attributes are visible only after a close 
examination of the internal processes used in producing and handling of a given 
product and are made available by tracing the provenance of information along the 
supply chain (Jahn et al.,  2005 ). 
 The context described above  constitutes  an opportunity for open data efforts and 
for promoting innovation among a diverse set of individuals and organizations, 
including producers, supply chain operators, certiﬁ ers, government agencies, 
NGOs, and information aggregators that provide analyzed information to consum-
ers. Since 2009, US government and governments around the world have developed 
policy initiatives for promoting disclosure of information held by both public and 
private entities through open government and smart disclosure efforts. The goal of 
 smart disclosure is to foster the creation of products and tools that help consumers 
make important marketplace decision. Although federal government has histori-
cally disclosed consumer information, the rise of Web 2.0 and Internet technology 
enabled governments to use information disclosure as a  policy approach in areas 
such as health, education, energy, ﬁ nance, and public safety. The highlighted bene-
ﬁ ts of  smart disclosure include enabling  consumer decision-making in complex 
market conditions and improving economy by enhancing market transparency and 
efﬁ ciency. In order to achieve these beneﬁ ts, it is recognized that disclosure of infor-
mation held by public entities is not enough as vast amount of information that is 
relevant to consumer choices are held by private entities. To provide consumers 
with access to product information, companies involved in production and 
 distribution of products need to be encouraged to release data that is of high quality 
and in machine readable format. 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

30
2.2.2  Information Technology and Sustainable 
Supply Chain Management 
 Wider interest in the issue of  sustainability from the standpoint of industry begun 
with the recognition of companies as important stewards in addressing the challenges 
of sustainable development in the 1990s (Angell & Klassen,  1999 ; Matos & Hall, 
 2007 ). This recognition in turn created immense external pressure from government, 
the public, and nongovernmental organization forcing companies to integrate sus-
tainability into their practices (Linton et al.,  2007 ; Sarkis, Zhu, & Lai,  2011 ; Vachon 
& Klassen,  2007 ; Zhu & Sarkis,  2004 ). 
 The initial focus of companies was on integrating sustainability into their inter-
nal  operations and reducing the adverse impact of their own organization (Hsu, Tan, 
Zailani, & Jayaraman,  2013 ). This strategy was soon deemed inadequate because of 
the interconnectedness of supply chain partners (Hsu et al.,  2013 ). In reaction, com-
panies started to explore management approaches that consider the environmental 
impact of the entire supply chain, from production, consumption, and customer 
service to post-consumption ( Hsu et al. ; Linton et al.,  2007 ; Matos & Hall,  2007 ; 
Vachon & Klassen,  2007 ). Integrating sustainability management into the entire 
supply chain is considered to optimize the operation of the company (Linton et al., 
 2007 ) and minimize the risks of business operation and global competition (Beamon, 
 1999 ;  Hsu et al. ). 
 However, in order to manage sustainability across the whole supply chain, it is 
necessary to share information about the sustainable practices and capabilities of all 
 supply chain partners and to collaborate with each other to address various issues 
(Vachon & Klassen,  2007 ). This becomes especially important when consumer 
interest in company’s sustainability practices is heightened, particularly in the food 
and agriculture industry (Collins, Steg, & Koning,  2007 ; Locke, Kochan, Romis, & 
Qin,  2007 ; Locke & Romis,  2007 ; Opara,  2003 ; Wilson & Clarke,  1998 ). Thus 
information technology that enables information sharing and integration can play an 
important role in supporting sustainable supply chain as a whole. 
 This promise of information technologies, however, is yet to materialize, as 
information-driven supply systems and infrastructure are in the beginning stages of 
design and development (Steinﬁ eld, Markus, & Wigand,  2011 ). In practice, many 
barriers exist preventing  full  integration of information across the supply chain. 
There is as much, if not more, incentive for hoarding or manipulating access to 
information, as there is for sharing information (Mishra et al.,  1998 ). This opens the 
door to questions concerning stakeholders’ motivations to share information, distri-
bution of beneﬁ ts, and shifts of bargaining power in supply chains (Clemons & 
Row,  1993 ; Johnston & Vitale,  1988 ). Information systems that would dramatically 
reduce information asymmetries in  supply chains would undoubtedly alter many 
important attributes of supply  chains such as governance, incentives to share infor-
mation and other resources, and motivations to create and participate in long-term 
relationships. 
J. Zhang et al.

31
 In addition, supply chain actors must consider the cost and potential return as 
developing and maintaining sustainable supply chain management  infrastructure 
will not be free. Creating and sustaining sharing capabilities will impose additional 
costs on producers, retailers, and everyone in between. On the other hand, current 
IS research has shown that information sharing promotes efﬁ ciencies and cost 
reductions (Malhotra et al.,  2005 ) and information sharing may create value through 
marketing intelligence (Malhotra et al.,  2005 ). Yet, the positive impacts of such 
investments remain difﬁ cult to quantify and thus justify within the corporate struc-
ture (Wolf,  2011 ). Likewise, competition and market conditions make the distribu-
tion of such beneﬁ ts inequitable and uncertain along the supply chain, further 
reducing possible incentive for information sharing (Clemons & Row,  1993 ; Han, 
Chang, & Hahn,  2011 ; Johnston & Vitale,  1988 ). 
 Summarizing the literature review on sustainable consumption and sustainable 
supply chain, it is reasonable to argue that developing  information  integration capa-
bility through an interoperable data architecture is a viable solution to some of the 
major roadblocks toward an expanded market for sustainable products. The devel-
opment of such interoperable architecture, however, requires policymaker, manag-
ers, and developers to deal with a few key challenges facing the various players 
along the supply chain.  
2.3  The Primary Data Producers and Information Flow 
in Sustainable Coffee Supply Chain 
 The  coffee supply chain in the NAFTA region consists of multitude of actors with 
different roles and different responsibilities in respect to data production, data main-
tenance, and data ownership. Identiﬁ cation of these main actors is key to under-
standing the data environment in the supply chain and to identifying challenges to 
integrated information sharing. This section presents our ﬁ ndings about the primary 
data producers and information ﬂ ows in the sustainable coffee supply chain based 
on data collected in workshops and 44 semi-structured interviews conducted 
throughout the I-Choose project. 
 The workshop participants from the  I-Choose project identiﬁ ed seven primary 
stakeholders in the sustainable  coffee supply chain : consumers, producers, certiﬁ -
ers, retailers/roasters, distributors, cooperatives, and consumer associations (Sayogo 
et al.,  2012 ). Individual interviews conducted as part of the I-Choose project with 
various stakeholders in the supply chain provided a more accurate account of the 
involvement of key stakeholders in the creation of data relevant to assessing 
 sustainable practices, the direction of the data ﬂ ow, and the challenges of data shar-
ing and reuse. 
 In an ideal supply chain, the relationship between producers, retailers, and con-
sumers is rather linear in respect to product ﬂ ow which is not necessarily accompa-
nied by a related production information ﬂ ow. In the case of a sustainable coffee 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

32
supply chain, the actors and their relationships are more complex. In Fig.  2.1 , we 
depict several tiers of supply chain actors and the ﬂ ow of product among them. This 
ﬁ gure does not depict ﬂ ow of information that accompanies products throughout the 
sustainable coffee supply chain; the ﬂ ow of information is described in latter para-
graphs in this section.
 The sustainable  coffee supply chain in Mexico includes two different kinds of 
coffee producers, small and medium farmers. There are no large farmers in Mexico 
because of land regulations that started after the Mexican revolution in the early 
twentieth century. Medium farmers tend to integrate the value chain from produc-
tion to roasting, and most of them have their own brands that are sold in national and 
international markets. Some medium farmers who are interested in exporting have 
some coffee certiﬁ cations such as UTZ or the Rainforest Alliance. Small farmers, 
on the other hand, only have access to the market through a local intermediary who 
may have access to larger intermediaries in the supply chain. 
 Larger intermediaries in the supply chain include cooperatives, specialty roast-
ers, and other larger entities, each of them buying product from different kinds of 
local intermediaries and selling to a number of various types of clients. In the case 
of cooperatives, for example, local intermediaries are cooperative members at the 
local level. In the case of specialty roasters, the local intermediary is usually a well- 
known certiﬁ ed coffee taster who builds relationships with producers to improve 
their production methods, so they can provide the specialty roaster with high- quality 
coffee to be sold directly to the end consumer in small coffee shops. Finally, other 
large intermediaries gather coffee to be sold to either national or international ros-
ters and are usually in charge of the drying process, getting the coffee beans ready 
for roasting. Large intermediaries in the sustainable supply chain that we inter-
viewed were certiﬁ ed by 4C and belonged to the  Nestlé supply chain . 
 Fig. 2.1   Main stakeholders in sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain 
 
J. Zhang et al.

33
 The interview ﬁ ndings and secondary data analysis indicate two major types of 
 information ﬂ ow along the supply chains: (a) trading information and (b)  certiﬁ ca-
tion information. In general, the information collection process for certiﬁ cation pur-
poses begins when 2 an applicant submits an application package and documentation 
to a certiﬁ cation body. This package is evaluated to determine the eligibility and the 
scope of audit for the applicant, and if deemed eligible, an authorized auditor con-
ducts an audit on behalf of the certiﬁ cation body. The audit process involves several 
 information collection processes : initial meeting, document review, interviews, 
physical site visit, and closing meeting. Following the audit, an audit report is sent 
to the certiﬁ cation body for further evaluation and subsequently for a certiﬁ cation 
decision. Even though the information is collected by a certiﬁ cation body, the own-
ership of all data collected during a certiﬁ cation process remains with the applicant, 
generally producers or roasters. The certiﬁ cation body acts only as an information 
custodian and stores the information in their database. 
 Information about products is also collected continuously during the trading pro-
cess between producers and roasters/importers 3 through trading documents such as 
invoice, bills of lading, or other documents, to ensure that the traded products are 
certiﬁ ed as sustainably produced. Each document for sustainable trading must be 
identiﬁ ed with particular certiﬁ cation body that the producers or roasters are regis-
tered with, usually in the form of a certiﬁ cation ID. In addition to the trading docu-
ments, some certiﬁ cation bodies require the roasters to submit quarterly reports of 
their sustainably certiﬁ ed coffee sales. 
 Given the complexities of the  sustainable coffee supply chain and the number of 
stakeholders involved, it is not difﬁ cult to discern the difﬁ culties of integrating 
information among these actors. In the next section, we describe ﬁ ve categories of 
challenges identiﬁ ed during our project as they apply to three primary data produc-
ers in the supply chain—producers (small and medium farmers), roasters, and certi-
ﬁ ers. More detailed descriptions of these challenges are provided in Sayogo 
(Sayogo,  2013 ; Sayogo et al.  2014 ,  2015 ). 
2.4  Challenges to Opening Data to Support Interoperable 
Data Platforms 
 The literature on  information integration  and challenges associated with such 
endeavors is numerous and spans a number of disciplines from science to technol-
ogy, business, and medicine. Each  information integration effort is unique, however, 
and as such entails unique challenges based on the complexity of the environment, 
2  Detail description of data collection process can be found in documentations published by third-
party certiﬁ cation bodies. For example, for FLO refer to  http://www.ﬂ ocert.net/fairtrade-services/
fairtrade-certiﬁ cation/how-it-works/ 
3  Some roasters also act as retailers by directly selling their product to end consumers, some roast-
ers sell their product to retailers, and some roaster do both. 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

34
the scope of the information landscape, the number of actors involved, and many 
other factors. The sustainable coffee supply chain is no different, creating a set of 
unique challenges for the various stakeholders involved in data production along the 
chain. Throughout our interviews and workshops, we have identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve main chal-
lenges to making  coffee certiﬁ cation information more readily available to the pub-
lic that producers, roasters, and third-party certiﬁ ers face as the primary data 
producers, data owners, and/or data stewards. 
2.4.1  Data Challenges: Collection, Accuracy, and Credibility 
 Interoperable data platforms , such as I-Choose, depend for its usefulness and accu-
racy of its recommendations on unfettered access to data from data producers and 
data stewards. The ﬁ rst step to making data from the  coffee certiﬁ cation process 
available is to ensure that the necessary data is collected and is accurate and credi-
ble. Our interview ﬁ ndings indicate that the main data producers and data stew-
ards—coffee producers, roasters, and  third-party certiﬁ ers —face a number of 
challenges when attempting to collect accurate and credible data. 
 Coffee Producers 
 As  we have seen in Fig.  2.1 , producer in a sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply 
chain is usually a cooperative comprised of a number of small farmers or a 
medium-sized plantation owner. Certiﬁ cation and inspection data for certiﬁ ed 
sustainable coffee consists of many pieces of data collected from small farm-
ers by either their cooperative or a local intermediary. Farmers represent the 
smallest unit of data source, and ensuring continuous ﬂ ow of data from them 
is crucial for the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain. Our interviews with various 
stakeholders indicated that requesting farmers to maintain consistent docu-
mentation of their production processes is the most difﬁ cult challenge. 
Typically, farmers do not understand the value of maintaining documentation, 
see documentation as a waste of their time, and are reluctant to record infor-
mation about their products if the documentation process is complicated. As 
a consequence, cooperatives frequently have to assume additional costs to 
ensure data is collected. Cooperatives often distribute predeﬁ ned and easy-to-
ﬁ ll forms to farmers or assign staff, usually the internal control, to solicit data 
from farmers through  interviews . 
J. Zhang et al.

35
 Additionally, large intermediaries such as cooperatives or specialty roasters have 
to contend with ensuring accuracy and credibility of data in situations where small 
farmers, motivated by geographical location and ﬁ nancial issues, sell their coffee to 
local intermediaries who in turn sell it to the large intermediaries. Our interviewees 
stated that these local intermediaries, especially those who are not part of a coopera-
tive, occasionally fabricate information about the certiﬁ cation of their product in 
order to quickly fulﬁ ll orders. Most often these local intermediaries record and 
report noncertiﬁ ed products as certiﬁ ed. 
 Roasters 
 Roasters’ primary challenge is ensuring access to production data and credi-
bility of the data they receive.  Roasters generally procure their coffee from 
traders or importers. Our interviews indicated that some importers hesitate to 
reveal their information or source of information due to two reasons. First, 
some traders in a sense “cheapen[ing] the spirit of fair trading” by manipulating 
prices during negotiations with producers. These traders thus do not wish to 
disclose their source of product and producer information. Second, hoarding 
or hiding information is seen by some traders as a competitive advantage and 
strategy to mitigate threat of substitution. As a result, roasters are often faced 
with incomplete and inaccurate data regarding the origin of the product they 
purchase, which in turn affects their ability to provide accurate and complete 
data for their roasted product. 
 Third-Party Certiﬁ ers 
 Third-party certiﬁ ers  face similar challenges as those faced by data producers. 
Our interviewee from Control Union, a globally recognized certiﬁ cation 
agency, indicated that inspectors who conduct audits in the ﬁ eld often encounter 
incomplete or unavailable information for their audit. Since audits are con-
ducted only once a year, the information gaps hinder the ability of inspectors 
to understand what happens in the period between audits. In addition, despite 
the existence of criteria that are in turn governed by standards, inspectors and 
evaluators still need to exercise their own judgment when applying the criteria 
in the ﬁ eld. For example, the third-level indicators for criteria 3.2.22 of 
Fairtrade (FLO)—training members on appropriate use of fertilizers—are (a) 
at least 50 % members have been trained and (b) content of training was suf-
ﬁ cient. The inspectors need to use their judgment based on their expertise and 
experience to measure the sufﬁ ciency of the training content. When consistent 
and reliable information is lacking, the audit reports that are at the core of 
certiﬁ cation and inspection data are prone to human judgment biases. Without 
adequate information, auditors  must use their experience in deciding the 
extent to which the applicant conforms to the given criteria  and  standard. 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

36
 Roasters and Third-Party Certiﬁ ers 
 Interviewees from roasters and third-party certiﬁ cations asserted that they are 
 sometimes  limited by their lack of technical expertise despite their willing-
ness to disclose their data. For instance, our roasters/importers’ interviewees 
abandoned their efforts to publish coffee contract documents online due to the 
lack of sufﬁ cient technical expertise that would be needed to build a robustly 
protected and highly functional database system. Our interviewee from Fair 
for Life also stated that their organization limits the publication of certiﬁ ca-
tion ratings and indicators on their website due to technological capability 
concerns. The interviewee indicated that they have to use the help from exter-
nal programmers, which is an additional cost. While larger organizations such 
2.4.2  Technology Capability: Technical Expertise, Hardware, 
and Communication 
 The second large challenge facing producers, roasters, and third-party certiﬁ cation 
bodies is limited technological capabilities including limited technical expertise of 
people on the ground, limited access to technology (hardware), and lack of access 
to reliable communication infrastructure. 
 Coffee Producers 
  Limited access to technology and limited technical knowledge represent a 
major challenge for both kinds of coffee producers—small farmers and local 
cooperatives. The lack of technical expertise and access to technology is espe-
cially severe at the small farmer level. Our interviews with small farmers 
point to the challenge of accessing technology due to the geographical remote-
ness of their location. For instance, when trying to sell  organic coffee , such as 
US Department of Agriculture (USDA) organic, small farmers have difﬁ cul-
ties with publishing their organic certiﬁ cate, which requires information tech-
nology as well as a reliable internet connection to access the certiﬁ er 
information system. Both tend to be in short supply in some of the remote 
areas of Mexican coffee-producing states. 
 Limited access to technology at points of production also represents a challenge 
for local cooperatives that are forced to assign additional staff in locations where 
technology is accessible to facilitate communication with traders (roasters and 
importers). An additional challenge facing local cooperatives is acquiring the neces-
sary technical knowledge that would be required to manage an implementation of a 
system that would allow them to digitally integrate data from individual small  farm-
ers  where they have to adopt computerized record keeping. 
(continued)
J. Zhang et al.

37
as FLO might have the resources to build and maintain a system that allows 
public to access information about certiﬁ cation,  smaller  certiﬁ cation systems 
with smaller target markets simply do not possess the ﬁ nancial resources 
needed. Although large organizations like FLO do make their systems avail-
able to other participants in the system, the licensing costs are high for small 
and medium roasters and third-party certiﬁ ers. The diversity of systems devel-
oped by small and medium roasters, besides their technical limitations, poses 
the additional challenge of integration of information.  
2.4.3  Challenges to Third-Party Certiﬁ er: Data Ownership 
and Conﬂ ict of Disclosure Policy 
 Majority of data related to product inspection and certiﬁ cation as well as to sustain-
able trading is  in  the stewardship of third-party certiﬁ cation bodies that collect and 
store such data. Opening the data available in third-party certiﬁ cation databases 
could provide substantial beneﬁ ts for promoting sustainable consumption practices 
by lowering information asymmetry in the supply chain through innovative technol-
ogy solutions that would make such information accessible in an easily understood 
format. However, third-party certiﬁ ers face two interrelated challenges to publish-
ing their data: data ownership and conﬂ ict with applicant’s disclosure policy. 
 Data Ownership 
 Even though third-party certiﬁ cation bodies are responsible for collection and 
maintenance of certiﬁ cation data, the data ownership remains with the appli-
cant, usually the producer or roaster, not the certiﬁ cation body itself. Thus, 
any release, access to, or publishing of this data requires consent from the 
applicants, which is often difﬁ cult to obtain, not only because producers need 
to be willing to disclose their information but also because producers—as we 
described before—are usually large cooperatives or federations of coopera-
tives with thousands of members. In such situations, reaching an agreement to 
disclose data is a very challenging task. Moreover, most certiﬁ cations are 
designed with the assumption of data conﬁ dentiality as part of their core strat-
egy to attract new producers. Even those that promote a more open system 
face this challenge on a regular basis. Interviewees from  Fair for Life certiﬁ -
cation —a certiﬁ cation system with an open policy—indicated that the option 
for data owners to publish certiﬁ cation results is voluntary, and applicants can 
opt out from this requirement. Consequently, certiﬁ ers are limited in  the 
 amount of data they can publish. 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

38
 Conﬂ ict of Disclosure Policy 
 As  we brieﬂ y commented in the previous paragraph, the disclosure policy of 
the certiﬁ cation body often conﬂ icts with the disclosure policy of the appli-
cant with regard to publishing certiﬁ cation data. According to an interviewee 
from  CERTIMEX , one of the ﬁ rst things that auditors do when they start 
working with an applicant is to sign a legally binding document that acknowl-
edges that the ownership of all certiﬁ cation-related data remains with the 
applicant. Applicants, in the meantime, have their own information policies 
governing the release of their data, which generally operate on full consensus 
of all cooperative members. Given the number of farmers and their limited 
incentive for releasing such data, acquiring a permission for release is quite 
difﬁ cult and time consuming. Other types of applicants, such as medium 
farmers, take into consideration their own disclosure  policy before deciding 
whether to publish their certiﬁ cation data, and they are especially concerned 
about the impact to their brand and reputation.  
2.4.4  Information Policy: Conﬁ dentiality, Commercial Privacy, 
and Economic Value of Information 
 While disclosure  of  information has the potential to greatly beneﬁ t the public as 
well as the entity disclosing such information, disclosure also carries risks associ-
ated with safeguarding information that might hurt the organization both in the short 
and in the long term. Our interviews indicated that many companies lack policies 
that would clearly identify which and how much information should and should not 
be disclosed due to concerns related to privacy, conﬁ dentiality, and economic com-
petitiveness. Interviewees from mission-driven companies pointed out that a major 
barrier to opening their data is making a decision about how to balance disclosing 
enough information to create value with the need not to violate disclosure restric-
tions. Interviewees from corporate entities within the supply chain showed willing-
ness to open their data if doing so adds value to the organization and restrictions 
related to the conﬁ dentiality and economic value of information can be implemented 
easily. Some information is closely related to competitive advantage and disclosing 
it potentially endangers the organization’s market share. 
 There is also the issue of ensuring commercial privacy. As alluded to in the para-
graph above, disclosing certiﬁ cation results might compromise the reputation and 
competitive advantage of the applicants. The problem is not necessarily new because 
supply chains have a long tradition of sharing information to reduce costs and 
improve ﬂ exibility (Malhotra et al.,  2005 ; Clemons & Row,  1993 ). However, it has 
also been identiﬁ ed in the literature that the distribution of both costs and beneﬁ ts 
can be one of the main barriers to continued information disclosure inside the supply 
chain. The issue becomes more salient when considering not only these private 
exchanges but also public disclosure of information. 
J. Zhang et al.

39
2.4.5  Financial Costs of Digital Data/Information Disclosure 
 As discussed above, the costs and challenges associated with information  collection 
are tremendous. But the costs associated with information disclosure are not limited 
just to the point of collection but also involve costs associated with disclosing such 
information in a digital, machine readable format, as well as the continuous process 
of updating and maintaining the shared resource. Such information disclosure can 
be very costly to all actors involved with data production and maintenance. 
 The interviewees indicated that indirect costs of certiﬁ cation can be very expen-
sive even if mechanisms exist to mitigate direct costs. For instance, third-party cer-
tiﬁ cation generally requires producers to maintain records and documentation to 
support the certiﬁ cation and/or traceability efforts. Maintaining records and docu-
mentation represents a major cost for  producers  due to the challenges discussed in 
sections above. Publishing their data online is costly for both roasters and third- 
party certiﬁ cation bodies as well. For roasters, additional work is required to  transfer 
information from an ofﬂ ine format to online or to public domain, which increases 
expenses. For third-party certiﬁ cation bodies, the information can be extensive; for 
example, audit results might consist of 30 pages with 10 or 20 control points for 
each category, making open data costly for them. 
 As the foregoing discussion indicates, the challenges to creating an interoperable 
data sharing platform are numerous. As with any information sharing effort, it is not 
just technical limitations that might make development of such platform difﬁ cult but 
also issues connected to policy and governance issues, data reliability and trustwor-
thiness, and creation of economic incentives for various actors along the supply 
chain. In the concluding section of this chapter, we discuss some of the practical 
implications of these challenges in regard to creating conditions that would allow 
for successful integrated data sharing along the supply chain for sustainable coffee. 
2.5  Conditions for Developing Interoperable Data Platform 
in Sustainable Supply Chain 
 An  interoperable data platform does not consist just of the software, hardware, and 
data contained in it. Rather it is a system enveloping components of governance, 
policy, business, trustworthiness, stakeholder relations, and more. The following 
paragraphs begin to sketch a few system components and conditions that are neces-
sary for a good foundation of an interoperable data platform. 
2.5.1  Ensuring Information Integrity, Trustworthiness, 
and Security 
 The  functionality and usefulness  of  any information sharing system depends on the 
degree to which information contained in the system is accurate, timely, and useful 
and the extent to which it protects integrity of the said information. In other words, 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

40
assuring data’s trustworthiness is crucial when data is being shared among various 
sources and in various formats and also in creating aggregated information from the 
shared data (Dinh, Wenqiang, & Datta,  2012 ). The degree of trust toward the data 
and the platform’s security presumably inﬂ uences the likelihood that both consum-
ers and supply chain partners will use the information produced by a system like 
I-Choose, and thus creating technical and process mechanisms to ensure informa-
tion integrity is essential. 
 Information security in platforms such as I-Choose is particularly important 
because data that is relevant might often be considered conﬁ dential and/or proprie-
tary. As noted in previous sections, our interviewees considered some of the infor-
mation disclosed during a certiﬁ cation process as vital to their economic 
competitiveness. As a result, any information architecture or platform would need 
to incorporate proper access controls to authenticate its diverse users to ensure that 
proprietary data is not being accessed inappropriately. To ensure participation of 
some of the key actors of the supply chain, the developers must ﬁ nd an effective way 
to involve primary stakeholders, if not primary data producers, in designing the 
information security requirements from the start. Such participation will boost 
stakeholders’ trust in the data and enhance conﬁ dence among data owners that their 
proprietary data is well protected (see Chap.   6 for a discussion on security and pri-
vacy requirements and challenges). 
 In addition to data security,  developers  also need to ensure trustworthiness of data 
in their system. Recent research examined trustworthiness of data through various 
lenses, namely, data integrity, data quality, and data lineage and provenance (Bertino 
& Lim,  2011 ; Bertino, Dai, & Kantarcioglu,  2009 ). Previous research on data qual-
ity suggests that, from the user perspective, data quality correlates to high relevance 
(Bertino et al.,  2009 ; Tayi & Ballou,  1998 ; Wang & Strong,  1996 ). In terms of data 
provenance, trustworthiness of the data is deﬁ ned as having access to the source and 
origins of the data (Bertino & Lim,  2011 ;  Bertino et al. ; Ram & Liu,  2009 ). 
 Few researchers, however, pay attention  to the role that can be played by govern-
ments. Presumably, government policy promoting disclosure of information held not 
only by public entities but also private entities contributes to market transparency 
and trust production in sustainable markets. Trust is often related to institutional fac-
tors, such as legal contracts, social networks, and societal norms that make opportu-
nistic behaviors less likely. Arguably, government efforts in establishing legal 
framework to ensure consistent product standards for sustainable products could 
contribute to the development of consumer trust. Using a survey, we investigated the 
determinants of consumer trust in the presumed sustainability of a product (Sayogo, 
Zhang, Liu, Picazo-Vela, & Luna-Reyes,  2014 ). Our results suggest that in the case 
of sustainable products, brands, certiﬁ cate’s reputation, support from government 
agencies and endorsement from nonproﬁ t organizations signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uence con-
sumers’ trust in the product. We argue that to be useful, additional information from 
the certiﬁ cation process should be aggregated and presented to consumers in a simple 
and value-added fashion. 
 Nonetheless, our research is only the ﬁ rst step to understanding the dynamic 
interaction of market and government policy. The issues of generating and measur-
J. Zhang et al.

41
ing data trustworthiness from the user perspective are still very much open for thor-
ough  investigat ion.  The   challenge of creating trustworthiness in the system is 
discussed in more detail in Chap.   3 . 
2.5.2  Creation of Semantic Compatibilities Among Standards 
and Protocols 
 Although  the interviewees did not explicitly emphasize  the issue of semantic incom-
patibilities, this issue is crucial for developing platform such as I-Choose. There are 
diverse certiﬁ cation standards and protocols applied to the sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee 
supply chain (van Hoek, Vos, & Commandeur,  1999 ; Wang & Strong,  1996 ), and 
each uses different criteria and processes for assessment and certiﬁ cation. The 
EcoLabelIndex, 4 an information aggregator on eco-certiﬁ cations, is currently track-
ing 444 ecolabels in 197 countries and 25 industry sectors. Consequently, to provide 
trustworthy recommendations, platforms such as I-Choose need to take into account 
these diversities by creating semantic compatibilities among standards and protocols. 
Technically, the development of semantic compatibilities and common language and 
schema among diverse knowledge is possible through ontology to facilitate automatic 
data extraction and reasoning about sustainable certiﬁ cation and trading. The primary 
 stakeholders   in sustainable  certiﬁ ed   coffee supply chain could share a common 
understanding of the certiﬁ cation structures through the ontology layers. Chapter   5     in 
this book includes a more detailed description of our project’s efforts  toward   develop-
ing an ontology that would accommodate data from sustainable coffee supply chain.  
2.5.3  Designing Information Policy That Balances 
Commercial Interests and Openness 
 One of the biggest  challenges  facing a system such as I-Choose is the lack of eco-
nomic motivations for information disclosure. The interviewees indicated inclina-
tion and willingness to open their information only if doing so adds value to their 
organizations. Thus, it is important to design information policy that balances the 
desire for supply chain transparency and the need for keeping businesses competitive. 
A lesson from studies in economics can be used as a starting lens. These studies 
point out that timing and manner of disclosure supersede the decision of whether 
companies need to disclose. Appropriate timing and method for information disclo-
sure can mitigate the company’s fears that disclosure will disrupt their market posi-
tion and thus allow them to accrue the beneﬁ ts from disclosing information (Vachon 
& Klassen,  2007 ). 
4  http://www.ecolabelindex.com 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

42
2.5.4  Creation of Business Model for Integrated Data Platform 
 The potential for  a  business or revenue model of systems like I-Choose has both 
practical and research implications. Arguably, the existence of an integrated and 
open data architecture might provide fertile ground for entrepreneur development. 
Processing and providing users’ information that ﬁ ts their needs could create inno-
vative business models based on market signals and value provisions. 
 Our current simulation experiments reveal that the market resists “takeoff” unless 
external ﬁ nancial support can be found (Ran et al.,  2016 ). Additionally, “takeoff” 
dynamics of the system are dominated by marketing budgets and external support 
for infrastructure. Marketing budgets drive how fast users adopt the system, and 
without external sponsorship of system, the ﬁ nal market collapses. Further research 
investigating an appropriate business model would be beneﬁ cial for the develop-
ment and adoption of such platforms such as I- Choose . 
2.5.5  Establishing Collaborative Governance Model 
 A number of  the  challenges discussed above call for attention to policy development 
in respect to governance. Speciﬁ cally, interoperable systems that integrate various 
organizations in the fragmented supply chain and multiple certiﬁ cations would 
involve multiple stakeholders with diverse interests, degrees of power, and values. 
Integration of these diverse values necessitates the construction of governing mech-
anisms that take these complexities into account. 
 One possible governance intervention is the creation of data commons governed 
by collaborative governance body (Flynn, Huo, & Zhao,  2010 ). This is a roundtable 
type of governance model involving stakeholders in the supply chain. The function 
of such governance mechanism is to generate policies to support the implementa-
tion of platform such as I-Choose. This governance body supervises the creation of 
semantic  compatibilities among standards and protocols, the creation of informa-
tion security policies, and the design of information policy that balances the need 
for commercial privacy and desire for information openness. Jarman et al. ( 2011 ) 
envisioned balancing three elements of (1) “hard” regulation, (2) partnership building, 
and (3) wider participation from consumer review as one plausible governing 
mechanism for I-Choose. Chapter   8 of this book further discusses governance issues 
and further paths for development. 
 The involvement of various supply chain stakeholders including government 
regulators, industry associations, consumers, consumer advocates, producers, and 
others is a must. Involvement of these stakeholders in the governance body mini-
mizes resistance caused by variety of conﬂ icting interests as well as making sure 
that all stakeholders’ interests are represented. This way the issue of negative 
impacts to sustainability and competitiveness can be mitigated, especially for  stake-
holders  with less power and inﬂ uence. 
J. Zhang et al.

43
2.6  Concluding Remarks 
 Information asymmetry in the relationship between end consumers and ﬁ rms in 
supply chain is argued to be one of the key barriers that conﬁ ne the proliferation of 
sustainable consumption (Seyfang,  2005 ). A challenge to remedy such problems 
lies in making vast amounts of disparate data and information regarding sustainability 
practices shareable across the supply chain and usable by end consumers. One key 
missing element is a platform that combines interoperable data standards and archi-
tecture with policy and governance mechanisms. This chapter presents main chal-
lenges and key conditions to be considered in developing data standards to support 
interoperable platform for sustainability as perceived by key stakeholders in sustain-
able certiﬁ ed coffee industry.  
 References 
 Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. 
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3), 488–500. 
 Angell, L. C., & Klassen, R. D. (1999). Integrating environmental issues into the mainstream: An 
agenda for research in operations management.  Journal of Operations Management, 17 (5), 
575–598.   http://doi.org/10.1016/S0272-6963(99)00006-6  . 
 Beamon, B. M. (1999). Designing the green supply chain.  Logistics Information Management, 
12 (4), 332–342. 
 Bertino, E., & Lim, H. S. (2010). Assuring data trustworthiness-concepts and research challenges. 
In Secure Data Management (pp. 1–12). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
 Bertino, E., Dai, C., & Kantarcioglu, M. (2009, January). The challenge of assuring data trustwor-
thiness. In Database Systems for Advanced Applications (pp. 22–33). Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg.  
 Clapp, J. (1998). The privatization of global environmental governance: ISO 14000 and the devel-
oping world.  Global Governance, 4 (3), 295–316. 
 Clemons, E. K., & Row, M. C. (1993). Limits to interﬁ rm coordination through information tech-
nology: Results of a ﬁ eld study in consumer packaged goods distribution.  Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 10 (1), 73–95.  
 Collins, C. M., Steg, L., & Koning, M. A. S. (2007). Customers’ values, beliefs on sustainable 
corporate performance, and buying behavior.  Psychology and Marketing, 24 (6), 555–577. 
 Darby, M. R., & Karni, E. (1973). Free competition and the optimal amount of fraud.  Journal of 
Law and Economics, 16 (1), 67–88. 
 Dinh, T. T. A., Wenqiang, W., & Datta, A. (2012). City on the sky: Extending XACML for ﬂ exible, 
secure data sharing on the cloud.  Journal of Grid Computing, 10 (1), 151–172.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10723-012-9212-9  . 
 Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory: An assessment and review.  The Academy of Management 
Review, 14 (1), 57–74. 
 Fama, E. F., & Jensen, M. C. (1983). Separation of ownership and control.  Journal of Law and 
Economics, 26 (2), 301–325. 
 Flynn, B. B., Huo, B., & Zhao, X. (2010). The impact of supply chain integration on performance: 
A contingency and conﬁ guration approach.  Journal of Operations Management, 28 (1), 58–71. 
  http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2009.06.001  . 
 Fuchs, D. A., & Lorek, S. (2005). Sustainable consumption governance: A history of promises and 
failures.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 28 (3), 261–288.   http://doi.org/10.1007/s10603-005-8490-z  . 
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

44
  Goleman, D. (2010). Ecological intelligence: The hidden impacts of what we buy. Broadway 
Business.  
 Han, K., Chang, Y. B., & Hahn, J. (2011). Information technology spillover and productivity: The 
role of information technology intensity and competition.  Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 28 (1), 115–146.   http://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222280105  . 
 Hardin, G. (1968). The tragedy of the commons.  Science, 162 (3859), 1243–1248. 
 Howard, A. (2012, April 1).  What is smart disclosure? Retrieved from   http://radar.oreilly.
com/2012/04/what-is-smart-disclosure.htm   
 Hsu, C.-C., Tan, K. C., Zailani, S. H. M., & Jayaraman, V. (2013). Supply chain drivers that foster 
the development of green initiatives in an emerging economy.  International Journal of Operations 
& Production Management, 33 (6), 656–688.   http://doi.org/10.1108/IJOPM-10-2011-0401  .  
 Jahn, G., Schramm, M., & Spiller, A. (2005). The reliability of certiﬁ cation: Quality labels as a 
consumer policy tool.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 28 (1), 53–73.   http://doi.org/10.1007/
s10603-004-7298-6  . 
 Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Whitmore, A., Picazo-Vela, S., Andersen, D. L., et al. 
(2011).  I-choose: Consumer choice, digital government, and sustainability in North America . 
Presented at the APPAM Fall Research Conference, Washington D.C.  
 Johnston, H. R., & Vitale, M. A. (1988). Creating competitive advantage with interorganizational 
information systems.  MIS Quarterly, 12 (2), 153–165. 
 Linton, J. D., Klassen, R., & Jayaraman, V. (2007). Sustainable supply chains: An introduction. 
 Journal of Operations Management, 25 (6), 1075–1082. 
  Locke, R., & Romis, M. (2007). Improving work conditions in a global supply chain.  MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 48 (2), 54–61. 
 Locke, R., Kochan, T., Romis, M., & Qin, F. (2007). Beyond corporate codes of conduct: Work 
organization and labour standards at Nike’s suppliers.  International Labour Review, 146 (1–2), 
21–40. 
 Malhotra, A., Gosain, S., & Sawy, O. A. E. (2005). Absorptive capacity conﬁ gurations in supply 
chains: Gearing for partner-enabled market knowledge creation.  MIS Quarterly, 145–187 . 
 Matos, S., & Hall, J. (2007). Integrating sustainable development in the supply chain: The case of 
life cycle assessment in oil and gas and agricultural biotechnology.  Journal of Operations 
Management, 25 (6), 1083–1102.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2007.01.013  . 
 Mishra, D. P., Heide, J. B., & Cort, S. G. (1998). Information asymmetry and levels of agency 
relationships.  Journal of Marketing Research, 35 (3), 277.   http://doi.org/10.2307/3152028  . 
 Mont, O., & Plepys, A. (2008). Sustainable consumption progress: Should we be proud or alarmed? 
 Journal of Cleaner Production, 16 (4), 531–537.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2007.01.009  . 
 Nelson, P. (1970). Information and consumer behavior.  Journal of Political Economy, 78 (2), 
311–329. 
 Opara, L. U. (2003). Traceability in agriculture and food supply chain: A review of basic concepts, 
technological implications, and future prospects.  Journal of Food, Agriculture and Environment, 
1 , 101–106. 
 Ram, S., & Liu, J. (2009). A New Perspective on Semantics of Data Provenance. SWPM, 526 . 
 Ran, W., Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Andersen, D. L., Tayi, G. K., et al. (2016). 
Supply-chain transparency and governance systems: Market penetration of the I-choose system. 
In J. Zhang, L. F. Luna-Reyes, T. A. Pardo, & D. S. Sayogo (Eds.),  Information, models, and 
sustainability: Policy informatics in the age of big data and open government . Pravi: Springler. 
 Sarkis, J., Zhu, Q., & Lai, K. (2011). An organizational theoretic review of green supply chain 
management literature.  International Journal of Production Economics, 130 (1), 1–15.   http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2010.11.010  . 
 Sayogo, D. S. (2013).  Modeling incentives to disclose: Smart disclosure policy, private sector 
transparency and demanded disclosure (Dissertation). University at Albany State University of 
New York, Albany. 
 Sayogo, D. S., Jarman, H., Whitmore, A., Tayi, G. K., Zhang, J., Hrdinova, J., ... & Andersen, D. 
L. (2012, June). A stakeholder analysis of interoperable data architecture: The case of 
I-Choose. In Proceedings of the 13th Annual International Conference on Digital Government 
Research (pp. 145–154). ACM.  
J. Zhang et al.

45
 Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Liu, H., Picazo-Vela, S., & Luna-Reyes, L. (2014, June). Examining trust 
as key drivers in smart disclosure for sustainable consumption: the case of I-choose. In 
Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research (pp. 
137–146). ACM.  
 Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Pardo, T. A., Tayi, G. K., Hrdinova, J., Andersen, D. F., et al. (2014). 
Going beyond open data: Challenges and motivations for smart disclosure in ethical consump-
tion.  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 9 (2), 3–4.   http://doi.
org/10.4067/S0718-18762014000200002  . 
  Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Luna-Reyes, L., Jarman, H., Tayi, G., Andersen, D. L., et al. (2015). 
Challenges and requirements for developing data architecture supporting integration of sustain-
able supply chains.  Information Technology and Management, 16 (1), 5–18.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10799-014-0203-3  . 
   Senge, P. M., Smith, B., Kruschwitz, N., Laur, J., & Schley, S. (2008). The necessary revolution: 
How individuals and organizations are working together to create a sustainable world. Crown 
Business.  
 Seyfang, G. (2005). Shopping for sustainability: Can sustainable consumption promote ecological 
citizenship?  Environmental Politics, 14 (2), 290–306.   http://doi.org/10.1080/09644010500055209  . 
 Steinﬁ eld, C., Markus, M. L., & Wigand, R. T. (2011). Through a glass clearly: Standards, archi-
tecture, and process transparency in global supply chains.  Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 28 (2), 75–108.   http://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222280204  . 
 Tayi, G. K., & Ballou, D. P. (1998). Examining data quality.  Communications of the ACM, 41 (2), 
54–57.   http://doi.org/10.1145/269012.269021  . 
  Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008).  Nudge: improving decisions about health, wealth, and 
happiness . New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Vachon, S., & Klassen, R. (2007). Supply chain management and environmental technologies: the 
role of integration.  International Journal of Production Research, 45 (2), 401–423. 
 van Hoek, R. I., Vos, B., & Commandeur, H. R. (1999). Restructuring European supply chains by 
implementing postponement strategies.  Long Range Planning, 32 (5), 505–518.   http://doi.
org/10.1016/S0024-6301(99)00071-0  . 
 Wang, E., Tai, J., & Wei, H.-L. (2006). A virtual integration theory of improved supply-chain 
performance.  Journal of Management Information Systems, 23 (2), 41–64.   http://doi.
org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222230203  . 
 Wang, R. Y., & Strong, D. M. (1996). Beyond accuracy: What data quality means to data consum-
ers.  Journal of Management Information Systems, 12 (4), 5–33. 
 Wilson, T. P., & Clarke, W. R. (1998). Food safety and traceability in the agricultural supply chain: 
Using the Internet to deliver traceability.  Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 
3 (3), 127–133.   http://doi.org/10.1108/13598549810230831  . 
 Wolf, J. (2011). Sustainable supply chain management integration: A qualitative analysis of the 
German manufacturing industry.  Journal of Business Ethics, 102 (2), 221–235.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-011-0806-0  . 
 Zhu, Q., & Sarkis, J. (2004). Relationships between operational practices and performance among 
early adopters of green supply chain management practices in Chinese manufacturing enterprises. 
 Journal of Operations Management, 22 (3), 265–289.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2004.01.005  .  
2 Challenges to Developing Interoperable Data Architecture to Support Sustainable…

47
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_3
 Chapter 3 
 Collaboration and Trust Building Among 
Public and Private Actors 
 Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes ,  Deborah  Lines  Andersen ,  David  F.  Andersen , 
and  Holly  Jarman 
 Abstract    Using data from the I-Choose project, a study of coffee produced in 
Mexico and distributed and sold in Canada and the United States, this chapter ana-
lyzes three distinct traceability systems in relation to the ways in which each 
attempts to build and sustain trust. In each case, supply chain actors are working 
together to capture information about how and where their products are produced, 
aiming to provide this information to consumers. The ultimate goal in each system 
is the same: to demonstrate the quality of their product and earn a price premium. 
We ﬁ nd that institutional, calculative, and relational trust are used in different ways 
in each of the three systems, with distinct variations over time. Extrapolating from 
these cases, we ﬁ nd that providing consumers with sustainable supply chain infor-
mation evolves dynamically over time with calculative trust less permanent and 
relational trust more permanent. Institutional trust appears to be the best way to 
communicate with consumers in international marketplaces. 
 Keywords  Trust •  Provenance •  User conﬁ dence •  Information assurance •  Social 
computing •  Customer-oriented systems 
 L. F.  Luna-Reyes (*) 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: lluna-reyes@albany.edu 
 D. L.  Andersen 
 Department of Information Studies ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: dla@albany.edu 
 D. F.  Andersen 
 Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy ,  University at Albany , 
 Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: david.andersen@albany.edu 
 H.  Jarman 
 Department of Health Management and Policy ,  School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan ,  Ann Arbor ,  MI ,  USA 
 e-mail: hjarman@umich.edu 

48
3.1  Introduction 
 In a period in which more and more  product information is available electronically, 
it can still be extremely difﬁ cult to understand  the  provenance of a product. Origins 
and history, from farmer to ﬁ nal customer for coffee, can be impossible to follow to 
the ﬁ nal point of purchase. Despite online reviews and internationally recognized 
labeling systems, customers often know relatively little about products that they 
buy, especially in highly dispersed, international markets and supply chains. 
Individually, farmers, manufacturers, distributors, certiﬁ ers, and retailers have some 
understanding of their part in the supply chain. However, it is highly likely that none 
of them would be able to map the supply chain in its entirety. If the ultimate goal of 
a system is to demonstrate the quality of a product and earn a price premium, then 
providing customers trusted information on provenance is a critical factor in making 
a traceability system a viable marketing tool. 
 As the previous chapter explains, understanding every aspect of a product supply 
chain is necessary if we are to support sustainable commerce and perhaps design 
more sustainable supply chains. More and more commerce is taking place in virtual 
settings where product attributes cannot be directly observed by the consumer (Ba 
& Pavlou,  2002 ). Although consumers might be drawn to farmers’ markets in which 
the supply chain is extremely short—a producer and a customer—much of what 
consumers purchase has a much more complicated history. 
 Unequal information distribution  between  consumers and producers appears to 
be a fundamental issue across supply chains. Consumers often know much less 
about products than do producers, although it is very possible that information lost 
across the supply chain means that farmers, manufacturers, distributors, certiﬁ ers, 
and retailers all know only a portion of a where a product has been, how it has been 
produced, and by whom under what conditions. This unequal distribution of infor-
mation, described by Akerlof ( 1970 ) in his discussion of used car markets, creates a 
lack of trust on the part of consumers. How is it possible for a consumer to believe 
what a retail package says? How might stakeholders along the supply chain come to 
trust the information that they are given and then supply trusted information as a 
product moves toward the consumer? How can institutional mechanisms such as 
guarantees, certiﬁ cations, brands, and supply chains reduce the uncertainty associ-
ated with information asymmetries in the market (Backhouse, Hsu, Tseng, & 
Baptista,  2005 ; Pan,  2011 ; Pavlou, Liang, & Xue,  2007 ; Sriram,  2005 )? 
 Assembling and assessing supply chain data with a view to supporting sustain-
ability and inﬂ uencing customer purchases requires something more than coercion 
alone. In  order for producers, roasters, and retailers to invest in the collection and 
open sharing of data—often sensitive commercial information—a signiﬁ cant degree 
of trust must be established. Consumers, too, must ﬁ nd credible the supply chain 
information provided to them if their purchasing preferences are to be inﬂ uenced 
and changed (Arora,  2006 ). In traditional supply chains that emphasize price above 
all other values, trust among organizations is often established through rational cal-
culations based on economic data and supplemented by institutional mechanisms 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

49
such as contracts. Full Information Product Pricing (FIPP) systems, however, 
emphasize not only the value of price and cost efﬁ ciency but also attempt to com-
municate information to consumers regarding other aspects of the supply chain such 
as sustainable, environmentally friendly processes, and fair labor practices. This 
more complex goal arguably requires a test of trust-building mechanisms with a 
slightly different emphasis. 
 This chapter asks, given these conditions,  how is trust built and sustained among 
sustainable supply chain actors with different levels of information? Using data 
from the I-Choose project, which focuses on goods produced in Mexico and distrib-
uted and sold in the United States and Canada, we review three distinct traceability 
systems: Tosepan Titataniske (Together We Win), a cooperative that exports organic 
and fair-trade coffee to the United States, Japan, and Europe; a coffee roaster in 
Chiapas, Mexico, named Bats’il; and the Nescafé plan, led by Nestlé. Each of these 
systems approaches the problem of information asymmetry along the supply chain 
in a different way. All three, however, share the same objective of capturing data 
about the  provenance of the products—information about where, how, and under 
what conditions they are created, distributed, and sold—in order to pass this infor-
mation on to the consumer. In each case, producers hope to collect and communi-
cate valuable data that will generate consumer trust in the product and support a 
price premium. 
 After this introduction, the chapter continues with a discussion of three overarch-
ing types of trust creation mechanisms. Following an explanation of methodology, 
data, and case selection criteria, the chapter ﬁ nishes by comparing the three cases 
and the ways in which trust is generated 
3.2  Creating and Maintaining Trust 
 There appears to be no generally accepted deﬁ nition of trust (Rousseau, Sitkin, 
Burt, & Camerer,  1998 ; Sheppard & Sherman,  1998 ). Nonetheless, there are some 
common themes and general understandings of its nature, including vulnerability, 
risk, and the role of positive expectations or optimistic belief (Rousseau et al.,  1998 ; 
White-Cooper, Dawkins, & Anderson,  2009 ). Trust is usually seen as a two-party 
relationship, in which one party A (an individual or an organization) accepts the 
inherent risk of a relationship with another party B (Sheppard & Sherman,  1998 ). In 
fact, some authors point out that different kinds of relationships between the same 
participants can have different levels of risk. In this way, A can trust B for taking 
care of his or her dog, but might not trust B for doing business (Viitaharju & 
Lähdesmäki,  2012 ). 
 We ﬁ nd that each of these traceability systems attempts trust production in three 
ways that correspond to established theories of trust building. According to 
Rousseau et al. ( 1998 ), these three mechanisms are interrelated. For example, insti-
tutional mechanisms of trust creation (1) relate to calculative mechanisms by 
reducing the perception of risk associated with a particular transaction or relationship. 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

50
Calculative trust (2) plays a more important role at the beginning of a relationship, 
and after repeated positive interactions, greater elements of relational trust (3) arise 
and play a more important role in the interaction between individuals and 
organizations. 
3.2.1  Institutional Trust 
 First, trust is built  through institutions such as contracts, formal agreements, certiﬁ -
cation procedures, laws, and regulations (Burkert, Ivens, & Shan,  2012 ). These 
institutions come together to create a trusted environment that can facilitate the 
development of other types of trusted systems. Institutional trust refers to the exis-
tence of an institutional framework that regulates the relationship between the main 
actors in the collaboration. These institutional frameworks include the basic institu-
tional mechanisms discussed by Akerlof ( 1970 ) such as contracts, guarantees, and 
certiﬁ cations (Albersmeier, Schulze, Jahn, & Spiller,  2009 ; Jahn, Schramm, & 
Spiller,  2005 ), as well as the laws, regulations, and  other  institutions oriented to 
enforce the contracts. Research has found that institutional trust is particularly rel-
evant for systems such as I-Choose and also that some features of information sys-
tems and information technologies contribute to building institutional trust (Gefen, 
Pavlou, Benbasat, McKnight, & Stewart,  2006 ; Thornton, Esper, & Morris,  2013 ). 
Some of these features include peer feedback, online testimonials, afﬁ liation links, 
guarantees, or system quality. In each case there are social systems behind these 
system features that make them legitimate. 
3.2.2  Calculative Trust 
 Next,  by identifying information about available options and weighing costs and 
beneﬁ ts, supply chain actors can manage the risks inherent in participating in any 
one system. Calculative trust refers to an estimation of the risks and payoffs inter-
twined in the interaction. Stakeholders may conceptualize a ratio of payoffs and 
risks for each interaction between individuals and organizations. This ratio is con-
ditional and only arises when reliable information attests to the beneﬁ cial intention 
and competence of another player in the relationship (Rousseau et al.,  1998 ). 
3.2.3  Relational Trust 
 Third and ﬁ nally, relational trust is established through emotional bonds, shared 
values or objectives between the actors, or recognition of the trustworthiness of 
other participants in a repeated relationship. Relational trust is associated with 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

51
emotional bonds, shared values or objectives between the actors, or recognition of 
the trustworthiness of other participants in a repeated relationship. Compared to 
calculative trust, relational trust is more resilient to environmental changes and may 
cover a broad array of interactions (Román,  2010 ; Saini,  2010 ; Saparito, Chen, & 
Sapienza,  2004 ; Smith & Barrientos,  2005 ; Zornoza, Orengo, & Penarroja,  2009 ). 
3.3  Methods, Data, and Case Selection 
 As introduced in Chap.   1 , this book reports on the I-Choose project. The main pur-
pose of the project was to better understand how information disclosure might inﬂ u-
ence ﬁ rm and consumer behavior and potentially create a more sustainable world. 
Following a case study approach, this chapter now moves to report on a project 
component that consisted of further understanding the ways in which trust is built 
and sustained among supply chain actors (Eisenhardt,  1989 ; Stake,  1995 ; Yin, 
 1994 ). Given the focus on process and the emphasis on “how” trust is built, the case 
study is an appropriate methodological approach (Yin,  1994 ). 
 Case selection obeyed the criteria of theoretical sampling (Eisenhardt,  1989 ; 
Eisenhardt & Graebner,  2007 ). We used the conceptual framework introduced in the 
previous section to analyze a series of collaborative traceability efforts in Mexico. 
For our purposes, “collaborative traceability efforts” have three key characteristics. 
They are (i) collaborations among coffee supply chain actors, (ii) with the purpose 
of gathering information about  the  provenance and quality of their products and 
communicating this information to consumers, (iii) in ways that support a price 
premium for those coffee products. For each of the selected collaborative traceabil-
ity efforts, we were interested in the mechanisms by which supply chain actors 
attempted to build trust—both among the collaborators themselves and between the 
collaborators and consumers. 
 Our initial survey of coffee  suppliers in Mexico revealed wide diversity among 
the population of collaborative traceability efforts. After identifying initial contacts 
for interview, we used a snowball sampling method to identify further interviewees. 
We conducted 36 interviews in two different time periods, interviewing participants 
in the coffee supply chain as well as certiﬁ ers. As a result, we identiﬁ ed several sup-
ply chain systems introduced in Chap.   2  . While some systems rely heavily upon 
institutions to generate trust, others rely almost exclusively on building close rela-
tionships. Among this diversity, we selected the three cases that were more theoreti-
cally rich in terms of trust relationships. Sixteen out of the 36 interviews were 
related to these three ﬁ nal cases. 
 The  interview protocol  was developed and revised by an interdisciplinary team 
of researchers and included the following topics: the mission and objectives of the 
organization represented by the interviewee, an exploration of information that is 
currently shared by their organization as well as information that should be shared, 
the level of trust in the information provided, barriers and incentives to sharing data, 
and collaboration, governance, and certiﬁ cation processes. The interview protocol 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

52
was translated into Spanish by native speakers and then retranslated back into 
English in order to test for consistency in the terms used. Interviews were conducted 
in Spanish by native speakers and formally transcribed. 1 
 Data analysis included the identiﬁ cation of key themes in the data as well as a 
process of comparing and contrasting both cases and current theory in an iterative 
process (Eisenhardt,  1989 ). Following common practices in qualitative research, 
data analysis started during the data collection process, allowing us to identify the 
gaps in the available data so that they could be addressed in subsequent data collec-
tion activities. The validity of constructs used in our analysis comes from their cur-
rently accepted use in the literature. 
3.4  Collaborative Traceability Efforts Within Mexican 
Coffee Supply Chains 
 In this section of the chapter, we include a description of each of the three cases of 
collaborative traceability efforts, analyzing them in terms of the trust-building 
mechanisms employed by each. The cases are (1) a coffee cooperative in the moun-
tains of Puebla, Mexico, named Tosepan Titataniske; (2) a coffee roaster in Chiapas, 
Mexico, named Bats’il; and (3) the Nescafé plan, led by Nestlé. 
3.4.1  Tosepan Titataniske (Together We Win) 
 As  a response to the coffee market crisis of the 1990s, coffee producers in Mexico 
adopted the concept of  fair trade.   Fair trade involves a series of quality, organic, and 
social standards devised to differentiate coffee produced under these norms, increas-
ing sales price and reducing risks of price ﬂ uctuations. Tosepan Titataniske is a 
cooperative in the northern mountains of the state of Puebla in Mexico, which pro-
duces and exports organic and fair-trade coffee to the United States, Japan, and 
Europe. The Tosepan cooperative groups about 1400 small producers from about 70 
communities in the mountains. Tosepan is organized as a network of local coopera-
tives that collaborate to sell coffee through a central warehouse at Cuetzalan, the 
main city in the area. 
 Tosepan is certiﬁ ed as an organic/fair-trade coffee producer by Fair Trade 
Mexico, Certimex, Ocia International, and Fair Trade Labeling Organization (FLO). 
The certifying process involves inspection of local small producers by visiting their 
lands and establishing production quotas for each of them. The total amount of 
organic or fair-trade coffee that Tosepan can sell/export is the sum of each small 
producer’s quota. 
1  This research was supported by CONACYT grant no. 133670. 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

53
 Tosepan has a manual traceability system to control individual quotas. 
 Although they use the Internet (e-mail) and some basic productivity applications 
(spreadsheets and word processing), information technologies have the potential 
to facilitate certiﬁ cation and traceability of coffee in the network of producers. 
However, the Tosepan interviewee showed caution about the use of a traceability 
system like the one described in the interview policy scenario. His reaction was 
“we like systems to have traceability and transparency, but when a system is big, 
it can be heavy as a rock and it needs to be carried…. [I]f the system is too rigid, 
it can leave out many possibilities to producers.” 
 Moreover, and according to Tosepan’s interviewee,  fair-trade exports could ben-
eﬁ t from having clearer government standards and regulations, which are much 
more developed for organic products. However, Tosepan’s relationships with the 
government have been limited and difﬁ cult. As the informant expressed, “Today 
government is interested in organic and fair trade because of the market, and not the 
philosophy. They have realized that conventional producers are out of business. 
They did not believe all people who approached them before. Our relations with 
government have been complicated…. Although there are government ofﬁ cials that 
show a lot of interest in their work, there is a huge bureaucracy that makes it hard 
for us to see government as our partner.” 
 Institutional Trust   Tosepan  producers  rely heavily on institutional mechanisms to 
introduce their products in the international market. Organic and fair-trade seals 
provided by Certimex, Ocia International, and FLO are important instruments to 
inform coffee producers and consumers in the international markets about the envi-
ronmental and social practices at Tosepan. Their current traceability system not 
only is a requirement from all certiﬁ cation authorities but also a tool to promote 
transparency and trust among members of the cooperative reducing opportunistic 
behaviors such as paying friends fair-trade or organic prices when they do not meet 
the requirements. 
 Calculative Trust   The robustness and strength of Tosepan’s institutional mecha-
nisms help to build  calculative trust. This trust plays a role when starting a rela-
tionship with a new client (importers or exporters) who relies on Tosepan’s 
capabilities to meet the time requirements of a transaction. However, even in those 
initial processes, relational trust has proven more important as we will discuss in 
the following section.  
 Relational Trust    Relational trust  plays an important role in Tosepan’s success. In fact, 
through its relationships with other Mexican cooperatives, Tosepan participates in a 
number of organizations promoting fair trade in Mexico and abroad. Some of these 
organizations include Comercio Justo Mexico, Agromercados, and Certimex. This 
network of organizations has been key in developing marketing and commercial 
capabilities among cooperatives. 
 More speciﬁ cally, the network (relational  trust) has been important for building 
export capabilities in Tosepan through its relationships with other fair-trade 
 cooperatives in Mexico. According to the interviewee, these relationships were key 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

54
to their ability to start exporting, and currently they are helping other cooperatives 
to enter the market by selling their products. 
 Moreover, it has also played an important role in the creation of contacts with 
buyers. As the interviewee commented, “Exporting is difﬁ cult because of the lan-
guage and the need to learn many rules and terms. Selling to a national broker has 
its intricacies, but it is easier. Exporting requires more responsibility during the 
negotiation, logistics and follow-up. We have learned slowly, and we have been able 
to learn because of conscientious buyers who know that it is difﬁ cult and have 
helped us to do it.” 
3.4.2  Bats’il Maya 
 Azúcar Morena (raw sugar) and Capeltic  are  two specialty coffee shops in central 
Mexico. Both coffee shops constitute the front end of a network of organizations 
promoting organic and fair-trade coffee in Mexico and abroad.    At the heart of this 
network is Bats’il Maya, a gourmet coffee roasting organization established in 
1993 in Chilon, Chiapas, Mexico. Similar to Tosepan Titataniske, Bats’il Maya 
started as a way to deal with the coffee crisis of the 1990s. However, Bats’il Maya 
is not a cooperative, but a micro-roaster founded by a Jesuit Mission in Chiapas. 
Although Bats’il Maya exports coffee to Japan, it also collaborates with a very well- 
known coffee taster, local cooperatives from the area, and specialty coffee shops 
such  as  Capeltic and Azúcar Morena to integrate the supply chain “from the plant to 
the cup.” The coffee mix that consumers can taste in each coffee shop is unique. 
 Although Bats’il is—according to a local certiﬁ er—an organic certiﬁ ed organi-
zation, coffee shops like Azúcar Morena and Capeltic do not use the organic label. 
Both coffee shops, nevertheless, claim to sell organic coffee from Chiapas. The 
certiﬁ cation of the coffee was not even mentioned during the interview and is not 
included in any of the organizations’ websites. The manager of Azucar Morena 
mentioned several times that the coffee taster working in Bats’il was a well- 
recognized taster offering technical assistance to local producers to continuously 
improve coffee production processes. Every claim was also supported by extensive 
explanations of the process and the local cooperatives involved in the supply chain. 
Capeltic is located at Jesuit colleges in Mexico, which may generate trust among 
consumers. 
 All organizations involved in the network rely heavily on personal relations for 
trade. Moreover, all share a special interest to promote Mexican products and other 
ethical and aesthetic values.  For instance, Azucar Morena combines gourmet coffee 
with a space that can be used as an art gallery by local artists. The owner, recogniz-
ing the special value of coffee for the cooperatives in Chiapas, attempts to build a 
bridge between Indian communities and other Mexicans. 
 Institutional Trust   Institutional trust  is not an important source of trust in this 
speciﬁ c coffee supply chain. For consumers at Capeltic, maybe the only source of 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

55
institutional trust comes from the Jesuit endorsement of both Bats’il and the coffee 
shops. In the case of Azucar Morena, the main source of institutional trust is per-
haps the personal accreditations of the coffee taster working at Bats’il. 
 Calculative Trust   From our point of view, there is no evidence of calculation as a 
source of trust among supply chain participants. Maybe the only source of calcula-
tive trust is the premium paid to producers in exchange for high-quality coffee or the 
expectation of increased proﬁ ts by selling gourmet coffee. 
 Relational Trust   Relationships may be the most important sources of trust among 
this network of  organizations  . As the owner of Azucar Morena commented, “I 
started this coffee shop because I am a friend of the coffee taster at Bats’il, and saw 
him at another coffee shop that was already brewing its own coffee mix.” Moreover, 
Bats’il has a close relationship with local coffee cooperatives, buying coffee from 
them at a fair price and also providing technical assistance  to continuously improve 
the quality of the product. Jesuits relationships have been also a key element in the 
creation of some coffee shops such as Capeltic. 
3.4.3  The Nescafé Plan 
 Nestlé is a global  company  with headquarters in Switzerland.  Company history can 
be traced back to 1866 with the opening of their ﬁ rst condensed milk factory in 
Cham, Switzerland. Since then, the organization has grown and diversiﬁ ed its oper-
ations to become the global leader in the food industry. Particularly referring to 
coffee, Nestlé created the Nescafé brand in the 1930s in Brazil and currently is one 
of the leading global brands of the company. In Mexico, Nestlé is the leader in cof-
fee roasting and production, and it owns the biggest coffee factory in the world, 
located in Toluca, Mexico. In 2010, Nestlé launched the Nescafé plan as a global 
program to promote sustainability in the coffee industry as well as ethical consump-
tion. The program includes partnerships with coffee producers and other supply 
chain participants, as well as a traceability program to better communicate quality 
to consumers. With a global investment of 500 million Swiss francs, Mexico is a 
pilot country for the program. 
 Nestlé is a corporate partner of the Common Code for the Coffee Community or 
 the  4C program, consisting of a third-party veriﬁ cation of best practices in terms of 
quality, social, and environmental principles. The 4C principles and practices are 
the result of the collaboration of some national governments as well as standard- 
setting organizations such as UTZ and the Rainforest Alliance. However, 4C does 
not involve a label, but a commitment of compliance with their basic principles and 
practices. This compliance is veriﬁ ed by third-party auditors. As of fall 2013, Nestlé 
bought coffee from 12,000 4C-compliant producers. The goal is to reach out to 
70,000 producers through the program by 2015. 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

56
 One important component of the Nescafé plan is the construction of  a traceabil-
ity system for coffee that will allow Nestlé to communicate to consumers about 
coffee origin and quality. In México, Nestlé has collaborated directly with medium 
and large producers, and with large intermediaries, to gather information from small 
producers.  Although building a database has been a quite successful project—there 
are already 80,000 producers in the system—using the information has proved a 
challenge. As one of the interviewees commented, “One single coffee lot for the 
production process includes coffee from 300 to 400 producers, thus making it hard 
to trace back an individual jar of Nescafé to one producer.” Nevertheless, the system 
is used not only for traceability purposes but also to work on quality control and to 
measure the impact of the Nescafé plan’s beneﬁ ts to producers. 
 From the point of view of the interviewees,  sustainability should be a shared 
commitment along the supply chain, and promoting more sustainable systems 
results from partnerships with producers, governments, and NGOs. In fact, as one 
of the interviewees explained, “The Nescafé plan involves a group of partnerships 
and alliances, including the producer themselves, intermediaries, Agromor, 2 the 4C 
Association, and the Tec of Monterrey.” 3 
 Institutional Trust   Nestlé main source of institutional trust is the brand itself and 
its long history as a world leader in the food industry.  The brand, however, triggers 
different and contradictory perceptions among other coffee supply chain partici-
pants. In general, large roasters as well as intermediaries recognize Nestlé because 
of its quality control systems. For example, one large intermediary commented, 
“Nestlé is a very attractive client to us. We have several years working with them, 
and it is a company always interested in quality and innovation.” However, Nestlé 
perception among small producer organizations is not always as positive. A second 
source of institution trust may, indeed, include becoming a part of the 4C Association, 
improving brand perception among some producer and consumer groups.  
 Calculative Trust   Calculative trust is an important component in the Nestlé sup-
ply chain. On the one hand, being the largest coffee roaster in the country makes 
Nestlé a very attractive client to producers and other intermediaries. Additionally, 
Nestlé pays a premium price to 4C producers. As one intermediary commented, 
“Once you are a 4C producer, you get a premium for your coffee. A group from 
Tomatlán, which is already 4C, got an additional 80 cents per kg of green coffee.” 
On the other hand, according to some interviewees, Nestlé chooses its partners on 
the basis of the long-term expected beneﬁ t from the relationship. That is to say, they 
will invest in training and improved plants mainly in those areas where they know 
they will get the most proﬁ t, paying less attention to areas that they calculate will 
2  Agromor is an organization that works closely with the Mexican National Institute for Agricultural 
Research (INIFAP) in the development of improved coffee plants. Nestlé distributes the plants to 
coffee producers as a component of the Nescafé plan. 
3  The Tec of Monterrey is a higher education institution that collaborates with Nestlé in training 
programs for producers. 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

57
not yield a high-quality product. These lower quality markets, in this sense, are out 
of reach of the Nescafé plan. 
 Relational Trust   Nestlé is an  organization interested in the creation of long-term 
relationships as part of the Nescafé plan. As we mentioned above, Nestlé invests 
heavily in improving the quality and production capabilities of its partners. It shares 
costs with intermediaries to make the program free to producers and to reach directly 
to medium and large producers. The relationship involves training, on-site technical 
assistance, and coffee plant improvement. 
3.5  Comparison and Discussion of Three Trust Networks 
 Looking across the three cases, it is apparent that trust-building mechanisms play an 
important role in each, albeit in different ways. None of the collaborations rely on a 
single source of trust. Each network mobilized various combinations of institutional 
frameworks, calculating evidence as well as goodwill relationships and identity 
alignment to promote trust. Each of these plays overlapping as well as unique roles. 
 Table  3.1 provides a narrative summary of the three cases and how each case relates 
to the three types of trust found in the literature.
 An interesting aspect of the stories contained in Table  3.1 is how various types of 
trust evolve over time in each of the three cases. Figure  3.1 retells each of the case 
stories as suggestive “graphs over time.” In each graph, the horizontal axis repre-
sents time, and the vertical axis is some measure of the relative prominence of each 
type of trust in the case narrative.
 Panel A depicts an over-time story about the evolution of trust in the Tosepan 
Titataniske cooperative. In this case two forms of institutional trust come into play. 
 Within the international coffee market, the fair-trade and organic labels are well 
known and highly trusted. The coffee market’s trust in these two certifying institu-
tions provides a basic framework for the creation and sustenance of the coopera-
tive. On the other hand, farmer trust in the institution of the cooperative itself is not 
as important factor over time. Rather, high levels of institutional trust bind mem-
bers of the cooperative together. Panel A illustrates that in the beginning, calcula-
tive trust played an important role as local farmers calculated their decisions to join 
the cooperative. However, over time the need to calculate costs and beneﬁ ts of 
membership in the cooperative declined as overall trust in the institution of the 
cooperative itself grew. 
 Panel B depicts a quite similar dynamic story for the  Bats’il Maya case. Relational 
trust dominates the story throughout. Players in the local market do calculate their 
self-interests in participating in these commercial relationships, but these calcula-
tions decline in importance over time. Institutional trust is the least important factor 
in this case. 
 The Nestlé case as depicted in panel C is somewhat more complicated.  As with 
the Tosepan Titataniske cooperative, the international coffee market’s willingness to 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

58
 Table 3.1  Trust  characteristics of collaborative traceability efforts in Mexico 
 Collaboration 
 Institutional 
 Calculative 
 Relational 
 Tosepan 
Titataniske: the 
cooperative 
allows over time 
less emphasis on 
long-term/
short-term 
calculation and 
more emphasis 
on institutional 
and relational 
trust 
 Provided by cooperative 
itself. Provides 
assurance that there is a 
premium. Reduces risk. 
A predictable structure 
to govern distribution 
and payment. Manages 
cash ﬂ ow. Allows 
members to form more 
trusted relationships 
over time. The most 
important form of 
communication to 
consumers: through 
certiﬁ cation and 
labeling 
 Calculation that if 
sold through 
cooperative, there 
will be more beneﬁ t. 
Guaranteeing returns, 
especially when 
market poor. 
Trade-off between 
long-term and 
short-term beneﬁ t. 
Longer-term options 
require more trust to 
be built. Perhaps 
more important at 
ﬁ rst before relational 
trust built up 
 Developed over time, 
better trusted 
relationships develop 
with other co-op 
members. Reduces the 
importance of 
calculative trust over 
time. Members can 
eventually take on 
leadership roles and 
participate in 
decision-making 
 Bats’il: specialty 
coffee roaster that 
relies not on 
certiﬁ cation but 
on personal 
reputations to 
promote its 
coffee 
 The credentials of the 
taster are important in 
generating trust at ﬁ rst. 
Certifying authorities 
generate accreditation 
for the taster. 
Certiﬁ cation is not so 
important for 
communicating with 
consumers: shop does 
not advertised based on 
labels 
 Expectation of having 
coffee sold at a higher 
price 
 The relationship 
already exists before 
the coffee shop starts. 
The owner knows and 
trusts taster and trusts 
him/her to pick the best 
coffee. Taster builds 
relationships with 
producers and helps 
them to improve their 
methods and make 
their coffee better over 
time. Most important 
in getting new 
customers and building 
trust with consumers 
 Nestlé: trying to 
build trust 
through technical 
assistance and 
money. Want to 
produce 
high-quality 
coffee that it can 
sell for a 
premium 
 Brand reputation is a 
source of institutional 
trust. A good reputation 
for some higher-quality 
products. Small farmers 
do not trust Nestlé 
because they do not like 
the poorer-quality 
products 
 Nestlé calculates 
when to build 
relationships with 
intermediaries and 
when to partner with 
medium-sized 
farmers. Nestlé pays 
much better than the 
average. 
Intermediaries 
calculate when to sell 
to Nestlé: they like to 
sell to Nestlé because 
it pays more 
 Builds relationships 
with medium-sized 
farmers directly. 
Providing technical 
assistant to some 
medium-sized farmers 
(taking them to the 
second best university) 
to build their 
management, ﬁ nance, 
and agricultural skills. 
They say they feel like 
partners in the business 
 Nestle is trying to 
communicate to the 
public using 
institutional trust: they 
joined 4C (see Chap.   4 ) 
 Nestlé also builds 
strong relationships 
with intermediaries and 
trusts them to gather 
information 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

59
trust the Nestlé brand name as an institutional anchor is an important driver. 
However, institutional trust of the Nestlé brand name as an institutional force among 
the producers is a much less important force. Rather, in the beginning more and 
more of the producers calculate that it may be in their interest to cooperate with 
Nestlé. Over time and as the case develops, some of this calculative trust converts to 
a more relational trust, making it less necessary for the producers to continually 
calculate the costs and beneﬁ ts of their relationship with Nestlé. 
 Taken together the three cases depict trust as a complicated multidimensional 
concept that evolves dynamically over time. Based on the limited data from these 
three cases, we might expect the more calculative model of trust to be less perma-
nent over time, while the relational model is more permanent but less generalizable. 
One weakness of the institutional model is long-term versus short-term calculation 
and how well the institution can adapt to changes in the market. A countervailing 
strength is that institutional trust is perhaps the best way to communicate with con-
sumers in an international marketplace (Delhey & Newton,  2005 ). 
 Fig. 3.1   Trust patterns over time. ( a )  Tosepan Titataniske. ( b )  Bats’il Maya. ( c ) Nestlé 
 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

60
3.6  Trust as a Design Characteristic in Large, Scalable FIPP 
Systems 
 In our larger research project, we were interested in how using  advanced technolo-
gies such as cloud computing, interoperable data architectures, and social comput-
ing systems can support the development of scalable systems that approximate 
some of the desirable properties of the smaller-scale networks that we studied in the 
three cases. We expect that all three forms of trust—institutional, calculative, and 
relational—will play a large role in all forms  of  FIPP customer-oriented systems 
and networks. However, both the literature and our cases suggest that relational and 
institutional trust may play a more central role compared to calculative trust (Gefen 
et al.,  2006 ; Pavlou & Dimoka,  2006 ). 
 It seems clear to us that  adding social computing components to such systems can 
be a good way to build relational trust by empowering consumer activists to play a 
more prominent role in FIPP-oriented markets. Research on trust in information 
systems indicates that most individuals trust peers over certiﬁ cation or branding 
(Pavlou & Dimoka,  2006 ). For example, the US Center for Disease Control (CDC) 
reports that most individuals take to heart its advice on a communicable disease 
such as H1N1 ﬂ u more readily when information is forwarded to them from a peer- 
computing site rather that when downloaded from an ofﬁ cial CDC site (Nall,  2010 ). 
But what information can social computing sites use to develop reliable ratings? 
Peer ratings based on consumer experiences with the product alone will not work 
since FIPP packages, by deﬁ nition, report on unobservable attributes of products 
(e.g., when produced, by whom, and under what conditions). 
 Institutional trust will also  play  an important role (Gefen et al.,  2006 ). However, 
simple and straight-forward certiﬁ cation systems will probably not work because as 
we will discuss in other chapters in the book, the explosive increase in certiﬁ cation 
systems makes it hard for consumers and other members of the supply chain to 
understand the meaning of each of these certiﬁ cations. The answer may rest in some 
combination of system features such as providing online conﬁ rmable metadata 
about certiﬁ ers, providing information about how certiﬁ ers are certiﬁ ed, by allow-
ing consumer advocates to rate certiﬁ ers as well as producers and supply chain 
operators, and perhaps even providing a legal status for some portion of the FIPP 
information package (with stiff penalties for providing false information or misus-
ing such information as in the case of SEC prosecutions for insider trading). 
 In order to create information  systems that can create such complex mixtures of 
trust, the missing key technical mechanism is a combination of data standards and 
procedures that allow data to be shared  among user communities or a “data infra-
structure building block.” 4 In our research, we have been working on the creation of 
4  The name “data infrastructure building block” derives from National Science Foundation Data 
Infrastructure Building Block program which aims to “foster cross-community infrastructure 
development that solves common problems, while building blocks of data infrastructure that can 
support and provide data solutions to a broader range of scientiﬁ c disciplines while reducing dupli-
cative efforts.” ( http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=504776 ) 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

61
a proof-of-concept  Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB).  A CIDIBB is a set of data standards speciﬁ cally tuned to the certiﬁ cation 
and inspection process that would allow certiﬁ ers and inspectors to post their data 
in a standard way and allow consumer advocates to gain structured access to the full 
information package that rests behind each certiﬁ cate. Consumer advocates would 
know who did what, when, where, and under whose authority to create a given cer-
tiﬁ cate. In Chapter   5 , we provide a technical description of the CIDIBB prototype. 
 At a high level, Fig.  3.2 shows how  CIDIBB could work. Each of the four classes 
of key stakeholders is represented by an idealized individual shown in each of the 
four corners.
 Ellen, shown in the upper right-hand quadrant, represents consumers who will 
scan a product bar code to view its consumer rating to help them make a purchasing 
decision. Ellen is the end customer who is willing to pay a premium for a product if 
she receives information that she can trust indicating that the product has been pro-
duced in a manner that is consistent with her values as a consumer. She is the con-
sumer who purchases certiﬁ ed coffee from Tosepan Titataniske, who goes out of her 
way to take her coffee break at the Azúcar Morena specialty coffee shop, and who 
recognizes the Nestlé brand name. 
 Lucy, in the lower right-hand quadrant, represents the emerging open data 
industry, where consumer advocates, among other different types of entrepreneurs, 
Carlos
William
Lucy
Ellen
Producers of value-based
products and services
The FIPP Marketplace
Consumers of value-based
products and services
Producers
support
certification
and inspection
industry
Certification and
Inspection DIBB
Consumers
purchase
product
information
Certifiers and inspectors
producing certification and
inspection data)
Symbiotic, Open Exchange
of Certification and
Inspection Data
Consumer advocate
aggregating certification and
inspection data
 Fig. 3.2   Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block (CIDIBB) 
 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

62
analyze the full information package of consumer products and then—through 
innovative business models—make that information available to consumers such 
as Ellen. Lucy’s ﬁ nancial success rests on her ability to create a trusted business 
model appealing to Ellen and other supply chain actors, using a combination of 
calculative, institutional, and relational (social media) trust-building technologies 
and approaches. In current large-scale consumer markets,  Lucy’s role is not well 
developed. It might be best represented by consumer advisory services such as 
 GoodGuide 5 or perhaps the popular version of  Consumer Reports. 6 In our cases, 
Lucy might best be represented by the taste testers who work for at Bats’il Maya 
and promote high-quality coffee in Azúcar Morena. 
 Lucy relies on William, a member of the inspection and certiﬁ cation industry, 
who uses CIDIBB to broadcast information about how, when, where, and by whom 
consumer products are created. The marketplace will drive what certiﬁ cates William 
is creating depending on what issues consumers are concerned with. In our three 
cases, the ideal type of William would be represented by Certimex, Ocia 
International, and FLO in the case of Tosepan Titataniske or perhaps the Common 
Code for the Coffee Community (4C) being promoted by the Nestlé Corporation. 
 Carlos represents producers of value-based products and services. Carlos is 
cooperating with William to certify his production processes and to document unob-
servable attributes of his products because he understands that Ellen is willing to 
pay a price premium for products produced using methods that are congruent with 
her values. In order to stay in business, both William and Carlos will need to sell 
trusted information to Lucy based on institutional assurances (e.g., Fair Trade, 
USDA Organic, and other virtual certiﬁ cations that may come into existence). In 
our case studies, the ideal-type producer of “Carlos” is represented by the small 
coffee producers in the Tosepan Titataniske cooperative, those cooperating with 
Bats’il Maya as well as the 80,000 producers who register with Nestlé’s 4C produc-
tion registry. In the future, as large-scale Internet-based systems based on CIDIBB 
emerge, these systems will possess an ability to “drill down” and test the logic, 
 provenance, and trustworthiness of that information using sophisticated probes and 
queries that Lucy may deploy to search William’s  data (an extreme version of cal-
culative trust-building mechanisms) based on data provided by Carlos in the ﬁ rst 
instance. 
 Our previous research has shown that trust plays a key role in all aspects of infor-
mation transfer around a distributed CIDIBB  structure  such as that sketched in Fig. 
 3.2 (Luna-Reyes et al.,  2013 ). In fact, trust is considered as an alternative gover-
nance mechanism in most collaborative relations (Powell,  1996 ). Higher trust levels 
lead to lower costs resulting from the need to protect against opportunism (Shapiro, 
Sheppard, & Cheraskin,  1992 ). Moreover, the literature points out the importance of 
trust in these market transactions, particularly in the case of unobservable product 
attributes (Arora,  2006 ). 
5  http://www.goodguide.com 
6  http://www.consumerreports.org 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

63
3.7  Concluding Remarks 
 Institutional factors, based largely on certiﬁ cation and traceability systems, create 
an environment conducive to collaboration among producers and distributors, as 
well as channels for trustworthiness to be forwarded from producers over the supply 
chain to the customers, thus reducing the risks of information asymmetry. Our cases 
show little relevant evidence about the ways in which calculative trust contributes to 
FIPP networks, which suggests that its importance is limited, and may only be use-
ful in establishing initial relationships between producers and distributors. Since 
consumers do not often engage in transactions directly with producers—at least in 
our three cases—calculation of risks and gains may not be a realistic action to take. 
 The role of  relational trust is signiﬁ cant for both the relationship among produc-
ers and distributors and the relationship between producer and consumers in all of 
the cases that we reported. In all cases, deference based on reciprocal interactions 
and shared identities are critical for actors to share knowledge and information, 
build relatively permanent reliance on each other, and coordinate production and 
distribution activities. In addition, we can observe that the producers are also trying 
to reach end consumers and bridge the connection through identity alignment, such 
as producer-consumer connections built in the network of cafes in Bats’il Maya. 
 Another observation we had is that trust is not static. It evolves over time during 
which time the three forms of trusts interact. For example, institutional trust may 
ease the way for the development of calculative trust and relational trust. In FIPP 
networks, because of  the   information asymmetry problem, it is difﬁ cult for consum-
ers to calculate risks and differentiate qualities. In our cases, certiﬁ cation and trace-
ability systems (sources of institutional trust) appear to have an important role in 
building new relationships with producers and distributors. In the case of the 
Tosepan Titataniske cooperative, for example, fair-trade and organic certiﬁ cation 
labels established an ability to penetrate export markets reaching a different class of 
consumers. The result is that the evaluation of trustworthiness of information pro-
vided to consumers can be more effective which in turn drove the development of 
shared values between producers in Mexico and consumers in the North American 
coffee market. Similar mechanisms are also observed in the other cases. 
 The literature suggests that calculative trust can be turned into relational trust 
after a certain period of positive transactions. We do see some evidence for this 
relationship in the Nestlé case. Over time, conscious calculation of a coffee pro-
ducer can be replaced with voluntary association with a cooperative in his or her 
community, sharing the same set of principles and values. This phenomenon could 
be especially apparent in FIPP networks as it promotes certain social and environ-
mental objectives at the community level. 
 What seemed to be different across the cases, however, is that trust  development 
 may not take a single path. In the cases of the Tosepan cooperative and Bats’il 
Maya, high levels of relational trust appear early and dominate commercial rela-
tionships. In the Nestle case, relational trust, when it comes at all, seems to come 
later and is predicated by early calculations of costs and beneﬁ ts. In both the 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

64
Tosepan Titataniske and Nestle cases, institutional trust at the level of international 
coffee markets came ﬁ rst, either in the form of third-party certiﬁ cation such a FLO 
labeling or an information system providing reliable information about the products 
such as Nestlé’s 4C system. However, institutional trust is not always a sufﬁ cient 
condition to succeed. In the case of Tosepan, for example, relational trust has played 
an important role in taking advantage of certiﬁ cation in exporting their coffee. 
 In order for the FIPP  production  to survive, FIPP producers need to prove to end 
consumers that their products are handled in certain ways that meet consumers’ 
needs and deliver more social and economic value than standard products. In this 
way, what really differentiates FIPP products from standard products is the informa-
tion associated with the production and the trustworthiness of sources of informa-
tion. As a result, trust is of fundamental importance for building the conﬁ dence of 
consumers, mitigating the risks associated with information asymmetry and, ulti-
mately, driving the demand for FIPP production. In a way, trust is the essential 
lubricant for two major types of relationships in FIPP networks. One is the relation-
ship among producers and distributors, and the other is the direct relationship 
between producers and consumers. 
 In sum, these case studies provide helpful clues that will point the way to future 
system designers who aspire to create scalable FIPP systems by designing the attri-
butes and features that such high-tech systems must have to attain the high-quality 
and trusted performance of their small-scale, often face-to-face predecessors. 
 References 
 Akerlof, G. A. (1970). The market for “lemons”: Quality uncertainty and the market mechanism. 
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (3), 488–500. 
 Albersmeier, F., Schulze, H., Jahn, G., & Spiller, A. (2009). The reliability of third-party certiﬁ ca-
tion in the food chain: From checklists to risk-oriented auditing.  Food Control, 20 (10), 927–
935.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2009.01.010  . 
 Arora, R. (2006). Product positioning based on search, experience and credence attributes using 
conjoint analysis.  Journal of Product & Brand Management, 15 (5), 285–292.   http://doi.
org/10.1108/10610420610685695  . 
 Backhouse, J., Hsu, C., Tseng, J. C., & Baptista, J. (2005). A question of trust.  Communications of 
the ACM, 48 (9), 87–91.   http://doi.org/10.1145/1081992.1081994  . 
 Ba, S., & Pavlou, P. A. (2002). Evidence of the effect of trust building technology in electronic 
markets: Price premiums and buyer behavior.  MIS Quarterly, 26 (3), 243.   http://doi.
org/10.2307/4132332  . 
 Burkert, M., Ivens, B. S., & Shan, J. (2012). Governance mechanisms in domestic and interna-
tional buyer–supplier relationships: An empirical study.  Industrial Marketing Management, 
41 (3), 544–556.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2011.06.019  . 
 Delhey, J., & Newton, K. (2005). Predicting cross-national levels of social trust: Global pattern or 
Nordic exceptionalism?  European Sociological Review, 21 (4), 311–327.   http://doi.org/10.1093/
esr/jci022   . 
 Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research.  The Academy of Management 
Review, 14 (4), 532–550. 
 Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities and chal-
lenges.  Academy of Management Journal, 50 (1), 25–32.   http://doi.org/10.5465/AMJ.2007.
24160888  . 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

65
 Gefen, D., Pavlou, P., Benbasat, I., McKnight, H., & Stewart, K. (2006). ICIS panel summary: 
Should institutional trust matter in information systems research?  Communications of the AIS, 
17 (Article 9), 205–222. 
 Jahn, G., Schramm, M., & Spiller, A. (2005). The reliability of certiﬁ cation: Quality labels as a 
consumer policy tool.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 28 (1), 53–73.   http://doi.org/10.1007/
s10603-004-7298-6  . 
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Roy, R., Andersen, D. F., Whitmore, A., & Andersen, D. L. (2013). 
Information strategies to support full information product pricing: The role of trust.  Information 
Polity, 18 (1), 75–91. 
 Nall, J. (2010). CDC 2.0: Using social media to improve public health. In  Proceedings of the 11th 
Annual International Digital Government Research Conference on Public Administration 
Online: Challenges and Opportunities, Digital Government Society of North America . Puebla, 
Mexico: ACM. 
 Pan, Y. (2011). Eliminating the cyber “lemons” problem with the e-reputation in e-commerce 
market: Theoretical model and practice.  International Journal of Networking and Virtual 
Organisations, 8 (3/4), 182.   http://doi.org/10.1504/IJNVO.2011.039993  . 
 Pavlou, P. A., & Dimoka, A. (2006). The nature and role of feedback text comments in online 
marketplaces: Implications for trust building, price premiums, and seller differentiation. 
 Information Systems Research, 17 (4), 392–414.   http://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1060.0106  . 
 Pavlou, P. A., Liang, H., & Xue, Y. (2007). Understanding and mitigating uncertainty in online 
exchange relationships: A principal- agent perspective.  MIS Quarterly, 31 (1), 105–136. 
 Powell, W. W. (1996). Trust-based forms of governance. In  Trust in organizations: Frontiers of 
theory and research (pp. 51–67). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc. Retrieved from 
  http://knowledge.sagepub.com/view/trust-in-organizations/SAGE.xml  
 Román, S. (2010). Relational consequences of perceived deception in online shopping: The mod-
erating roles of type of product, consumer’s attitude toward the internet and consumer’s demo-
graphics.  Journal of Business Ethics, 95 (3), 373–391.   http://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-010-
0365-9  . 
 Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A 
cross-discipline view of trust.  Academy of Management Review, 23 (3), 393–404.   http://doi.
org/10.5465/AMR.1998.926617  . 
   Saini, A. (2010). Purchasing ethics and inter-organizational buyer–supplier relational determi-
nants: A conceptual framework.  Journal of Business Ethics, 95 (3), 439–455.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-010-0432-2  . 
 Saparito, P. A., Chen, C. C., & Sapienza, H. J. (2004). The role of relational trust in bank – Small 
ﬁ rm relationships.  Academy of Management Journal, 47 (3), 400–410.   http://doi.org/
10.2307/20159589  . 
 Shapiro, D. L., Sheppard, B. H., & Cheraskin, L. (1992). Business on a handshake.  Negotiation 
Journal, 8 (4), 365–377.   http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1571-9979.1992.tb00679.x  . 
    Sheppard, B. H., & Sherman, D. M. (1998). The grammars of trust: A model and general implications. 
 Academy of Management Review, 23 (3), 422–437.   http://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.1998.926619  . 
 Smith, S., & Barrientos, S. (2005). Fair trade and ethical trade: Are there moves towards conver-
gence?  Sustainable Development, 13 (3), 190–198.   http://doi.org/10.1002/sd.277  . 
 Sriram, M. S. (2005). Information asymmetry and trust: A framework for studying microﬁ nance in 
India.  The Journal for Decision Makers, 30 (4), 77–85. 
 Stake, R. E. (1995).  The art of case study research . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
 Thornton, L. M., Esper, T. L., & Morris, M. L. (2013). Exploring the impact of supply chain coun-
terproductive work behaviors on supply chain relationships.  International Journal of Physical 
Distribution and Logistics Management, 43 (9), 786–804.   http://doi.org/10.1108/IJPDLM-09-
2012-0298  . 
 Viitaharju, L., & Lähdesmäki, M. (2012). Antecedents of trust in asymmetrical business relationships: 
Differing perceptions between food producers and retailers.  Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 
30 (5), 567–587.   http://doi.org/10.1108/02634501211251061  . 
3 Collaboration and Trust Building Among Public and Private Actors

66
 White-Cooper, S., Dawkins, N. U., & Anderson, L. A. (2009). Community-institutional partner-
ships: Understanding trust among partners.  Health Education & Behavior, 36 (2), 334–347. 
 Yin, R. (1994).  Case study research: Design and methods . Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 Zornoza, A., Orengo, V., & Penarroja, V. (2009). Relational capital in virtual teams: The role 
played by trust.  Social Science Information, 48 (2), 257–281.   http://doi.org/10.1177/
0539018409102414  . 
L.F. Luna-Reyes et al.

67
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_4
 Chapter 4 
 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust 
 Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Holly  Jarman ,  David  F.  Andersen , and  Joanne  S.  Luciano 
 Abstract    Increased interest in ethical consumption has promoted the creation of 
incentives for product differentiation, which has been adopted by the market in terms 
of a variety of labels and certiﬁ cates to describe a whole collection of product attri-
butes related to health, social, or environmental sustainability. In this chapter, we 
describe and compare six coffee certiﬁ cations in terms of their certiﬁ cation pro-
cesses, governance mechanisms, and market penetration. Our comparison shows that 
leading certiﬁ cations reassert their trustworthiness by emphasizing transparency, 
legitimacy, and accountability of their practices and governance processes. To dem-
onstrate transparency, it is common that certiﬁ cation authorities openly publicize 
their standards and principles to demonstrate the transparency. To show legitimacy, 
they get accreditations from reputable national or international organization. 
Unfortunately, most of this information is not always at the reach of ﬁ nal 
consumers.  
 Keywords  Certiﬁ cation •  Labeling •  Governance mechanisms •  Greenwashing • 
 Bluewashing •  Consumer trust 
 D. S.  Sayogo (*) 
 University of Muhammadiyah at Malang ,  Jl. Raya Tlogomas no. 246 ,  Malang ,  Indonesia 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany 
 187 Wolf Rd., Suite 301 ,  Albany ,  NY  12205 ,  USA 
 e-mail: dsayogo@ctg.albany.edu 
 H.  Jarman 
 Department of Health Management and Policy ,  School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan ,  Ann Arbor ,  MI ,  USA 
 e-mail: hjarman@umich.edu 
 D. F.  Andersen 
 Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: david.andersen@albany.edu 
 J. S.  Luciano 
 Tetherless World Constellation ,  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute ,  Troy ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: jluciano@gmail.com 

68
4.1  Introduction 
 A number of studies of  ethical and sustainable consumption   suggest that consumer 
trust in ethical products is engendered partially based on the company’s ethical 
conduct and the ethical and sustainable label attached to the product (see, e.g., 
Carrigan & Attalla ( 2001 ), Castaldo, Perrini, Misani, and Tencati ( 2009 ), Janssen 
and Hamm ( 2011 ), Pivato, Misani, and Tencati ( 2008 ), Polonsky, Bhaskaran, and 
Cary ( 2005 ); Swaen and Chumpitaz ( 2008 )). However, the current rapid growth of 
certiﬁ cation and labeling schemes (Bacon,  2005 ; Muradian & Pelupessy,  2005 ; 
Raynolds, Murray, & Heller,  2007 ) 1 makes critics question the extent to which a 
particular ecolabel truly reﬂ ects the sustainability of the product and whether labels 
and certiﬁ cations have simply become marketing gimmicks for large corporations 
(Gibson,  1999 ). 
 This chapter explores the ways existing certiﬁ cations and labels enhance  con-
sumer trust in a particular product. We examine six coffee certiﬁ cations to assess the 
adequacy of private regulation as a  trust-inducing tool . We chose sustainable certi-
ﬁ ed coffee as our case study for three reasons. First, sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee 
provides comprehensive yet manageable overview of the complexities in sustain-
able certiﬁ cation and labeling practices. Second, certiﬁ cation of coffee represents 
one of the most rapidly growing areas of certiﬁ cation (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ). Third, 
coffee is one of the most traded commodities in the world market (Taylor, Murray, 
& Raynolds,  2005 ). 
 We examine the certiﬁ cations in respect to their certiﬁ cation process, governance 
mechanism, and market growth. Through this comparison, we found certiﬁ cation 
schemes that use different strategies to reassert the  trustworthiness of their certiﬁ -
cate to the consumer and general public. However, we also found that information 
about the steps certiﬁ cations are taking to increase their trustworthiness is not read-
ily apparent or available to consumers. 
 We begin this chapter with a look at the relationship between government inter-
vention, private regulation, and market governance. We follow with an examination 
of the utility of certiﬁ cations and labels in helping consumers make informed deci-
sions and describe some of the shortcomings of the current certiﬁ cation system. The 
subsequent sections, section four to six, focus on examining six different labeling 
and certiﬁ cation schemes. Section four presents the coverage and scope of certiﬁ ca-
tions and  labels in terms of operational scope, market growth, market penetration, 
and growth strategy. Section ﬁ ve focuses on the governance process and section six 
outlines the differences in certiﬁ cation assessment processes. Finally, section seven 
provides the concluding remarks.  
1  There is a rapid and sustained growth for certiﬁ ed products, especially food products with coffee 
in particular (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ), especially after the coffee crisis (Muradian & Pelupessy, 
 2005 ). There is also rapid growth of ecolabels in general; ecolabel index in 2012 tracks the exis-
tence of 435 ecolabels worldwide ( www.ecolabelindex.com ). 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

69
4.2  Government Interventions, Private Regulation, 
and Market Governance 
 Smart disclosure is seen as one way of creating market intervention by allowing 
consumers make better purchasing decisions. Information can be used to create 
market interventions directly and indirectly (Weiss,  2002 ).  Direct intervention 
occurs when the government collects and distributes information directly to the 
public. An example of such direct intervention is the publication of information on 
chemical and toxic substances manufactured in, or imported into, the United States 2 
by the  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) . Indirect intervention occurs when 
nongovernment actors generate or share information that is required or enabled by 
the government (Weiss,  2002 ). Product labeling is an example of an indirect inter-
vention and this chapter will focus on this type of intervention. 
 Indirect interventions through product labeling can either be mandated by gov-
ernment or be voluntary in nature. Mandatory policies for product labeling are 
backed by government regulation and require compliance by all market actors with-
out any exceptions. For example, the US Nutritional Labeling and Educational Act 
of 1990 3 requires all manufacturers to attach nutrition labels to their products, and 
the Alcohol Beverage Labeling Act of 1988 requires two mandatory warnings to be 
placed on all alcoholic beverage containers. 
 In contrast, voluntary requirements for product labeling allow market actors to 
adopt or ignore measures as they see ﬁ t. Most labeling and certiﬁ cation schemes 
adopt a voluntary approach whereby market actors complying with a set of stan-
dards may attach a label onto their product based on their own interests. Producers 
use labels to maintain and enhance their reputation, boost consumer trust in their 
products, and differentiate themselves from their competitors in the marketplace. 
For example, companies use labels and certiﬁ cations to support the credibility of 
their claims on issues such  as environmental sustainability or human rights (Fig.  4.1 ).
  Voluntary policies   exist under two different types of governance regime, hybrid 
or market based. Under hybrid systems of governance, voluntary standards can be 
created or enabled by the government, but are administered by an independent body. 
For example, the government of Quebec created an independent organization to 
monitor labeling systems regarding the origin and authenticity of products sold 
within the province, called  CARTV . 4 Similarly, the  US Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) enacted  National Organic Program (NOP) to regulate production and han-
dling of organically produced agricultural products. The standards are created by 
USDA but the certifying process is conducted by third-party certifying agents 
accredited by the USDA NOP. 5 
2  http://java.epa.gov/oppt_chemical_search 
3  http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/Inspections/InspectionGuides/ucm074948.htm 
4  Conseil des appellations réservées et des termes valorisants (CARTV),   http://www.cartv.gouv.
qc.ca/en/about-us 
5  http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=ORGANIC_CERTIFICATIO 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

70
 Under market governance regimes, standards are “market driven.” This means 
that their adoption among organizations, and the rate of compliance, depends on 
market demand for the given standards (Cashore, Auld, & Newsom,  2004 ). 
Certiﬁ cation schemes under market governance are commonly referred to as private 
regulation. Private regulation is a governance system formed by coalition of nongov-
ernment actors to codify and monitor conduct of private entities in respect to issues 
such as sustainable and ethical production (Bartley,  2007 ; Büthe,  2010a ,  2010b ; 
Mayer & Gerefﬁ ,  2010 ).  Private regulation   is designed to use market pressure to 
regulate the behavior of industry’s actors (Bartley,  2007 ; Mayer & Gerefﬁ ,  2010 ) and 
to add layers to the existing laws, regulations, and standards enacted by the govern-
ment (Bartley,  2011 ). Private regulation takes many forms (standards, codes of con-
duct, and certiﬁ cation systems) and is organized in three different formats: (a) 
privately developed voluntary policies and codes of conduct, (b) standards developed 
by industry and/or trade association and adopted by companies, and (c) third-party 
certiﬁ cation systems in which independent monitors certify company’s voluntary 
compliance to a particular standard (Bartley,  2007 ; Mayer & Gerefﬁ ,  2010 ). 
 Third-party certiﬁ cation systems   are deemed more trustworthy than the other two 
forms of private regulation because of the independent nature of monitoring, which 
eliminates potential conﬂ icts of interest (Jahn, Schramm, & Spiller,  2005 ). By pro-
viding trustworthy information, third-party certiﬁ cations and labels help alleviate 
information asymmetry between consumers and producers. In asymmetric relation-
ship, consumers have limited access to information that would help them accurately 
assess invisible product attributes such as safety, quality, or social and environmental 
sustainability. Third-party certiﬁ cations provide assurances to consumers regarding 
the credibility of product attributes as represented by the product label. This assur-
ance is especially important in reducing information asymmetry regarding product 
attributes related to  internal production methods   that are difﬁ cult and/or economically 
 Fig. 4.1   Categories of  product labeling 
 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

71
infeasible for consumers to access and evaluate by themselves. Some examples of 
these attributes are the robustness of automobile engine quality, toothpaste’s ability 
to reduce plaque, or a claim that a product produced under a fair-trade standard 
improved living conditions of small farmers or plantation workers.  
4.3  The Utility of Labels in Assisting Consumer  Choice 
 Consumer’s purchasing decisions are inﬂ uenced by competing priorities (Szmigin, 
Carrigan, & McEachern,  2009 ), which can create a gap between professed intention 
to purchase an ethically produced product and the actual purchase of such product 
(Carrigan & Attalla,  2001 ; Carrington, Neville, & Whitwell,  2010 ). Despite this 
gap, consumers recognize the utility of certiﬁ cations and labels using them as a 
substitute for searching for more information (Carrigan & Attalla,  2001 ) and as 
trust-inducing tools (Carrigan & Attalla,  2001 ; Janssen & Hamm,  2011 ; Polonsky 
et al.,  2005 ). For instance, consumers positively correlate organic certiﬁ cation with 
greater level of trust in a given product (Janssen & Hamm,  2011 ). 
 The usefulness of labels and  certiﬁ cations depends on the extent to which con-
sumers understand the information behind them (Carrigan & Attalla,  2001 ). A num-
ber of studies found that consumers’ understanding of what a particular label or 
certiﬁ cation conveys is rather limited (Carrigan & Attalla,  2001 ; Janssen & Hamm, 
 2011 ; Polonsky et al.,  2005 ). One of the reasons for the limited understanding is the 
rapid proliferation and increasing diversity of third-party certiﬁ cations and labels. 6 
The growing complexity of the third-party certiﬁ cation environment increases 
information processing demands on consumers and consequently diminishes the 
meaning of a certiﬁ cation as a trust element. In addition, the large number of certi-
ﬁ cation and labeling schemes complicates efforts to assess and compare the credi-
bility and quality of labels (Jahn et al.,  2005 ; Raynolds et al.,  2007 ), which in turn 
increases consumers’ need for additional information (Pelsmacker, Janssens, 
Sterckx, & Mielants,  2005 ). 
 The remainder of this chapter provides a comparison of existing certiﬁ cations to 
illustrate the strengths and weaknesses of certiﬁ cations as a trust-inducing tool. We 
compare and contrast six major coffee certiﬁ cation schemes 7 : Fairtrade International 
(FLO), Rainforest Alliance Network (RAN), UTZ Good Inside, Common Code for 
the Coffee Community (4C), the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) National 
Organic Program, and Coffee and Farmer Equity (C.A.F.E.)  Practices . We exclude 
Nespresso AAA due to its exclusive focus on coffee quality and less on social and 
environmental sustainability. The comparison addresses three aspects: the scope of 
the certiﬁ cation, the governance of third-party certiﬁ ers, and the certiﬁ cation and 
inspection processes. 
6  Data from EcoLabelIndex shows the existence of 435 ecolabels worldwide (Ecolabelindex,  n.d. ). 
7   Coffee Barometer 2012 indicates the existence of seven major coffee initiatives, namely, FLO, 
UTZ, 4C, Organic, RAN, C.A.F.E. Practice, and Nespresso AAA (Panhuysen & van Reenen,  2012 ). 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

72
4.4  The Scope of Certiﬁ cations and Labels 
 There are two different scopes we have to consider when talking about certiﬁ ca-
tions: the operational scope and the market scope. The operational scope refers to 
the operational capacity of a certiﬁ cation such as year of establishment, focus area, 
and legal status. Market scope refers to the economic growth of the certiﬁ cation in 
term of market share and penetration. 
4.4.1  The Operational Scope of Certiﬁ cations and Label 
 Initiatives 
 Operational scope of a certiﬁ cation, which includes its year of establishment, legal 
status, and area of focus, can impact the level of trust a consumer has in that particu-
lar certiﬁ cation. Three certiﬁ cations (FLO, RAN, and USDA Organic) were founded 
in the 1990s, while the other three certiﬁ cations (UTZ, 4C, and C.A.F.E.) were 
established in the 2000s. 8 A study by Rao ( 1994 ) found a signiﬁ cant relationship 
between organization’s age and survival of that organization, which implies that 
newer certiﬁ cations are more vulnerable to competition because of lower brand rec-
ognition. Similarly, age of certiﬁ cation might correlate with its reputation. Thus 
consumers might assume that older certiﬁ cations are more trustworthy because they 
have better public recognition. 
 Certiﬁ cations in the certiﬁ ed sustainable coffee context differentiate themselves 
by different areas of focus, either concentrating on social impact, environmental 
impact, or a combination of both. For instance, USDA Organic only focuses on 
environmental aspects, while FLO focuses on both social and environmental values. 
Each of these areas can include different specializations, ranging from child labor to 
health to safety of work environment. Some certiﬁ cations, such as FLO and RAN, 
add distinct focus areas to differentiate themselves. FLO adds gender issues, while 
RAN adds local  communities (Table  4.1 ).
 Objectiveness of the evaluation process is crucial for the reliability of a certiﬁ ca-
tion (Deaton,  2004 ; Tanner,  2000 ), which can be achieved by having certiﬁ cation 
processes accredited by an independent organization that has higher authority than 
the certiﬁ ers (Deaton,  2004 ). Being accredited is crucial to soliciting trust because 
it augments the reputation and legitimacy of the certiﬁ ers. As presented in Table  4.1 , 
four certiﬁ cation schemes, FLO, UTZ, 4C, and RAN, are accredited by ISEAL. 9 
USDA Organic, on the other hand, uses its status as a government agency to act as 
a standard setter as well as an accreditation body. C.A.F.E. Practices was established 
and is vouched for by a private company (Starbucks) and has no afﬁ liation with any 
accreditation body. 
8  http://www.ecolabelindex.com/ecolabel/cafe-practices 
9  ISEAL is a global membership association in which sustainable standards could be admitted if 
they meet ISEAL Code of Good Practice ( http://www.isealalliance.org/about-us ). 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

73
 Table 4.1  The operational scope of certiﬁ cations and  labels 
 Indicator 
 FLO 
 UTZ 
 4C 
 RAN 
 USDA 
 C.A.F.E. 
 Year of 
establishment 
 1993 
 2002 
 2006 
 1992 
 1990 
 2004 
 Social area covered 
 Child labor, 
employment 
practice, g ender 
 i ssues , health and 
safety work, ILO 8 
core conventions, 
work, and labor 
rights 
 Child labor, 
employment 
practice, health and 
safety work, ILO 8 
core conventions, 
work, and labor 
rights 
 Child labor, 
employment 
practice, health and 
safety work, ILO 8 
core conventions, 
work, and labor 
rights 
 Child labor, 
employment 
practice, health and 
safety work, ILO 8 
core conventions, 
 local communities , 
work, and labor 
rights 
 Not applicable 
 Child labor, 
employment 
practice, health and 
safety work, ILO 8 
core conventions, 
work, and labor 
rights 
 Status of 
certiﬁ cation 
 Private voluntary 
 Private voluntary 
 Private voluntary 
 Private voluntary 
 Public voluntary 
 Private voluntary 
 Accreditation 
 Full ISEAL 
member 
 Full ISEAL 
member 
 Full ISEAL 
member 
 Full ISEAL 
member (SAI) 
 Not applicable 
 Not applicable 
 Managing 
Organization 
 Fairtrade 
International e.V. 
(FLO) 
 UTZ Certiﬁ ed 
Foundation 
 4C Association 
 Sustainable 
Agriculture 
Network 
 US Department of 
Agriculture 
 Starbucks and 
Conservation 
International 
 Status of founder(s) 
 Majority nonproﬁ t 
entities 
 Nonproﬁ t and 
proﬁ t entities 
 Nonproﬁ t and 
proﬁ t entities 
 Majority nonproﬁ t 
entities 
 Government 
 Private entities 
 Source: Majority of the data was obtained from the voluntary standard analysis and research of the ITC (International Trade Center) (  http://search.standardsmap.
org  ) and data for C.A.F.E. was extracted from the Conservation International website (  http://www.conservation.org/campaigns/starbucks/Pages/CAFE_
Practices_Results.aspx  )  
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

74
4.4.2  The Market Growth and Coverage of Certiﬁ cations 
 One key to mainstreaming ethical and sustainable consumption is rooted in the 
assumption that an increase in demand for sustainable products sends signals to the 
rest of actors in the supply chain to conform to sustainability requirements (Seyfang, 
 2005 ). Consequently, the market growth for sustainable product signiﬁ es the power 
of consumers to change the behavior of supply chain actors. Consumers could use 
their purchasing behavior to exit their relationship with the company (Hirschman, 
 1970 ) or to express their political or ethical values to the company (Howard & 
Allen,  2010 ). Different certiﬁ cations/labels receive different reception in different 
markets (Pierrot, Giovannucci, & Kasterine,  2011 ).
•  Fair Trade (FLO) Certiﬁ ed Coffee : Fair Trade  certiﬁ cation is the second largest 
type of certiﬁ cation for coffee produced and consumed worldwide (Raynolds 
et al.,  2007 ). FLO certiﬁ ed coffee is very dominant in the United Kingdom, 
France, and recently in the United States. The 2011 annual report from FLO 
indicates that the worldwide volume of sales for fair-trade organic and fair-trade 
conventional grew by 6.7 % in just 3 years, from 12 % in 2008 to 2009 to 18.70 % 
from 2009 to 2010. In the United States, the growth rate of Fair Trade certiﬁ ed 
coffee experienced dramatic increase of 32 % from 2010 to 2011 10 and the US 
fair-trade market accounted for more than 10 % of total fair-trade sales world-
wide. In 2011, the majority of  Fair Trade certiﬁ ed coffee imported to the United 
States came from Latin America (86 %) with the rest coming from Asia (approx. 
10 %) and Africa (4 %) (Fig.  4.2 ).
•  Rainforest Alliance (RAN) Certiﬁ ed Coffee:     RAN   is regarded as the third largest 
initiative for NGO-based coffee certiﬁ cation after organic and fair trade 
(Raynolds et al.,  2007 ). RAN is also the market leader in Japan (Pierrot et al., 
 2011 ). RAN press release claims that RAN certiﬁ ed coffee represented approxi-
mately 3.3% of the global coffee market share. 11 The growth rate of RAN certi-
ﬁ ed coffee is impressive, with increase of 13 % in sales volume from 2010 to 
2011, from approximately 114,924 metric tons in 2010 to 129,864 metric tons in 
2011. The production of RAN certiﬁ ed coffee grew by 20 % from 2010 to 2011 
(RAN,  2012 ). The impressive growth of RAN certiﬁ ed coffee was attributed to 
the increasing commitment from their alliances with mainstreams and large cof-
fee companies, such as: Kraft Food, Nespresso, Tchibo, and others (Kolk,  2010 ; 
Pierrot et al.,  2011 ; Raynolds et al.,  2007 ). Nespresso, for example, committed to 
certifying 80 % of their coffee with the Rainforest Alliance by 2013 (Pierrot 
et al.,  2011 ) (Fig.  4.3 ).
•  UTZ Certiﬁ ed Good Inside: UTZ certiﬁ ed coffee achieved strong growth in the 
European market, particularly in the Netherlands (Pierrot et al.,  2011 ). 
Approximately 30 % of coffee consumed in the Netherlands have UTZ label 
10  See the Coffee Almanac published by the Transfair USA for 2011 ( http://www.fairtradeusa.org/
sites/default/ﬁ les/Almanac%202011.pdf ). 
11  http://www.rainforest-alliance.org/newsroom/news/annual-growth-2011 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

75
Honduras
11%
Mexico
7%
Costa Rica
7%
Colombia
12%
Other Latin America
countries
2%
Guatemala
6%
Indonesia
9%
Other Asian countries
1%
Ethiopia
3%
Other African countries
1%
Brazil
7%
Nicaragua
10%
Peru
24%
 Fig. 4.2   Percentage of Fair Trade certiﬁ ed  coffee imported into the United States by country of 
origin, 2011 (Source: Impact report fair trade USA 11 ) 
 Fig. 4.3   Worldwide 
imports of Rainforest 
Alliance certiﬁ ed  coffee , 
2009 (Source: adopted 
from Pierrot et al. ( 2011 )) 
 
 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

76
(Pierrot et al.,  2011 ). The UTZ Supply and Demand update for 2011 indicates that 
the sales increased by almost 50 % from 2009 to 2010 with sales in 2010 reaching 
121,234 metric tons. 12 Similar to RAN, the growth of UTZ certiﬁ ed coffee is inﬂ u-
enced by their alliance with large mainstream market corporations such as Sara 
Lee, Ahold, and Safeway (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ). The majority of imported UTZ 
certiﬁ ed coffee originated from the Latin America region (70 %) (Fig.  4.4 ).
•  Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C) :  4C  is different from the other 
three certiﬁ cations in two ways: ﬁ rst, 4C is designed around a business-to- 
business concept, while the other three are more consumer oriented, and second, 
4C offers veriﬁ cation procedures that are less rigorous than the other certiﬁ cation 
processes (Pierrot et al.,  2011 ). 4C annual report in 2010 indicates that their sales 
in volume from 2008 to 2009 increase by approximately 140 %, from 11,900 
12  See 
 http://www.UTZcertiﬁ ed-trainingcenter.com/home/images/documentos/general/supply__
demand_report_2011_UTZ_certiﬁ ed.pdf or  http://www.katocoffee.com/com/info/goodinside/
supply__demand_report_201104.pdf 
Other region
30%
Gautemala
4%
Colombia
5%
Costa Rica
2%
Honduras
12%
Peru
5%
Nicaragua
1%
Brazil
41%
 Fig. 4.4   UTZ certiﬁ ed  coffee imported worldwide by country of origin, 2010 (Source: Supply 
demand update UTZ 2011 13 ) 
 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

77
metric tons in 2008 to 28,600 metric tons in 2009. Much of the increases in 
 purchasing volumes were attributable to the purchasing commitments of 4C buy-
ing members, such as Nestle, Kraft Foods, and Tchibo, which were members of 
the 4C steering committee until December 2006 (Kolk,  2010 ). 
•  USDA Organic   :  USDA   National Organic Program acts as standard setter as well 
as an accreditor for certifying bodies that will certify compliance to USDA require-
ments on their behalf. In terms of market growth, a survey by USDA’s Economic 
Research Service indicates a signiﬁ cant 4.86 % growth in demand for organic 
food from $3.6 billion in 1997 to $21.1 billion in 2008 (Dimitri & Oberholtzer, 
 2009 ). The North American organic coffee market for 2009 accounted for $1.4 
billion (Pierrot et al.,  2011 ), which is roughly 6 % of the overall organic food 
market in 2008. Approximately 89 million pounds of organic coffee was imported 
into the United States and Canada in 2008 which represents a 12 % increase from 
2007 (Pierrot et al.,  2011 ).  
•  C.A.F.E. Practices :  C.A.F.E.  Practices is a standard developed by Starbucks in 
collaboration with the Conservation International in 2004 to ensure that coffee 
sold to Starbucks met their environment and social criteria and ﬁ nancial viability 
(Semroc, Baer, Sonenshine, & Weikel,  2012 ). Starbucks C.A.F.E. Practices is 
the single largest sustainable coffee certiﬁ cation in the United States (Raynolds 
et al.,  2007 ; Pierrot et al.,  2011 ). Starbuck’s purchase of C.A.F.E. Practices certi-
ﬁ ed coffee increased signiﬁ cantly; from 2007 to 2008, it increased to 77–81 % 
in 2009 to 84 % in 2010 (Semroc et al.,  2012 ) and reached 86 % in 2011. 
Starbucks projected to have 93 % (509 million pounds) of their coffee supplies 
either certiﬁ ed by third-party certiﬁ er or through C.A.F.E. Practices by 2012 and 
to have them 100 % certiﬁ ed by 2015. 13 With high volume of purchase from 
 C.A.F.E. certiﬁ ed coffee, only small number of coffee was certiﬁ ed by third-
party certiﬁ cation. For instance, only 8.1 % (44.4 million pounds) of Starbucks 
coffee was Fair Trade certiﬁ ed and only 1.6 % (8.7 million pounds) was certiﬁ ed 
organic in 2012 18 .    
 The review of market penetration by the six major sustainable coffee certiﬁ ca-
tions points to three signiﬁ cant issues. First, the demand for certiﬁ ed coffee for all 
six types of certiﬁ cation is growing rapidly. The signiﬁ cant increase in market share 
of certiﬁ ed coffee implies that consumers increasingly trust certiﬁ cation, which in 
turn appears to drive increased for certiﬁ ed coffee products. Second, much of this 
rapid growth is attributable to alliances with mainstream coffee purchasers. The 
growth in RAN, UTZ, and 4C is propelled by connections to, and commitments by, 
mainstream coffee purchasers. Third, market growth of third-party certiﬁ ed coffee 
is restricted by certiﬁ cation schemes propagated by private companies, such as 
Starbuck’s C.A.F.E. Practices. 
13  http://www.conservation.org/campaigns/starbucks/Pages/CAFE_Practices_Results.aspx  and  http://
www.starbucks.com/responsibility/sourcing/coffee 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

78
4.5  The Governance of Third-Party Certiﬁ ers 
 The main objective of third-party certiﬁ ers is to provide a consumer some degree of 
assurance in respect to the invisible attributes of a product. The main selling point of 
third-party certiﬁ ers is to invoke trust from consumers through appeals to values such 
as independence, objectivity, and transparency (Deaton,  2004 ; Hatanaka, Bain, & 
Busch,  2005 ; Tanner,  2000 ). The claim of independence from conﬂ ict of interest 
(Hatanaka et al.,  2005 ; Tanner,  2000 ) and the democratic nature of the  decision- 
making process of the third-party certiﬁ ers (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ) become distin-
guishing factors among different certiﬁ cation schemes. This section compares the 
 governance mechanisms   of the coffee certiﬁ ers in respect to participation and inde-
pendence. Participation refers to the engagement of stakeholders in the governance of 
the certiﬁ cation, such as public comments during standard development. Independence 
refers to freedom from conﬂ ict of interest in the certiﬁ cation process. 
 The comparison of the independence and participation aspects of each certiﬁ ca-
tion focuses on three  indicators : (1) compliance to national/international regula-
tions, norms, and conventions, (2) democratic standard-setting process, and (3) the 
engagement of NGOs as coordinating organizations. The summary of the compari-
son is provided in Table  4.2 .
•  Fair Trade (FLO) Certiﬁ ed Coffee :  FLO is a certiﬁ cation initiative with the 
broadest and strongest NGO support (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ). The governance of 
FLO follows democratic mechanisms where members and other stakeholders can 
contribute to the strategy and standard setting through a general assembly. FLO 
has 25 members classiﬁ ed under ﬁ ve types: nineteen National Fairtrade organiza-
tions, three producer networks, four fair-trade marketing organizations, two fair-
trade applicant members, and Flo-Cert, an independent certiﬁ cation body for 
fair-trade global certiﬁ cation. All members and other stakeholders are given the 
opportunity to participate at three annual assemblies: the general assembly, label-
ing initiatives’ assembly, and producer network assembly. Certiﬁ cation bodies 
under FLO, such as Flo-Cert, are accredited by the ISO/IEC 65 to assure their 
independence in making certiﬁ cation decision.  
•  Rainforest Alliance (RAN) Certiﬁ ed Coffee :  RAN   is also regarded as certiﬁ cation 
with strong engagement with NGOs through their alliance to Sustainable 
Agriculture Network (SAN) (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ; Pierrot et al.,  2011 ). As of 
recent, RAN has not yet complied with the ISO 65 requirements. However, RAN 
established a set of principles to govern the integrity of their practice, including 
principles of independence and participation. Among others, these principles are 
(see   www.rainforest-alliance.org  ) (a) separating the entity responsible for 
 certiﬁ cation from the entity responsible for receiving donations; (b) limiting the 
objectives of contributions to fees from certiﬁ cations, sponsorship for public 
events, and funding for educational activities; (c) initiating and creating public 
consultation via stakeholders’ outreach, local workshops, or direct contacts; and 
(d) forming International Standards Committee with membership from stake-
holders to improve their standards. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

79
•  UTZ Certiﬁ ed Good Inside :  UTZ Good Inside assigned monitoring activities to 
independent organizations external to UTZ and demanded that these external 
veriﬁ ers complied with the ISO/IEC 65. UTZ demonstrates a multi-stakeholder 
approach in their governance involving public and private entities, especially the 
supervisory board and standard committee. For example, Sara Lee and Ahold 
serve on the board and standard committee of UTZ. Their supervisory board 
consists of combination of representatives from coffee companies, NGOs, and 
producer cooperatives (Raynolds et al.,  2007 ). The standard committee of UTZ 
consists of between 6 and 12 individuals, ranging from private entities, NGOs, 
and academics. 14 
•  Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C) :  4C Association claims to pro-
mote participatory decision-making process by including coffee producers, trade 
and industry, and civil society members 15 in their governance approach. These 
tripartite components form three separate chambers that have equal voices in the 
governing entity of 4C Association. The governance consists of ﬁ ve elements: 
the general assembly, the council, the executive board, the technical committee, 
and the mediation board. Similar to UTZ, 4C also employs independent external 
14  See  http://www.UTZcertiﬁ ed.org/en/whoweare/standards-committee 
15  See  http://www.4c-coffeeassociation.org/aboutus/our-governance.html 
 Table 4.2  Comparison of governance  process 
 Indicator 
 FLO 
 4C 
 UTZ 
 RAN 
 USDA 
 C.A.F.E. 
 Multi-stakeholder 
engagement in governance 
and standard setting 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 No 
 Involvement of private 
entity in standard setting 
 n/a 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 n/a 
 No 
 Yes 
 General assembly or 
supervisory board as the 
highest authority 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 No 
 No 
 No 
 Engagement of NGOs in 
the governance mechanism 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 No 
 Yes 
 Compliance to national/
international regulations, 
norms, and conventions 
 Critical 
 Critical 
 Critical 
 Short 
term 
 Not 
covered 
 n/a 
 Policy for complaints 
against standard-setting 
organizations is available 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 No 
 Yes 
 n/a 
 Policy for complaints 
against certiﬁ cation body 
(CB) is available 
 Yes 
 n/a 
 Submit 
to CB 
 n/a 
 Yes 
 Submit 
to CB 
 Source: Majority of the data was obtained from the voluntary standard analysis and research of the 
ITC (International Trade Center) (  http://search.standardsmap.org  ) and data for C.A.F.E. was 
extracted from the Conservation International website (  http://www.conservation.org/campaigns/
starbucks/Pages/CAFE_Practices_Results.aspx   ) 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

80
certiﬁ ers to conduct their veriﬁ cation process and requires these certiﬁ ers to con-
form to ISO/IEC Guide 65.  
•  USDA Organic:     USDA   Organic is a state-based certiﬁ cation, meaning that this 
certiﬁ cation is supported by government, in this case the US Department of 
Agriculture. As a consequence, compliance to national or international regula-
tions, norms, and conventions in regard to certiﬁ cation processes is not applicable 
to the USDA Organic certiﬁ cation. USDA Organic is also unique because USDA 
acts as standard setter and accreditation body at the same time. As standard setter, 
USDA develops the National Organic Program (NOP), a federal regulatory 
framework governing organic food in the United States guided by and based on 
the Organic Food Production Act of 1990 (  http://www.ams.usda.gov  ). In devel-
oping the NOP, USDA solicited input from their citizen advisory board and the 
general public. As an accreditation body, USDA accredits certiﬁ cation organiza-
tions to inspect products for compliance to NOP on behalf of USDA. USDA also 
employs policy for complaints both against the standard-setting organization 
(USDA) and the certiﬁ cation bodies accredited by USDA (  http://www.intracen.
org/  ) to ensure accountability and integrity of the standard.  
•  C.A.F.E. Practices: There is less information about the governance of 
 C.A.F.E. Practices . C.A.F.E. Practices is a result of collaboration between a pri-
vate entity, Starbucks, and a nongovernmental organization, Conservation 
International (CI). As such, the development of standards in C.A.F.E. Practices 
was led by these two organizations. On the other hand, to ensure the integrity and 
credibility of the certiﬁ cation process, the enforcement of C.A.F.E. Practices is 
conducted by a third-party certiﬁ er, the Scientiﬁ c Certiﬁ cation System (SCS) 
Global Service. The SCS accredits third-party certiﬁ ers to perform the certiﬁ ca-
tion process for C.A.F.E. Practices on their behalf. According to the Starbucks’ 
website as well as Conservation International’s website, there is no policy for 
complaints against the standard-setting organization. 16 However, complaints can 
be submitted against the third-party certiﬁ ers and the SCS Global Service. 
 The comparison of the six major coffee certiﬁ cations indicates that they assert 
their  credibility and legitimacy in three  ways (Table  4.2 ). First, they promote their 
good governance through the engagement of multiple stakeholders, particularly 
engaging civil society organizations such as NGOs. For some certiﬁ cation, this 
multi-stakeholder engagement includes the involvement of private sector organiza-
tions, such as Sara Lee for UTZ. 
 Second, they emphasize their legitimacy by complying with national and or 
international regulations, norms, and conventions. This is especially the case for 
non-state certiﬁ cation schemes. The state-based certiﬁ cation such as USDA Organic 
uses their adherence to legislation to demonstrate legitimacy. Third, these certiﬁ ca-
tion schemes highlight the availability of mechanisms to lodge complaints against 
the standard-setting organization and/or the certiﬁ cation body to ensure account-
ability and integrity of the standard.  
16  For more information, refer to  http://www.scsglobalservices.com/starbucks-cafe-practices . 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

81
4.6  The Assessment Processes of Third-Party Certiﬁ cations 
and Labels 
 The robustness of an assessment process, also called  audit , determines the reliabil-
ity of a certiﬁ cation and label quality (Albersmeier, Schulze, Jahn, & Spiller,  2009 ; 
Jahn et al.,  2005 ). As a result, the quality of the assessment process becomes the 
determining factor of the information quality of a label (Jahn et al.,  2005 ). Borrowing 
from the ﬁ nancial audit literature, two factors affect the quality of an audit: the 
competence and the independence of the auditor (DeAngelo,  1981 ; Duff,  2004 ). 
 Competence refers to the ability of the auditor to conduct due diligence and a thor-
ough assessment of the audit object (DeAngelo,  1981 ). Auditor competence is also 
inﬂ uenced by applicant’s perception of auditor independence and elimination of 
conﬂ ict of interest (Ammenberg, Wik, & Hjelm,  2001 ). 
 In general, an applicant has to undergo two types of  audit —a desk and a ﬁ eld 
audit. The desk audit compares the requirements listed in the standard against docu-
mentation submitted by an applicant. The desk audit is useful for planning the scope 
and focus of the ﬁ eld audit. During ﬁ eld audit, the auditor assesses the degree of 
compliance by reviewing the current practices of the applicant against a set of deci-
sion criteria. These decision criteria, usually called compliance criteria or control 
criteria, represent a set of measureable control points derived from the certiﬁ cation 
standard. In some certiﬁ cation schemes, such as FLO, the result of the ﬁ eld audit 
will be sent to the certiﬁ ers for ﬁ nal certiﬁ cation decision. Other certiﬁ cation 
schemes, such as UTZ, rely on the judgment of the auditor to make the ﬁ nal certiﬁ -
cation  decision (Fig.  4.5 ).
 The strengths and weaknesses of the assessment processes for each of the six 
certiﬁ cation schemes are presented in the paragraphs bellows, with a summary of 
the comparison  presented in Table  4.3 .
•  Fairtrade International (FLO ) .  FLO established Flo-Cert as an independent unit 
under FLO to organize and coordinate their certiﬁ cation process. As a certiﬁ ca-
tion body, Flo-Cert is conforming to the speciﬁ c quality requirements in the ISO 
65. The audit begins with a desk audit performed by Flo-Cert, which is followed 
by a ﬁ eld audit performed by a local auditor. Local NGOs and civil society rep-
resentatives are involved during the audit process as a demonstration of the value 
that FLO places on local knowledge. Following ﬁ eld audit, the auditor sends the 
evaluation results to Flo-Cert for a quality check by the responsible certiﬁ cation 
analyst and for the ﬁ nal certiﬁ cation decision. After initial audit, the certiﬁ cate is 
issued for 6 years, but it is contingent on passing an annual audit. The robustness 
of the FLO certiﬁ cation is enhanced by their requirement to conduct full audit of 
all functions in the applicant’s organization, in contrast to a sampling audit, 
which only assesses certain functions of the organization. In addition, Flo-Cert 
ensures competence of their auditors by requiring comprehensive training and by 
establishing a designated entity that is responsible for evaluating the auditor’s 
work and skills. 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

82
•  Rainforest Alliance Network (RAN) uses internal auditors, which does not con-
form to the ISO 65 requirement. 17  RAN requests a written declaration of inde-
pendence from the members who conduct audits to ensure independent nature of 
their assessments. RAN also makes sure that the member who conducts an audit 
is not involved in the ﬁ nal certiﬁ cation decision. The responsible authority for 
certiﬁ cation decision is the Sustainable Farm Certiﬁ cation International, Ltd 
(SAN). RAN also administers two types of audit, annual audit and surprise 
audit. 18 To ensure competence, RAN requires that their auditors acquire speciﬁ c 
educational background, at minimum a university degree. The auditors are 
required to go through a training program to qualify for auditing responsibilities 
and are evaluated internally to assess their work and skills. 
•  UTZ relies completely on independent certiﬁ cation bodies external to UTZ for 
both the assessment process and certiﬁ cation decision. They require the indepen-
dent certiﬁ cation bodies to be accredited by ISO and comply with ISO 65. In 
contrast to the other certiﬁ cation bodies, UTZ relies on the lead auditor for the 
ﬁ nal certiﬁ cation decision. UTZ consulted their stakeholders in the development 
of local indicator development, which is part of their code development 
 procedure. UTZ also combines annual and surprise audit. Similar to the other 
certiﬁ cation schemes, UTZ requires the auditors to go through training program 
to ensure the competence of the auditor and the quality of audit. The rules and 
policies to evaluate the auditor’s work and skills are developed by external certi-
ﬁ cation bodies, but auditors are audited only if there is a complaint from the 
applicant. 
•  The  Common Code for Coffee Conducts (4C)  relies on external independent bod-
ies, such as Control Union or Bio Cert, to perform their audits. In case of 4C, the 
ﬁ nal decision is still made by 4C and not the independent certiﬁ ers. These exter-
17  Per July 2012, for more information, refer to  http://www.rainforest-alliance.org/about/integrity/
accountability 
18  Surprise audit means that the audit process is unplanned, unannounced, and without warning 
(Wells,  2002 ). 
Standard owner
Monitoring
Standards
Certification
Certification
body
Accreditation
Accreditation
body
Control
body
Monitoring
Supplier
Flow of
Goods
Certificate as
a quality signal
Customer
 Fig. 4.5   The basic structure of  certiﬁ cation process (Source: Jahn et al. ( 2005 )) 
 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

83
 Table 4.3   Strictness of  audit process 
 Indicator 
 FLO 
 4C 
 UTZ 
 RAN 
 USDA 
 C.A.F.E. 
 Involvement of 
certiﬁ cation body with 
governance mechanism 
of standard-setting 
organization 
 Yes 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 No 
 No 
 The use of local 
knowledge and 
stakeholder involvement 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 n/a 
 The use of local auditor 
to conduct the audit 
 Yes 
 n/a 
 n/a 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 The scope of the audit 
(full or sampling) 
 Full 
 No 
 n/a 
 No 
 n/a 
 n/a 
 The frequency of the 
audit 
 Annual 
 Surprise 
 Annual, 
surprise 
 Annual, 
surprise 
 Annual, 
validity 
365 days 
 Annual, 
validity 
365 days 
 Independency of auditor 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Limited 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Auditor undergoes 
training program to 
qualify for audit 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Internal 
by the 
certiﬁ er 
 Information on 
certiﬁ cation decision is 
made accessible to the 
stakeholders 
 Public 
 Public 
 Public 
 n/a 
 Public 
 n/a 
 Certiﬁ cation body is 
independent of standard 
setter 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Speciﬁ c educational 
background is requested 
to act as auditor 
 No 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
(univ. 
degree) 
 No 
 Yes 
 Rules and policies exist 
to evaluate auditor’s 
work and skills 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Internal 
of CB 
 Internal 
policies 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Responsible entity 
exists to evaluate 
auditors 
 Yes, 
every 3 
years 
 Yes 
 Yes, after 
planning 
or 
complaint 
 Yes, 
annual 
 Yes 
every 
2.5 years 
 Yes, 
frequent 
 Certiﬁ cation body 
complies to ISO 65 
requirements 
 Yes 
 No 
 Yes 
 No 
 Yes 
 Yes 
 Source: Majority of the data was obtained from the voluntary standard analysis and research of the 
ITC (International Trade Center) (  http://search.standardsmap.org  ) and data for C.A.F.E. was 
extracted from the Conservation International website (  http://www.conservation.org/campaigns/
starbucks/Pages/CAFE_Practices_Results.aspx   ) 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

84
nal independent certiﬁ ers must be accredited by ISO and must conform to the 
speciﬁ c requirements in the ISO 65. The use of external certiﬁ cation body ensures 
the independence of the certiﬁ ers from the governance mechanism of 4C. Similar 
to FLO or UTZ, the 4C also uses local or locally operating companies, but they 
do not use multi-stakeholder processes such as one followed by FLO. 4C auditors 
conduct surprise audits to ensure consistent adherence to standards. Similar to 
UTZ, the auditor needs to go through a training program to qualify for audits, but 
for a speciﬁ c education background of the auditor is not necessary. 4C also 
employs rules and policies to evaluate the auditor’s work and skills.  
•  USDA Organic.  The USDA      Organic audits are conducted by third-party certiﬁ -
ers or certifying agents. Only certiﬁ ers that have been accredited directly or 
authorized by the USDA are allowed to verify compliance to the NOP and certify 
products. The accreditation is valid for two and a half years and afterward the 
certiﬁ ers have to reapply for accreditation. Similar to other certiﬁ cations, certify-
ing agents have to comply with ISO 65 requirements. Certiﬁ ers that are autho-
rized by USDA are certiﬁ ers accredited by foreign governments that have 
recognition agreement with USDA. These certiﬁ ers can be private, foreign, or 
state entities that are located around the world. USDA has accredited and autho-
rized 84 certiﬁ ers, with 49 certiﬁ ers located in the United States and 35 certiﬁ ers 
in other countries. The certiﬁ cation process conducted by third-party certiﬁ er 
consists of ﬁ ve steps: (a) application by applicant, (b) desk audit by certiﬁ er, (c) 
ﬁ eld inspection by inspector, 19 (d) review of inspection report and documents, 
and (e) issuance of organic certiﬁ cate by certifying agent/certiﬁ er issues organic 
certiﬁ cate. 20 The USDA also does not require speciﬁ c educational background, 
but inspectors need to participate in a training program to qualify for inspection. 
In addition, USDA also applies rules and policies to evaluate the inspector’s 
work and skills. 
•  C.A.F.E:  C.A.F.E.  Practices relies on the SCS (Scientiﬁ c Certiﬁ cation System) to 
administer and enforce their certiﬁ cation process. The SCS accredits third-party 
certiﬁ ers to act as certifying agents on behalf of the SCS. The SCS and the third- 
party certiﬁ ers need to comply with the requirements of ISO 65. The SCS also 
requires that the auditors employed by the third-party certiﬁ ers take training pro-
gram and have speciﬁ c educational background to qualify for audit. The SCS 
also frequently evaluates the auditor’s work and skills. 21 The guidelines in 
C.A.F.E. Practices consist of 249 indicators. These indicators are used to evalu-
ate the social and environmental performance of applicant (Semroc et al.,  2012 ). 
C.A.F.E. Practices employs four different degrees of assessment results: non-
compliant, veriﬁ ed, preferred, and strategic. Noncompliant is a  condition when 
the applicant failed to meet the minimum requirements. Veriﬁ ed is assigned to 
applicant who met the minimum requirements and achieved a score of less than 
60 %. Preferred is assigned if the applicant achieves a score between 60 and 
80 % and strategic if over 80 % (Starbucks,  2013 ). 
19  The term “inspector” in the USDA Organic is comparable to the term “auditor” for fair trade. 
20  www.ams.usda.gov 
21  www.intracen.org 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

85
 In general, the certifying agents use three strategies to assert the trustworthiness 
of their  certiﬁ cation process . First, they ensure the independence of their certiﬁ ca-
tion process by eliminating conﬂ ict of interest between the certiﬁ cation agents and 
standard-setting bodies. Independency is in general assured by using independent 
(external) auditors and separating auditors from those that make ﬁ nal decisions 
about granting certiﬁ cations. Second, the assessment process involves  local knowl-
edge and resources , especially during ﬁ eld audit. Most certiﬁ cation schemes also 
advocate connection with local knowledge and context by either involving local 
auditors or using multi-stakeholder process to develop audit indicators. Finally, the 
certiﬁ cation schemes use different strategies to emphasize the strength of their 
audits such as alternating between annual and surprise audits. 
 In sum, different certiﬁ cation schemes showcase different  strictness in their 
assessment process to demonstrate the trustworthiness of their claims to the con-
sumers. The existence or nonexistence of these assessment indicators, such as pre-
sented in Table  4.3 , could signify different degrees of trust. For instance, full 
independence of certiﬁ cation body from the standard-setting body and full indepen-
dence of the auditor from the certiﬁ cation body are argued to guarantee fairer audit 
results and limit possibility of collusion and manipulation (Deaton,  2004 ). 
Unfortunately, while these processes are known to the applicants, they are generally 
not known to the consumer. As a consequence, the ability of consumers to discern 
the trustworthiness of a certiﬁ cation and meaning of a label remains limited. 
4.7  Concluding Remarks 
 Certiﬁ cations and labels in the certiﬁ ed coffee market enable companies to provide 
its consumers non-price information, such as information about products’  environ-
mental and social sustainability . They are used to differentiate among companies 
based on their conduct and as a way for companies to limit competition or gain 
competitive advantage (Bartley,  2007 ). Endorsement by an external and independent 
organization is assumed to create trust among consumers who tend to disregard 
company’s own claims regarding their ethical and sustainable conduct. However, as 
certiﬁ cations and labels proliferated, consumers’ trust in the validity of various seals 
slowly decreased. The decline in trust was caused mainly by the difﬁ culty faced by 
consumers in verifying information behind the certiﬁ cations and in the increasingly 
complex nature of the certiﬁ cation environment. In other words, the large number of 
certiﬁ cation and labeling schemes presents consumer with too many alternatives to 
choose from and obscures the meaning behind each individual label. 
 A close look at the six major coffee certiﬁ cation initiatives presented above 
reveals that in order to reassert their trustworthiness in the eyes of the general pub-
lic, certiﬁ cations emphasize transparency, legitimacy, and accountability of their 
practices. Majority of the certiﬁ cation and labeling schemes openly publicize their 
standards and principles to demonstrate the transparency of their  governance pro-
cess . They also use a number of approaches to assert the legitimacy of their practice, 
such as accreditation from reputable national or international organization. They 
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

86
also put emphasis on the democratic nature of their governance processes, such as 
strong collaboration with NGOs and producers during the standard-setting phase. 
The six certiﬁ cation  and labeling schemes also demonstrate the accountability of 
their practice by emphasizing the independent nature of their certiﬁ cation agents, 
frequently evaluating their inspectors/auditors, and establishing formal mechanisms 
for complaints against the standard-setting body and certiﬁ cation agents. 
 Unfortunately, information about the steps certiﬁ cations are taking to increase 
their trustworthiness is not readily apparent to the consumer. The information is 
unavailable either because consumers need to expand signiﬁ cant effort to research 
this information or some of this information might be proprietary. In addition, even 
if this information was available to the consumers, the magnitude of this informa-
tion might deter consumers from using it as a basis for their purchasing decisions. 
We propose that one way to address these issues is to build an interoperable data 
platform that would enable private sector actors to share information and data 
through the use of agreed-upon semantic and ontology standards. Such platform can 
enable data owners and producers to make their information readily available by 
standardizing and simplifying the process for publishing information using  seman-
tic web-based technology . By making such information standardized and semanti-
cally interoperable, such platform would also enable social entrepreneurs to build 
decision assistance tools that are designed to empower a consumer to make a pur-
chasing decision consistent with their values. 
 As argued in the previous chapter, considerable  collaboration and trust building 
among public and private entities are crucial to push for private transparency to 
enable choice architecture of product information for the beneﬁ t of public. In addi-
tion, publishing the information also needs to take into account the three exceptions 
to information disclosure which are privacy, secrecy/conﬁ dentiality/proprietary, and 
national security (Stiglitz,  1998 ). One key problem with pushing private sector to 
share information is that the relevant data is often considered to be conﬁ dential, 
proprietary, and in some cases private data. In addition, considering the  complexity 
of certiﬁ cation process, ensuring quality and security of the data and information for 
consumer use becomes crucial. The subsequent chapter reports on the creation of 
ontology-enabled interoperable data infrastructure based on semantic technologies 
to chare trust information of certiﬁ cation and labels, and Chap.   6 outlines the issues 
of privacy, secrecy, and security in information disclosure of commercial data and 
existing mechanism and strategies for negotiating these issues. 
 References 
 Albersmeier, F., Schulze, H., Jahn, G., & Spiller, A. (2009). The reliability of third-party certiﬁ cation 
in the food chain: From checklists to risk-oriented auditing.  Food Control, 20 (10), 927–935.  
 Ammenberg, J., Wik, G., & Hjelm, O. (2001). Auditing external environmental auditors—investi-
gating how ISO 14001 is interpreted and applied in reality.  Eco-Management and Auditing, 
8 (4), 183–192. 
    Bacon, C. (2005). Confronting the coffee crisis: Can fair trade, organic, and specialty coffees 
reduce small-scale farmer vulnerability in Northern Nicaragua?  World Development, 33 (3), 
497–511.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2004.10.002  . 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

87
 Bartley, T. (2007). Institutional emergence in an era of globalization: The rise of transnational 
private regulation of labor and environmental conditions.  American Journal of Sociology, 
113 (2), 297–351.   http://doi.org/10.1086/518871  . 
 Bartley, T. (2011). Mapping the hard/soft law terrain: Labor rights and environmental protection: 
Transnational governance as the layering of rules: Intersections of public and private standards. 
 Theoretical Inquiries in Law, 12 , 517–665. 
 Büthe, T. (2010a). Global private politics: A research agenda.  Business and Politics ,  12 (3), 1–24. 
  http://doi.org/10.2202/1469-3569.1345  . 
 Büthe, T. (2010b). Private regulation in the global economy: A (p)review.  Business and Politics , 
 12 (3).   http://doi.org/10.2202/1469-3569.1328  . 
 Carrigan, M., & Attalla, A. (2001). The myth of the ethical consumer – Do ethics matter in pur-
chase behaviour?  Journal of Consumer Marketing, 18 (7), 560–578.   http://doi.org/10.1108/
07363760110410263  . 
 Carrington, M. J., Neville, B. A., & Whitwell, G. J. (2010). Why ethical consumers don’t walk 
their talk: Towards a framework for understanding the gap between the ethical purchase inten-
tions and actual buying behaviour of ethically minded consumers.  Journal of Business Ethics, 
97 (1), 139–158. 
 Cashore, B. W., Auld, G., & Newsom, D. (2004).  Governing through markets: Forest certiﬁ cation 
and the emergence of non-state authority . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Castaldo, S., Perrini, F., Misani, N., & Tencati, A. (2009). The missing link between corporate 
social responsibility and consumer trust: The case of fair trade products.  Journal of Business 
Ethics, 84 (1), 1–15. 
 DeAngelo, L. E. (1981). Auditor size and audit quality.  Journal of Accounting and Economics, 
3 (3), 183–199. 
 Deaton, B. J. (2004). A theoretical framework for examining the role of third-party certiﬁ ers.  Food 
Control, 15 (8), 615–619.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2003.09.007  . 
 Dimitri, C., & Oberholtzer, L. (2009).  Marketing U.S. organic foods: Recent trends from farms to 
consumers (No. 58). U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, United 
States.  
 Duff, A. (2004).  AUDITQUAL: Dimensions of audit quality . Edinburgh, Scotland: Institute of Chartered 
Accountants of Scotland. Retrieved from   http://icas.org.uk/res_duff_auditqual_report.pdf   
 Ecolabelindex. (n.d.).  Ecolabel Index|Who’s deciding what’s green? . Retrieved August 12, 2013, 
from   http://www.ecolabelindex.com/  
 Gibson, C. C. (1999).  Politicians and poachers: The political economy of wildlife policy in Africa 
(transferred to digital print). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hatanaka, M., Bain, C., & Busch, L. (2005). Third-party certiﬁ cation in the global agrifood sys-
tem.  Food Policy, 30 (3), 354–369.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2005.05.006  . 
 Hirschman, A. (1970).  Exit, voice and loyalty: Responses to decline in ﬁ rms, organizations, and 
States . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Howard, P., & Allen, P. (2010). Beyond organic and fair trade? An analysis of ecolabel preferences in 
the United States.  Rural Sociology, 75 (2), 244–269.   http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1549-0831.2009.00009.x  . 
 Jahn, G., Schramm, M., & Spiller, A. (2005). The reliability of certiﬁ cation: Quality labels as a 
consumer policy tool.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 28 (1), 53–73. 
 Janssen, M., & Hamm, U. (2011). Consumer perception of different organic certiﬁ cation schemes 
in ﬁ ve European countries.  Organic Agriculture, 1 (1), 1–13. 
 Kolk, A. (2010). Mainstreaming sustainable coffee.  Sustainable Development . Retrieved from 
  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/sd.507/full  
 Mayer, F., & Gerefﬁ , G. (2010). Regulation and economic globalization: Prospects and limits of 
private governance.  Business and Politics, 12 (3).   http://doi.org/10.2202/1469-3569.1325  . 
 Muradian, R., & Pelupessy, W. (2005). Governing the coffee chain: The role of voluntary regulatory 
systems.  World Development, 33 (12), 2029–2044.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2005.06.007  . 
 Panhuysen, S., & van Reenen, M. (2012).  Coffee barometer 2012 . Report, The Hague, Netherlands. 
Retrieved from   http://www.teacoffeecocoa.org/tcc/Media/Files/Coffee-Barometer-2012  
4 Labeling, Certiﬁ cation, and Consumer Trust

88
 Pelsmacker, P. D., Janssens, W., Sterckx, E., & Mielants, C. (2005). Consumer preferences for the 
marketing of ethically labelled coffee.  International Marketing Review, 22 (5), 512–530.   http://
doi.org/10.1108/02651330510624363   . 
 Pierrot, J., Giovannucci, D., & Kasterine, A. (2011).  Trends in the trade of certiﬁ ed coffees 
(Technical Paper No. MAR-11-197.E, p. 17). Geneva: International Trade Centre. 
 Pivato, S., Misani, N., & Tencati, A. (2008). The impact of corporate social responsibility on con-
sumer trust: The case of organic food.  Business Ethics: A European Review, 17 (1), 3–12.   http://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8608.2008.00515.x   . 
  Polonsky, M., Bhaskaran, S. and Cary, J. (2005), Exploring the opportunities for sustainable food 
labelling : a supply chain perspective, in ANZMAC 2005 : Proceedings of the Australia and New 
Zealand Marketing Association Conference 2005, ANZMAC, [Perth, W.A.], pp. 184–190.  
 RAN. (2012, April 11). The rainforest alliance demonstrates signiﬁ cant growth in 2011|Rainforest 
alliance. Retrieved July 29, 2013, from   http://www.rainforest-alliance.org/newsroom/news/
annual-growth-2011  
 Rao, H. (1994). The social construction of reputation: Certiﬁ cation contests, legitimation, and the 
survival of organizations in the American Automobile Industry: 1895–1912.  Strategic 
Management Journal, 15 (S1), 29–44.   http://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250150904  . 
 Raynolds, L. T., Murray, D., & Heller, A. (2007). Regulating sustainability in the coffee sector: A 
comparative analysis of third-party environmental and social certiﬁ cation initiatives. 
 Agriculture and Human Values, 24 (2), 147–163. 
 Semroc, B., Baer, E., Sonenshine, J., & Weikel, M. C. (2012).  Assessment of the Starbucks coffee and 
farmer equity (C.A.F.E) practices program FY08 – FY10 . Starbucks & Conversation International, 
  http://www.conservation.org/publications/Documents/2012_04_CAFE_Practices_Assessment_
FY08-FY10_Final.pdf   
 Seyfang, G. (2005). Shopping for sustainability: Can sustainable consumption promote ecological 
citizenship?  Environmental Politics, 14 (2), 290–306.   http://doi.org/10.1080/09644010500055209  . 
 Starbucks. (2013).  C.A.F.E practices veriﬁ er and inspector operations manual – Starbucks coffee 
company (Guideline No. V5.1). SCS Global Service,   https://www.scsglobalservices.com/ﬁ les/
cafe_man_verinsops_v5_2_010614.pdf   
 Stiglitz, J. E. (1998). Distinguished lecture on economics in government: The private uses of pub-
lic interests: Incentives and institutions.  The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12 (2), 3–22. 
  http://doi.org/10.2307/2646959  . 
 Swaen, V., & Chumpitaz, R. C. (2008). Impact of corporate social responsibility on consumer 
trust.  Recherche et Applications En Marketing (English Edition), 23 (4), 7–34.   http://doi.
org/10.1177/205157070802300402  . 
 Szmigin, I., Carrigan, M., & McEachern, M. G. (2009). The conscious consumer: Taking a ﬂ exible 
approach to ethical behaviour.  International Journal of Consumer Studies, 33 (2), 224–231. 
  http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1470-6431.2009.00750.x  . 
 Tanner, B. (2000). Independent assessment by third-party certiﬁ cation bodies.  Food Control, 
11 (5), 415–417.   http://doi.org/10.1016/S0956-7135(99)00055-9  . 
 Taylor, P. L., Murray, D. L., & Raynolds, L. T. (2005). Keeping trade fair: Governance challenges 
in the fair trade coffee initiative.  Sustainable Development, 13 (3), 199–208.   http://doi.
org/10.1002/sd.278  . 
 Weiss, J. A. (2002). Public information. In L. M. Salamon (Ed.),  The tools of government: A guide 
to the new governance (pp. 217–254). Oxford, MA/New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Wells, J. T. (2002). Let them know someone’s watching.  Journal of Accountancy, 193 (5), 
106–110. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

89
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_5
 Chapter 5 
 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test 
a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data 
Infrastructure Building Block  
 Joanne  S.  Luciano ,  Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Weijia  Ran ,  Nicolau  Depaula , 
 Holly  Jarman ,  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes ,  Giri  K.  Tayi ,  Jing  Zhang ,  Jana   Hrdinova , 
 Deborah  Lines  Andersen ,  David  F.  Andersen , and  Theresa  A.  Pardo 
 Abstract    Global markets for information-intensive products contain sharp informa-
tion asymmetries that lead to market inefﬁ ciencies resulting from consumer purchas-
ing decisions that are based on incomplete information. Elimination or reduction of 
such information asymmetries has long been the goal of governments as well as vari-
ous nongovernmental entities that recognize that addressing issues such as sustainable 
production, socially just labor practices, and reduction in energy needs and health 
expenditure is closely linked to consumers being fully aware of the economic, envi-
ronmental, and social impacts of their purchasing decisions. This chapter reports on 
the creation of ontology-enabled interoperable data infrastructure based on semantic 
technologies that would enable information sharing in traditionally information-
restricted markets. The main technical result is a proof-of-concept set of data stan-
dards built on semantic technology applications and the functionalities of formal 
ontology of certiﬁ cation and inspection processes. The current proof of concept 
focuses speciﬁ cally on certiﬁ ed fair-trade coffee, and while its  applicability is cur-
rently limited, it has the potential to become universally applicable to any certiﬁ cation 
 J. S.  Luciano 
 Tetherless World Constellation ,  Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute ,  Troy ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: jluciano@gmail.com 
 D. S.  Sayogo 
 Department of Economics and Business ,  The University of Muhammadiyah 
Malang ,  Indonesia 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: dsayogo@ctg.albany.edu 
 W.  Ran (*) 
 System Dynamics Society ,  University at Albany ,  135 Western Ave. ,  Albany ,  NY  12222 ,  USA 
 e-mail: wran@albany.edu 
 N.  Depaula •  L. F.  Luna-Reyes •  D. L.  Andersen 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: ndepaula@albany.edu; lluna-reyes@albany.edu; dla@albany.edu 

90
and inspection process for any product and service. In addition to producing a number 
of artifacts relevant to the expandability of the work, such as domain ontologies, the 
research indicates that while big data systems are necessary, they are not sufﬁ cient to 
create high levels of consumer trust. By testing the criteria using both hand-generated 
and automated queries, we are able to demonstrate that CIDIBB (Certiﬁ cation and 
Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block) is not only able to test the trustworthi-
ness of certiﬁ cation schemes but also that our ontology generates consistent results.  
 Keywords   Ontology •  Virtual certiﬁ cates •  Certiﬁ cates •  Semantic applications • 
 Ontology validation •  Certiﬁ cation ontology 
5.1  Introduction 
 Economic theory  tells us that a market clears when the upward sloping supply curve 
and the downward sloping demand curve cross—it is the basis for the bold assertion 
that free markets are the best way to distribute the factors of production to create a 
globally efﬁ cient production and distribution system. But hidden behind the theory 
of markets are assumptions about perfect information—both sellers and buyers must 
have access to the same perfect information about the state of the market. As we all 
know, these assumptions about information in free markets are often not true. When 
we choose (purchase) surgeon’s services, we are often ignorant of how successful 
she has been in past surgeries. When we purchase a health insurance policy, we most 
likely do not know or understand what important features or services are not cov-
ered. When we buy a pair of running shoes, we do not know if they were 
 H.  Jarman 
 Department of Health Management and Policy ,  School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan ,  Ann Arbor ,  MI ,  USA 
 e-mail: hjarman@umich.edu 
 G. K.  Tayi 
 Department of Information Technology Management ,  University at Albany , 
 Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: gtayi@albany.edu 
 J.  Zhang 
 Graduate School of Management ,  Clark University ,  Worcester ,  MA ,  USA 
 e-mail: jizhang@clarku.edu 
 J.  Hrdinova •  T. A.  Pardo 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: hrdinova.1@osu.edu; tpardo@ctg.albany.edu 
 D. F.  Andersen 
 Department of Public Administration & Policy, Department of Informatics , 
 University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: david.andersen@albany.edu 
J.S. Luciano et al.

91
manufactured in a sweat shop using child labor. When we purchase a pound of cof-
fee, we do not know if it was grown in a way that exploited farm workers or dam-
aged some distant ecology or even used unhealthy pesticides. Each of these market 
transactions points to the problems of information asymmetry that pervade many 
contemporary global marketplaces. 
 Current trends in consumer markets involve a growing number of ethical con-
sumers who are increasingly paying attention to information about where, when, 
how, and by whom our food, consumer, and durable goods are produced (Bray, 
Johns, & Kilburn,  2011 ; Goleman,  2009 ; Watts & Wyner,  2011 ). For instance, 
 organic market penetration for fresh produce has grown to 12 % in the United States 
since the adoption of USDA organic standards (Dimitri & Greene,  2002 ); fair-trade 
markets have grown 20 % in Europe and 40 % annually in the United States and the 
Paciﬁ c Rim (Kim, Lee, & Park,  2010 ). Yet information needed by ethical consum-
ers during the buying process is still rarely available (Graham & Haarstad,  2011 ). 
Moreover, market premiums for organic,  fair-trade, or environmentally friendly 
products offer an incentive to “greenwash” products by adding product labeling that 
promises low to no environmental impact with the sole aim of increasing proﬁ tabil-
ity for the manufacturer or retailer and introducing additional sources for informa-
tion asymmetries into the market. As a measure of the problem, a 2010 survey by 
TerraChoice conducted in 24 stores in the United States and Canada claimed that 
more than 95 % of the 5300 products being observed commit at least one instance 
of greenwashing (Makower,  2010 ; TerraChoice,  2010 ). 
 To reduce information  asymmetry  in this particular area, governments, NGOs, 
and private organizations have created a third-party certiﬁ cation and labeling indus-
try. The numbers of third-party labeling initiatives have expanded rapidly since the 
1990s (Albersmeier, Schulze, Jahn, & Spiller,  2009 ; Jahn, Schramm, & Spiller, 
 2005 ). The rapid proliferation of labeling obstructs the ability of consumers to 
observe the meaning behind labels, making their warranty of trusted information no 
longer adequate (Jarman et al.,  2011 ). 
 This chapter describes  the design and development of a semantic web-based pro-
totype that could help correct information asymmetries in free markets. We are 
seeking to build an information infrastructure that can promote what we refer to as 
Full Information Product Pricing (FIPP) systems. FIPP systems are characterized 
by features that allow a surgeon an insurance company or a coffee producer to 
charge a premium (a FIPP price) for a product or service because consumers trust 
the information provided to them in regard to the key attributes of these products 
and services and these attributes align with consumers’ values. 
 The rest of the chapter is organized in six sections following this introduction. 
Section two provides a vision of the ways in  which  CIDIBB can help in the creation 
of virtual certiﬁ cates to promote FIPP systems. Section three describes previous 
research and some basic concepts about ontologies. Section four includes a brief 
description of the main components of CIDIBB as a set of three ontologies, CerTIN, 
FLO, and CiTruST. Section ﬁ ve presents an empirical evaluation of CIDIBB. In this 
section, we show ways in which CiTruST can be used to automatically classify 
certiﬁ cation systems in terms of their trustworthiness. Finally, section six includes a 
discussion, concluding remarks, and future work to fully develop CIDIBB.  
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

92
5.2  Creating Virtual Certiﬁ cates to Correct for Information 
Asymmetries in Markets 
 Our approach  to   producing FIPP systems involves the creation of a certiﬁ cation 
ecosystem.  Certifying organizations will set explicit measurable standards for all 
types of products and services. Then third-party certiﬁ ers will send representatives 
to inspect facilities, processes, and outcomes to certify that they indeed meet the 
publicly available standards. Finally, a certiﬁ cate will be attached to the product or 
service that gives consumers, or consumer advocates operating as agents of the 
consumers, all the trusted information that they need, i.e., perfect information with-
out asymmetric bias. 
 Such systems already exist but only in partial form.  Some  organizations already 
produce certiﬁ cates that are physically attached to products or services that we pur-
chase. Examples of such physical certiﬁ cates include Fair Trade and USDA Organic 
certiﬁ cates that are printed on food products or the certiﬁ cate issued by the local 
department of health of a clean and healthy kitchen hanging in many restaurants. 
Our scheme proposes that certiﬁ cates, rather than being physically attached to prod-
ucts or services, become virtual certiﬁ cates. Virtual certiﬁ cates will be broadcasted 
on the internet and can be attached as an extended package of information to a 
unique product identiﬁ er such as a UPC product codes. 
 The challenge of making such virtual certiﬁ cates a reality lies mainly in making 
the vast amounts of disparate data shareable and understandable across certiﬁ cation 
and inspection processes in a way that will be trusted by consumers. A key technical 
component that is necessary but missing is a combination of data standards and 
procedures that allow data to be shared seamlessly among the various and potential 
users of that data. We refer to this component as the “data infrastructure building 
block.” 1 The Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block 
( CIDIBB),  whose creation is described in detail in this chapter, is a set of data stan-
dards in the form of a formal ontology of the certiﬁ cation and inspection process 
that would allow the creation of a data ecosystem for certiﬁ cation processes. 
 From a technical point of view, CIDIBB consists of four interlocking compo-
nents that all operate in a semantic web environment. Three of the key components 
of CIDIBB consist of linked ontologies that model the domain of inspection and 
certiﬁ cation of consumer products with the certiﬁ cation and inspection of fair-trade 
coffee taken as a speciﬁ c exemplar. The fourth component is a 28 question use case 
scenario that serves as a normative deﬁ nition of what constitutes a trusted inspec-
tion virtual certiﬁ cate (see Appendix). 
 At a high level, Fig.  5.1 shows the  main  components of the ecosystem created 
around CIDIBB. Such an ecosystem may include at least four classes of key 
1  The name “Data Infrastructure Building Block” derives from the National Science Foundation 
Data Infrastructure Building Block program which aims to “foster cross-community infrastructure 
development that solves common problems, while building blocks of data infrastructure that can 
support and provide data solutions to a broader range of scientiﬁ c disciplines while reducing dupli-
cative efforts.” ( http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=504776 ) 
J.S. Luciano et al.

93
stakeholders that we represent by an idealized individual shown in each of the 
four corners of the ﬁ gure.
 Ellen, shown in the upper right-hand quadrant, represents consumers who will 
scan a product bar code to view its consumer rating and help them make a purchas-
ing decision. Lucy, in the lower right-hand quadrant, represents a new consumer 
advocate industry that analyzes the full information package of consumer products 
and then sells that information to consumers such as Ellen. Lucy relies on William, 
a member of the inspection and certiﬁ cation industry, who uses CIDIBB  to  broad-
cast information about how, when, where, and by whom consumer products are 
created. The marketplace will drive what virtual certiﬁ cates William is creating 
depending on what issues consumers are concerned with. For example, if  consumers 
are concerned about the environmental impacts of the products they buy, then 
William’s virtual certiﬁ cates would focus on, for example, the carbon footprint cre-
ated in producing and delivering the product to the ﬁ nal consumer Ellen. Carlos 
represents producers of value-based products and services. Carlos is cooperating 
with William to certify his production processes and to document unobservable 
attributes of his products because he understands that Ellen is willing to pay a price 
premium for products produced using methods that are congruent with her values. 
However, Carlos can continue to charge a price premium, and Lucy and William can 
stay in business only as long as Ellen continues to trust the information about virtual 
certiﬁ cates that are being introduced into this newly formed Full Information 
Product Pricing (FIPP) ecosystem.  
Carlos
William
Lucy
Ellen
Producers of value-based
products and services
The FIPP Marketplace
Consumers of value-based
products and services
Producers
support
certification
and inspection
industry
Certification and
Inspection DIBB
Consumers
purchase
product
information
Certifiers and inspectors
producing certification and
inspection data)
Symbiotic, Open Exchange
of Certification and
Inspection Data
Consumer advocate
aggregating certification and
inspection data
 Fig. 5.1   Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block (CIDIBB) 
 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

94
5.3  Previous Research 
5.3.1  FIPP Systems and Trust 
 Our previous  research  has shown that trust plays a key role in all FIPP relationships 
(Luna-Reyes et al.,  2013 ). In fact, trust is considered as an alternative governance 
mechanism in most collaborative relations (Powell,  1996 ). Higher trust levels lead 
to lowering of costs that result from the need to protect against opportunism 
(Shapiro, Sheppard, & Cheraskin,  1992 ).  Moreover, the literature points out the 
importance of trust in these market transactions, particularly in the case of unob-
servable product attributes (Arora,  2006 ). 
 Researchers have identiﬁ ed several mechanisms for “trust production,” which 
include calculative, relational, and institutional mechanisms (Rousseau, Sitkin, 
Burt, & Camerer,  1998 ). Institutional trust refers to the existence of an institutional 
framework that regulates the relationship between the main actors in the collabora-
tion. Calculative trust refers to an estimation of the risks and payoffs intertwined in 
the interaction, and relational trust is associated with emotional bonds, shared val-
ues or objectives between the actors, or recognition of the trustworthiness of other 
participants in a repeated relationship. Research has found that institutional trust is 
particularly relevant for systems such as the proposed CIDIBB and that some fea-
tures of information systems and information technologies contribute to building of 
institutional trust (Gefen et al.,  2006 ; Luna-Reyes et al.,  2013 ).  Some of these fea-
tures include peer feedback, online testimonials, afﬁ liation links, guarantees, or sys-
tem quality.  The development of trust was central to designing the various 
components of CIDIBB, which are described in Sect.  5.4 . 
5.3.2  Ontologies and the Semantic Web 
 In the ﬁ eld of information and computer science, ontologies refer to explicit speci-
ﬁ cations of terms and their relationships within a domain of interest (Gruber,  1993 ). 
 Such speciﬁ cations provide a number of beneﬁ ts, the most basic of which is 
enabling a computer to reason over the terms and properties of data (Uschold & 
Gruninger,  1996 ).  Semantic web applications or services require that data be pub-
lished in a format that makes use of these speciﬁ cations as proposed in ontologies 
relevant to the domain of interest to which the data belongs (Berners-Lee, Hendler, 
& Lassila,  2001 ). Data published following such speciﬁ cations may  be  called 
“ linked data,”   and such data serve as building blocks for the semantic web (Berners-
Lee,  2006 ). Creating data this way allows for more precise results from searches in 
the web and the automation of inferences over contents of the data (Bizer, Heath, & 
Berners- Lee,  2009 ). Speciﬁ cally, using ontologies for the semantic web involves 
publishing data in the Resource Description Framework (RDF) ﬁ le structure (W3C 
J.S. Luciano et al.

95
speciﬁ cation) in which subjects, predicates, and objects (or RDF triples) within 
components of the data are explicitly identiﬁ ed. 
 As semantic web technologies make use of speciﬁ cations established in domain 
ontologies, they make it possible for data from different organizations and with dif-
ferent terminology—within a particular domain (e.g., certiﬁ cation and inspection 
processes) and using semantically equivalent concepts—to be integrated and classi-
ﬁ ed in a structured way to improve searchability and the use of automated reason-
ing. For example, when a certiﬁ cation or inspection organization provides data 
 where the “ﬁ eld inspector” is labeled as an “auditor,” deﬁ nitions in the ontology 
may indicate that these terms refer to the same concept, although they are labeled 
differently from one organization or one dataset to another. A software application 
can then use the ontology to determine that two attributes in two different datasets 
are equivalent. Applications can also use inference tools to make determinations 
about items and properties included in the dataset, such as “Is there an auditor?” or 
“Is the date of inspection before the date of certiﬁ cate?” 
 The use of these tools and  approaches makes it possible to adopt a framework 
that supports integration, data reuse, and automated reasoning. Therefore, these 
technologies are used in this research as the framework for our efforts to design, 
 build, and test the concept of a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure 
Building Block (CIDIBB).  
5.4  Key Technical Components of CIDIBB: Ontology-Based 
Data Standards and Evaluation System 
 CIDIBB is an abstract architecture for data storage, retrieval, and automated reason-
ing of certiﬁ cation and inspection data, based on semantic web principles. We 
developed three ontologies, CerTIN, FLO, and CiTruST (See Fig.  5.2 ). These three 
ontologies together form the fundamental base of the proposed Certiﬁ cation and 
Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block (CIDIBB). CerTIN ontology deﬁ nes 
the high-level abstraction of concepts, which we refer to as the global ontology. 
FLO ontology and CiTruST are called local ontologies. They inherit and expand 
high-level concepts deﬁ ned in the global ontology. For more elaborate description 
about these ontologies and their development process, please refer to Sayogo et al. 
( Forthcoming ).
 CerTIN  deﬁ nes  the most important and basic concepts of a certiﬁ cation system 
at a high level, meaning that CerTIN only provides the higher-level deﬁ nition of a 
certiﬁ cation system that serves as an overarching architecture to connect multiple, 
more detailed ontologies for each certiﬁ cation and labeling scheme. The CerTIN 
ontology used standard deﬁ nitions of class and property that are available from 
existing ontology literature. In addition, CerTIN has adopted  classes and properties 
from three ontologies recommended by the W3C (World Wide Web Consortium). 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

96
These three include Dublin Core, 2 FoaF 3 , and Good Relation 4 (Sayogo et al., 
 Forthcoming ). 
 CiTruST ontology  was created to further demonstrate the scalability and 
expanded functionality of CerTIN ontology as an integrated global ontology. Thus, 
this ontology uses the classes and properties from CerTIN to deﬁ ne the quality of a 
certiﬁ cation process. CiTruST enables the determination of a “good” or “poor” cer-
tiﬁ cation process. We started with the basic structure of a certiﬁ cate to ﬁ nd indica-
tors for the quality of certiﬁ cation. Some components of the basic structure of a 
reliable certiﬁ cation process are accreditation body, certiﬁ cation body, standard set-
ter, and monitoring process (Albersmeier et al.,  2009 ; Deaton,  2004 ; Jahn et al., 
 2005 ; Tanner,  2000 ). The document analysis and interviews further indicated the 
importance of independence and monitoring processes that combine both document 
and ﬁ eld inspection as an indicator of reliable certiﬁ cation. 
 We thus posited that existence or nonexistence of particular components in the 
structure of certiﬁ cation indicates the degree of reliability of the certiﬁ cation 
scheme. The level of trustworthiness refers to the degree of certiﬁ cation trustwor-
thiness derived from the conformance or nonconformance to the object of trustwor-
thiness. The object of trustworthiness refers to the classes speciﬁ ed in CerTIN 
ontology. CiTruST ontology proposes four levels of certiﬁ cation process reliability, 
namely, level A to level D of certiﬁ cation trustworthiness. The assignment of the 
2  http://dublincore.org/2008/01/14/dcterms.rdf 
3  http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/ 
4  http://www.heppnetz.de/projects/goodrelations/ 
 Fig. 5.2   The proposed ontologies and their relationships (Source: Sayogo et al. ( Forthcoming )) 
J.S. Luciano et al.

97
level depends on the existence of the criteria in the object of trustworthiness. The 
properties of level A of trustworthiness from CiTrusT ontology are shown below.
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 conformsTo 
 Some 
 Standard> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 certiﬁ edBy 
 Only 
 ‘Third Party Certiﬁ er’> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasCertifyingOfﬁ cer 
 min 1 
 CertifyingOfﬁ cer> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasCompleted 
 Some 
 DocumentInspection> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasCompleted 
 Some 
 FieldInspection> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasEvaluationDecision 
 Some 
 CorrectiveMeasure> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasEvaluationDecision 
 Some 
 NonConformity> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasEvaluation Decision 
 Some 
 ObjectiveEvidence> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 hasStandardSetter 
 Exactly 1 
 StandardSetter> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 inspectedBy 
 min 1 
 Inspector> 
 <’Level A of 
Trustworthiness’ 
 Authorize 
 min 1 
 Certiﬁ cate> 
 FLO ontology is an example of a local ontology that we created to further dem-
onstrate how CerTIN ontology can be mapped to speciﬁ c certiﬁ cation and inspec-
tion schemes. The ability of CerTIN to map into a local ontology such as FLO 
enables users (consumer advocates) to extract consistent and detailed information 
for assessing the trustworthiness of a certiﬁ cation scheme. 
 The most important elements of FLO ontology are the detailed classiﬁ cations of 
compliance criteria into their properties. A compliance criterion is constructed with 
several restrictions, as deﬁ ned in the FLO standard, by speciﬁ c timeline, criteria 
types, measurement of the criteria, and organization applicability. These restrictions 
represent the properties of the criterion. Conformance to these properties affects the 
evaluation decision for certiﬁ cation, and it is also argued that conformance to these 
properties deﬁ nes the level of trustworthiness of the certiﬁ cation schemes. 
5.5  Empirical Testing of the Proof of Concept 
 After we created the basic building blocks of the CIDIBB, we devised a set of 
empirically based  steps to test  the resulting proof-of-concept system: (1) we gener-
ated a sample dataset drawn from the domain of Fair Trade certiﬁ cation of coffee 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

98
grown in Mexico, (2) we used the ontology-based standards to publish this dataset 
in the form of an RDF triple store, (3) we generated SPARQL queries to determine 
if we could retrieve the answers to the 28 use case questions from the online pub-
lished data (and if not, why not), (4) we summarized our results in terms of how 
many of the 28 use case questions could be answered with what level of assuredness 
and accuracy, and (5) we tested some limited reasoning capabilities to see if an 
inference-based system could distinguish between several datasets with known dif-
ferences in quality and trustworthiness. 
 The testing process has been run against four datasets stored using the CIDIBB 
architecture: an  Ideal Benchmark  certiﬁ cation and inspection dataset and three 
 certiﬁ cation schemes including FLO, Dave and Nic, and Nonviolent Dove. “Ideal 
Benchmark”  certiﬁ cate characterizes a hypothetical virtual certiﬁ cate that could 
answer 100 % of the questions posed by the use case. FLO certiﬁ cate dataset repre-
sents a high-quality virtual certiﬁ cate. “Dave and Nic” and “Nonviolent Dove” are 
two synthetic certiﬁ cates that represent degrees of greenwashed data. We created 
these two levels of greenwashed data by eliminating some key inspection data, not 
specifying criteria, or taking other shortcuts in the full certiﬁ cation and inspection 
process. 
 Answers to the 28 use case questions for each of the four datasets produced a 
unique distribution across the three classiﬁ ed levels (see Fig.  5.3 ).  Differences in the 
level of difﬁ culty required to retrieve the answers to these 28 questions can be used 
to assess the relative trustworthiness of various certiﬁ cation and inspection pro-
cesses. Our test results clearly differentiate trustworthy virtual certiﬁ cate datasets 
and datasets that yield less trustworthy virtual certiﬁ cates.
 Our results clearly distinguish between high-quality FLO data and data from the 
other virtual certiﬁ cates that were missing answers to many of the detailed questions 
in the use  case  (See Fig.  5.3 ). We added an “Ideal Benchmark” certiﬁ cate to charac-
terize a hypothetical virtual certiﬁ cate that could answer 100 % of the questions 
posed by the use case. 
 Tautologically, the  Ideal Benchmark  provides answers to all 28 questions in the 
use case, whereas the FLO certiﬁ cate answers 19 of the questions; the lightly green-
washed certiﬁ cate (“Dave and Nic”) answers ten of the questions, and the heavily 
greenwashed certiﬁ cate answers only seven of the detailed questions in the use case. 
Because the ontology contains an elaborated and semantically meaningful descrip-
tion of what a normatively deﬁ ned good certiﬁ cation and inspection system should 
contain and because the use case questions do probe into some detail, greenwashed 
systems cannot “hide” the fact that their certiﬁ cates are based on shortcuts and less 
than rigorous methods. Notice especially the sharp decline in questions that can be 
answered directly by SPARQL queries. By testing the criteria using both SPARQL 
and DL queries, we are able to demonstrate that not only is CIDIBB able to test the 
trustworthiness of certiﬁ cation schemes but also that our ontology generates consis-
tent results. 
 Our empirical results show that the structure of CIDIBB provides a framework 
to evaluate the trustworthiness of different certiﬁ cation schemes. The CIDIBB 
architecture can support a system that integrates and exchanges massive amounts of 
J.S. Luciano et al.

99
dispersed data about product certiﬁ cation and inspection schemes using semantically 
structured triple stores and allows consumer advocates, such as Lucy, to directly 
query such data for answers to the 28 use case questions and to use those answers 
to inform consumers, such as Ellen, about the trustworthiness of the certiﬁ cates on 
the products and services she plans to purchase. 
 As discussed immediately above, a skilled human user of our CIDIBB can 
exhaustively query the existing data for multiple certiﬁ cation schemes, paying close 
attention to all 28 use case questions to arrive at the results presented in Fig.  5.3 . 
Because of the use of semantic technologies, the manual process described above 
can be automated to classify a certiﬁ cation scheme as of four types (A through D) 
where an “A” classiﬁ cation is compatible with highly trusted data (again as deﬁ ned 
by the 28 use case questions) and “D” classiﬁ cation is compatible with heavily gre-
enwashed certiﬁ cation processes.  Table  5.1 presents the results of our automatic 
classiﬁ cation of trustworthiness for the four datasets.
 Fig. 5.3   The result of empirical testing of the certiﬁ cation schemes into the CIDIBB benchmark 
 for  trustworthiness 
 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

100
5.6  Discussion: Vignettes Illustrating How a Certiﬁ cation 
and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB) Might Be Used to Create Virtual Certiﬁ cates 
 The components described above create a whole that is greater than the sum of its 
parts. These components constitute a “Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data 
Infrastructure Building Block” (CIDIBB) that can be used to support the sharing of 
diverse datasets to meet multiple needs in the supply chain that feeds the consumer 
marketplace. We support this claim with four vignettes, illustrating how such a plat-
form, based on semantic web technologies, might enhance the efﬁ ciency of the 
consumer marketplace. 
5.6.1  Vignette #1: A Certifying Organization Uses CIDIBB 
to Create a New Virtual Certiﬁ cate 
 William is the cofounder  of  CyberJustTrade ( CJT),  a start-up certiﬁ cation agency. 
As someone who is well trained in both sustainable marketing and economics, and 
who is knowledgeable about information systems, William understands the impor-
tance of differentiation strategy. Thus, he envisioned the creation of ﬁ rst-ever virtual 
sustainable certiﬁ cation scheme as the company’s lever to compete against other 
much bigger certiﬁ cation agencies. His extensive observations and research on cur-
rent certiﬁ cation schemes lead to an understanding of the lack of transparency in the 
current system. Based on this, he and his cofounder plan to enrich end consumers’ 
purchasing experiences by providing a sustainable certiﬁ cation label that has three 
distinct functionalities: (a) enables instant traceability of certiﬁ cation information, 
(b) enables comparison against other certiﬁ cation schemes, and (c) provides 
increased transparency on certiﬁ cation information. William and his cofounder 
soon confronted three major challenges to their efforts: (a) the ownership of certiﬁ -
cation information is in the hands of the applicant and not the certiﬁ cation agency, 
(b) commercial privacy related to certiﬁ cation data for each ﬁ rm in a supply chain, 
and (c) provision of instant traceability and comparability requires the availability 
of standardized data across supply chain ﬁ rms and other certiﬁ cation schemes. 
 Upon discovering CIDIBB, William realizes it can help his certiﬁ cation agency 
in overcoming the abovementioned challenges. By requiring the applicant to store 
 Table 5.1  The automated  trustworthiness ranking of three certiﬁ cation schemes using the CiTruST 
ontology and reasoning  
 No 
 Certiﬁ cation scheme 
 Trustworthiness rating 
 1 
 FLO Labeling International (Flo-Cert) 
 A 
 2 
 Dave and Nic Certiﬁ cation 
 C 
 3 
 Nonviolent Dove Certiﬁ cation 
 D 
J.S. Luciano et al.

101
their data in CIDIBB compliant format, it will enable CJT to extract consistent and 
standardized information across the entire supply chain. Since CIDIBB is based on 
CerTIN global ontology,  CJT could set up the level of abstraction of the data that 
needs to be extracted from the supply chain. By setting the level of abstraction to a 
higher level,    CJT could evade the problem of commercial privacy. Since CIDIBB 
as a framework is equipped with well-established collaborative governance, the 
use of CIDIBB also solves the data ownership issue.  The ability of CIDIBB to 
facilitate retrieval of consistent and standardized data supported with a trustworthi-
ness  ontology enables the CJT to easily compare the trustworthiness of different 
certiﬁ cation schemes against CJT certiﬁ cation and then to sell the comparison 
information.  
5.6.2  Vignette #2: A Consumer Advocate Uses CIDIBB 
to Create a New Product or Service Rating System 
 Lucy is the CEO of a well-established product rating ﬁ rm. Lucy’s ﬁ rm is an infor-
mation aggregator that harvests information about sustainable consumer products 
and publishes proprietary product ratings (organized by UPC code).  The ﬁ rm has 
created a number of apps that allow consumers to access the product ratings, while 
they are shopping either in a physical store or online. Their business model is to sell 
a low cost-subscription to their service to individual consumers. One of the early 
entrants into their market niche was the GoodGuide product rating system. 5 
 Figure  5.4 shows the  architecture Lucy can use to build a CIDIBB-based product 
rating system. Consumer values are expressed as concerns and questions, which can 
be translated into machine-understandable queries. These queries are executed 
against standardized data and semantically enriched by CIDIBB ontology. For 
example, some consumers may be concerned if child labor was used during produc-
tion processes (see Sect.  5.3 ). This concern can be translated into a machine- 
understandable query as presented below:
 If<NoEmployementOfChildrenUnderAgeOf15 hasEvaluationDecision some ‘Evalu
ationDecision’>and 
 <NoEmployementOfChildrenUnderAgeOf15 
hasCriteriaType value “Core 
Criteria”>and 
 <NoEmployementOfChildrenUnderAgeOf15 hasTimeline value “Initial Audit”>and 
 <NoEmployementOfChildrenUnderAgeOf15 hasApplicability value “Members of 
Organization”>and 
 <NoEmployementOfChildrenUnderAgeOf15 hasIndicator value “There are no 
Children under the age of 15 years employed”> 
5  GoodGuide is an actual product rating service that provides consumers with information about 
the health, environmental, and social performance of products and companies.  http://www.
goodguide.com 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

102
 If the returned query result is true,  then it means that no child labor was used in 
the production of the good. Query results are then fed into the rating algorithm. The 
output of the algorithm is one or more ratings that reﬂ ect the value of the good or 
service according to a particular value system. 
5.6.3  Vignette #3: A Producer Featuring Sustainable Products 
or Services Creates Databases that Are CIDIBB 
Compliant 
 Carlos intends to reorient his mango producing farm in Central America to a farm 
that produces products that can be exported  to  premium consumer markets in the 
United States, Canada, and the EU. 
 Carlos  recognizes  that having multiple virtual certiﬁ cates attached to his man-
goes is key to the success of his export business. He wants his mangoes to be Fair 
 Fig. 5.4   CIDIBB-based product or service rating system 
 
J.S. Luciano et al.

103
Trade certiﬁ ed, USDA organic certiﬁ ed, Shade Grown Certiﬁ ed, as well as being 
certiﬁ ed with a number of new virtual certiﬁ cates that have emerged in the past 
several years (see Vignette #1 above). Carlos intends to manage all aspects of his 
business so that details of his operations, all of which are being inspected by mul-
tiple certiﬁ cation and inspection organizations, will all be as open as possible to 
anyone and everyone who is interested in buying his products. As Carlos 
 contemplates setting up his business and its information systems, he recognizes that 
broadcasting the certiﬁ cation information of his mangoes to the internet using the 
CIDIBB will be key to his ability to charge a premium price. 
 In order to broadcast this information, Carlos has two options, (1) he can recon-
struct his databases to make them CIDIBB compliant, or (2) he can retrieve the 
certiﬁ cation and inspection data from existing databases, further improve the 
retrieved data, and make them CIDIBB compliant. Choosing either option, Carlos 
will be facing some technical challenges. 
5.6.4  Vignette #4: TallMart Creates a Two-Sided Market 
Platform to Produce and Distribute Sustainable Products 
and Services 
 The strategic planning unit of TallMart corporation, a major retailer in the United 
States and the EU, has realized that about 14 % of its base market consists of “green 
consumers,” individuals who are willing to pay a premium for products that they 
can trust have been produced in conditions that are consistent with their values. 6 
TallMart recognizes the potential of the CIDIBB to bring trusted information into 
the consumer marketplace as well as the commercial potential of creating a “two- 
sided” marketing platform wherein retail consumers pay a premium for products 
that can be sold  with  CIDIBB-certiﬁ ed virtual certiﬁ cates, while at the same time 
producers of sustainable products are willing to pay a fee to have information about 
their products distributed on TallMart’s platform using the CIDIBB standard, as 
shown in Fig.  5.5 .
5.7  Concluding Remarks 
 Global markets for information-intensive products contain sharp information asym-
metries that lead to market inefﬁ ciencies, resulting in consumer purchasing deci-
sions that are based on incomplete information. Unintended side effects of these 
6  Walmart has been working with suppliers on various sustainability initiatives. In 2009 they intro-
duced a sustainable measurement system that tracks the environmental impact of products. See 
especially: 
 http://corporate.walmart.com/our-story/ 
or 
 http://corporate.walmart.com/global-
responsibility/ 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

104
information asymmetries vary depending on the markets in question, ranging from 
negative externalities such as environmental degradation in the case of unsustainable 
production practices for agricultural products, loss of human capital in the case of 
exploitative labor practices, or unfavorable patient outcomes in the case of incom-
plete information about the quality of care provided in different healthcare settings. 
Elimination or reduction of such information asymmetries has long been the goal of 
governments as well as various nongovernmental entities that recognize that address-
ing issues such as sustainable production, socially just labor practices, and reduction 
in energy needs and health expenditure is closely linked to consumers who are fully 
aware of the economic, environmental, and social impacts of their purchasing 
decisions. 
 Our current research explored creation of ontology-enabled interoperable data 
infrastructure, based on the semantic web that would enable information sharing in 
traditionally information-restricted markets. Throughout the 3-year project, we 
explored the feasibility of tagging and broadcasting a diverse and dispersed set of 
 Fig. 5.5   TallMart platform 
 
J.S. Luciano et al.

105
data from product certiﬁ cation and inspection processes to allow for assessment of 
their accuracy and trustworthiness. The main technical result of our project is a 
proof-of-concept Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB), which is a set of data standards built on semantic web applications and 
the functionalities of a formal ontology of the certiﬁ cation and inspection process. 
While the current proof of concept focuses narrowly on certiﬁ ed fair-trade coffee 
and its functionality is limited, it has the potential for becoming universally appli-
cable to any certiﬁ cation and inspection process for any product and service. 
 Achieving  universal applicability of the CIDIBB, however, requires a series of 
steps aimed at reﬁ nement and broadening of our existing proof of concept and grad-
ually increasing the scope of products and services. The ﬁ rst step is to further reﬁ ne 
and test a full prototype in the original area of its focus, namely, certiﬁ ed fair-trade 
coffee. Such reﬁ nement and testing requires access to real-world certiﬁ cation and 
inspection data. The second step is the application of the reﬁ ned CIDIBB to other 
certiﬁ cations surrounding coffee, such as organic, to test the applicability of our 
Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Ontology (CerTIN) to other certiﬁ cation schemes. The 
continual focus on coffee takes advantage of our domain expertise and allows us to 
test CIDIBB’s ability to address comparability of different certiﬁ cation schemes. If 
such buildup is successful, the next step toward testing for universal applicability is 
to incorporate other agricultural products that might require different inspection 
processes. Finally, the last step toward universal application is to use the existing 
CIDIBB for nonagricultural domains. 
 Making CIDIBB a reality requires integration of data and information that is 
under the ownership and stewardship of public and private entities. In this way, 
many nontechnical requirements also need to be met. While  information quality and 
integrity  have always been an issue of concern even in situations with a single infor-
mation source, it will be an even more complex problem in the case of a platform 
that is designed to integrate information from multiple disparate sources. Thus, cre-
ating technical and process mechanisms to ensure information integrity and security 
is essential for the data to be trustworthy. Moreover, designing information policy 
that balances the need for supply chain transparency and ability of businesses to 
remain competitive is key. Establishing a governance structure is crucial for all large 
system development projects, but perhaps especially so for the development of plat-
forms dealing with the complex determinants of sustainability such as CIDIBB. The 
key to this process is establishing a basis for “principled engagement”—a common 
understanding of the ways in which different stakeholders use central concepts and 
terms (Emerson, Nabatchi, & Balogh,  2012 ). 
 By making our proof-of-concept CIDIBB operational, we would provide, for the 
ﬁ rst time, a way for end users to reduce sharp information asymmetries in consumer 
markets through access to certiﬁ cation and inspection information in areas as widely 
dispersed as the performance of a healthcare provider, energy consumption patterns, 
or the safety of products we use each day in our daily routines.  
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

106
 References 
 Albersmeier, F., Schulze, H., Jahn, G., & Spiller, A. (2009). The reliability of third-party certiﬁ ca-
tion in the food chain: From checklists to risk-oriented auditing.  Food Control, 20 (10), 
927–935. 
 Arora, R. (2006). Product positioning based on search, experience and credence attributes using 
conjoint analysis.  Journal of Product & Brand Management, 15 (4/5), 285–292.   http://doi.
org/10.1108/10610420610685695  . 
 Berners-Lee, T. (2006, July 27).  Linked data . Retrieved from Berners-Lee, T. (2006).  Linked data . 
Retrieved from   http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html  
 Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., & Lassila, O. (2001). The semantic web.  Scientiﬁ c American, 
284 (5), 34.  
 Bizer, C., Heath, T., & Berners-Lee, T. (2009).  Linked Data – The Story So Far: International 
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems, 5 (3), 1–22.   http://doi.org/10.4018/
jswis.2009081901  . 
 Bray, J., Johns, N., & Kilburn, D. (2011). An Exploratory Study into the Factors Impeding Ethical 
Consumption.  Journal of Business Ethics, 98 (4), 597–608.   http://doi.org/10.1007/
s10551-010-0640-9  . 
 Deaton, B. J. (2004). A theoretical framework for examining the role of third-party certiﬁ ers.  Food 
Control, 15 (8), 615–619.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2003.09.007  . 
 Dimitri, C., & Greene, C. (2002).  Recent growth patterns in the U.S. organic food markets. 
Economic Research Service (No. #AIB-777). Washington, DC 20036: US Department of 
Agriculture (USDA). Retrieved from   http://www.ers.usda.gov/media/255720/aib777fm_1_.
pdf  
 Emerson, K., Nabatchi, T., & Balogh, S. (2012). An integrative framework for collaborative gov-
ernance.  Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 22 (1), 1–29.   http://doi.
org/10.1093/jopart/mur011  . 
 Gefen, D., Pavlou, P. A., Benbastat, I., McKnight, H., Stewart, K., & Straub, D. W. (2006). ICIS 
panel summary should institutional trust matter in information systems research? 
 Communications of the AIS, 17 , 205–222. 
 Goleman, D. (2009).  Ecological intelligence: How knowing the hidden impacts of what we buy can 
change everything (1st ed.). New York: Broadway Books. 
 Graham, M., & Haarstad, H. (2011). Transparency and development: Ethical consumption through 
web 2.0 and the internet of things.  Nformation Technologies & International Development, 
7 (1), 1–18. 
 Gruber, T. R. (1993). A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁ cations.  Knowledge 
Acquisition, 5 (2), 199–220.   http://doi.org/10.1006/knac.1993.1008  . 
 Jahn, G., Schramm, M., & Spiller, A. (2005). The reliability of certiﬁ cation: Quality labels as a 
consumer policy tool.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 28 (1), 53–73. 
 Jarman, H., et al. (2011).  I-choose: Consumer choice, digital government, and sustainability in 
North America . Presented at the APPAM Fall Research Conference. Washington, DC. 
 Kim, G.-S., Lee, G. Y., & Park, K. (2010). A cross-national investigation on how ethical consumers 
build loyalty toward fair trade brands.  Journal of Business Ethics, 96 (4), 589–611.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-010-0486-1  . 
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Roy, R., Andersen, D. F., Whitmore, A., & Andersen, D. L. (2013). 
Information strategies to support full information product pricing: The role of trust.  Information 
Polity: The International Journal of Government & Democracy in the Information Age, 18 (1), 
75–91. 
 Makower, J. (2010, November 1).  Is TerraChoice Greenwashing? Retrieved from   http://www.
greenbiz.com/blog/2010/11/01/terrachoice-greenwashing   
 Powell, W. (1996). Trust-based forms of governance. In T. Tyler & R. M. Kramer (Eds.),  Trust in 
organizations: Frontiers of theory and research (pp. 51–67). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 
J.S. Luciano et al.

107
 Rousseau, D. M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R. S., & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after all: A 
cross-discipline view of trust.  Academy of Management Review, 23 (3), 393–404.   http://doi.
org/10.5465/AMR.1998.926617  . 
 Sayogo, D. S., et al. (Forthcoming). Ontological modeling of certiﬁ cation and inspection process 
to support smart disclosure of product information.  International Journal of Public 
Administration in the Digital Age . 
 Shapiro, D. L., Sheppard, B. H., & Cheraskin, L. (1992). Business on a handshake.  Negotiation 
Journal, 8 (4), 365–377. 
 Tanner, B. (2000). Independent assessment by third-party certiﬁ cation bodies.  Food Control, 
11 (5), 415–417.   http://doi.org/10.1016/S0956-7135(99)00055-9  . 
 TerraChoice. (2010).  Greenwashing Report 2010 . Retrieved from   http://sinsofgreenwashing.org/
ﬁ ndings/greenwashing-report-2010/index.html  
 Uschold, M., & Gruninger, M. (1996). Ontologies: Principles, methods and applications. 
 Knowledge Engineering Review, 11 (2), 93–136. 
 Watts, S., & Wyner, G. (2011). Designing and theorizing the adoption of mobile technology‐
mediated ethical consumption tools.  Information Technology & People, 24 (3), 257–280.   http://
doi.org/10.1108/09593841111158374  . 
5 Using Ontologies to Develop and Test a Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data…

109
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_6
 Chapter 6 
 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security 
Challenges for Interoperable Data 
Platforms in Supply Chains  
 Djoko  S.  Sayogo ,  Mahdi  Mirdamadi  Najafabadi ,  Giri  K.  Tayi , 
and  Theresa  A.  Pardo  
 Abstract   Privacy, conﬁ dentiality, and information security constitute basic require-
ments for the design and implementation of IT-enabled platforms for information 
sharing such as the I-Choose platform described in this book. In this chapter, we 
discuss privacy and security issues from an organizational perspective along three 
dimensions: ownership, access rights, and data quality. The challenge of protecting 
the conﬁ dentiality and privacy of data lies in developing effective and transparent 
security policies and protocols that govern access to and integrity of both proprie-
tary and public information. Our ﬁ ndings highlight that these challenges stem from 
the complexity of the information chain and the heterogeneity of stakeholders and 
data sources in the sustainable coffee supply chain. As a result, addressing these 
issues will require not only technologically sophisticated solutions but also creation 
of governance structures and adoption of appropriate business practices. In this 
chapter we propose ﬁ ve management and policy solutions for mitigating the privacy, 
 D. S.  Sayogo (*) 
 University of Muhammadiyah at Malang ,  Jl. Raya Tlogomas no. 246, Malang ,  Indonesia 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany , 
 187 Wolf Rd., Suite 301 ,  Albany ,  NY  12205 ,  USA 
 e-mail: dsayogo@ctg.albany.edu 
 M. M.  Najafabadi 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: mnajafabadi@albany.edu 
 G. K.  Tayi 
 Department of Information Technology Management ,  University at Albany , 
 Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: gtayi@albany.edu 
 T. A.  Pardo 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany , 
 187 Wolf Rd., Suite 301 ,  Albany ,  NY  12205 ,  USA 
 e-mail: tpardo@ctg.albany.edu 

110
conﬁ dentiality, and security challenges that confront successful implementation of 
I-Choose platform.  
 Keywords  Privacy •  Conﬁ dentiality •  Information security •  Data quality 
6.1  Introduction 
 Smart disclosure   represents a form of open data policy that has the objective of pro-
moting innovations to help consumers make purchasing decisions that reﬂ ect con-
sumer’s social and environmental values (Thaler & Sunstein,  2008 ). In energy and 
utility marketplace, for example, an initiative called Green Button provides consum-
ers with access to their energy consumption data, helping them to improve energy 
efﬁ ciency by providing them with “benchmarks and customized retroﬁ t recommen-
dations” (Thaler & Tucker,  2013 ). In the beauty products industry, “The Story of 
Stuff” campaign aims to make it a requirement for manufacturers to disclose infor-
mation about the use of microbeads in their products. In recent years, the use of 
microbeads in personal hygiene products has been linked to the spread of micro-
plastics throughout the marine environment (Thompson,  2004 ), which has been rec-
ognized as a serious, global environmental issue (Sutherland et al.,  2010 ). There is 
now an international movement supported by 75 NGOs from 35 countries that uses 
a mobile application to classify products on the basis of their microbeads content. 
 Although much has been written about smart disclosure, the initiative is still in its 
formative stages from the consumer choice point of view. One of the barriers to an 
effective smart disclosure in the sustainable supply chain is the lack of integrated, qual-
ity information about the degree of sustainability for each of the interim products and 
raw materials. The main challenge is in capturing and amassing information across the 
supply chain while maintaining its timeliness, integrity, quality, and usefulness. 
 An interoperable data platform that  leverages  semantic web technology to con-
nect different organizations in the supply chain, such as the one described in Chap.   5 , 
is one possible solution to this challenge.  Although there already exist private 
exchanges of information among participants in the supply chain supported by 
interorganizational information systems  1 (Choudhury, Hartzel, & Konsynski,  1998 ; 
Clemons & Row,  1993 ; Malhotra, Gosain, & Sawy,  2005 ; McLeod, Carpenter, & 
Clark,  2008 ), there is not yet an application that covers end-to-end information inte-
gration in a supply chain. Given the diversity of information and disparity of infor-
mation sources in a product supply chain, such an interoperable data platform would 
require a complex sociotechnical system to integrate data under the stewardship of 
both public and private entities (Klein & Rai,  2009 ; Luna-Reyes et al.,  2014 ; 
Steinﬁ eld, Markus, & Wigand,  2011 ). 
 Four elements of the information ecosystem contribute to  the  complexity of such 
supply chains: (1) information stored in diverse formats needs to be extracted and 
1  Examples of such interorganizational systems include efforts on Electronic Data Interchange 
(EDI), Electronic Markets, and Supply Chain Management Applications. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

111
integrated from numerous and heterogeneous sources; (2) large volumes of data 
from heterogeneous sources and in disparate formats make analysis of such data 
very difﬁ cult; (3) some data might be available in a legacy form that cannot be used 
in automated analysis, and thus, conversion to machine-readable format would be 
required; and (4) some data, especially the data residing under custody of private 
entities, is mostly treated as nontransparent to the public—for reasons such as main-
taining conﬁ dentiality and protecting data that is viewed by companies as proprietary. 
The same is true for data that is protected by individual privacy regulations. 
 Given this complexity, effective interoperable data architecture would at least 
require mechanisms that would guarantee legitimate access to all data needed, 
maintain and assess data integrity in order to generate trust among users, and create 
conﬁ dence in effective data protection measures for the data owner. This chapter 
outlines issues connected to securing authorized access rights, assessing data integ-
rity, and the resulting challenges that might arise in creation of an interoperable data 
architecture for sustainable supply chain. Following the argument of Strong, Lee, 
and Wang ( 1997 ), this chapter uses the terms information and data based on their 
differences in the production process: data refers to “information at its early stages 
of processing,” while information refers to “the product at a later stage.” 
 This chapter only addresses information security  challenges related to publishing 
and reusing data, leaving end-user security challenges and concerns (related to con-
sumer use of smart applications using an interoperable architecture) outside the 
scope.  We use the data collected as part of our project aimed to build an interoper-
able data platform for the certiﬁ ed sustainable coffee supply chain, as previously 
described in more detail in Chap.   5 . This chapter is organized into seven sections 
including this foregoing introduction. Section  6.2 discusses information security 
challenges for an interoperable architecture based on a review of literature in the 
information system domain. Section  6.3 describes data complexities in the certiﬁ ed 
sustainable coffee supply chain. Section  6.4 brings up the issues related to securing 
legitimate access to the data. Section  6.5 focuses on data integrity and quality. 
Section  6.6 suggests ﬁ ve policy and management solutions to the challenges 
discussed in previous sections, and Sect.  6.7 concludes the discussion. 
6.2  Challenges to an Interoperable Data Platform 
 There are numerous challenges in creating an interoperable data platform, ranging 
from unequal access to infrastructure and managing authorization, privacy, and con-
ﬁ dentiality issues to making disparate data formats from various heterogeneous 
sources interoperable. In this chapter we focus on three speciﬁ c challenges (adopted 
from the information system literature): securing legitimate access to data, govern-
ing access rights, and maintaining data quality and integrity (Rindﬂ eisch,  1997 ). 
 Securing Legitimate Access   A number of studies posit that the issue of securing 
access to information should be understood from a broader perspective and context 
(D’Aubeterre, Singh, & Iyer,  2008 ; Smith, Watson, Baker, & Pokorski,,  2007 ). 
   Securing legitimate access to information in an interorganizational information sys-
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

112
tem like the one proposed by our research requires a clear understanding of key secu-
rity requirements such as conﬁ dentiality, integrity, and availability (Smith et al.,  2007 ). 
Conﬁ dentiality refers to the protection of data and information from unauthorized 
disclosure. Integrity requires data to be protected from improper modiﬁ cation either 
on a server or in transit from one place to another in the system. Finally, availability 
refers to the continued accessibility to data and information services and exchanges. 
Meeting these requirements is already recognized as a key challenge of current infor-
mation and data exchanges in supply chains (D’Aubeterre et al.,  2008 ; Smith et al., 
 2007 ; Zhang & Li,  2006 ).  
 Governing Access Rights   Maintaining access rights while securing legitimate 
access to  the information is challenging because their goals can be seen as partially 
contradictory. Maintaining legitimate access might be affected if a large number of 
diverse entities are involved in the sustainable supply chain. As argued by Kagal, 
Finin, and Joshi ( 2003 ), large and heterogeneous entities are not expected to use 
similar data structures and data dictionaries (terminologies), thus making it difﬁ cult 
for their security protocols to communicate with each other. Similarly, when authen-
tication processes receive large numbers of requests, they can become strained and 
thus become more prone to failure. Since authentication processes are necessary for 
any data-seeking activities, they can easily become a bottleneck for the whole sys-
tem (D’Aubeterre et al.,  2008 ). Therefore, the larger the number of entities involved, 
the greater the risk of failure to properly grant access to the requested data. 
 Depending upon the security architecture of the system, it can either lead to an 
inappropriate denial of access (because the authentication and authorizations mech-
anisms do not work properly and the system does not grant access to the informa-
tion based on predeﬁ ned access rights), or otherwise illegitimate access to 
information (since the system cannot determine the data seeker’s access level using 
the authorization processes and the default access level has been set higher than the 
access level granted to the data seeker). 
 Maintaining Data Quality   Data quality is known as the degree to which the data 
stored in the system is reﬂ ective of the truth in the real world. Some researchers 
argue that data quality needs to be understood within the context of “ﬁ tness for use” 
(Tayi & Ballou,  1998 ) or “utility” for a simpler term. Fitness for use stems from the 
relevance, interpretability, and ease of understanding of the information. 
 The literature has introduced several  features associated with the quality of the 
data such as accuracy, timeliness, precision, reliability, currency, completeness, and 
relevance (Wang,  1998 ; Wang & Strong,  1996 ). Analyzing the importance of all 
these attributes from the user perspective, Wang and Strong ( 1996 ) grouped them in 
four distinctive categories relevant for our purposes. The ﬁ rst category involved data 
accuracy and included elements like the reputation of the source, its accuracy, and 
the believability of the data. The second category was related to the relevance of the 
data and involved categories such as the value added by the data to the user, its com-
pleteness, and its timeliness. Representation of the data was the third dimension and 
involved factors such as how easy it was to understand the data, as well as  consistency 
and conciseness in its representation. The last category involved accessibility issues, 
which included knowledge in how to get access to the data in a cost-effective way. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

113
 An application of interoperable data platform along the entire supply chain 
necessitates integration of a large number of independent but semantically related 
data sources (Luna-Reyes et al.,  2014 ). To better understand the integration com-
plexities, we use the case of the certiﬁ ed sustainable coffee supply chain to discuss 
the challenges regarding securing legitimate access, governing access rights, and 
maintaining data quality. 
6.3  The Information Chains in Certiﬁ ed Coffee Domain 
 As we have already described in Chaps.   2 and   3 , the information needed to sustain 
transactions in a certiﬁ ed sustainable coffee supply chain involves multiple stake-
holders using their own information systems that record and manage data in differ-
ent formats. In general, there are two information chains in the certiﬁ ed coffee 
supply chain: sustainable trading information and the certiﬁ cation information. 
  Sustainable trading information refers to the information regarding the trading of 
sustainable products. This information is contained in the trading documents such 
as invoices, bills of lading, farmer’s contracts, and ﬁ nancial contracts. The informa-
tion content of each document might differ for each ﬁ rm. Certiﬁ cation information 
refers to the information collected by a certiﬁ cation body during the process of 
granting sustainable certiﬁ cate to the companies in the supply chain. 
 The two chains are interrelated and provide a complementary picture of informa-
tion ﬂ ows in a certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain. For instance, certiﬁ cation ID (one 
record type among the certiﬁ cation data) is required in each document used in sus-
tainable trading. Sustainable trading information is then compiled into quarterly 
reports submitted to the certiﬁ cation body to ensure compliance control over traded 
certiﬁ ed goods. 2 Thus, any data platform that aims to make smart disclosure for 
sustainably produced coffee needs to capture data from both information chains in 
order to be capable of building a trustworthy result. 
 The complexity of the information chains in the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain 
calls for a more robust identiﬁ cation of the critical components of an interoperable 
data architecture. As discussed earlier, an interoperable data platform needs to cap-
ture and amass data that is aggregated and held by both public and private entities. 
As argued in other chapters of this book, triangulating the data collected from public 
entities and the data from private entities along the supply chain is needed not only 
to ensure comprehensiveness of the data but also to verify its  reliability . This 
 veriﬁ cation is needed to enable smart disclosure tools make comprehensive analy-
ses and suggest trustworthy recommendations to end users. 
 Adapting from the White House’s Memorandum on Informing Consumers 
through Smart Disclosure (Sunstein,  2012 ), we posit three different types of infor-
2  Detailed description of data collection process can be found in documentations published by 
third-party certiﬁ cation bodies. For example, for FLO, refer to  http://www.ﬂ ocert.net/fairtrade-
services/fairtrade-certiﬁ cation/how-it-works 
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

114
mation that might be critical for an interoperable data architecture for certiﬁ ed sus-
tainable supply chains:
 
Product information such as full pricing information, geographic availability, 
product origin, compliance standards, type of labels, features and attributes, 
nutritious contents, ingredients, and production process  
 
Supplier/trader information such as types of certiﬁ cations, location, in-trade 
associations, complaints, citations, ﬁ nancial situations, and producer’s 
information 
 
Third-party information including subjective ratings of the product, certiﬁ cation 
process, certiﬁ cation results, auditors, etc. 
 The complexity of the information  chain  and also the conﬂ icting interests of dif-
ferent actors (e.g., openness versus privacy and conﬁ dentiality) makes capturing 
critical data components from the sustainable supply chain a challenge. In the fol-
lowing sections, we describe the challenges of securing access to data, managing 
access rights, and maintaining data quality and integrity in greater detail. We spe-
ciﬁ cally focus on such challenges from the perspective of producers, roasters, and 
third-party certiﬁ cation bodies. 
6.4  Securing Legitimate Access 
 Securing legitimate access to information for all actors involved in the certiﬁ ed 
sustainable coffee supply chain is difﬁ cult partially due to the competing nature of 
openness, commercial privacy and conﬁ dentiality, information availability and 
integrity, and the corresponding differences among actors’ interests in their infor-
mation disclosure policies. Some information about the product such  as nutritious 
contents are now publicly disclosed by vendors due to government mandates, while 
withholding information such as supplier’s location(s), production process, or the 
origin of raw materials are still justiﬁ ed by arguments of trade secrets and protection 
of ﬁ rm’s competitive advantage. 
 The data used in this section was collected through in-depth interviews with vari-
ous stakeholders of the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain—producers, exporters, import-
ers, roasters, third-party certiﬁ cation bodies, and also some nongovernmental 
organizations. The interviews were conducted in two waves: from May until June 
2012 and from November 2012 until May 2013. Additional secondary data was col-
lected from openly available documentation from seven major coffee initiatives. 3 
For a detailed description of all methods used in the book, refer to the methodologi-
cal appendix. 
3  The seven major coffee certiﬁ cation initiatives: FLO, UTZ Good Inside, 4C, RAN, Organic, 
C.A.F.E Practices, and Nespresso AAA (Panhuysen & van Reenen,  2012 ). 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

115
6.4.1  Data Ownership 
 Information  collection in the sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain is conducted 
by two different types of entities. Information owner, who is often also the producer 
of the information, generates and provides input data to the certiﬁ cation process and 
sustainable trading. Information owners in sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain 
are coffee producers (e.g., small farmers and cooperatives) and coffee traders (e.g., 
roasters or importers). The second group that collects information are information 
custodians/stewards, who receive, record, and maintain the information from the 
information owners. This role is generally fulﬁ lled by the various certiﬁ cation bod-
ies in the sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee trade such as certiﬁ cation authorities like FLO, 
UTZ, or the USDA, as well as certiﬁ ers who manage the inspection process (e.g., 
CertiMex, Bio Latina, etc.). 
 Although information custodians maintain the data in their systems, it is the 
information owner whose decision matters when it comes to making data available 
for a third-party agent. In other words, extracting data in the custody of information 
stewards requires consent from the information owner. Some of this information is 
already being shared in proprietary information systems such as the Ecert, which is 
the FLO platform to collaborate during the certiﬁ cation process. The existence of 
platforms such as Ecert facilitates the integration of the platform described in 
Chap.   5 . However, conﬁ dentiality, integrity, and availability need to be warrantied 
for all participants.  
6.4.2  Conﬂ icting Disclosure Policies 
 As mentioned before, actors in the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain have different infor-
mation disclosure policies. For example, our interview with the director of Fair for 
Life certiﬁ cation body indicates that the disclosure policy of the certiﬁ cation appli-
cant—the data owner—very often conﬂ icts with the disclosure policy of the certiﬁ -
cation body and of course applicants take into consideration their own and unique 
data disclosure policies for publishing their certiﬁ cation data. The applicants are 
especially concerned with the impact of such data disclosure on their brand image 
and reputation. Conﬂ icting disclosure policies pose challenges to consistent extrac-
tion and integration of data in the smart disclosure process. In its simplest form, a 
data owner might allow disclosure of a particular piece of information, whereas 
disclosure of the same piece of information is not allowed under policies imposed 
by another data owner. These discrepancies might hinder the ability and perfor-
mance of the system to map and trace information from the entire supply chain. 
 Again, extended conversations among actors are needed to clarify the types of data 
that can be shared among members of the supply chain and types of data that should 
be shared or opened to the general public.  
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

116
6.4.3  Assessing Data Integrity 
 Maintaining the integrity of the  data is crucial for any data platform since—as 
discussed earlier—there are uncertainties stemming from the sheer number and 
variety of data sources and agents. A large number of agents would be involved 
or affected by an interoperable data platform in the semantic web technologies 
(O’Hara, Alani, Kalfoglou, & Shadbolt,  2004 ). Consequently, the system should 
acquire access to numerous heterogeneous data sources for veriﬁ cation pur-
poses, by triangulating and comparing instances of data from different sources 
(Huynh, Jennings, & Shadbolt,  2004 ). Once data sources are discovered and 
their integrity is approved, it will have to ascertain the relevance of the 
information. 
 Understanding the provenance of the information is necessary in every domain 
and more so in a supply chain certiﬁ cation and inspection domain due to the depen-
dency of the pipelined data (which virtually moves along the entities in the supply 
chain) on time and context (D’Aubeterre et al.,  2008 ). The inherent subjectivity in 
this domain could make the assessment of the trustworthiness of information and 
the legitimacy of the information producers more complicated. There might be situ-
ations in which one agent is assessed as trusted on a particular information but 
another agent is not. For instance, a certiﬁ cation generated by a nongovernmental 
organization (NGO) that does not have a conﬂ ict of interest might be viewed as 
more reliable than a certiﬁ cation generated by commercial brands such as Starbucks 
or Nestle. 
6.5  Governing Access Rights 
 An important challenge for implementing an interoperable data platform lies in the 
ability to produce models of integrity assurance that recognize the context-sensitive 
information but at the same time recognize different access levels. Consequently, 
information policies capable of governing trust should be developed. Jarman et al. 
( 2011 ) argue for the creation of data commons (see also Chap.   8 in this volume), a 
roundtable type of governance model involving stakeholders in supply chains, to 
generate policies to support the implementation of interoperable data platforms. 
This governance structure would need to involve a wide range of  stakeholders 
including government regulators, industry associations, consumers and consumer 
advocates, producers, and others. The policies could govern the minimum level of 
data integrity that each agent in the supply chain must comply with to ensure trust-
worthiness of information. Additionally, the policies could specify the requirements 
for authentication and foolproof authorization of data seekers as well as data providers 
to sufﬁ ce this aim. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

117
6.5.1  Repercussions of Information Sharing 
 A data  commons like the one brieﬂ y described in previous paragraphs implies the 
existence of a system with several levels of access. FLO Ecert information system 
is in a sense an example of a data commons. Ecert facilitates the workﬂ ow of the 
certiﬁ cation system, facilitating information exchange among certiﬁ ers and data 
owners. Most of this information, however, remains private. Sharing this informa-
tion (or part of it) with the public or with other entities depends mostly on the per-
ception of value creation. Private entities regard their information as strategic assets 
from which they can extract signiﬁ cant business value, as certain information is 
closely related to core competencies that lead to ﬁ rm’s competitive advantage. 
In this view, disclosing this information can beneﬁ t ﬁ rm’s rivals and potentially 
endangers the organization’s market share. Therefore, information disclosure deci-
sion—i.e., granting access to information to a third party—is associated with the 
expectations of returns (Stiglitz,  2000 ). Interviews with mission-driven companies 
in the certiﬁ ed coffee industry point to concerns of economic repercussions in open-
ing information. The interviewees indicated willingness to open their information 
only if doing so can add value to the organization and would not erode their com-
petitive advantage as sources or enablers of revenue. 
 Opening other types of information about the ﬁ rm and the product might also 
have impact on the market share. For example, disclosing some details of certiﬁ ca-
tion audit results might compromise the reputation of the applicant. Our interviewee 
from the Fair for Life certiﬁ cation body stated that companies are extremely cau-
tious about what details of their certiﬁ cation audit results will be published, for fear 
of damage to their reputation and public image. 
 Addressing concerns related to economic repercussions of disclosing informa-
tion might require information policies that offer an effective governance structure 
for not only promoting disclosure as a mechanism to deliver public value but also to 
have solutions for the potential challenges stemming out of concerns over integrity 
and conﬁ dentiality. Our interview ﬁ ndings indicate that when such policies are in 
place, disclosure is more welcomed since it creates value. For instance, in the case 
of mission-driven companies, opening their data to support smart disclosure is 
desirable if it allows publicizing their exceptional conduct of economic, social, and 
environmental sustainability. This is because although each organization assigns 
different value upon information from which they draw their competitive advantage, 
they are all seeking ways to promote their public image, while protecting their core 
competencies and continuing to generate revenue by utilizing them. 
6.5.2  Challenges to Information Access 
 As we described early in this chapter, clear policies on access to shared data resources 
are a key requirement for a platform such as I-Choose. Information shared needs to 
be protected from potential unauthorized access as well as  inference attacks . 
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

118
Unauthorized access refers to a situation where a piece of information is accessed by 
a user who should not have access to it. In many instances, the same user might be 
authorized to have access to a subset of the same piece of information legitimately. 
Therefore, it is important not only to keep unauthorized people behind the authenti-
cation wall but also to have an effective access control mechanism in place to guar-
antee that it only grants access to the requesters as per their legitimate access rights, 
based on a preexisting agreement with the information owners or otherwise a strong 
information disclosure protocol. In some cases, an attacker might try to leverage its 
access rights by fooling the governance structure, and hence intrusion detection 
mechanisms can also be a part of the system to allow detecting even unknown mali-
cious efforts which follow a known pattern. The system should encrypt the data at 
all communication and storage points, to minimize risks of unauthorized disclosure 
by eavesdropping or intercepting the connection to the data sources. 
 Inference attack refers to the ability of a user to deduce information, which they 
are not authorized to access. This is done by using the information that they have 
legitimate access to and using it to reproduce a higher level of information which 
was not the intention of the governance structure. There are two factors determining 
the amount of risk by inference attacks: the number of organizations involved in the 
certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain and the availability of large volumes of information 
(for legitimate users). For example, the certiﬁ cation body might remove all informa-
tion but the certiﬁ cation ID from audit results of producers to maintain anonymity. 
However, by connecting certiﬁ cation ID with supplier information from roaster, an 
attacker might be able to identify the actual producer. Given the nature of the data 
collected, it is not always an easy task to determine the possibility of such attacks, 
and it is even harder to design and enforce governing protocols and policies to 
ensure such attacks are not feasible. However, there are known techniques in com-
puter security inference control profession that are designed to ensure that one can-
not infer new pieces of information from a certain number of interconnected datasets 
that she/he has legitimate access to but none can completely guarantee that such 
attacks are impossible in rare circumstances. 
 In this model, new  governance mechanisms  are needed in order to change the 
current mindsets of information owners and information disclosure policies in the 
certiﬁ cation context. According to the director of Fair for Life certiﬁ cation body, 4 
disclosure of certiﬁ cation information is only on a voluntary basis under the current 
system, leaving the data owners with the option not to disclose their information (or 
at least certain parts of their information) to the public. Nonetheless, the new 
 governance model should promote information policies that guarantee access to 
such information for the public or legitimate information seekers, while maintain-
ing information owner’s integrity and conﬁ dentiality. 
 In addition, the model should also include an authentication and authorization 
process to govern the appropriate access level.  Granting the appropriate access level 
to data consists of two distinct processes: authentication process, which determines 
the identity of the data seeker, and authorization process, which grants an appropriate 
4  http://www.fairforlife.org 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

119
access level to the data seeker based on some predeﬁ ned policies or otherwise stored 
data. The latter deﬁ nes who can access what type of information (Rindﬂ eisch, 
 1997 ). Under the current certiﬁ cation system, data owners can set different access 
rights and permission levels for different actors and can employ various solutions 
for authenticating data requesters. One such solution involves a formal agreement 
between data owners, potential entrepreneurs, and data custodians. In this model, 
the data owner provides the data custodian with a list of actors who are authorized 
to grant a given level of access to the data. Another solution would be to permit for 
instantaneous authorization, where the system authenticates the data requester, 
making the decision to allow or disallow access to the data right on the spot, based 
on a predeﬁ ned authorization protocol. 
 The resulting variety of  protocols  for accessing data would impede the ability of 
the system users to access data from various data owners. To illustrate, consider the 
444 ecolabels worldwide as identiﬁ ed by EcoLabelIndex. 5 If each of these certiﬁ ca-
tion bodies hosted information from just 100 coffee producers, there would be 44,400 
data owners whose disparate authentication and authorization processes would have 
to accommodate to the interoperable data platform. Thus, the technical solution must 
include an efﬁ cient operation toward such diverse and heterogeneous system.  
6.6  Maintaining Data Quality 
 While information quality and integrity has always been an issue of concern even in 
situations with a single source of information, it will be an even greater issue in a 
platform designed to integrate data in multiple formats from heterogeneous sources. 
In this section we discuss major challenges to maintaining information quality and 
integrity in this context. 
6.6.1  Information Accuracy Challenges 
 In the certiﬁ cation process, two major factors can  inﬂ uence information accuracy: 
human judgment bias and actual data fabrication at the data source. Human judg-
ment bias affects information accuracy as certiﬁ cation decisions are made based on 
ﬁ eld reports from certiﬁ cation auditors. Even though certiﬁ cation auditors undergo 
vigorous training, the element of human subjectivity cannot be fully eliminated 
given the interpretability of some of the certiﬁ cation criteria. There are at least two 
points where human judgment impacts the certiﬁ cation decision—ﬁ eld audit and 
evaluation interpretation of the audit results. For example, each of the Fairtrade 
Labeling Organization (FLO 6 ) measurement criteria is based on ﬁ ve levels of com-
5  http://www.ecolabelindex.com 
6  http://www.fairtrade.net 
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

120
pliance; to acquire the certiﬁ cation, the applicant must meet at least the third level. 
However, the indicators for each compliance level are not always prescriptive. For 
instance, the third-level indicators for criteria 3.2.22 of FLO—training members on 
appropriate use of fertilizers—are (a) at least 50 % members have been trained and 
(b) content of training was sufﬁ cient. In this case, the auditor will have to use her 
judgment to measure the sufﬁ ciency of the training content. Such subjective judg-
ment can distort the fact and might result in less objective and lower-quality infor-
mation recorded (Strong et al.,  1997 ). The subjectivity of these reports will in fact 
have an effect on the accuracy of information. 
 In addition to the human bias, the factual  value  of information can be distorted if 
the original data is wrong or is intentionally fabricated. Based on our interview with 
cooperatives, information fabrication can happen in the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain 
due to ﬁ nancial interests, and the remoteness of certiﬁ cation applicant’s location 
makes it more challenging to cope with. Our ﬁ ndings suggest that small farmers 
often sell their coffee to local intermediaries who in turn sell it to the cooperatives. 
According to the interviewees, local intermediaries often fabricate information 
about the origin or the certiﬁ cation status of the products in order to fulﬁ ll orders 
more quickly. This is mostly due to the exclusion of local intermediaries from dis-
closing the premium accrued from the certiﬁ ed coffee. As a consequence, although 
the quantitative pieces of data might remain correct, it usually does not represent the 
actual sales of the certiﬁ ed coffee. 
 The threat to information accuracy caused by human bias and data fabrication in 
the supply chain requires governance-based process controls. There are three pos-
sible approaches to creating such controls:
 1.  The certiﬁ cation body assures the competence of auditors by developing policies 
for auditor’s training and requirements for speciﬁ c educational background and 
experience levels. 7 
 2.  The certiﬁ cation body enforces the implementation of some better internal con-
trols in the audit process at the applicant’s level. 
 3.  An expert system monitors and analyzes the audit results against actual data and 
utilizes historic patterns and heuristic algorithms, in an effort to minimize human 
bias. 
6.6.2  Information Provenance Complexities 
 Provenance is  fundamental to data quality as it relates to the relevance of the infor-
mation in the context of our application (Buneman & Davidson,  2010 ). As argued 
by Buneman ( 2013 ), the process of making a platform, which is based on semantic 
7  Currently, only three out of seven major coffee certiﬁ cations require speciﬁ c educational back-
ground for their auditor. See Panhuysen and van Reenen ( 2012 ) or the International Trade Center 
( http://legacy.intracen.org/marketanalysis/Default.aspx ). 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

121
web technologies, “provenance aware,” is a nontrivial task. Understanding informa-
tion provenance is important to ensure that the recommendations provided by smart 
disclosure tools using interoperable data platforms are relevant to the consumer and 
based on valid information. This is especially important in the sustainable coffee 
certiﬁ cation domain due to time-relevance and context-relevance nature of the infor-
mation. Since the meaning of the information is inﬂ uenced by time and/or context, 
ignoring these dimensions may distort the analysis and consequential recommenda-
tions. Here are two examples to illustrate the importance of the two dimensions. 
 First, standards and certiﬁ cation criteria are dynamic and therefore can be 
changed frequently. Thus, if the data platform does not consider provenance in 
terms of the versions of the standard and/or certiﬁ cation criteria, the recommenda-
tion provided by the decision support tools that draw information from such plat-
form can become misleading after a certain amount of time. Our interviews with the 
Fair for Life certiﬁ cation body indicated that the Fair for Life decided not to publish 
certiﬁ cation results for more than 2 years back, as the frequent changes in standards 
make certiﬁ cation results incomparable to older records. 
 Second, in situations where organizations are switching from one certiﬁ cation to 
another, not knowing the context of the certiﬁ cation ecosystem can result in distor-
tion of certiﬁ cation and decertiﬁ cation information provided on the certiﬁ cation 
website/database. For instance, Fairtrade Canada provides the listing of the regis-
tered and de-registered ﬁ rms on their website. A ﬁ rm de-registered by Fairtrade 
Canada at the end of 2012 might gain certiﬁ cation in Fairtrade USA the same year. 
Without knowing the provenance in term of context, the platform might equate 
Fairtrade Canada and Fairtrade USA as the same certiﬁ cation under Fairtrade. This 
misses the fact that Fairtrade USA is a totally different certiﬁ cation body  whose 
 certiﬁ cation criteria differ from those of Fairtrade Canada and abide by the criteria 
of the FLO. 
6.6.3  Data Representation and Reuse 
 Guaranteeing safe and fair secondhand  use  of data after it is disclosed to a legitimate 
party or published openly is a major concern for both data owners and data custodi-
ans. Some certiﬁ cation and inspection data in certiﬁ ed coffee domain might fall 
under commercial privacy categories, such as trade secrets, that can directly affect 
the company’s competitive advantage. Intrusion into the data repositories can be 
detrimental for the data owner since it may lead to destruction, unauthorized manip-
ulation, or illegitimate disclosure of business information that could endanger the 
sources of revenue of the company and hence its business continuity. Alteration of 
the conﬁ dential information could impair the integrity of the certiﬁ cation and 
inspection information and may lead to mistrust in the company’s image. 
Unauthorized manipulation of the data can be damaging for the data owners (i.e., 
coffee producers) and will increase data seekers’ liabilities as well. Repudiation 
constitutes another potential problem that will have an impact on the trust in the 
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

122
data. For instance, a data owner might allow access to parts of its certiﬁ cation data 
but after some feedback from the market or after it was used as the basis of an 
assessment by a certiﬁ cation body, decide to deny (or repudiate) the original data or 
its consequential information in further stages of the supply chain. 
 As argued by Zimmerman ( 2007 ), appropriate metadata to enable tracing the 
provenance should be complemented with regulations and policies to ensure proper 
and accountable reuse of data. Therefore, corresponding legal and policy frame-
works that ensure that data will not be poached and misused systematically if 
reused—as evidenced in the scientiﬁ c research domain (Sayogo & Pardo,  2013 )—
should also be developed. 
6.7  Mitigating Security Risks: Management 
and Policy Implications 
 Ensuring information security of an interoperable data platform should encompass 
not only technical elements to ensure access control and integrity but also integra-
tion of policies, business rules, management practices, and actors’ culture. This 
section outlines the policies and managerial aspects to govern the information issues 
outlined above from the perspectives of data owners and the data seekers. 
6.7.1  Integrating an Information Security Policies and Culture 
 Ensuring  information security   is not a solely technical issue (Lim, Chang, 
Maynard, & Ahmad,  2009 ). As we described in Chap.   2  , sustainable certiﬁ ed cof-
fee supply chains involve not only small or medium producers, cooperatives, and 
roasters but also large intermediaries and well-resourced enterprises such as 
Starbucks or Nestle. Each of these participants might have different information 
security and privacy policies in place or none at all. An assumption suggesting 
that most organizations have already developed information security and privacy 
policies to protect their information assets exposed security risks might not apply 
generally (Saint-Germain,  2005 ). Efforts should be made to ensure that partici-
pants in sustainable certiﬁ ed supply chains are all aware of the possibility of 
information loss and security breaches farther in the supply chain and the poten-
tial consequences. 
 As previous research shows, majority of information security breaches are 
caused by poor security behavior (Da Veiga & Eloff,  2010 ; Leach,  2003 ) such as 
noncompliance with information security policies (Pahnila, Siponen, & Mahmood, 
 2007 ). In an interoperable data platform where data sources and data seekers are 
heterogeneous, lapses of information security behavior by employees can be dam-
aging because the magnitude of breach can be escalated. In this way, managers need 
to recognize the importance of fostering an information security culture by integrating 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

123
information security and privacy  policies into everyday business processes and 
procedures. It is crucial to change the mindset of the employees who might still 
believe that information security is the sole responsibility of a handful of technology 
products and the IT personnel. In fact, employees themselves are the component of 
information security systems where there is no known defense against risky actions 
such as downloading an attachment or following a link that may expose sensitive 
data to security vulnerabilities and threats. 
 Thus, integrating information security and privacy  awareness  along with infor-
mation security best practices is necessary for companies in various stages of the 
supply chain. This, of course, will also require appropriate training of the actors 
involved in different stages of the coffee production supply chain and also the certi-
ﬁ cation bodies. This requires an alignment of strategic choices and direction, busi-
ness processes, and information security policies and practices.  
6.7.2  Balancing Between Conﬁ dentiality, Commercial Privacy, 
and the Beneﬁ t of Openness 
 Protection of information is crucial  to the continuity of a business organization. 
 There are many cases where information breach resulted in signiﬁ cant business loss 
for an organization. Cavusoglu, Mishra, and Raghunathan ( 2004 ) assessed an aver-
age loss of 2.1 % of a company’s market value within two days of publicly announc-
ing a security breach. 
 On the other hand, opening  data is valued by consumers. A thorough review by 
Healy and Palepu ( 2001 ) sheds light on the fact that numerous studies in account-
ing, management, and economics afﬁ rm the beneﬁ ts of publicly disclosing informa-
tion. Moreover, the basic assumption of the smart disclosure policy is in fact the 
creation of economic value for participants in supply chains, promoting innovative 
business by opening otherwise private information to help consumers to make better 
decisions (Thaler,  2013 ; Sunstein,  2012 ; Sayogo,  2013 ). Thus, considering the trad-
eoff between information conﬁ dentiality and privacy, and the beneﬁ ts of opening 
data, a paradigm shift has already begun. This new paradigm encourages managers 
to securely open data to the public as part of investments or even as a revenue gen-
erating activity and not only an additional cost to the ﬁ rm. This paradigm shift could 
change traditional mindset believing in direct causality between commercial conﬁ -
dentiality and proﬁ tability. In this context, ﬁ rst movers and leading ﬁ rms will have 
to answer questions like: what data is truly conﬁ dential, and if breached, will it 
result in a signiﬁ cant loss to the organization? What data, if opened entirely, endan-
gers the commercial privacy of the organization? 
 Once the true value of open data is perceived by the consumers, the expecta-
tions formed in the market also push companies to cope with the new paradigm. 
Thus, more and more organizations might discover that the release of previously 
restricted data might not only be harmless for their proﬁ tability but in fact create 
new economic beneﬁ ts.  
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

124
6.7.3  Business Process Models for Access Control Policies 
 A semantic web-based data platform such as the one described in Chap.   5  in this book 
will bring together heterogeneous actors and integrate disparate data sources. As argued 
in the section above, the heterogeneity in users and data sources exposes the informa-
tion to more security risks. A system is as secure as its weakest link, and hence data 
extraction efforts by several heterogeneous actors can generate more vulnerability in 
the whole system.    This situation calls for an automated intrusion detection mechanism 
due to the magnitude of possible information access requests and data extraction efforts. 
 Consequently, an access control mechanism should be designed and implemented 
to conduct authentication and authorization and govern access rights, as part of a for-
mal business process (Fabian, Kunz, Müller, & Günther,  2013 ). Therefore, the various 
roles of employees in the organization and their different access rights required to 
accomplish their duties and also the patterns of the cooperation between employees 
should all be considered in designing and conﬁ guring this system. Due to these dimen-
sions of complexity, it is clear that the access control mechanism should be designed 
as an integrated system capable of interchanging data with several subsystems, some 
of which may be based on different data structures and even in several formats. 
 However, opening data from one department might be detrimental to other func-
tions in the organization. As discussed in Sect.  6.5.2 , enough precautions should be 
employed to minimize a systematic inference attack on the disclosed data. Such 
attacks try to integrate data from different levels and several sources in order to dis-
cover some conﬁ dential information. When a user requests information about an orga-
nization’s internal control system, the access control mechanism should be capable to 
determine the extent to which such information, in conjunction with other disclosed 
information, could potentially allow an inference attack to the accounting procedures 
in the organization. However, following such a procedure may create inefﬁ ciencies in 
the system. An alternative way of solving the problem consists of making an analysis 
during the time of designing the system and its corresponding data structure(s). 
 Integrating access control policies into business process requires managers to 
have an integrated perspective on their technology, people, and processes. 
Technology functions are backed by business processes, and business processes, in 
turn, support the aims of the policies. Behaviors supporting the policies are fostered 
by organizational rules and regulations to shape the organizational culture in the 
desired way. Consequently, values in open data initiative and also integrated access 
control mechanisms will both be parts of this business model. 
6.7.4  Cooperation for Monitoring and Enforcement 
 As discussed above, the vast number of agents participating in semantic web plat-
forms poses a challenge to maintaining information security, especially due to the 
assumption that each party has their own policies and protocols governing their 
information security. This challenge could hamper the initiative to create open data 
in certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

125
 Consequently, we argue for the creation of a cooperative policy standard or an 
agreed upon framework for monitoring and enforcement. Procedures to govern dif-
ferent security policies and protocols will also be a part of such system. This frame-
work can be developed under a new association whose members are the participating 
agents. This entity could serve three functions: assisting members in resolving con-
ﬂ icts emerging from different security policies and protocols, creating appropriate 
governance mechanisms for access control especially in terms of authentication and 
authorization of agents, and helping agents understand the impacts of different 
security policies and choose the best ﬁ t for their needs, while also maintaining the 
integration of the system as a whole at the desired level. 
 This proposition envisions the creation of standards that formalize the different 
information security policies, protocols, and procedures to enhance cooperative 
security policy for monitoring and enforcement. This standard will help harmonize 
the business rules in sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee with integrated or otherwise com-
patible information security policies and procedures. As the processes employed in 
the creation of certiﬁ ed coffee by various organizations involved in certiﬁ ed coffee 
supply chain are very similar, coming up with such a universal framework seems 
feasible. For instance, although the mix of the roasted coffee is a trade secret and 
entails commercial privacy value, the general process of transforming coffee bean 
into ground coffee is the same almost in all producers. 
6.7.5  Flexible Trust Management 
 The availability of  standards formalizing the different versions of information secu-
rity policies could be useful in facilitating the creation of ﬂ exible trust management. 
The standard could facilitate a ﬂ exible policy framework for formulation of infor-
mation policies. This framework would enable identiﬁ cation and negation of dispa-
rate policies and protocols for gaining access to information. Supported by the 
standard, the framework could be used to assess the balance between the acceptable 
trust level and risk level from each particular agent. The key tasks would be identi-
fying the indicators and evidence necessary to induce trust. The issue in here is to 
ﬁ nd the right balance between efﬁ ciency of the indicators and the generality of the 
framework. Too general framework might need less stringent indicators, which 
could result in less efﬁ cient framework for policing the security of information. On 
the other hand, a too restrictive efﬁ ciency indicator in inducing trust might result in 
less generality in terms of the framework implementation. 
6.8  Concluding Remarks 
 A global interoperable architecture based on  semantic web technology that needs to 
access the data currently in the custody of private and public entities must be capable 
of maintaining information security. In an effort to protect the conﬁ dentiality and 
privacy of the data, custodians—private and public entities—should cooperatively 
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

126
enact security policies and procedures. These policies and procedures should govern 
the appropriate access level, minimize the inference attack, and provide a non- 
repudiation mechanism for the information that was legitimately disclosed. However, 
as a large number of users are expected in a semantic web platform, with heterogeneous 
data structures and security policies (O’Hara et al.,  2004 ), concerns about protecting 
information as an economic and also public asset become crucial. Failing to build a 
trust in the effectiveness of a secured platform may become another barrier to actors 
participating in the platform (Fabian et al.,  2013 ). 
 This chapter outlined challenges to information security and suggested that man-
agers care about and come up with information security policies to mitigate the risks 
of unauthorized or illegitimate disclosure of information. This is especially impor-
tant because it can affect the effective operation of semantic web platform for sus-
tainable certiﬁ ed coffee. Challenges to information security of interoperable 
sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain platform stem can be categorized into at 
least three different classes 8 : incompleteness or error in the source(s) of data, com-
plexity of the information environment, and fraud. 
 These challenges stem from the complexity of the information chains and the 
heterogeneity of stakeholders and data sources in the sustainable coffee supply 
chain. Achieving a platform that has an acceptable level of information security is 
only possible by integrating not only information security technologies (software/
hardware products) but also people (awareness, skills, organizational culture) and 
business processes that are designed to back the other two dimensions in a way that 
satisﬁ es security measures. 
 References 
 Buneman, P. (2013). The providence of provenance. In G. Gottlob, G. Grasso, D. Olteanu, & 
C. Schallhart (Eds.),  Big data (Vol. 7968, pp. 7–12). Berlin, Germany/Heidelberg, NY: 
Springer. Retrieved from   http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-642-39467-6_3  
 Buneman, P., & Davidson, S. B. (2010, September 1).  Data provenance – The foundation of data 
quality . Retrieved from   http://www.sei.cmu.edu/measurement/research/upload/Davidson.pdf  
 Cavusoglu, H., Mishra, B., & Raghunathan, S. (2004). The effect of internet security breach 
announcements on market value: Capital market reactions for breached ﬁ rms and internet secu-
rity developers.  International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 9 (1), 69–104. 
 Choudhury, V., Hartzel, K. S., & Konsynski, B. R. (1998). Uses and consequences of electronic 
markets: An empirical investigation in the aircraft parts industry.  MIS Quarterly, 22 (4), 
471–507. 
 Clemons, E. K., & Row, M. C. (1993). Limits to interﬁ rm coordination through information tech-
nology: Results of a ﬁ eld study in consumer packaged goods distribution.  Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 10 (1), 73–95. 
 D’Aubeterre, F., Singh, R., & Iyer, L. (2008). A semantic approach to secure collaborative inter- 
organizational eBusiness processes.  Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 9 (3), 
231–266. 
8  Based on the interviews with stakeholders in sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee and literary explorations. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

127
 Da Veiga, A., & Eloff, J. H. P. (2010). A framework and assessment instrument for information secu-
rity culture.  Computers & Security, 29 (2), 196–207.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2009.09.002    .  
 Fabian, B., Kunz, S., Müller, S., & Günther, O. (2013). Secure federation of semantic information 
services.  Decision Support Systems, 55 (1), 385–398.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.dss.2012.05.049  . 
 Healy, P. M., & Palepu, K. G. (2001). Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital 
markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature.  Journal of Accounting and Economics, 
31 (1–3), 405–440.   http://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-4101(01)00018-0  . 
 Huynh, T. D., Jennings, N. R., & Shadbolt, N. (2004).  Developing an integrated trust and reputa-
tion model for open multi-agent systems  (pp. 65–74). Presented at the 7th International 
Workshop on Trust in Agent Societies. Retrieved from   http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/259557/  
 Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Whitmore, A., Picazo-Vela, S., Andersen, D. L., et al. 
(2011).  I-Choose: Consumer choice, digital government, and sustainability in North America . 
Presented at the APPAM Research Conference, Washington, DC.  
 Kagal, L., Finin, T., & Joshi, A. (2003). A policy based approach to security for the semantic web. 
In  International semantic web conference  (Vol. 2870, pp. 402–418). Sanibel Island, FL: Springer.  
 Klein, R., & Rai, A. (2009). Interﬁ rm strategic information ﬂ ows in logistics supply chain relation-
ships.  MIS Quarterly, 33 (4), 735–762. 
 Leach, J. (2003). Improving user security behaviour.  Computers & Security, 22 (8), 685–692. 
  http://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-4048(03)00007-5  . 
 Lim, J. S., Chang, S., Maynard, S., & Ahmad, A. (2009). Exploring the relationship between orga-
nizational culture and information security culture. In  Australian information security manage-
ment conference  (p. 12). Retrieved from   http://ro.ecu.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1011
&context=ism   
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Whitmore, A., Jarman, H., Picazo-Vela, S., Andersen, D. L., et al. 
(2014). Full information product pricing: An information strategy for harnessing consumer 
choice to create a more sustainable world.  Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 34 (1), 637–654. 
 Malhotra, A., Gosain, S., & Sawy, O. A. E. (2005). Absorptive capacity conﬁ gurations in supply 
chains: Gearing for partner-enabled market knowledge creation.  MIS Quarterly, 29 (1), 145–187. 
 McLeod, A. J., Jr., Carpenter, D. R., & Clark, J. G. (2008). Measuring success in interorganiza-
tional information systems: A case study.  Communications of AIS, 22 (1), 617–634. 
 O’Hara, K., Alani, H., Kalfoglou, Y., & Shadbolt, N. (2004).  Trust strategies for the semantic web . 
Presented at the Workshop on Trust, Security, and Reputation on the Semantic Web, 3rd 
International (ISWC’04). Retrieved from   http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/260029/  
 Pahnila, S., Siponen, M., & Mahmood, A. (2007). Employees’ behavior towards IS security policy 
compliance. In  40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2007. 
HICSS 2007 (p. 156b).   http://doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2007.206  . 
 Panhuysen, S., & van Reenen, M. (2012).  Coffee barometer 2012 . Report, The Hague, Netherlands. 
Retrieved from   http://www.teacoffeecocoa.org/tcc/Media/Files/Coffee-Barometer-2012  
 Rindﬂ eisch, T. C. (1997). Privacy, information technology, and health care.  Communications of the 
ACM, 40 (8), 92–100.   http://doi.org/10.1145/257874.257896  . 
 Saint-Germain, R. (2005). Information security management best practice based on ISO/IEC 
17799.  Information Management Journal, 39 (4), 60–66. 
 Sayogo, D. S. (2013).  Modeling incentives to disclose: Smart disclosure policy, private sector 
transparency and demanded disclosure.  Dissertation, University at Albany State University of 
New York, Albany, NY. 
 Sayogo, D. S., & Pardo, T. A. (2013). Exploring the determinants of scientiﬁ c data sharing: 
Understanding the motivation to publish research data.  Government Information Quarterly, 
30 (Supplement 1), S19–S31.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2012.06.011  . 
 Smith, G. E., Watson, K. J., Baker, W. H., & Pokorski, J. A., II. (2007). A critical balance: 
Collaboration and security in the IT-enabled supply chain.  International Journal of Production 
Research, 45 (11), 2595–2613.   http://doi.org/10.1080/00207540601020544  . 
6 Privacy, Conﬁ dentiality, and Security Challenges for Interoperable Data…

128
 Steinﬁ eld, C., Markus, M. L., & Wigand, R. T. (2011). Through a glass clearly: Standards, archi-
tecture, and process transparency in global supply chains.  Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 28 (2), 75–108.   http://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222280204  . 
    Stiglitz, J. E. (2000). The contributions of the economics of information to twentieth century economics. 
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (4), 1441–1478.   http://doi.org/10.1162/003355300555015  . 
 Strong, D. M., Lee, Y. W., & Wang, R. Y. (1997). 10 potholes in the road to information quality. 
 Computer, 30 (8), 38–46. 
 Sunstein, C. (2012, March 30).  Informing consumers through smart disclosure . Retrieved from 
  http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2012/03/30/informing-consumers-through-smart-disclosure  
 Sutherland, W. J., Clout, M., Côté, I. M., Daszak, P., Depledge, M. H., Fellman, L., et al. (2010). 
A horizon scan of global conservation issues for 2010.  Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 25 (1), 
1–7.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2009.10.003  . 
 Tayi, G. K., & Ballou, D. P. (1998). Examining data quality.  Communications of the ACM, 41 (2), 
54–57. 
 Thaler, R. H. (2013, May).  Smart disclosure: The regulatory future . Presented at the Boulder 
Summer Conference on Consumer Financial Decision Making, Boulder, Colorado. Retrieved 
from   http://leeds.colorado.edu/event/bouldersummerconference#2012conference  
 Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008).  Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and 
happiness . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
   Thaler, R. H., & Tucker, W. (2013, February). Smarter information, smarter consumers.  Harvard 
Business Review . Retrieved from   http://hbr.org/2013/01/smarter-information-smarter-consumers   
 Thompson, R. C. (2004). Lost at sea: Where is all the plastic?  Science, 304 (5672), 838.   http://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1094559  . 
 Wang, R. Y. (1998). A product perspective on total data quality management.  Communications of 
the ACM, 41 (2), 58–65.   http://doi.org/10.1145/269012.269022  . 
 Wang, R., & Strong, D. (1996). Beyond accuracy: What data quality means to data consumers. 
 Journal of Management Information Systems, 12 (4), 5–33. 
 Zhang, C., & Li, S. (2006). Secure information sharing in internet-based supply chain management 
systems.  Journal of Computer Information Systems, 46 (4), 18–24. 
 Zimmerman, A. (2007). Not by metadata alone: The use of diverse forms of knowledge to locate 
data for reuse.  International Journal on Digital Libraries, 7 (1), 5–16. 
D.S. Sayogo et al.

129
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_7
 Chapter 7 
 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power 
Structures: A Convention-Based View 
 Francois  Duhamel ,  Sergio  Picazo-Vela ,  Isis  Gutiérrez-Martínez , 
and  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Abstract   Sharing information in supply chains may prompt conﬂ icts of interest 
among stakeholders, presenting a challenge for achieving the long-term goals 
 associated with platforms such as I-Choose. In this chapter, we analyze such poten-
tial conﬂ icts and possible ways to overcome them, on the basis of convention theory 
and as a result of case studies. Through semistructured interviews with stakeholders 
of the coffee supply chain in the NAFTA region, we found the presence of four 
worlds, or “orders of worth”: the domestic, civic, market, and industrial worlds, 
according to the terminology of convention theory. Our empirical work shows that 
in practice, supply chain participants can be characterized by a combination of at 
least two of such views. We also specify the conditions that make different supply 
chain conﬁ gurations and set of values more or less amenable to the changes implied 
in the disclosure of private information that the I-Choose platform requires. In the 
conclusion of this chapter, we draw policy implications to design the right  incentives 
to the private sector to enhance public value. 
 Keywords  Certiﬁ cation •  Coffee supply chain •  Convention theory •  Controversies 
•  NAFTA 
 F.  Duhamel (*) 
 School of Business and Economics, Department of International Business , 
 Universidad de las Americas Puebla ,  San Andres Cholula ,  Puebla  72810 ,  Mexico 
 e-mail: francois.duhamel@udlap.mx 
 S.  Picazo-Vela •  I.  Gutiérrez-Martínez 
 School of Business and Economics, Department of Business Administration , 
 Universidad de las Américas Puebla ,  San Andres Cholula ,  Puebla  72810 ,  Mexico 
 e-mail: sergio.picazo@udlap.mx; isis.gutierrez@udlap.mx 
 L. F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: lluna-reyes@albany.edu 

130
7.1  Introduction 
 The ﬁ rst Fair Trade Seal—Max Havelaar—was created in 1988 as a result of a 
 collaboration between the Mexican Cooperative UCIRI and the Dutch NGO 
Solidaridad (Fridell,  2007 ), with the aim of providing UCIRI producers with ofﬁ cial 
recognition of their labor-friendly practices and thus providing them with access 
to new geographical markets. In 1993, several existing Fair Trade certiﬁ cation 
 programs (including Max Havelaar)   decided to group together under the umbrella 
of  the  Fairtrade Labeling Organization ( FLO),  creating an international network of 
Fair Trade organizations using the same certiﬁ cation standards.  The   FLO standards, 
as described in Chap.   4 , are extensive and were historically applied exclusively to 
small farmers organized through cooperatives. However, in recent years, the annual 
40 % average growth of the Fair Trade market in the US (Kim, Lee, & Park,  2010 ) 
has created strong pressures on the US Fair Trade organization to satisfy demand. In 
order to deal with those pressures, FLO’s US partner, TransFair USA, decided to 
unilaterally extend fair trade certiﬁ cation to plantation and hired labor operations. 
For members of the traditional Fair Trade movement, certifying large-scale planta-
tions represents a conﬂ ict of values given that many ancestors of large owners used 
to exploit the ancestors of current small producers. The lack of an agreement 
between TransFair USA and FLO on this issue resulted in the division of the Fair 
Trade movement into two main organizations, FLO and Fair Trade USA in 2011. 
Given that the US market is the largest coffee market in the world, the separation of 
Fair Trade USA gave rise to many changes in the Fair Trade ecosystem around 
the world. 
 The key question of our book, as stated in Chap.   1 , is how to incentivize private 
actors to share their data in a way that promotes public value of the information 
disclosed. However, different organizations and consumers will not respond to the 
same incentives as they do not share the same set of values, thus creating a  possibility 
of clashes even among organizations that share the same overarching objective. As 
illustrated above, TransFair USA’s market-oriented values compelled them to create 
conditions designed to respond to the increased demand for fair trade coffee. This 
clashed with civic values represented by the FLO movement, which puts greater 
emphasis on maintaining the integrity of the original fair trade objective—the 
empowerment of small-scale producers. Both perspectives, each important and 
 relevant in the Fair Trade movement, coexist along the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain. 
This is to show that values, embedded in practice and carried out by stakeholders, 
play a fundamental role in the development of conﬂ icts as well as facilitation of 
 agreements within supply chains and certiﬁ cation systems, and can affect consensus 
on data disclosure. 
 Information-sharing  platforms that are designed to enable information sharing 
across the supply chain are dependent for their success on the development of 
widely recognized and accepted information standards. Successful development of 
such standards requires engagement of stakeholders across the entire supply chain. 
Because stakeholders occupying different positions within the supply chain hold 
F. Duhamel et al.

131
different value preferences, the process of standard creation might be fraught with 
conﬂ icting priorities. As illustrated in Chap.   2 , stakeholders in the coffee supply 
chain  in  NAFTA region hold different frameworks of reference that guide their 
 deﬁ nitions of quality and sustainability.  The coexistence of those frameworks 
 represents a source of further conﬂ ict, in addition to conﬂ icts stemming from power 
imbalances in each supply chain governance mode. This poses speciﬁ c challenges 
when introducing a platform like the one proposed in our project into an existing 
supply chain. 
 In this chapter, we use the lens of convention theory to address two main 
 questions: what are the potential conﬂ icts that can arise in the process of creating 
information- sharing platforms for the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain and what 
 conditions need to be created to overcome those conﬂ icts? To answer these ques-
tions, we have organized this chapter into ﬁ ve sections, including this introduction. 
The following section consists of literature review that introduces convention theory 
as a lens for understanding potential sources of conﬂ ict in the certiﬁ ed coffee supply 
chain. The third section describes our research methods. The fourth section presents 
characterization of ﬁ ve types of supply chains based on their value preferences 
identiﬁ ed through an analysis of our interview data. The ﬁ nal section is used for a 
discussion of the different sources of conﬂ ict among the actors within the ﬁ ve 
 supply chains and ways of resolving these conﬂ icts. We seek clearer understanding 
of the sources of conﬂ ict to inform creation of governance mechanisms that might 
foster long-term adoption of information-sharing platforms through creation of 
adequate incentives to participate. 
7.2  The Relevance of Convention Theories for Supply 
Chain Integration 
 Our main goal in this chapter, as we stated in the introduction, is to account for the 
possible conﬂ icts that could impede efﬁ cient information sharing among the various 
actors in the certiﬁ ed coffee supply chains and to identify potential solutions to 
these conﬂ icts. Effective information sharing is critical to platforms such as the one 
designed in our project, which cannot otherwise be sustained. 
 Institutional logics  tend to explain conﬂ icts within a given societal ecosystem as 
a consequence of the coexistence of different institutional orders (Gond & Leca, 
 2012 ). Thornton and Occasio deﬁ ned institutional logics as “socially constructed, 
historical patterns of material practices, assumptions, values, beliefs, and rules by 
which individuals produce and reproduce their material subsistence, organize time 
and space, and provide meaning to their social reality” (Thornton & Ocasio,  1999 , 
p. 804). Each institutional order has a central logic that guides its organizing 
 principles and provides social actors with vocabularies of motive and a sense of 
identity (Thornton & Ocasio,  2008 ). Institutional logics theory has been used to 
describe how contending institutional orders, with different practices and beliefs, 
shape how individuals engage in political struggles (Friedland & Alford,  1991 ). 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

132
 In this chapter, we apply the lens of convention theory, which is closely related 
to institutional logics (Thornton & Ocasio,  2008 ; Weber, Patel, & Heinze,  2013 ) 
although some basic assumptions of both approaches differ (Gond & Leca,  2012 ). 
The advantage of convention theory and its  “economies of worth” approach 
(Boltanski & Thévenot,  2006 ) is that it considers the coexistence of multiple logics 
as inherent to ordinary social and organizational life, and not necessarily as an 
exception or a problem to be solved (Gond & Leca,  2012 ). In other visions of insti-
tutional logics, the most likely outcome of a struggle between distinct institutional 
orders would be an eventual dominance of one order over all others (Marquis & 
Lounsbury,  2007 ; Thornton & Ocasio,  1999 ). Our analysis of coffee supply chains 
aligns well with the convention theory, which directly addresses the patterns of 
coexistence of different deﬁ nitions of product quality, or differing “orders of worth.” 
It also identiﬁ es theoretical approaches to solving conﬂ icts stemming from the 
 presence of conﬂ icting values, specifying how people view the world in general and 
the legitimation of their activities in particular. 
 Convention theory recognizes that there is no “objective” deﬁ nition  of  product 
quality expressed exclusively by differences in prices in the market. Quality 
 standards depend on the shared identiﬁ cation of common characteristics that can be 
grouped into three categories:  search attributes, which can be veriﬁ ed at the time of 
the transaction;  experience attributes, which can be assessed only after the transac-
tion has taken place; and  credence attributes , which cannot be objectively veriﬁ ed 
and are based on trust (Darby & Karni,  1973 ; Nelson,  1970 ). A product represents 
not only the outcome of a material production process, but is at the center of a web 
of contractors, distributors, consumers, and regulators, which develops over time 
in a path-dependent manner driven by taken-for-granted assumptions, common 
practices, and shared conventions that deﬁ ne quality and maintain stable relations 
(Biggart & Beamish,  2003 ). Conventions in that context can be deﬁ ned as “shared 
templates for interpreting situations and planning courses of action in mutually 
comprehensive ways that involve social accountability” (Biggart & Beamish,  2003 , 
p. 444). Conventions appear as  “models of evaluation” where  actors need to agree 
on the attributes associated with a given deﬁ nition of product quality. The tools that 
are consequently used to ensure such quality depend for their legitimacy on shared 
values among the actors (Ponte & Gibbon,  2005 ). Assumptions and values involved 
in the development of these conventions can be conceptually classiﬁ ed in several 
“worlds” that specify how reality is grasped by different constituencies, and “the 
format of what constitutes information” (Thévenot,  2006 ,  2007 ), and how this 
 information is communicated. 
 Conventions serve several  functions: they express actors’ values, help actors 
 justify their actions in a particular world, and enable coordination of behavior 
(Eymard- Duvernay,  1989 ). The convention theory identiﬁ es four worlds, or “orders 
of worth”: market, domestic, industrial, and civic. The coordination mechanism of 
the market world is price information, which expresses worth and serves to justify 
actions in this world. Domestic worth qualiﬁ cation places value on experience 
and seniority, and legitimacy of information is based mainly on trust. Industrial 
worth qualiﬁ cation values operational expertise in the efﬁ cient execution of a task, 
F. Duhamel et al.

133
with legitimacy depending on consensus about the correctness of the technique 
employed. Civic worth qualiﬁ cation emphasizes social values, and legitimacy is 
based on respect of law and social relevance (Boltanski & Thévenot,  2006 ; Ponte & 
Gibbon,  2005 ). 
 In addition to deﬁ ning  the  coordination mechanisms of the different orders of 
worth, convention theory allows us to identify sources of potential conﬂ icts between 
actors that exhibit different orders of worth. For example, people in the domestic 
order tend not to like the anonymity of the civic world, the corruption of market 
relations, and the unnecessary formalism and standardization of the industrial 
world. The civic order tends not to appreciate the dependence on personal relations 
of the domestic world, which are seen as leading to particularism, paternalism, and 
corruption. Civic order may consider market coordination with suspicion for its 
individualism and insistence on particular interests and selﬁ shness. The civic order 
sees the industrial world as dominated by unnecessary technocracy and bureaucracy. 
Market order, on the other hand, promotes liberalization from the domestic world, 
through abolishment of personal links, particularism, and personal prejudices to 
access a borderless, anonymous world. Market order does not go well with the 
 public space promoted actively by the civic order. People in the market order prefer 
contracts and face-to-face relations rather than open justice in the public space. 
Market order also criticizes the lack of ﬂ exibility of industrial order’s tools,  methods, 
and structures. For the industrial world, the domestic world is judged as traditional 
and outdated. Its particularism is judged inefﬁ cient and superiors relying on 
 authoritarianism are judged incompetent. Administrative procedures are considered 
excessive and social policies unnecessarily expensive in the industrial world, which 
also resents lavish consumption, high prices, and the ﬂ uctuations in prices of the 
market order (Ponte & Gibbon,  2005 ). 
 The conﬂ icting values of the different orders of worth are an obvious source of 
conﬂ ict in social institutions where actors with different values coexist. In order to 
maintain functionality of such institutions or systems, actors must ﬁ nd ways to 
resolve these conﬂ icts. Boltanski and Thévenot ( 2006 ) identify three potential 
 outcomes for conﬂ icts between orders of worth: agreement, compromise, and 
 relativization.  Agreement  is an instance in which conﬂ icts within the same order of 
worth can appeal to superior common values to arbitrate disagreements. The need 
for compromise arises when disagreements occur between orders of worth. In such 
situations, appealing to a superior common value is not feasible as actors inherently 
disagree on the importance of basic values and justify their actions according to 
 different orders of legitimacy. Relativization occurs when actors agree to ﬁ nd a 
compromise and conclude a private agreement without resorting to debate over 
principles: “A private arrangement is a contingent agreement between two parties 
that refers to their mutual satisfaction rather than to a general good ( you do this 
which is good for me; I do that, which is good for you )” (Boltanski & Thévenot, 
 2006 , p. 336). 
 Convention theory helps with formulating conditions for overcoming potential 
conﬂ icts in the transmission of information and reﬁ ning policy recommendations. 
However, the way actors try to solve conﬂ icts within and across organizations where 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

134
a plurality of normative orders prevails has been studied only sparingly in the  present 
literature (Gond & Leca,  2012 ; Patriotta, Gond, & Schultz,  2011 ). Some of the 
 existing literature focuses on the possible compromises that can be found between 
different orders of worth, such as the increasing adoption of selected norms from one 
another (Ponte & Gibbon,  2005 ), which has resulted in a degree of value interpenetra-
tion. For example, industrial and market orders of worth have worked together using 
industrial norms of productivity, economies of scale, and technical progress. Also, 
market order of worth has adopted some forms of domestic coordination when 
 marketing of a branded product is based on geographic location. In market coordi-
nation, people may work together with civic partners to accommodate products 
 fulﬁ lling a series of minimal norms. Compromise between market and domestic 
orders is more difﬁ cult to achieve as we will show later on in our interview analysis. 
We illustrate some of these potential sources of conﬂ ict and compromise in Table  7.1 .
 Convention theory can be criticized for overlooking institutional issues linked 
to power and domination. For example, some actors may not have the capacity to 
criticize or contest dominant social orders, while others may access multiple logics 
due to their position at the intersection of different orders of worth and can use the 
different logics to justify and impose their views (Greenwood, Díaz, Li, & Lorente, 
 2010 ). Integrating insights of value chain governance theory (Gerefﬁ , Humphrey, & 
Sturgeon,  2005 ) into convention theory, as done by Ponte and Gibbon ( 2005 ), 
addresses this objection.  Value chain governance theory takes into account three 
main variables when considering coordination strategies between actors: (1) the 
complexity of information exchanged, (2) the “codiﬁ ability” of information 
exchanged, and (3) the capabilities of the supplier base. Complexity refers to the 
volume of non-price information ﬂ owing across interﬁ rm boundaries, “codiﬁ ability” 
refers to the extent to which information and knowledge needed for conducting 
transactions can be codiﬁ ed and transmitted efﬁ ciently, and capabilities of the 
 supplier base refer to the capabilities of suppliers to respond to control and 
 Table 7.1  Sources of conﬂ ict and  compromise  between civic order and market, industrial, and 
domestic orders  
 With market order of worth 
 With industrial 
order of worth 
 With domestic 
order of worth 
 Source of conﬂ ict 
with civic order 
of worth 
 Suspicion stemming from 
alleged manipulation of 
information asymmetries, 
due to protection of 
particular corporate 
interests 
 Resented for its 
focus on 
technology and 
measurability 
 Resented for the 
secrecy of personal 
relations 
 Source of 
compromise at the 
value level with the 
civic order of worth 
 Aligning civic values with 
market values through 
adoption of civic values by 
consumers 
 Reintroducing 
social rights to 
favor productivity, 
against waste 
 Aligning civic 
values with 
personalized 
relations 
 Integration of 
technology 
 Source: Own elaboration from Boltanski and Thevenot ( 2006 ) and Patriotta et al. ( 2011 ) 
F. Duhamel et al.

135
 monitoring requirements (Gerefﬁ  et al.,  2005 ). This is relevant to our research 
because every supply chain conﬁ guration exhibits a lead organization that deter-
mines who does what along the chain, at what price, using which standards, and 
under which speciﬁ cations (Muradian & Pelupessy,  2005 ; Ponte & Gibbon,  2005 ). 
The analysis of a supply chain reveals not only contrasting world views but also 
power relations between partners in a chain, conditioning the possibilities of 
 transmission of information and the possibilities of adoption of technical standards 
that codify information. 
 We found two studies applying convention theory to the coffee sector. In the ﬁ rst 
one, Ponte and Gibbon ( 2005 ) identify three main orders of worth: the domestic 
world, dominated mostly by producers and niche marketers of specialty coffee; the 
civic world, dominated by marketers of ethical products selling fair trade, organic, 
and other sustainable coffee; and ﬁ nally, a combination of two worlds, the industrial- 
market world, where retailers sell branded, mainstream coffee. In line with their 
work, we consider the presence of all four orders of worth but treat industrial and 
market orders as separate for the purposes of our analysis. The second study focuses 
on the difﬁ culty of harmonizing civic and market values around fair trade coffee, 
because of a “contradiction between the identity of the groups linked to activism 
and their reality as business” (Renard,  2003 , p. 92). This contradiction results in the 
division of fair trade into two streams: one reabsorbed by market forces and the 
other at the service of “alternative” producers. 
 Although convention theory addresses standard setting, the role of certiﬁ ers and 
certiﬁ cation processes has not yet been thoroughly analyzed under that lens, despite 
the important role certiﬁ ers play in the certiﬁ ed coffee market. Certiﬁ ers are key to 
the deﬁ nition and effective transmission of quality standards in supply chains, not 
only at the service of large retailers but also at the level of smaller producers. In doing 
so, they inﬂ uence the reconﬁ guration of global supply chains. Hatanaka, Bain, and 
Busch ( 2005 ) contend that third party certiﬁ cation supports alternative practices of 
small producers but has also become a tool used by dominant retailers to increase 
their market power in global agrifood chains. At the same time, Reardon, Codron, 
Busch, Bingen, and Harris ( 2000 ) observe that large ﬁ rms and multinationals in the 
global agrifood sector often create private grades and standards, which is also the 
case with large specialty retailers such as Starbucks (Macdonald,  2007 ). These pow-
erful actors drive other actors, such as smaller domestic ﬁ rms and farms in emerging 
markets, into adopting comparable standards to gain access to desirable export mar-
kets. Some governments may develop programs to help smaller producers invest in 
upgrading their farms according to the requirements demanded by the dominant 
grades and standards. The smaller ﬁ rms may also choose to ally with public and non-
proﬁ t sectors to establish their own grades and standards (Reardon et al.,  2000 ). 
 Convention theory deals with observing different world visions  of  stakeholders 
(consumers, distributors, roasters, and producers in the case of coffee) and how they 
enter into conﬂ ict or harmony to bring about a negotiated order of information 
transmission. The task of the researcher is to compare the plurality of legitimate 
orders of worth and look at the needed compromises between stakeholders 
(Thévenot,  2006 ) in respect to information formats and transmission of reliable and 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

136
up-to-date data to overcome conﬂ icts. To address those issues, we conducted a 
series of interviews with participants in the coffee supply chain as we describe in the 
following section and used this data to draw theoretical and empirical implications 
that are presented in the discussion and conclusion sections.  
7.3  Methods 
 In order to answer our research questions, we interviewed multiple stakeholders along 
the coffee supply chain following a multiple case study approach (Yin,  1994 ), in 
which analysis of individual cases is followed by an analysis aimed at comparing and 
contrasting their similarities and differences. To identify participants for the study, we 
followed a snowball sample approach, starting with interviewees from  coffee associa-
tions who were then asked to identify other potential candidates. This process was 
reiterated with each consecutive interview.  The  semistructured interview protocol 
included questions about information sharing, conventions on quality, characteristics 
of an information standard, motivations, barriers, and potential conﬂ icts to share 
information across the supply chain. Each interview lasted approximately 1 h. 
 We conducted 25  interviews  from September to December 2013. We interviewed 
three producers, three intermediaries, one roaster, and seven retailers. In addition, 
we interviewed some participants that were involved in more than one process: two 
that were intermediaries and roasters and two that were producers, intermediaries, 
roasters, and retailers. We also interviewed two members of a coffee association and 
ﬁ ve certiﬁ ers. All interviews were recorded and transcribed with the exception of 
one where interviewee did not give permission for recording. In this case, three 
interviewers documented the interview. 
 To compare and contrast responses from participants,  we coded all the inter-
views. We worked together to deﬁ ne a set of 13 categories including themes such 
as barriers, motivations, values, conﬂ icts, and quality. We coded each interview 
according to these themes, and each comment was classiﬁ ed as representative of 
one of the four worlds. That is to say, we classiﬁ ed comments in terms of the 
 worldview they represented: civic, market, industrial, or domestic. In this way, by 
analyzing the interviews, we identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve different types of supply chains. We 
arranged codiﬁ cation tables belonging to each type of supply chain to understand 
the perspective of their members. Finally, we compared and contrasted the ﬁ ve 
 perspectives. Although we are reporting the results in English, data collection and 
analysis were done in Spanish by native speakers. 
7.4  Results 
 As mentioned in the previous section, our analysis of the interview data led to char-
acterization of ﬁ ve different types of coffee supply chains. Each of the ﬁ ve supply 
chains works in different ways, with each following different deﬁ nitions of coffee 
F. Duhamel et al.

137
quality. What we found is that each supply chain exhibited adherence to more than 
one of the orders of worth deﬁ ned by convention theory, with many actors valuing 
elements of all four worlds. In order to classify the ﬁ ve identiﬁ ed supplied chains, 
we used the two dominant orders of worth present in each of the chains to describe 
their actors’ guiding value set. Based on this approach we identiﬁ ed the following 
coffee supply chains: 
7.4.1  Traditional Fair Trade Supply Chain 
 The ﬁ rst type of supply chain  represents what we have called the traditional fair 
trade supply chain (see Fig.  7.1 ). In this supply chain, small farmers organized 
in local cooperatives sell their coffee to the Mexican and the international market, 
usually in the form of green coffee beans. The farmers who own small plots of land 
pick the cherries and remove the pulp around the coffee beans in a process usually 
known as the “wet process.” In order to transport the ﬁ nished product to the main 
processing site, coffee beans are gathered by a local intermediary, usually a local 
representative of the cooperative. Coffee beans are then moved to the central 
 cooperative location, where they undergo a second “dry process” before being sent 
to the roaster. Certiﬁ ed coffee is usually sold to the international market, while 
the noncertiﬁ ed coffee also produced by cooperative members is sold to the national 
market. Roasters then distribute the coffee to the consumer using a retailer, which in 
some cases is the roaster himself.
 The  civic and the  industrial orders of worth are present in the traditional fair 
trade supply chain, with the civic order being the dominant order. Participants in 
this supply chain frequently refer to the importance of establishing a fair relation-
ship between producers and consumers. For example, one representative of a 
Mexican cooperative commented “the objective of Fair Trade is – as the name 
 suggests – to establish a fair exchange between producers and consumers… 
Working together… the product is supervised by experts who certify that the 
 products are fair and comply with speciﬁ c processes, and the consumer responds to 
our effort by paying a fair price for our products.” 
 Conversations with  participants  in this supply chain are also full of references to 
quality of process, products, and compliance to certiﬁ cation, which are closely 
related to the industrial order of worth. For example, one of the managers of a local 
trading organization explained their mission as “Our organization serves about 
Local
intermediary
Cooperative
National
roaster
International
roaster
Broker/Importer
National
retailer
Small
farmer
International
retailer
Consumer
 Fig. 7.1   The traditional fair trade supply chain 
 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

138
60 producers in Mexico. We are not a trading company in the strict sense because 
we are technical staff supporting product development and process improvement 
to help our producers comply with quality, safety and other legal requirements.” 
Another example of the combination of the  civic and  industrial orders of worth 
can be found in the fair trade certiﬁ cation processes, which consist of norms and 
standards (representing the  industrial  world) that deﬁ ne product quality in terms of 
social, environmental, and economic factors (representing the  civic world). 
7.4.2  Mixed Supply Chain 
 The second type  of  supply chain is a “mixed” supply chain (see Fig.  7.2 ). There are 
two subclasses encompassed within this classiﬁ cation titled type I and type II mixed 
supply chain, which involve the same participants but have different modes of 
 operation. The chain begins with small independent farmers not organized in a local 
cooperative, who pick the cherries and run the “wet” process before selling the cof-
fee beans to local intermediaries. Local intermediaries sell the coffee to large inter-
mediaries who run the dry process before selling the coffee beans to either national 
or international roasters. Roasters in turn sell the coffee to the consumer through 
retailers or corporate clients.
 The ﬁ rst mode of operation of this supply chain (type I mixed) follows a logic, 
which is a mix of the  industrial and  civic worlds (where industrial order of worth is 
dominant over civic order of worth), and we found it mainly in the Nestlé supply 
chain. The second mode of operation (type II mixed) is a mix of the  industrial and 
 market world views, and it is represented by other Mexican roasters that sell their 
products both in the national and international markets. 
 As mentioned above, the type I mixed supply chain (industrial-civic) is illus-
trated by the Nestlé mode of operation. The Nestlé supply chain is currently 
 working under the principles of the 4C certiﬁ cation program on a global initiative 
called the “Nescafe Plan.” The main objective of the Nescafe Plan is to provide 
traceability to each jar of Nescafe to enable the consumer to trace the origins of 
the particular coffee she is about to consume. The plan also involves a series of 
Large 
intermediary
Local
intermediary
National
roaster
International
roaster
Broker/Importer
National
retailer
Small
farmer
International
retailer
Consumer
Corporate
clients
 Fig. 7.2   The “mixed” supply chain 
 
F. Duhamel et al.

139
interventions to improve production and processing practices to make the  products 
more environmentally, socially, and economically sustainable. The focus on trace-
ability, process improvement, and quality control are the main references to the 
industrial world, and the sustainability concerns are closely related to the civic 
world. Both views are continuously mentioned in the interviews with participants 
in this supply chain. For instance, one of the large intermediaries selling coffee 
beans to Nestlé commented that “something that coffee requires from the plant to 
your cup is quality control. If you do not have quality control in every step, even 
when you are brewing it, the  coffee will be spoiled.” He also highlighted the 
importance of adhering to the  speciﬁ c processes and improving sustainability as a 
necessary condition in order to remain part of the Nestlé program, “Nestlé is a 
very innovative and trustworthy company to us, and a very attractive client. They 
are always at the cutting edge. For example, nowadays, if you want to sell coffee 
beans to Nestlé, you are required to have a sustainability certiﬁ cation that involves 
food safety as well as environmental sustainability.” This view is also shared by 
Nestlé representatives. One of them described the program as “a 500 million 
Swiss Francs with a holistic approach to promote sustainability and sustainable 
consumption. Currently there are 22 million 4C coffee plants, which comply with 
social, economic and environmental principles coming from the Rainforest 
Alliance and UTZ.” 
 Although this supply chain emphasizes the same basic principles that motivate 
the traditional Fair Trade coffee supply chain, the main trigger for the movement is 
not on the side of the producer, looking for a more fair treatment, but on the side of 
the consumers and their information needs. For example, when we asked an inter-
mediary about information that could be useful to him, he commented that “it is 
more about the information that consumers want to know, which is a ﬁ rst-world 
trend, and these needs go hand-in-hand with the main beneﬁ ts to the environment 
that Nestlé is looking for.” Nestlé representative also stressed the idea of the con-
sumer as the main driver. For example, when asked about deﬁ nitions of quality, one 
Nestlé marketing representative described a quality coffee as “the coffee that con-
sumers like, and once we know what they want, it is our commitment to always 
provide the same ﬂ avor and quality.” 
 The type II mixed form of  operation  in this type of supply chain was most 
 committed to the  market and  industrial worlds, where market order of worth is 
dominant over industrial order of worth. The quality of coffee and the process 
needed to ensure it were topics continuously mentioned during the interviews. The 
interviewees from the type II mixed supply chain mainly made references to market 
conditions and price, with transparency and sustainability being completely omit-
ted. For example, when describing the perception of the company about organic and 
other certiﬁ cates, a representative of an important Mexican roaster commented: “I 
do not see a lot of value in that [certiﬁ cations]. We have a Kosher seal that goes to a 
very speciﬁ c market segment, and an organic coffee that people do not buy much. 
I mean, I do not see these seals as a competitive advantage because of the price. I 
think that people [in Mexico] do not decide to buy a coffee like that.” In general, 
interviewees involved in supply chains that mostly produce coffee for the Mexican 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

140
market were far less interested in certiﬁ cations than those exporting a large portion 
of their products. 
7.4.3  Specialty or the Relational Supply Chain 
 The third type of supply  chain  can be characterized as the specialty or relational 
supply chain (see Fig.  7.3 ). In this supply chain, local intermediaries are usually 
recognized coffee cuppers who build close relationships with both producers and 
roasters. The cupper helps producers improve their practices to gradually increase 
the quality of their coffee beans and helps the roaster improve roasting techniques 
to create specialty coffees that are usually sold in retail coffee shops, each of them 
featuring a speciﬁ c mix of coffees that make the experience at the coffee shop 
unique. Interviews with participants in this supply chain made us infer that the main 
values in the supply chain were the  industrial and the  domestic orders of worth, with 
the industrial order being dominant. Conversations with participants in this supply 
chain emphasize the quality of the coffee and the importance of quality control 
processes along the entire production chain, signifying the dominance of the 
 industrial order of worth. The domestic order of worth is illustrated by their empha-
sis on the importance of promoting Mexican producers in Mexico. Moreover, the 
domestic order of worth is also demonstrated by the value specialty coffee shops 
we interviewed placed on the relationships with their producers. The interviewees 
emphasized that for them deﬁ ning coffee quality comes from the quality of the 
relationships within the supply chain, rather than from external certiﬁ cations.
7.4.4  Medium-Sized Farmer Supply Chain 
 The last type of supply chain that we found during our data gathering process 
involves small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), in some cases, family busi-
nesses, who own a medium-sized plantation or several of them (see Fig.  7.4 ). In 
general, these supply chains were more hierarchically organized, enveloping the 
entire production process from growing to roasting under a single brand. 
Occasionally, these ventures have to supplement their production by purchasing 
coffee from local intermediaries to be able to satisfy demand for their product. 
Although not all interviewed SMEs had a sustainability certiﬁ cation, all SMEs that 
exported their product to foreign markets had a certiﬁ cation, recognizing the price 
premium they could receive from the seal. The medium-sized producers get to the 
Small
farmer
Local
intermediary
Specialty
roaster
Retail
Coffee shop
Consumer
 Fig. 7.3   The specialty coffee or relational supply chain 
 
F. Duhamel et al.

141
end consumer in many different ways, including international retailers, national 
retailers, corporate clients, or even their own coffee shops. We found that  participants 
in this type of supply chain mainly exhibit values compatible with the  industrial and 
 domestic worlds, with industrial order of worth being dominant. The industrial 
 commitment comes from their emphasis on the production process, and the quality 
control from the selection of the beans to the roasting process. Because those are 
local or family businesses, they also emphasize personal relations and trust in doing 
business, which makes them part of the domestic world.
 It is important to mention some other relevant results that come from our 
 observations and interview data. First, small farmers have no access to certiﬁ cations 
because they do not have the resources or the technical knowledge to go through a 
certiﬁ cation process. Certiﬁ cations are generally awarded to cooperatives, large 
intermediaries, and medium farmers, who have the resources to undergo the neces-
sary certiﬁ cation processes and obtain a certiﬁ cation. In this way, any relationship 
to gather information from small producers—who produce about 80 % of all coffee 
in Mexico—needs to be mediated by these intermediaries. 
 Second, we found that participants in different types of supply chains have 
 conﬂ icts that are driven by historical context and thus may be hard to address. 
For example, medium-sized farmers are in many cases family businesses that in 
the past were owners of big plantations that exploited Mexican Indians. Although 
most of them are currently concerned about being fair to their workers, coopera-
tive  members and fair trade advocates in Mexico do not agree with allowing 
them to be Fair Trade certiﬁ ed. Curiously enough, they provide a market reason 
for that. For example, one cooperative representative mentioned that “a small 
producer has only few spaces to get into the market, and fair trade  certiﬁ cation 
 is a way to protect that market.” 
 Finally, large corporations, such as Nestlé, have the recognition, even admira-
tion, from medium-sized farmers and also from other large participants in the  supply 
chains. On the other hand, small farmers and fair trade advocates are very suspi-
cious about their current practices. This conﬂ ict between large and small producers 
is at the core of the division of the global Fair Trade movement and represents a 
Medium
farmer
Local
intermediary
Coffee
wet/dry
process
Coffee
Roasting
Retail
Coffee shop
Corporate
clients
International
retailer
National
retailer
Consumer
 Fig. 7.4   The medium-sized farmer supply chain 
 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

142
major risk for any project that aims to create information-sharing platform across 
the entire certiﬁ ed coffee ecosystem. 
7.5  Discussion and Concluding Remarks 
 As described in the previous section, four potentially conﬂ icting orders of worth 
interact in the coffee supply chain: the civic world, the industrial world, the domestic 
world, and the market world. In our research, we identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve different types of 
 supply  chains classiﬁ ed by different combinations of exhibited values: civic- industrial 
(the “traditional fair trade” supply chain), industrial-civic (the “type I mixed” supply 
chain), industrial-market (the “type II mixed” supply chain), industrial- domestic (the 
specialty coffee or relational supply chain), and the domestic- industrial (the “medium-
sized famer” supply chain). The presence of mixed motivations in the ﬁ ve identiﬁ ed 
supply chains challenges the depiction of the role of values in the convention theory, 
which treats the four orders of worth as ideal types. We contend that a singular actor 
or singular supply chain can exhibit more than one order of worth as long as the 
underlying values can be reconciled. In fact, we observed that inside the same 
 organization, individual departments had different “orders of worth” depending on 
their proximity to production practices, quality control, or to the ﬁ nal consumer mar-
ket. These combinations deﬁ ne types of institutional arrangements that might oppose 
each other but also may coexist in an ecosystem catering to different needs. 
 Four worlds, or orders of worth, seem to be at play in the coffee industry:  Civic 
values are becoming increasingly important in the negotiation of the deﬁ nition of 
coffee  quality (paying a fair price, helping small farmers’ organizations). At the 
same time, labeling and certiﬁ cation systems are organized in terms of an  industrial 
convention, and relationships with some mainstream distributors who carry fair 
trade coffee are based on a  market convention. It is interesting to note the apprecia-
tion of all the interviewees for the values in the industrial world, which may be a key 
point to facilitate any long-term relationships in a platform such as I-Choose. Our 
interviews also suggest that the main potential source of conﬂ ict in the coffee supply 
chain comes from the contradicting values in the market and civic worlds, which 
already caused a division in the Fair Trade movement. 
 “Lead ﬁ rms,” such  as  Nestlé in type I mixed supply chains or other big ﬁ rms in 
type II mixed supply chains, deﬁ ne and manage “quality” by shaping the rules and 
conditions of participation and determining the functional division of labor along 
the chain, sometimes with support of certiﬁ cation programs such as 4C. Such 
 leading ﬁ rms diffuse dominant normative paradigms that provide legitimacy for the 
mechanisms used to exert “leadership.” The actual forms of coordination between 
lead ﬁ rms and ﬁ rst-tier suppliers (and their hands-on or hands-off character) vary 
depending on (1) the mechanisms for transmitting knowledge and information 
about quality and (2) the values guiding the lead ﬁ rms. Their success depends on 
how well they transfer information to their suppliers and to standardize, codify, and 
obtain credible external certiﬁ cation. 
F. Duhamel et al.

143
 In specialty coffee markets, more information is provided about the coffee’s 
 origin and its environmental and other impacts. In these markets, actors tend to use 
narratives such as origin-based trust narratives. These narratives are being 
 increasingly replaced by certiﬁ ed quality systems such as  the  coffee standards 
developed by the Specialty Coffee Association of America that partially dissociate 
coffee’s quality from its place of origin. These narratives tend to be replicated in a 
standardized manner for mass consumption (Starbucks), thus recalling industrial 
quality conventions. 
 The  system architecture  introduced in our information-sharing platform carries 
civic values of transparency, favoring public goods, and public services for the 
 general public and consumers. Such system can be read as an attempt to introduce 
civic order of worth into an environment normally dominated by industrial/market 
order of worth, and thus be classiﬁ ed along the lines of a traditional fair trade supply 
chain that exhibits values of civic-industrial order of worth. This leaves us with two 
questions: What kind of conﬂ icts might we expect as a result of introducing a 
system- wide information-sharing platform? And how can such conﬂ icts be 
 overcome? We expect that the resulting conﬂ icts will need to be resolved via com-
promises, and not as much through agreements and relativization of conﬂ icts as 
described by Boltanski and Thévenot ( 2006 ).  In  Table  7.2 , we describe the various 
sources of conﬂ ict between the civic-industrial type of a supply chain as a stand-in 
for an information- sharing platform and the other four types of supply chains identi-
ﬁ ed through our empirical exploration as well as potential sources of compromise.
 As we show in Table  7.2 , the  traditional fair trade supply chain   and the 
industrial- civic mixed supply chain are in agreement about core values. However, 
they are not necessarily in agreement about the means to support such values. For 
 Table 7.2  Potential points of friction and sources  of  compromise with I-Choose 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 Order of worth 
 Industrial-civic 
 Industrial- 
market 
 Industrial- 
domestic 
 Domestic-industrial 
 Type 
 “Type I mixed” 
 “Type II 
mixed” 
 “Specialty 
coffee” 
 “Medium-sized 
famer” 
 Source of 
conﬂ ict with 
civic-industrial 
order of worth 
 Agreement in 
the ends but 
conﬂ icts about 
the means 
 Protection of 
corporate 
interests vs. 
producer and 
consumer 
well-being 
 Trust in quality 
comes from 
personal 
relationships 
rather than 
certiﬁ cation 
systems 
 Domestic values 
are closely related 
to family businesses 
that used to be 
owners of big 
plantations 
 Source of 
compromise 
with the 
civic-industrial 
order of worth 
 Harmonizing 
ways of being 
fair with the 
producer 
 Consumer 
interest in 
civic values 
may align 
market and 
civic worlds 
 Aligning people 
and product 
certiﬁ cations 
 Negotiating market 
segments and 
differentiation 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

144
example, Nestlé program involves supporting high-quality producers with a 
monetary prize, which is independent from the price paid for the coffee. 
Traditional fair trade farmers see this monetary price as a low-impact interven-
tion. Moreover, traditional fair trade values self-improvement rather than  external 
interventions to improve the quality of life of the small farmers. Compromises 
then can be made by harmonizing the means of fair relationships between main 
actors in both supply chains, which should include small farmer involvement in 
the conversations. Currently, most conversations and certiﬁ cations are mediated 
in these mixed supply chains by intermediaries. 
 Market focus of the  type II mixed supply chain conﬂ icts with the civic interests 
of the traditional fair trade supply chain because market prices do not include 
 externalities from the production and distribution process. Participants in this type 
of supply chain showed little interest in the civic values mainly because there is not 
yet consumer interest in paying the price premium that implies a more sustainable 
commerce. Promoting market penetration of fair trade and other sustainable prod-
ucts is a key source of compromise with the market view. In a sense, type I mixed 
supply chains are, from our point of view, supply chains that have already started 
the transition process given the projected demands. Corporations in type I mixed 
supply chains are the leaders in the market, and we believe that other corporations 
will follow once consumers become more aware of civic values. 
 Specialty coffee supply chains do not emphasize product certiﬁ cations because 
the main source of trust in the quality of the coffee comes from personal relation-
ships among supply chain participants. We had a chance to interview some of the 
participants in this kind of supply chain who did not know that the coffee that they 
were selling was actually certiﬁ ed following international norms. In their view, the 
quality of the coffee was attached to  the coffee cupper behind the process. Coffee 
cuppers are also recognized by personal certiﬁ cations,  and  we believe that including 
these personal credentials as an alternative source of trust may be a way of reaching 
compromise with participants in this supply chain. 
 Finally, the conﬂ ict that might be the most difﬁ cult to resolve is between partici-
pants in the medium-sized farmers supply  chain , which exhibits domestic-industrial 
values, and participants in the traditional fair trade supply chain. The main source 
of conﬂ ict stems from the fact that the domestic order of worth among this type of 
supply chain is rooted in the importance of family relations, which inevitably brings 
in the legacy of exploitation of small farmers and Indians. Coffee producers in this 
supply chain are usually descendants of landlords who exploited Indians and other 
small farmers in the past, which creates a historical division between both groups. 
Giving medium-sized farmers an opportunity to enter the fair trade market is inter-
preted as an inconsistency with the traditional values of fair trade, because of this 
historic divide. One way to look for compromise might be to develop alternative 
seals and certiﬁ cations that clearly differentiate both producers and may reach dif-
ferent  market segments. 
 In order to enhance public value, the ﬁ ndings from the interviews suggest that the 
accomplishment of compromise between actors belonging to different orders of 
worth and types of supply chains is necessary to incentivize participation of private 
F. Duhamel et al.

145
actors in information-sharing platforms. In these circumstances, public administra-
tion can play an important role by creating the environment for the establishment of 
alternative certiﬁ cations and by demonstrating the beneﬁ ts of sharing information. 
They should help to overcome potential barriers created by mistrust among companies 
(see Chap.   1 ). Moreover, policy makers should pay special attention to the diversity 
of values in the coffee supply chain which lead to the need for collaborative 
 governance like the one that we will describe in the next chapter of the book. 
 References 
 Biggart, N. W., & Beamish, T. D. (2003). The economic sociology of conventions: Habit, custom, 
practice, and routine in market order.  Annual Review of Sociology, 29 (1), 443–464.   http://doi.
org/10.1146/annurev.soc.29.010202.100051  . 
 Boltanski, L., & Thévenot, L. (2006).  On justiﬁ cation: Economies of worth . (Catherine Porter, 
Trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
 Darby, M. R., & Karni, E. (1973). Free competition and the optimal amount of fraud.  Journal of 
Law and Economics, 16 (1), 67–88. 
 Eymard-Duvernay, F. (1989). Conventions de qualité et formes de coordination.  Revue Économique, 
40 (2), 329–359. 
 Fridell, G. (2007).  Fair trade coffee: The prospects and pitfalls of market-driven social justice 
(Repr.). Toronto, ON: University of Toronto Press. 
 Friedland, R., & Alford, R. R. (1991). Bringing society back in: Symbols, practices and institu-
tional contradictions. In W. W. Powell & P. DiMaggio (Eds.),  The new institutionalism in orga-
nizational analysis (pp. 232–263). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Gerefﬁ , G., Humphrey, J., & Sturgeon, T. (2005). The governance of global value chains.  Review 
of International Political Economy, 12 (1), 78–104. 
 Gond, J. P., & Leca, B. (2012). Theorizing change in a pluralistic institutional context: What can 
economies of worth and new-institutionalism learn from each other?  Lille Economie & 
Management-LEM , Working Paper no. 15, 53 p. 
 Greenwood, R., Díaz, A. M., Li, S. X., & Lorente, J. C. (2010). The multiplicity of institutional 
logics and the heterogeneity of organizational responses.  Organization Science, 21 (2), 521–
539.   http://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1090.0453  . 
 Hatanaka, M., Bain, C., & Busch, L. (2005). Third-party certiﬁ cation in the global agrifood sys-
tem.  Food Policy, 30 (3), 354–369.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2005.05.006  . 
 Kim, G.-S., Lee, G. Y., & Park, K. (2010). A cross-national investigation on how ethical consumers 
build loyalty toward fair trade brands.  Journal of Business Ethics, 96 (4), 589–611.   http://doi.
org/10.1007/s10551-010-0486-1  . 
 Macdonald, K. (2007). Globalising justice within coffee supply chains? Fair trade, Starbucks and 
the transformation of supply chain governance.  Third World Quarterly, 28 (4), 793–812.   http://
doi.org/10.1080/01436590701336663   . 
 Marquis, C., & Lounsbury, M. (2007). Vive La Résistance: Competing logics and the consolida-
tion of U.S. community banking.  Academy of Management Journal, 50 (4), 799–820.   http://doi.
org/10.5465/AMJ.2007.26279172  . 
 Muradian, R., & Pelupessy, W. (2005). Governing the coffee chain: The role of voluntary regula-
tory systems.  World Development, 33 (12), 2029–2044.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.
2005.06.007  .  
 Nelson, P. (1970). Information and consumer behavior.  Journal of Political Economy, 78 (2), 
311–329. 
7 Long-Term Goals and Shifting Power Structures: A Convention-Based View

146
 Patriotta, G., Gond, J.-P., & Schultz, F. (2011). Maintaining legitimacy: Controversies, orders of 
worth, and public justiﬁ cations: Maintaining legitimacy.  Journal of Management Studies, 
48 (8), 1804–1836.   http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2010.00990.x  . 
 Ponte, S., & Gibbon, P. (2005). Quality standards, conventions and the governance of global value 
chains.  Economy and Society, 34 (1), 1–31.   http://doi.org/10.1080/0308514042000329315  . 
 Reardon, T., Codron, J. M., Busch, L., Bingen, J., & Harris, C. (2000). Global change in agrifood 
grades and standards: Agribusiness strategic responses in developing countries.  The 
International Food and Agribusiness Management Review, 2 (3), 421–435. 
 Renard, M.-C. (2003). Fair trade: Quality, market and conventions.  Journal of Rural Studies, 
19 (1), 87–96.   http://doi.org/10.1016/S0743-0167(02)00051-7  . 
 Thévenot, L. (2006, July).  Institutions and agency: Differentiating regimes of engagement . 
Presented at the Conference on Economy and Society, Italy. 
 Thévenot, L. (2007). The plurality of cognitive formats and engagements moving between the 
familiar and the public.  European Journal of Social Theory, 10 (3), 409–423. 
 Thornton, P. H., & Ocasio, W. (1999). Institutional logics and the historical contingency of power 
in organizations: Executive succession in the higher education publishing industry, 1958–1990. 
 American Journal of Sociology, 105 (3), 801–843.   http://doi.org/10.1086/210361  . 
 Thornton, P. H., & Ocasio, W. (2008). Institutional logics. In R. Greenwood, K. Sahlin, & 
R. Suddaby (Eds.),  The SAGE handbook of organizational institutionalism  (pp. 99–129). Los 
Angeles: Sage.  
 Weber, K., Patel, H., & Heinze, K. L. (2013). From cultural repertoires to institutional logics: 
A content-analytic method. In M. Lounsbury & E. Boxenbaum (Eds.),  Institutional logics in 
action, part B (Vol. 39, pp. 351–382). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 
 Yin, R. (1994).  Case study research: Design and methods . Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
F. Duhamel et al.

147
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0_8
 Chapter 8 
 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: 
Policies to Support Disclosure of Product Data 
in North America  
 Holly  Jarman ,  Luis  F.  Luna-Reyes , and  Theresa  A.  Pardo  
 Abstract   Our concluding chapter draws on the concepts and theories discussed 
in the book, particularly the concept of governance, collaboration, and the role of 
trust. The chapter focuses on the practicalities of information disclosure. It asks: 
how must this process be governed? A deﬁ nition of governance as the process of 
steering a society toward a set of predeﬁ ned goals is introduced. It discusses the 
beneﬁ ts and difﬁ culties of creating collaborative governance in the context of our 
project. The chapter presents our ﬁ ndings regarding governance from the I-Choose 
project. It evaluates existing experiments in collaborative governance that aim to 
extract public value from data disclosure, drawing on several examples from mul-
tiple countries, including the I-Choose project. We ﬁ nd that information disclosure 
alone is not enough to enhance the public sphere. It must be supported by innovative 
governance mechanisms that address classic problems such as establishing inde-
pendence among producing and regulating organizations and creating procedural 
transparency. 
 Keywords  I-Choose •  Data disclosure •  Consumer choice •  Governance 
 H.  Jarman (*) 
 Department of Health Management and Policy ,  School of Public Health, 
University of Michigan ,  Ann Arbor ,  MI ,  USA 
 e-mail: hjarman@umich.edu 
 L. F.  Luna-Reyes 
 Department of Informatics ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: lluna-reyes@albany.edu 
 T. A.  Pardo 
 Center for Technology in Government ,  University at Albany ,  Albany ,  NY ,  USA 
 e-mail: tpardo@ctg.albany.edu 

148
8.1  Introduction 
 Technology is facilitating a revolution in the way we access information about 
 markets, dramatically lowering the opportunity cost of learning about the prove-
nance of the products and service we purchase and consume. As discussed in previ-
ous chapters, governments wish to encourage the disclosure of product data for a 
number of reasons, including facilitation of consumer choice, product innovation 
and research, and more efﬁ cient ways to regulate markets. This goal cannot be 
achieved without collaboration among a range of disparate actors in the supply 
chains, as well as others in the certiﬁ cation industry. Collaboration between govern-
ment agencies, private actors, and consumer advocates is necessary in order to pro-
mote the disclosure of product data and to move toward the long-term goal of private 
sector transparency. 
 This book draws lessons from existing research for policymakers and other 
actors seeking to increase  “private” data sharing to promote more effective and efﬁ -
cient public policies. As we established in the introductory chapter, an enormous 
amount of data about the provenance and safety of the products we buy, our health-
care, education, ﬁ nancial transactions, and many other activities regulated by gov-
ernments, are held by private organizations. Much of this data is fragmented and 
separated from publicly assembled datasets. By creating incentives to share key 
elements of this data through a  collaborative and consensual system , we can pro-
mote public value creation through reducing information asymmetries and provid-
ing better information for consumer’s decision-making. As we argued in Chap.   2 of 
this book, it is also possible to ﬁ nd some applications that improve knowledge about 
some markets, which will be beneﬁ cial for supply chain participants. Additionally, 
the resulting combined and trusted data can be used for evidence-based policy 
decision- making, in market differentiation mechanisms, or to overcome market 
fragmentation in some sectors. Although this study focuses on one consumer prod-
uct, coffee grown in Mexico and consumed in Canada and the United States, we 
believe that the lessons drawn are more broadly applicable to areas such as health-
care, trade, ﬁ nance, food safety, and development. 
 This current and ﬁ nal chapter of the book takes one last pass at our initial ques-
tion: how can we incentivize private actors to share their data in a way that promotes 
the public value of the information disclosed? As we have suggested throughout the 
book, answering this question does not only entail overcoming substantial technical 
challenges but also paying close attention to a series of individual, organizational, 
and institutional factors. Individual factors refer to the emergence of consumer 
demand for companies to disclose information about their products. This “demanded 
disclosure,” driven by consumer demand for product data, is facilitated by new 
forms of technology that reduce the costs of exerting social pressure on organiza-
tions and governments (van der Laan,  2009 ). At the organizational level, issues of 
corporate social responsibility, private transparency, and opening government are 
the key drivers of these trends. Key institutions in the process, from our point of 
view, are those related to the certiﬁ cation and labeling mechanisms described in 
more detail in Chap.   4 . Moreover, as it was demonstrated by the evaluation of our 
H. Jarman et al.

149
technical prototype in Chap.   5 , even the ideal certiﬁ cation requires appropriate gov-
ernance mechanisms to regulate decisions, standards, and general rules of the sys-
tem. The following sections include reﬂ ections, explorations, and proposals on how 
a system of product data disclosure might be governed. 
8.2  Key Governance Dilemmas for Data Disclosure 
 Although current and developing  technologies make the disclosure and productive 
use of private and public data seem more feasible than ever before, data interoper-
ability and disclosure are not solely problems of  technology . They are also problems 
of human interaction. The competing interests of organizations and individuals with 
a stake in the debate over product data disclosure must somehow be managed. 
Furthermore, private sector organizations and public agencies have to be willing 
and able to share their data in a way that is useful and meaningful to consumers, 
stakeholder groups, and businesses. 
 There are several interconnected dilemmas facing anyone wishing to incentivize 
the disclosure of product data and promote its meaningful use (see Box  8.1 ). Several 
of these dilemmas have been already presented in more depth in one or more of the 
chapters in the book. The ﬁ rst set of dilemmas—discussed mainly in Chaps.   2 and 
  3 —relate to the organization’s decision to disclose data. As we know, any rate of 
data disclosure incurs some kind of cost. What is thus important for a private com-
pany to answer is whether the cost of disclosure is less than the anticipated beneﬁ ts 
from disclosing the information and what is the necessary and desirable level of 
information that can be provided at a reasonable cost. The answers to these ques-
tions may be different for every organization, but they are also dependent upon what 
others decide to do. An organization’s cost/beneﬁ t calculation might change, for 
example, based on the participation of a critical mass of similar actors or based on 
likely consumer demand for the disclosed data (Ran et al.,  2016 ). 
 Policymakers must consider not just how to promote the disclosure of more 
information but how to improve the quality of the information disclosed—as dis-
cussed in Chaps.   5 and   6 . We know that both government and private data often 
suffers from missing or incomplete information. The complexity of regulatory pro-
cedures means that there is considerable scope for errors and omissions. Government 
inspections of products might be patchy or inaccurately recorded. Compliance 
reports held by product certiﬁ ers may be submitted in hard copy only or in a format 
(such as PDF) that makes it hard to repurpose the information they contain. Missing, 
incomplete, or poorly trusted data is problematic and undermines the fundamental 
goals of smart disclosure, open government, or private sector transparency. The 
poorer the data, the higher the cost of utilizing it for other purposes. Private actors 
or consumers might be uninterested in product data that is not of high quality. 
Broker organizations looking to develop consumer tools may well pass on the 
opportunity to use certain datasets if they calculate that the up-front cost of making 
the information usable is too high. 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

150
 In addition  to creating conditions that might increase information disclosure 
among private actors and ensuring high quality of the disclosed data, policymakers 
must also think about how to make the disclosed data interoperable in order to pro-
mote its meaningful use. As illustrated in Chap.   5 , where we describe our prelimi-
nary prototype, this is an enormous technical challenge, and the success of any 
attempt to solve it rests on the degree of cooperation among the main actors in the 
system. Interoperability requires extensive collaboration between organizations and 
individuals, which ultimately rests on establishing trusted relationships among them 
(see Chaps.   3 and   7 ). 
 Underpinning these dilemmas is the fact that policymakers have to make some 
signiﬁ cant predictions about how individual consumers will behave. Smart disclo-
sure policies imply that better data disclosure will lead to an improved information 
environment for consumers and will impact  consumer choice . Producers and retail-
ers are interested in disclosing product data because of the potential to differentiate 
their products within crowded markets, making them more visible to consumers. 
Providing trusted information about the origins of a product to consumers can 
enhance a company’s sustainable credentials against its competitors. But this only 
works if consumer behavior is truly altered by the disclosure of product data. 
 We do know that consumers’ trust  in the data provided plays an important role in 
whether or not they use a particular system (see Chap.   3 and also Luna-Reyes et al., 
 2013 ; Sayogo, Zhang, Liu, Picazo-Vela, & Luna-Reyes,  2014 ; Sayogo, Zhang, 
Pardo, et al.,  2014 ). Consumers should be protected from fraudulent use of dis-
closed product data. Any governance system promoting product data disclosure 
should consider the relationship between collaborative standards for governing 
product data disclosure and hard law remedies against fraudulent use of product 
data, certiﬁ cations, or labels. 
 Box 8.1: Interconnected Governance  Challenges Around Smart 
Disclosure 
 1.  Promoting disclosure of information among a mixture of public and pri-
vate bodies 
 2.  Promoting participation in efforts to create standardized procedures for 
disclosure and data management 
 3.  Improving the quality and completeness of disclosed information 
 4.  Making supply chain data, government records, and product ratings 
interoperable 
 5.  Incentivizing the use of collaborative standards by supply chain actors and 
developers 
 6.  Predicting and managing the effects of these collaborative standards on 
organizational behavior 
 7.  Predicting and managing the effects of apps using these collaborative stan-
dards on individual behavior 
 8.  Promoting trust in the system by protecting consumer privacy 
H. Jarman et al.

151
 An additional key challenge relating to consumer trust is how to protect con-
sumer privacy in an open and accessible system. How should individual and com-
mercial privacy be balanced with appropriate, and broadly applicable, access to 
information? In order for them to trust the system, consumers should have the right 
to expect that important personal information will be kept private and the right to be 
protected from organizations that want to use disclosed information for direct mar-
keting and scams. 
8.3  Governance Experiments That Can Inform Private 
Sector Transparency 
 Governance is distinct from government in that it refers to a  dynamic process of 
governing that involves coordinated action by a mixture of government and nongov-
ernmental actors to achieve a policy goal (Rosenau,  1995 ,  2000 ). Via various gover-
nance processes, political agendas are debated and determined, decisions are made 
and reﬁ ned, and the resulting policies are implemented, enforced, and evaluated. 
 The concept of governance, as distinct from government, can be particularly use-
ful in areas where lines of authority and accountability are unclear or rapidly chang-
ing. This might be because both public and private sources of funding are used to 
implement a policy, because the problem to be solved cannot be addressed without 
considering the boundaries between different political jurisdictions, or because 
technology is rapidly making existing policies obsolete. All three of these issues 
arise when considering how to make product data public. Such data is likely to be 
held by private organizations but regulated in the public interest, its creation and 
dissemination crosses the boundaries of multiple regional and national governments 
through global supply chains, and the means of gathering, transmitting, disclosing, 
and analyzing it are rapidly changing. 
 No two governance systems are the same, but forms of governance can be easily 
classiﬁ ed into three broad categories: hierarchical governance, market governance, 
and network governance (Powell,  1990 ; Thorelli,  1986 ). The contrasts between 
these three categories can assist us in evaluating how product information is cur-
rently governed and identifying potential improvements to that process. 
 Hierarchical governance is top-down and highly structured, with much of the 
authority to make and enforce policy decisions remaining with government (Börzel 
& Risse,  2010 ; Hill & Lynn,  2004 ). We might refer to this type of governance as 
“direct” regulation, where government agencies write rules and regulations based 
directly on legislation. Nongovernmental actors are consulted in this process, but 
the agency’s decisions are ultimately binding upon them. Rules made through 
 hierarchical governance are legally enforceable and often come with steep penalties 
for noncompliance. 
 In contrast to hierarchical governance, market governance is bottom-up. In mar-
ket governance, governments rely heavily upon competition among private actors 
in order to incentivize desired behavior and achieve a policy goal (Donahue & Nye, 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

152
 2002 ). Governments may rely on market actors to self-regulate, to introduce compe-
tition into sectors dominated by publicly funded service providers, offer incentives 
for certain actions through the taxation system at the organizational or individual 
level, or inﬂ uence businesses through trade policy or investment guarantees. 
 Network governance can be thought of as more horizontal, although all networks 
contain some actors which are more powerful than others (Ansell & Gash,  2007 ; 
Goldsmith & Eggers,  2004 ). This form of governance relies on collaboration 
between peers or peer organizations, both to make policy decisions, and to change 
the behavior of participants. The relevant network might be brought together around 
a common goal or set of norms or drawn from an economic sector, industry, or 
profession. 
 The three  models of governance outlined above are, of course, ideal types. Most 
governance systems contain more than one of these elements, and some contain all 
of them. They are, however, useful analytic tools. Over time, the trend has been for 
governance systems in many policy areas to become less hierarchical and more reli-
ant upon market mechanisms to incentivize certain desired behavior. Governance 
processes have in many cases become more transparent, with consultations between 
government and nongovernmental organizations more visible and accessible to less 
powerful groups. In some cases, particularly in cross-border regions such as the 
European Union and ASEAN, experiments in network governance have multiplied 
in the last decade (see Box  8.2 ). 
 In the context of our project, it is inaccurate to speak of a single form of gover-
nance for international  trad e. A hierarchical global system—created by states, con-
sisting of binding legal rules, and headed by a formal international institution, the 
 World Trade Organization (WTO) —exists  alongside   a growing number of market 
and network-based regulatory and certiﬁ cation systems covering many products 
and services (Luna-Reyes, Andersen, Andersen, Derrick, & Jarman,  2012 ). There is 
a rapidly growing literature on these systems, which include standards produced by 
the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO)  ; on products produced by 
transnational private sector regulators such as ﬁ nancial product rating agencies, 
industry-wide accreditation bodies, international commercial tribunals, and non-
governmental product certiﬁ cation schemes (Auld, Cashore, Balboa, Bozzi, & 
Renckens,  2010 ; Bartley,  2003 ; Büthe,  2010 ; and on voluntary programs Coglianese 
& Nash,  2001 ; Darnall, Potoski, & Prakash,  2010 ). 
 There is an important distinction between how  state and non-state regulatory 
systems treat non-price information. The state-led system intentionally separates 
economic issues from the social and environmental consequences of trade, with the 
aim of identifying and eliminating trade barriers (Jarman,  2009 ; Jarman et al., 
 2011 ). The very purpose of non-state systems, however, is often to combine price 
and non-price information in order to increase the desirability and the value of the 
goods being traded (on coffee, e.g., see Fridell,  2007 ). At the moment, these two 
types of systems are not particularly compatible. As  FIPP  usage grows, however, it 
may become increasingly difﬁ cult, or less desirable, to separate price and non-price 
information, challenging the existing state-led trading system and presenting gov-
ernments with a range of new regulatory choices. 
H. Jarman et al.

153
 The governance of product information reﬂ ects these overall trends in gover-
nance models. Private actors currently hold the majority of information about how 
products are grown, manufactured, distributed, and sold. Consumers can access 
only observable information about the products that they buy, traditionally relying 
heavily on producers, distributors, and retailers, and associated marketing and 
brands, to provide them with information about their purchases. The relationship 
 Box 8.2: The  EU’s Platform for Diet, Nutrition, and Physical Activity 
 The EU’s Platform on Diet, Nutrition and Physical Activity is an example of 
hybrid governance. At the time of the Platform’s launch in March 2005, the 
European Union’s central organizations had little independent authority to 
make public health policies affecting diet and exercise (Jarman,  2009 ). The 
European Commission, one of the EU’s main agenda setting bodies, sought to 
build a coalition of European governments, private retailers and the food 
industry, public health advocacy groups, and consumer NGOs in order to 
“pool expertise and best practice” and act as a “catalyst for action” on diet, 
nutrition, and physical activity (ICF Consulting,  2015 ). Organizations and 
governments were asked to make public pledges regarding diet and exercise 
policy: fast-food companies might pledge to reduce fat and salt content, for 
example, while nonproﬁ t groups could pledge to increase information cam-
paigns regarding the beneﬁ ts of physical activity, or local governments could 
implement plans for increasing access to bike paths. 
 The Platform relied heavily on peer pressure and data disclosure to hold 
organizations and governments to the pledges made, including independent 
reviews of progress that were made public (Hallsworth & Ling,  2007 ). 
Participants made commitments on a range of activities as diverse as improv-
ing food labeling, the reformulation of food products, modifying portion 
sizes, limiting food advertising to children, and implementing lifestyle pro-
grams in the workplace (Hallsworth & Ling,  2007 ). 
 The pledges made were not legally binding, and monitoring progress 
through third-party reviewers was not intended to be a “value judgment on the 
activity itself” but rather a means whereby the completeness and timeliness of 
progress reports could be improved. 
 The success of this pledge and progress monitoring mechanism relied heav-
ily on the “public visibility” of the Platform among nonparticipating organiza-
tions and the public (De la Porte,  2010 ). Policymakers anticipated that NGOs 
would be able to hold companies to their pledges by threatening to damage 
ﬁ rms’ reputations among consumers, but the Platform’s poor public visibility 
meant that the costs of noncompliance were low. Ultimately, many of the 
pledges were not fulﬁ lled, and several headline participants pulled out of the 
program prematurely. The Platform, however, built enough of a consensus 
toward the  establishment  of new EU-wide powers and policies in public health. 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

154
between producers and consumer demand is key to understanding producer deci-
sions to disclose or not to disclose data about their products. 
 Nevertheless, governments play an important role in regulating various aspects 
of both products and supply chains. Government regulations prohibit or  limit the 
inclusion of certain chemicals or ingredients for public health reasons and put limits 
on polluting emissions from the manufacturing process. Government agencies regu-
late markets, brands, advertising, and ﬁ nancial transactions, and products moving 
across borders are inspected by customs agencies. Governments also set rules regu-
lating the information that  companies  provide to consumers about their products, 
mandating some information and overseeing redress procedures addressing misin-
formation. International and supranational organizations (e.g., the WTO or the 
European Union) and the agreements which underpin them (the North American 
Free Trade Agreement) further regulate activities such as trade and other forms of 
economic exchange and promote the coordination and harmonization of domestic 
regulations. 
 Importantly,  nongovernmental regulation of product information has ﬂ ourished 
in recent years as we discussed in more detail in Chap.   4 . Products claiming to have 
distinct non-price characteristics (such as organic status) are certiﬁ ed by third-party 
organizations and government agencies along speciﬁ ed criteria. Certifying organiza-
tions can be regional, national, or international, with the smallest often organized into 
larger networks. The implications of this explosion of interest in product certiﬁ ca-
tion and labeling for smart disclosure and private sector transparency are signiﬁ cant. 
8.4  The Strengths and Weaknesses of Certiﬁ cation 
and Labeling 
 One of the key assumptions of smart disclosure and private sector transparency poli-
cies is that information can be used as a policy tool to manipulate markets (see 
Chap.   2 and Sect.   8.2 above). As we further discussed in Chap.   4 , there are two main 
ways of using information to intervene in markets:  direct and indirect intervention 
(Weiss,  2002 ). Direct intervention occurs when a government collects and distrib-
utes information directly to the public. Indirect interventions occur when other 
actors generate or share the information that is required or enabled by the govern-
ment. Product labeling is one example of an indirect intervention. 
 Indirect interventions such as product labeling schemes can either be mandated 
by governments or can remain voluntary. Mandatory policies or standards require 
the compliance of all market actors without any exception. These policies are sup-
ported by government regulation through a process of hierarchical governance (see 
Sect.   8.3 , above). For example, the US government required all commodity product 
manufacturers to attach nutrition labels to their products based on the Nutritional 
Labeling and Educational Act of 1990. 1 Another example is the Alcohol Beverage 
1  http://www.fda.gov/ICECI/Inspections/InspectionGuides/ucm074948.htm 
H. Jarman et al.

155
Labeling Act of 1988, which requires two mandatory warnings to be placed on 
alcoholic beverage containers. 
 Voluntary policies allow market actors to adopt or ignore measures as they see 
ﬁ t. Most labeling and certiﬁ cation regimes are voluntary procedures whereby orga-
nizations complying with a certain standard or set of standards may attach a label 
into their product. Organizations use such labels to signify their credibility to con-
sumers regarding claims they make on certain issues such as environmental sustain-
ability or human rights. 
 Voluntary policies exist under two different types of governance regime. Under 
hybrid systems of governance, voluntary standards can be created or enabled by 
government but administered by an independent body. For example, the government 
 of Quebec legislatively authorized an independent organization—CARTV—to 
monitor labeling systems regarding the origin and authenticity of products sold 
within the province. 
 Under market governance regimes, standards are “buyer driven.” This means that 
their adoption among organizations, and the rate of compliance, depends on market 
demand for the standards (Cashore, Auld, & Newsom,  2004 ). These kinds of stan-
dards tend to proliferate within markets due to asymmetric information between 
consumers and producers (Jahn, Schramm, & Spiller,  2005 ). 
 As we discussed in Chap.   2 , under conditions of asymmetric information, con-
sumers have limited ability to assess product attributes, especially credence and/or 
quasi-credence attributes. Credence attributes (such as the claim that a brand of 
toothpaste provides plaque reduction) are difﬁ cult for the consumer to assess, even 
after using the product. However, they can be veriﬁ able through inspection by exter-
nal parties (Albersmeier, Schulze, Jahn, & Spiller,  2009 ).  Plaque reduction , for 
example, could be veriﬁ ed through scientiﬁ c testing. Quasi-credence or “Potemkin 
attributes” (Jahn et al.,  2005 ) are similarly difﬁ cult for the consumer to evaluate but 
are related to internal production methods and processes (Albersmeier et al.,  2009 ). 
Methods for evaluating quasi-credence claims are still being explored. A claim that 
a brand of organic coffee beans protects the environment more than a nonorganic 
brand is a quasi-credence, or Potemkin attribute. This claim can be evaluated by a 
third-party organization via a process of certiﬁ cation, with this process reﬂ ected in 
the product labeling. 
 As an alternative to relying on brand recognition alone, the main objective of 
voluntary standards is therefore to provide assurance to consumers regarding the 
credibility of quasi-credence claims represented by product labels. The  ISO 14020 
standard , an internationally recognized information standard established via a pro-
cess of expert deliberation, classiﬁ es certiﬁ cations and labeling schemes based on 
the extent and quality of information veriﬁ ability in the label. The ISO 14020 
divides the  certiﬁ cations scheme into 2 :
2  For further comparison among the three types, refer to  http://ec.europa.eu/environment/ecolabel/
about_ecolabel/reports/erm.pdf 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

156
 Type I labeling scheme (ISO 14024) : a labeling scheme that provides a seal of 
approval based on the veriﬁ cation of attributes by independent third-party certi-
ﬁ ers or veriﬁ ers. An example of this type I labeling schemes are the third-party 
certiﬁ cations such as Fairtrade, UTZ, Rainforest Alliance, and others. 
 Type II labeling scheme (ISO 14021, 14022) : a labeling scheme that is self-declared 
by private organization without a veriﬁ cation from independent third-party certi-
ﬁ cation. An example of this  type  of labeling is the C.A.F.E. Practice by Starbucks. 
 Type III labeling scheme (ISO 14025) : a labeling scheme that targets more toward 
business-to-business relationships. The claims for this type of labeling consist of 
quantiﬁ ed  product  information based on product life-cycle assessment (LCA). 
This labeling scheme aims to provide common label parameters and methodol-
ogy that would enable the comparability  between products. 
 The rapid growth in the number of different types of labeling schemes and third- 
party certiﬁ cations have led researchers to question the utility of labels in assisting 
 consumer choice in terms of both their credibility and quality (Raynolds, Murray, & 
Heller,  2007 ). The utility of these labels can be examined from three perspectives: 
the coverage or scope of the label, the governance of the certiﬁ cation scheme, and 
the assessment processes used when deciding whether or not to give permission to 
use the label. In Chap.   4  , we presented a detailed review of current labels in the 
market and their assessment. Our review concluded that certiﬁ cations emphasize 
transparency, legitimacy, and accountability of their practices. Majority of the certi-
ﬁ cation and labeling schemes openly publicize their standards and principles to 
demonstrate the transparency of their governance process. They also use a number 
of approaches to assert the legitimacy of their practice, such as accreditation from 
reputable national or international organization. They put emphasis on the demo-
cratic nature of their governance processes, such as strong collaboration with NGOs 
and producers during the standard setting phase. Unfortunately, information about 
the steps certiﬁ cations are taking to increase their trustworthiness is not readily 
apparent to the consumer. The information is unavailable either because consumers 
need to expand signiﬁ cant effort to research this information or some of this infor-
mation might be proprietary. In addition, even if this information was available to 
the consumers, the magnitude of this information might deter consumers from using 
it as a basis for their purchasing decisions. 
 As we have proposed in Chaps.   5 and   6 of the book, one way to address these 
issues is to build an interoperable data platform that would enable private sector 
actors to share information and data through the use of agreed-upon semantic and 
ontology standards. Such platform can enable data owners and producers to make 
their information readily available by standardizing and simplifying the process for 
data publishing. The platform can thus promote the creation of an ecology of pro-
ducers, consumers, and certiﬁ ers that produce, prepare, and consume information 
that is designed to empower a consumer to make a purchasing decision consistent 
with their values. 
 Development of a system based on an interoperable data platform designed to 
support private sector transparency should follow these  principles :
H. Jarman et al.

157
 1.  Human collaboration as the foundation of a data commons . The ﬁ rst goal of any 
data sharing initiative should be to create good working relationships between its 
participants. In bringing actors from very different ﬁ elds together, collaborations 
should aim to build consensus as to the goals and direction of the project, focus-
ing on the people involved as well as technological solutions. Chap.   7 in the book 
suggests to pay attention to key values of participants (industrial, civic, market 
and domestic) to be able to reach such agreements.  
 2.  Creation of transparent and open data systems . Participants should share the 
goal of increasing data transparency through an open system that is collectively 
owned and managed. 
 3.  Maintenance of brands and promote market differentiation . Any collaboration 
should be ﬂ exible enough to enable private commercial actors to maintain the 
values of their brands, and ideally, allow these actors to improve their differentia-
tion in the market by enabling them to promote the products of the data com-
mons to their customers.  
 4.  Ensurance of consumer protection and privacy . Any data collaboration should 
protect the rights of consumers to keep their personal information private. 
Consumers should be protected from organizations which might engage in mar-
keting scams. 
 5.  Support of equal access to decision - making . Any collaboration should strive 
from the outset to include  representation  from groups and individuals who have 
fewer opportunities to access the shared information and to give these groups 
equal decision-making power. These groups might include consumer or patient 
representatives, new or small providers or producers, or grassroots and commu-
nity groups.    
 Using these ﬁ ve principles, we can outline ﬁ ve actions to encourage disclosure 
of private data. The following sections will describe these actions in more detail:
 1.  Creation of a data commons . A group of interested organizations and individuals 
collaborate to create a “data commons”—a set of common information that is 
shared among the group in order to achieve collectively agreed goals. A subset 
of this information is released to the wider public via an API. One of the key 
tasks for the group is to collectively agree on the scope of the data commons and 
the extent of data to be publicly released.  
 2.  Progressive release model . Although the initial amount of data in the commons 
may be small, participants commit to progressively increase the amount of data 
that they release, setting goals and benchmarks for this process which are 
approved by the group and made public. 
 3.  Peer review of process ,  supported by “digital proof”  lemon laws . A peer-reviewed 
process among the participants monitors the amount and quality of the data 
released and puts pressure on organizations which fall  behind  on releasing data 
against their stated benchmarks. To protect against falsiﬁ ed information, a claim 
by a member against one of the data providers triggers a review. If the review 
process determines the information is false, there is a legal duty for the organiza-
tion to correct the data. Existing regulations are reviewed to gauge their ability to 
support this system. New regulations are created if necessary. 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

158
 4.  Rewriting of organization DNA . Participating organizations rewrite their found-
ing documents (e.g., articles of association) to reﬂ ect the group’s consensus 
regarding the goals and key principles of data sharing. 
 5.  Balancing of power structures . The group’s decision-making structure promotes 
the representation and inclusion of weaker actors in group decision-making. 
Efforts are made to minimize the resource burden of participation. Members 
make formal public statements about their relationships with, and representation 
of, outside groups. The group publishes and promotes model partnership agree-
ments which others can use. 
8.5  Collaborating to Create a Data Commons 
 Chapters   3 and   5 of this book describe a platform enabled by the I-Choose architec-
ture. The creation of such a platform, as suggested by the research presented in this 
book, requires at least three components: (1) a series of standards to share  data in an 
interoperable and usable way (I-Choose  ontology ), (2) a series of standard applica-
tion programing interfaces (APIs) to allow developers to create applications and 
take advantage of the information being  shared , and (3) a collaborative governance 
system involving consumers, government, NGOs, industry associations, etc. to 
facilitate the creation and maintenance of both sets of standards. Our conceptual 
 data sharing architecture is shown in Fig.  8.1 .
 Fig. 8.1   Two tiers of  data  sharing (Luna-Reyes et al.,  2012 ) 
 
H. Jarman et al.

159
 In the data commons, the participating members will agree to an interface and data 
speciﬁ cations for a web service that each member must implement to be considered 
part of the community. The standard for data exchange will be an encapsulated set of 
internal (i.e., community) web  APIs  . These community speciﬁ cations will be a deﬁ ned 
set of Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) request messages coupled with the deﬁ ni-
tion of the structure of the expected response messages. The data common’s standard 
will specify data responses that are complete, consistent, and accurate and will evolve 
over time based on the community’s desires. The standard will also specify the stan-
dardized web port for data exchange and the exact format of the requests and responses 
(e.g., Extensible Markup Language (XML), JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)). 
 Each participant in the  data commons community will be responsible for imple-
menting the agreed-upon standard by developing and deploying the web service 
speciﬁ cation. This will allow each organization the ability to maintain their own 
database systems but facilitate the free ﬂ ow of information between the community 
members. The producers will issue data keys to other members of the community, 
which will control access to the data commons. Each producer will be able to ensure 
the privacy and integrity of their data, and members of the community can self- 
regulate and verify other members by simply sending the agreed-upon data requests 
to members’ web services and then examining the returned responses to ensure 
compliance with the standard. 
 A similar process will be applied to provide access to third parties and the public. 
A  “non-keyed” data request format will be published as the standard, which will 
allow the release of a subset of data to noncommunity members. The advantage of 
using these  web service APIs is that it will allow for development of “mash-ups” 
using the public data from the community for easy comparison and consumption. A 
mash-up is an application or web page that combines and uses data from multiple 
sources. Mash-ups can provide fast and easy integration using the published com-
munity APIs and data sources from the various producers. This architecture will 
also allow mobile device developers to create mobile applications that leverage all 
of these new sources of information. 
 Of course, a reliable and trustworthy system requires, as it was suggested in Chap. 
  2 , peer-reviewed mechanisms to encourage the disclosure of product data. In the fol-
lowing paragraphs, we outline our strategies for peer review within the data com-
mons and the progressive release of supply chain data through an iterative process. 
 Agreeing on the  necessary  data standards need not involve imposition. Handling 
this problem requires delicate negotiation and collaboration within a framework 
that engenders trust between organizations, as well as between consumers. Any 
governance system, which aims to promote  FIPP   regimes , will need to bear differ-
ent conﬁ gurations, participants and values in the supply chain as we discussed in 
Chap.   7 . Conﬂ icting values between supply chain participants may prevent any 
cooperation. Overzealous regulation may turn off producers and retailers if the price 
is not right. At the same time, government-funding constraints critically shape regu-
latory capacity and direction. A key example is recent legislation 3 directing the  FDA 
3  FDA Food Safety Modernization Act. 2011. H.R. 2751.  http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/
bdquery/z?d111:H.R.2751 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

160
to improve product traceability, with the particular goal of improving food and drug 
safety. The FDA may not currently have the capacity or resources to make this man-
date work. A danger exists that such systems will be seen as purely or mostly reve-
nue raising mechanisms, charging large registration fees for entry, with little real 
oversight exercised. For this reason, as we explained in Chap.   2 , focus group partici-
pants stressed the need for broad participation in, and ownership of, any governance 
structure. 
 Governments already have well-established standards for  public and interest 
group consultation on trade, public health, and environmental issues—requirements 
to publish their actions and hold public meetings—as well as established advisory 
group systems that bring select stakeholders into regular contact with ofﬁ cials. 
Some of these public meetings, such as recent meetings to discuss the FSMA, 
already make extensive use of online tools. But great potential exists for govern-
ments to do more to bring consumers into the negotiating process—to make them 
part of the decision-making structure, not just an adjunct to it. For trade in goods, 
this means building a system that encourages broad consumer participation in for-
mulating expectations for how corporations should act, incentives to support com-
pliance with those expectations, and encouraging innovation among producers, 
suppliers, and entrepreneurs. We envision an iterative approach for developing and 
technically implementing the data sharing standards (see Fig.  8.2 ). The  iterative 
development process together with the concept of a data commons can be also 
applied to other domains besides sustainable coffee supply chains. For instance, the 
 Fig. 8.2   Iterative process for  policy and technical standard development and implementation 
 
H. Jarman et al.

161
federal government is currently incentivizing the creation of health information 
exchanges (HIEs) that would allow medical and public health data to be collected 
and made easily accessible  to  patients and healthcare professionals. One of the big-
gest challenges facing the creation of health information exchanges that are sustain-
able in the longer term is establishing collaborative relationships between fragmented 
private actors in the health sector. Creating a governance structure based on the 
principle of data commons could help with overcoming this barrier. The same could 
be said for an application in trade policy development, where such process could be 
used to streamline the production of a classiﬁ cation system which harmonizes prod-
uct or service codes among the three countries of North America, which can cur-
rently take years to develop.
8.6  The Relationship Between Collaborative Standards 
and Hard  Law      
 In order for any governance system to work effectively, participants must work 
together to achieve an acceptable balance between incentives for action and penal-
ties for noncompliance. While hierarchical governance systems are deﬁ ned in part 
by their clear lines of authority and binding regulations, most market and  hybrid 
governance systems fall under the category of “soft law,” meaning that while they 
create ofﬁ cial documents such as guidelines, benchmarks, or collaborative stan-
dards, these commitments are not binding on the actors that make them—noncom-
pliance cannot be judicially challenged. 
 Soft law is frequently used where boundaries between legal jurisdictions are 
messy or make problem solving difﬁ cult, such as in  international contexts . UN reso-
lutions and EU communications are examples of soft law. Not all international law 
is easily classiﬁ ed in this way—the NAFTA side agreements on labor rights and the 
environment are technically binding on North American governments but are 
largely voluntary in practice (Kirton & Trebilcock,  2004 ). Nevertheless, any pro-
spective governance system for managing product information must take this bal-
ance between soft and hard law, between consensus and binding commitments, into 
account. 
 Importantly, soft law carries  with  it the expectation that it may one day be trans-
posed into hard law. In other words, that the consensus built through collaboration, 
as expressed in the standards or guidelines created, will form a platform for future 
legislation. This is an important expectation, because there are things that soft law 
cannot do or does not do well. In particular, soft law does not protect consumers 
from organizations who are not just noncompliant but that are actively trying to do 
harm. This might include the fraudulent use of product labels, attempts to acquire 
personal information and abuse this information for proﬁ t, or other misleading 
product claims. Coffee producers in Mexico, as well as certiﬁ ers, for example, 
expressed their interest of having harder regulations regarding fair trade similarly to 
the clear rules of organic markets. 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

162
 In order for any private sector transparency initiative to be credible and widely 
used, the governance system created must be  abl e to relate soft law collaborative 
standards to existing hard law. In the United States, for example, there are many 
governmental entities that regulate green marketing claims, including the  National 
Advertising Division of the Better Business Bureau (NAD) , Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Department of 
Energy, National Association of Attorney Generals (NAAG), US Department of 
Agriculture (USDA), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA is the 
investigative/ enforcement arm of the NAD. NAD “seeks to ensure that claims made 
in national advertising are truthful, accurate and not  misleading . It requires that 
objective product performance claims made in advertising be supported by compe-
tent and reliable evidence” (Protecting consumers from false and deceptive adver-
tising of weight-loss products,  2014 ). The  NAD has issued nearly 30 decisions 
involving a wide range of “green” marketing claims, “often requiring the claims be 
modiﬁ ed or discontinued” as “each NAD case involves evaluation of the claims 
made in the advertising and labeling and the supporting evidence provided by the 
advertiser” (Peeler,  2008 ). Compliance with  the NAD is voluntary, but they enjoy a 
high rate of compliance with their green marketing decisions. 
 Currently, green labeling is prosecuted under the false advertising laws, statutes, 
and regulations. The legal remedies for false advertising vary depending on statute 
and forum but may include injunction, damages/restitution, recall, corrective adver-
tising, or fencing in (the FTC uses this remedy to inform industry what they think 
their rule should be). The  most likely class actions are cases in which the consumer 
was misled by a speciﬁ c green label and paid a premium for the alleged beneﬁ t that 
was fraudulent. The most straightforward claim by a plaintiff is to assert that the 
defendant’s label has violated  FDA regulations and marketed a product that could 
mislead a reasonable consumer. 
 The  FTC Green  Guides (Green Guides) are the FTC’s administrative interpreta-
tion of the law as applied to environmental  claims . The Green Guides are not 
 independently legally enforceable under federal law—the enforcement provision is 
under Sect.  8.5 of the FTC Act, which prohibits “unfair and deceptive” trade prac-
tices. But many states have incorporated the Green Guides as law, including 
New York, who has adopted them as to “recycled,” “recyclable,” or “reusable” 
claims. The application of the false advertising legal framework to labels such as 
organic, fair trade, and Rainforest Alliance is similar despite the fact that only the 
term organic is speciﬁ cally certiﬁ ed and regulated by the federal agency, the  USDA . 
8.7  Concluding Remarks: Encouraging  Private Sector 
Transparency 
 We have argued that there are three key elements that play a signiﬁ cant role in 
increasing the likely success of a product data disclosure system: the extent to which 
organizations can and do participate in the system, the extent to which individual 
H. Jarman et al.

163
consumers and other interested nonparticipant organizations can access information 
disclosed via the system, and mechanisms which improve the extent to which the 
system and the data it produces can be trusted. 
 These three elements—participation, access, and trust—are interconnected. 
Participation relates closely to the  “institutional visibility” of the system, the extent 
to which potential participants are aware of the system and its goals. Access relates 
closely to the “public visibility” of the system, the extent to which nonparticipant 
organizations and the public are aware of it. Taken together, these two factors are 
essential components of creating trust in governance experiments and the data that 
they produce—in creating a legitimate governance process and in creating legiti-
mate policy outputs from that process. 
 Broad participation is key to the success of any attempt to increase product data 
disclosure or private sector transparency. By the term “broad participation,” we are 
not just referring to having a critical mass of businesses in a particular sector or 
industry as participants but to the range and type of actors which are active partici-
pants in the system. A broader range of actors improves the potential for innovation. 
It also prevents regulatory capture. 
 SMEs, small developers, and other groups may lack expertise and need support 
to participate in the scheme, while producers and suppliers with fewer resources 
may have limited access to the Internet or technology. Current use of information 
systems and technologies varies in an important way not only across market actors 
but also among other potential members of collaborative networks such as con-
sumer groups or other NGOs. For instance, coffee cooperatives traceability systems 
of organic and fair trade coffee are very carefully designed paper-based system, 
while retailers like Walmart are heavily investing in advanced hardware and sophis-
ticated information systems. 
 Scholarship analyzing interest group   behavior shows that organizations with lim-
ited resources use networking and coalition building strategies in order to  counteract 
their resource deﬁ ciencies to some degree. Advocacy networks and social move-
ments frequently include coalitions of likeminded organizations working toward 
common goals and sharing relevant information. Small business and professional 
associations replicate this strategy for smaller commercial actors and individuals 
with common professional norms. 
 Any governance  mechanism encouraging private sector transparency should 
consider this dynamic. Producers and suppliers with fewer resources should be 
incentivized to act collectively in order to overcome these difﬁ culties. The gover-
nance system might incorporate the promotion and facilitation of collective agree-
ments between organizations with different levels of resources that are participating 
in the same data commons, which set out clear and equal relationships between the 
parties. 
 One further barrier to participation and access is the ability of consumers to 
access information in their own language. Any governance system should consider 
the need to promote crowd-sourced translation of various data. These language bar-
riers include some important legal requirements in some cases. In Canada, for 
example, there are legal requirements to translate ofﬁ cial information into both 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

164
French and English. Translation may impose additional cost burdens in jurisdictions 
with multiple language requirements. 
 In the long run, governance structures should promote North American partner-
ship agreements between organizations, which lay out what the expectations are for 
participants. The aim here would be to promote model agreements to participating 
certiﬁ ers and supply chain operators, producers, and other participating groups that 
draw on innovative experiments in intellectual property law and practice. While it 
may or may not be desirable to require such agreements, participants in the  NATC 
process could at least become model organizations, putting pressure on each other 
to address these ownership issues and sharing best practice. Given the current enor-
mous resource cost to companies of acquiring and defending patents, any  FIPP 
governance structure should embrace the potential inherent in these experiments. To 
be successful, this governance mechanism should respect several principles:
•  A living set of process management standards for providing, handling, and using 
product data. 
•  Common minimum information standards and reporting requirements for sus-
tainable goods. 
•  Aim to overcome information asymmetries through gradually increasing access 
to supply chain information.  
•  Achieved through collaboration between regulators/private sector/consumer 
champions, who publicly set benchmarks and note progress toward those 
benchmarks. 
•  Regular peer and consumer review of standards and progress toward them. 
•  Certiﬁ cation of companies who regularly meet the requirements during peer and 
consumer review. 
•  Drafting  and promotion of model “partnership agreements,” which govern the 
relationships between strong and weak links of the supply chain (i.e., make sure 
that the producers don’t get screwed). 
•  Data commons as a means to promote innovative, more open approaches to 
information ownership and intellectual property—evidence is that competition 
between companies gives way eventually to industry standardization. 
 One way to push this  vision forward might be to establish a North American 
Traceability Council (NATC) with representation from  stakeholders . Its members 
should include—at the least—government representation, sustainability and green 
supply chain experts, industry associations, and consumer organizations, with man-
datory  representation from or on behalf of producers and consumers with fewer 
resources. The NATC should be as “virtual” as possible to minimize costs to partici-
pants. The Council would work together to set the binding minimum information 
standards that will allow the system to function, based on existing information stan-
dards for traceability in the three countries. 
 The  NATC could then oversee the negotiation and implementation of a  “virtual 
ISO” which is not just negotiated in private by interested parties but is regularly 
reviewed by NATC and “consumer champions,” active consumers who participate 
regularly in reviewing products and organizations. The ISO would become a living 
H. Jarman et al.

165
set of process management standards for providing, handling, and using product 
data. They would be regularly updated with input from stakeholders, consumers, 
and regulators. Companies, NGOs, or government bodies could be certiﬁ ed under 
this ISO if they consistently meet the requirements for peer and consumer review. 
Evidence from scholars of global policy suggests that ISO standards, such as ISO 
9000, are popular with companies as means to differentiate themselves in the mar-
ketplace and seen as both ﬂ exible and fairly objective. 
 Within the framework of the virtual ISO, companies could nominate key sub-
stantive parameters and set benchmarks against them. Participating companies 
would be free to use the aggregate information in their product marketing, creating 
their own labels and so on, but under advisement from the NATC and guidelines 
established through the ISO. Results of peer review would become incorporated 
into future versions of the ISO. This is not a pipe dream—elements of this system 
are currently being implemented in several other countries. 
 This  peer-reviewed process would be matched by consumer review. Information 
from participating consumers acting in social networks—such as product and com-
pany reviews or location information enabling better supply chain mapping—could 
contribute to the evidence base for future versions of the ISO and for benchmarking 
exercises. Consumers could opt to comment on and review products, producers, and 
other suppliers. They would beneﬁ t by seeing what others have recommended and 
use this to assist their purchasing choices. Companies, on the other hand, would 
gain the opportunity to “test” the sustainability of their products among participat-
ing consumers and create better connections. NGOs could submit information into 
the system about certiﬁ cation, inspection, and production practices. Reviews and 
 reports would be veriﬁ ed and ranked by other participants. Consumers who 
 submitted highly ranked product reviews consistently would become “consumer 
champions.” Results from consumer comments could be aggregated and accessed 
by all participants. Signiﬁ cant consumer concerns would be addressed through the 
peer- reviewed process. 
 References 
 Albersmeier, F., Schulze, H., Jahn, G., & Spiller, A. (2009). The reliability of third-party certiﬁ ca-
tion in the food chain: From checklists to risk-oriented auditing.  Food Control, 20 (10), 927–
935.   http://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2009.01.010  . 
 Ansell, C., & Gash, A. (2007). Collaborative governance in theory and practice.  Journal of Public 
Administration Research and Theory, 18 (4), 543–571.   http://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/mum032  . 
 Auld, G., Cashore, B., Balboa, C., Bozzi, L., & Renckens, S. (2010). Can technological innova-
tions improve private regulation in the global economy.  Business and Politics, 12 (3), 1–42. 
 Bartley, T. (2003). Certifying forests and factories: States, social movements, and the rise of pri-
vate regulation in the apparel and forest products ﬁ elds.  Politics & Society, 31 (3), 433–464. 
 Börzel, T. A., & Risse, T. (2010). Governance without a state: Can it work?: Governance without a 
state.  Regulation & Governance, 4 (2), 113–134.   http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1748-5991.2010.01076.x  . 
 Büthe, T. (2010). Private regulation in the global economy: A (p)review.  Business and Politics, 
12 (3).   http://doi.org/10.2202/1469-3569.1328  . 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

166
 Cashore, B. W., Auld, G., & Newsom, D. (2004).  Governing through markets: Forest certiﬁ cation 
and the emergence of non-state authority . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Coglianese, C., & Nash, J. (Eds.). (2001).  Regulating from the inside: Can environmental manage-
ment systems achieve policy goals? Washington, DC: Resources for the Future. 
 Darnall, N., Potoski, M., & Prakash, A. (2010). Sponsorship matters: Assessing business participa-
tion in government- and industry-sponsored voluntary environmental programs.  Journal of 
Public Administration Research and Theory, 20 (2), 283–307.   http://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/
mup014  . 
 De la Porte, C. (2010). State of the art. Overview of concepts, indicators and methodologies used 
for analyzing the social OMC.  Overview of concepts, indicators and methodologies used for 
analyzing the social OMC (November 1, 2010) . REC-WP working paper on the reconciliation 
of work and welfare in Europe, (15/10). Retrieved from   http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.
cfm?abstract_id=1711245   
 Donahue, J. D., & Nye, J. S. (2002).  Market-based governance: supply side, demand side, upside, 
and downside . Cambridge, MA/Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. Retrieved from 
  http://www.brookings.edu/research/books/2002/market-based-governance  
 Fridell, G. (2007).  Fair trade coffee: The prospects and pitfalls of market-driven social justice 
(Repr.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
 Goldsmith, S., & Eggers, W. D. (2004).  Governing by network: the new shape of the public sector . 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press. 
 Hallsworth, M., & Ling, T. (2007).  The EU platform on diet, physical activity and health . Retrieved 
from   http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR474.html  
 Hill, C. J., & Lynn, L. E. (2004). Is hierarchical governance in decline? Evidence from empirical 
research.  Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 15 (2), 173–195.   http://doi.
org/10.1093/jopart/mui011  . 
 ICF Consulting Services. (2015).  EU plataform on diet, physical activity and health – 2014 Annual 
report. 
 Jahn, G., Schramm, M., & Spiller, A. (2005). The reliability of certiﬁ cation: Quality labels as a 
consumer policy tool.  Journal of Consumer Policy, 28 (1), 53–73.   http://doi.org/10.1007/
s10603-004-7298-6  . 
 Jarman, H. (2009).  Imagined commodities: “Trade and” policies in the European Union and 
United States . London School of Economics and Political Science, UK. Retrieved from   http://
etheses.lse.ac.uk/2330/   
 Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Whitmore, A., Picazo-Vela, S., Andersen, D. L., et al. 
(2011).  I-choose: Consumer choice, digital government, and sustainability in North America . 
Presented at the APPAM Fall Research Conference, Washington, DC.  
 Kirton, J. J., & Trebilcock, M. J. (Eds.). (2004).  Hard choices and soft law: Voluntary Standards 
in Global Trade, Environment and Social Governance . Toronto, Canada: Ashgate Publishing, 
Ltd. Retrieved from   http://www.gowerpub.com/pdf/SamplePages/Hard_Choices_Soft_Law_
Intro.pdf   
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Andersen, D. F., Andersen, D. L., Derrick, D., & Jarman, H. (2012). Full infor-
mation product pricing regimes: Policy implications for US-Mexico sustainable commerce. In 
 Puentes Symposium , Houston, TX. Citeseer. Retrieved from   http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/view-
doc/download?doi=10.1.1.310.4882&rep=rep1&type=pdf   
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Roy, R., Andersen, D. F., Whitmore, A., & Andersen, D. L. (2013). 
Information strategies to support full information product pricing: The role of trust.  Information 
Polity, 18 (1), 75–91. 
 Peeler, L. (2008, May 19).  Green packaging workshop – Comment, project no. P084200 . Retrieved 
from 
  https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/ﬁ les/documents/public_comments/2008/04/534743-
00053.pdf   
 Powell, W. W. (1990). Neither market nor hierarchy: Network forms of organization.  Research in 
Organizational Behavior, 12 , 295–336. 
 Protecting consumers from false and deceptive advertising of weight-loss products, § senate com-
mittee on commerce, science and transportation. (2014).  
H. Jarman et al.

167
 Ran, W., Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Andersen, D. L., Tayi, G. K., et al. (2016). 
Supply-chain transparency and governance systems: Market penetration of the I-choose sys-
tem. In J. Zhang, L. F. Luna-Reyes, T. A. Pardo, & D. S. Sayogo (Eds.),  Information, models, 
and sustainability: Policy informatics in the age of big data and open government . Basel, 
Switzerland: Springer. 
 Raynolds, L. T., Murray, D., & Heller, A. (2007). Regulating sustainability in the coffee sector: A 
comparative analysis of third-party environmental and social certiﬁ cation initiatives. 
 Agriculture and Human Values, 24 (2), 147–163. 
 Rosenau, J. (2000). The governance of fragmegration: Neither a world republic nor a global inter-
state system.  Studia Diplomatica, 53 (5), 15–40. 
 Rosenau, J. N. (1995). Governance in the twenty-ﬁ rst Century.  Global Governance, 1 (1), 13–43. 
 Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Liu, H., Picazo-Vela, S., & Luna-Reyes, L. (2014). Examining trust as 
key drivers in smart disclosure for sustainable consumption: The case of I-choose. In 
 Proceedings of the 15th annual international conference on digital government research 
(pp. 137–146). New York: ACM.   http://doi.org/10.1145/2612733.2612747  . 
 Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Pardo, T. A., Tayi, G. K., Hrdinova, J., Andersen, D. F., et al. (2014). 
Going beyond open data: Challenges and motivations for smart disclosure in ethical consump-
tion.  Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic Commerce Research, 9 (2), 1–16.   http://doi.
org/10.4067/S0718-18762014000200002  . 
 Thorelli, H. B. (1986). Networks: Between markets and hierarchies.  Strategic Management 
Journal, 7 (1), 37–51.   http://doi.org/10.1002/smj.4250070105  . 
 van der Laan, S. (2009). The role of theory in explaining motivation for corporate social disclo-
sures: Voluntary disclosures vs “solicited” disclosures.  Australasian Accounting, Business and 
Finance Journal ,  3 (4), 15–29. Retrieved from   http://ro.uow.edu.au/aabfj/vol3/iss4/2  
 Weiss, J. A. (2002). Public information. In L. M. Salamon (Ed.),  The tools of government: A guide 
to the new governance (pp. 217–254). New York: Oxford University Press. 
8 Encouraging Private Sector Transparency: Policies to Support Disclosure…

169
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0
 Appendix A 
Methodology 
 A.1. Introduction 
 The research that supports this paper emerges from the ongoing work of  the      North 
American Digital Government Working Group, a consortium of researchers explor-
ing the impact of product labeling, data architectures, and government-sponsored 
information policies on the market share of organic, fair-trade, and eco-friendly prod-
ucts in the NAFTA region. In these alternative markets, price is often complemented 
with information, transmitted through trusting networks or certiﬁ cation labels that 
convey the conditions under which a product is produced and distributed. 
 The project started with a preliminary exploration in which we completed a num-
ber of case studies from  the  NAFTA region (Luna-Reyes et al.,  2013 ), where produc-
ers created and sustained a FIPP network to deliver products to end consumers with a 
value-adding information package that allowed them to appeal to speciﬁ c consumer 
preferences for green products while at the same time realizing a price premium. This 
case-based work reinforced the experimental work of Komiak and Benbasat ( 2006 ) 
and demonstrated the importance of trust in FIPP networks and in the adoption and 
use of recommendation agents by end consumers. 
 Our initial explorations made evident the interest in improving sustainability in 
the region as supported by important side agreements to the  North American Free 
Trade Agreement (NAFTA)  oriented to ensure that ﬁ rms active in the NAFTA 
region observe fair labor practices and strive to minimize the environmental impacts 
of their activities—(1) the  North American Agreement on Environmental 
Cooperation (NAAEC) and (2) the  North American Agreement on Labor 
Cooperation (NAALC) . The Commission for Environmental Cooperation and the 
Commission for Labor Cooperation are two trilateral organizations established 
within NAFTA to monitor and promote these agreements. 
 The purpose of the research project was then to explore a set of government- 
sponsored product labeling and information policies that may have the potential to 

170
supplement a compliance-enforcement approach with a more market-based volun-
tary approach that relies on shifts in producer and consumer behavior to signiﬁ -
cantly expand the share of worker and environmentally friendly products traded 
within the NAFTA region. We proposed that the market share for such products can 
mirror the recent rapid expansion in “organic” food products that followed the 
development and implementation of organic food labeling and packaging standards 
led by federal and provincial governments in the United States, Canada, and Mexico. 
 We decided to start our exploration of FIPP networks with coffee because  the 
 NAFTA region is both an important market for coffee and an important coffee pro-
ducer. In addition, there exists in the NAFTA region a variety of coffee production 
practices reﬂ ecting values such as fair wages and environmentally friendly or 
organic production. Finally, coffee is produced within a commodity-driven supply 
chain whose pricing dynamics have been well studied and hence is amenable to a 
simulation approach that can explore the features of alternative production strate-
gies in a ﬂ exible “what if” approach. 
  As   shown in Fig.  A.1 , the research program involved several interrelated activities: 
we conducted ﬁ eld work, developed simulation models, and created and evaluated an 
 Fig. A.1  Overview  of  FIPP research program components and their relationships 
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

171
information prototype to make policy recommendations. Although it was not part of 
the initial plan, we also conducted a survey to better understand how information 
packages in product labels were connected to different aspects of trust in the informa-
tion included on it. In the following paragraphs, we brieﬂ y describe each of the com-
ponents in this research program.
 A.2. Fieldwork 
 A.2.1. Methods 
 The ﬁ eldwork component of our research project was intensive on interviewing. We 
interviewed multiple stakeholders along the coffee supply chain following a multi-
ple case study approach (Yin,  1994 ), in which the analysis of individual cases is 
followed by an analysis aimed at comparing and contrasting their similarities and 
differences. To identify participants for the study, we followed a snowball sample 
approach, starting with interviewees from coffee associations who were then asked 
to identify other potential candidates. This process was reiterated with each con-
secutive interview. The semi-structured interview protocol included questions about 
information sharing, conventions on quality, characteristics of an information stan-
dard, motivations, barriers, and potential conﬂ icts to share information across the 
supply chain. Each interview lasted approximately 1 h. The interview protocol was 
created originally in English by the project team. In order to be used in Mexico, the 
original protocol was translated into Spanish with the intervention of four project 
participants who were ﬂ uent in both English and Spanish. 
 We conducted 44 interviews in Mexico, the United States, Canada, and other 
countries such as Indonesia. Interviews took place in different moments during 
project development. We interviewed producers, intermediaries, roasters, and retail-
ers. In addition, we interviewed some participants that were involved in more than 
one process, working, for example, as intermediaries and roasters, or more inte-
grated operations that included production, intermediation, roasting, and ﬁ nal sales. 
We also interviewed members of coffee associations and certiﬁ ers. All interviews 
were recorded and transcribed with the exception of one where interviewee did not 
give permission for recording. In this case, three interviewers documented the inter-
view. The chapters in this book use different subsets of these interviews in the anal-
ysis presented in each of them. 
 Interviews and case analysis helped us to develop a conceptualization of the 
main stakeholders and participants in the coffee supply chain. To compare and 
 contrast responses from participants, we coded all the interviews. We worked 
together to deﬁ ne a set of 13 categories including themes such as barriers, motiva-
tions, values, conﬂ icts, and qualities. We coded each interview according to these 
themes. In this way, by analyzing the interviews, we identiﬁ ed ﬁ ve different types 
of supply chains. We arranged codiﬁ cation tables belonging to each type of supply 
Appendix A: Methodology

172
chain to understand the perspective of their members. Finally, we compared and 
contrasted the perspectives. Although we are reporting the results in English, data 
collection and analysis in Mexico was done in Spanish by native  speakers . 
 A.2.2. Interview Protocol 
 This protocol is intended as a guide for the interviewer. After an introduction com-
mon to all interviews, it indicates key questions that will be asked. The overall 
structure of these questions will be consistent across all interviewees, but the more 
detailed follow-up questions will vary by interview to accommodate the interests of 
different kinds of interviewees (e.g., coffee producers versus regulators). 
 Date: _________________ 
 Recording ref.: __________________ 
 Time start: _____________ 
 Location: _______________________ 
 Time end: ______________ 
 Interviewee: _____________________ 
 Introduction 
  (a)  Ask the interviewee to open the copy of project rationale/consent statement 
(already provided to them once by email or in hard copy prior to interview). 
 Interviewer: before we begin the interview, I need to go over some formali-
ties. Law requires that research conducted by university researchers does not 
put participants at the risk of harm. This interview is completely voluntary and 
anonymous. You may choose not to participate, skip answering any particular 
question, and terminate the interview at any time. This interview will take 
approximately 1 h. All information collected will be kept conﬁ dential and you 
will not be identiﬁ ed by name in our report. 
 Before we begin the interview, I invite you to read the consent form (hand 
interviewee form). The purpose of this form is to inform you about your rights 
as a research participant. You can be assured that we will keep all information 
conﬁ dential and nothing you say will be attributed to you without your permis-
sion. [Allow time for reading.] 
 Do you have any questions regarding the interview or the form? 
 Interviewer: “I would like to start our discussion today by asking you some 
questions about yourself and your work. Your name or any information that 
might identify you as an individual will not be used in the ﬁ nal report. I would 
also like to ask your permission to tape this interview. As I indicated in my 
request for this interview and as you can see from the project statement, we are 
researching [project goals from this interview]. The taped records are only to 
support my notes and recollection of what we talk about today and will not be 
Appendix A: Methodology 

173
made available in their entirety to anyone outside the research team in taped or 
transcribed format.” 
 Permission to tape: _______________________ 
 “I would like permission to quote anonymously from the transcripts to sup-
port points made in the academic papers resulting from this project.” 
 Permission to quote: _____________________ 
   (b)  Give interviewee an opportunity to ask questions of the interviewer, i.e., about 
the study, its goals, and the uses to which data will be put. 
 “Do you have any questions before we get started?” 
 __________________________________________________ 
 Questions 
 1.  Introduction 
 I would like to take the ﬁ rst few minutes to hear about your organization and 
your role within it.
  (a)  What are the major activities/mission of your organization? 
 (b)  What is your educational/professional background? 
  (c)  What is your ofﬁ cial job title in this organization? 
 And how long have you been in this position? 
 (d)  What are your roles/major responsibilities in this organization? 
 2.  How the  I-Choose  architecture will be used: 
 [We previously sent you two documents by email: (A) the mock-up applica-
tion powered  by  I-Choose and list of competency questions and (B) the stake-
holder map from I-Choose network meeting. Ask the interviewee to open the two 
documents]. 
 First, please open and look at document A, the mock-up of a future applica-
tion we are envisioning. In fact, there are already several apps with similar func-
tionality. This particular app, however, will go beyond what is currently possible 
because it will be powered by an interoperable information system called 
I-Choose. I-Choose can be understood as a huge virtual repository of data from 
the supply chain. We also have a preliminary list of questions in the second page 
that can be asked to this repository of data. 
 Second, please open and look at document B, the stakeholder map that was 
built thanks to the inputs and comments from a group of participants in the coffee 
supply chain and other partners who met with us last August in Albany, NY. Now 
I would like to get your ideas to reﬁ ne and expand these questions. 
  (a)  What questions might someone in your position ask of a system such as the 
one presented to you? What questions might your close partners’ organiza-
tions  ask of such a system? Why those questions? 
 (b)  What information is needed to answer these questions? 
Appendix A: Methodology

174
 Fig. A.2  Attachment document A: mock-up application powered by I-choose and list of competency questions 
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

175
 Probes 
  (a)  Are you aware of industry/government information standards to answer 
those questions? 
 (b)  Are you aware of any current practices to use speciﬁ c information to 
answer those questions? 
  (c)  How do you currently get some of this information, if any? 
 (c)  We know that new information systems can get subsequently used in unantici-
pated ways. Can  you imagine any such uses of this system? 
 3.  How is information extracted from the supply chain? 
 Now I would like to ask questions from the point of view of someone in your 
position and the point of view of your  close  partners. 
 (a) 
 What do you see as the main motivators and incentives to share data to 
support a system like I-Choose from your perspective? What might your 
close partners’ organizations see as the main motivators and incentives to 
share data to support such a system? 
 Probes 
  (a)  Are these kinds of information available currently in your organization? 
 (b)  What kind of information does your organization currently share? 
  (c)  What level of detail of (proprietary) data or information does your orga-
nization allow to be shared? 
 (d)  What level of detail (proprietary) data or information is your organization 
not willing to share? 
 (b) 
 Systems such as I- Choose  critically depend on the credibility and quality 
of available data. How can we create and maintain trust in a system like 
I-Choose? 
 Probes 
 (a)  Who does what in terms of:
 1.  Policy 
 2.  Management 
 3.  Technology 
 4.  Procedures 
 5.  Laws and regulations 
Appendix A: Methodology

176
 (c) 
 For your organizations, what are the main barriers to sharing trusted and 
quality data? For your close partners’ organization(s), what are the main 
barriers to sharing trusted and quality data?  
 Probes 
 (a)  In terms of:
 1.  Organizational processes 
 2.  Strategies and goals 
 3.  Legal requirements (security or privacy) 
 4.  Industry regulations 
 Fig. A.3  Attachment document B: stakeholder map from  I-choose 
 4.  How can and should organizations like yours collaborate around a system like 
I-Choose? 
 We expect that collaborating to share data within a system like I-Choose will 
depend upon building good relationships between organizations and people.
 (a)  What do you see as the main nontechnical or human barriers which might 
prevent organizations like your’s from collaborating around a system like 
I-Choose? 
 Probes 
  (a)  Which of these factors is most important? 
 (b)  Are there ways in which these problems can be reduced or overcome? 
What are they? 
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

177
 (b) 
 How do you envision the roles of the following  organizations  vis-à-vis a 
system like I-Choose in the longer term?  
 Probes 
  (a)  Government 
 (b)  NGO 
  (c)  3rd party certiﬁ cation bodies 
 (c) 
 Are there other actors/organizations that should be involved in a system 
like I-Choose? 
 (d) 
 Is a legal regulatory framework needed? If so, why is it needed? If not, why 
not? 
 (e) 
 Do you see any problems in having different kinds of organizations partici-
pating in the same system (e.g., big and small organizations, commercial 
and nonproﬁ t organizations, organizations from different countries)? If so, 
what are they? How might they be ameliorated or overcome?  
 (a)  Can you think of any examples of existing systems where organizations col-
laborate to share data that might be good models for I-Choose? These could be 
government-regulated, commercial, nonproﬁ t, or  voluntary  systems. 
 Probes 
  (a)  In your opinion, why is that system a good model? 
 (b)  To your knowledge, does/did that system experience any particular difﬁ -
culties in its creation or management? Were these difﬁ culties overcome? 
If so, how were they overcome? 
  (c)  Is there something that organizations in an I- Choose  system should do 
differently from the system you mention?  
 End 
 That concludes our interview. Is there anything else you would like to add or discuss 
in more detail? May we contact you again if we ﬁ nd that we need more information 
or clariﬁ cations? 
 Now that you are more familiar with our project, is there anyone else to whom 
you think would be interested in participating in our project? If so, could you pro-
vide them with our information? 
 Thank you very much for your time. We appreciate your  participation . 
Appendix A: Methodology

178
 A.3. Coffee Market Simulator 
 In this section of the appendix, we describe the processes involved in the develop-
ment of a preliminary theory for governance and market penetration for the I-Choose 
platform. The process consisted of  using  system dynamics group model building as 
a tool to support interdisciplinary theory-building efforts. The modeling team 
included researchers involved in the I-Choose project who have been involved in  the 
 design and data collection processes. Overall, our research progressed through three 
methodological phases: (1) a large-scale concept elicitation meeting with stakehold-
ers in the I-Choose supply chain, (2) a smaller-scale and more formal group model 
building project involving only team researchers who had been present at the larger 
stakeholder meetings, and (3) the creation of a simulation model. 
 A.3.1. Concept Elicitation  with  Stakeholders in the I-Choose 
Supply Chain 
 One main component of the project has been to create a network of researchers and 
key stakeholders of the coffee supply chain to understand the main requirements of 
a system like I-Choose. A core group of researchers from this network met regularly 
in a combination of face-to-face and electronic meetings from 2011 to 2014. This 
core group organized a workshop with a wider representation of stakeholders in a 
2-day meeting in August 2011. The goals of the workshop were to understand which 
were the main stakeholders of a system like I-Choose and what were the key issues 
to be considered in the development of the system (Djoko Sigit Sayogo et al.,  2015 ). 
The workshop involved a series of brainstorming and discussion sessions about 
main issues and stakeholders. Figure  A.3 (above) shows one of the products of the 
meeting, in which participants identiﬁ ed and ordered key stakeholders according to 
their power and interest in I-Choose. 
 The theory-building process reported in this paper has been informed by this 
workshop and by a series of follow-up interviews with stakeholders that members 
of the core  team have done during the last two years. 
 A.3.2. Group Model Building Exercise with Research Team 
 The second stage of this project component involved a series  of  formal and informal 
meetings to discuss and reﬁ ne both model structure and behavior. Similar to many 
other group model building projects, we had a series of small scoping meetings with 
the small team of researchers working in the simulation model. As described in the 
literature, many different visual representations have been used during these meet-
ings as boundary objects (Black & Andersen,  2012 ). These objects have helped this 
interdisciplinary team to communicate and work together sharing meanings and 
ideas. Figure  A.4  shows  what we understand as the root documentation of this proj-
ect. The drawing represents I-Choose as an umbrella concept involving many 
Appendix A: Methodology 

179
components: supply chain participants joining an initiative, sharing data through a 
structure called the data commons, and building a set of APIs to make it possible for 
developers to create applications for consumers to use through mobile devices. 
Governance was considered in this preliminary drawing as a component that builds 
trust in the system. 
 Following these series of scoping meetings, we conducted a group model build-
ing exercise with members of the research team. The purpose of this stage was to 
create a dynamic theory of the growth of  a market for “Green” product identiﬁ ca-
tion systems such as I-Choose. Each participant was asked to identify key variables 
in the I-Choose sociotechnical system and draw possible variable behaviors. Model 
variables were then selected based on participant votes and grouped into different 
clusters, and these clusters of variables and behaviors over time were used to build 
a sector view of the I-Choose system conceptual model.  Figure  A.5 shows a picture 
of the clusters of variables and behaviors over time created during the meeting. The 
center of the ﬁ gure includes the sector view created from the clusters. 
 Fig. A.4  Preliminary concept drawing for the I-Choose simulation 
 
Appendix A: Methodology

180
 Based on selected key model variables, participants were asked to identify stocks 
and ﬂ ows in the system and add causal relationships among these variables. The 
ﬁ nal product of this exercise is a preliminary conceptual model of the I- Choose 
 sociotechnical  system  (see Fig.  A.6 ).
 Figure  A.7  shows a clean version of some components of these two pictures. 
Figure  A.7a has a clean version of the sector view in the center of Fig.  A.5 . The 
initial sector view considers also main causal relationships among these sectors. 
These main sectors were also reﬂ ected in the preliminary map from Fig.  A.6 , and 
 A.7b shows  a  Vensim version of the picture in the board, including also the main 
areas showing main sectors in the model. 
 After eliciting the initial conceptual model—and recognizing the importance of 
the concept of governance—the group started a conversation around the concept, 
looking for important variables and concepts that could help to build an operational 
view of the concept. The group agreed on four important assumptions related to 
governance:
•  Completeness : data should be complete and have a high quality. 
•  Openness : data should be accessible and transparent processes should be in 
place. 
•  Relevance : data should be relevant to the needs of consumers. 
•  Reliability : data should be accurate and the system reliable. 
 Fig. A.5  Model variables and a preliminary sector view from the GMB session 
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

181
 A.3.3. Model Formulation and Analysis 
 With the products from the group model building exercise, we formalized the theory 
using mathematical formulations in Vensim. This process involved some additional 
thinking to make the conceptual thought operational, yielding a ﬁ rst running simu-
lation model. We reﬁ ned the preliminary conceptual model, identiﬁ ed key causal 
loops, and drew a system map, which provided guidance through the rest of the 
model building process. Figure  A.8 shows one of these maps, with a more detailed 
and operational form of the Information Commons. As it is possible to see in the 
ﬁ gure, some of the basic assumptions of governance were introduced into the con-
ceptualization. These more operational conceptual models were reﬁ ned and 
improved during a couple of scoping meetings.
 While a running simulation model did emerge quickly from these sketches, its 
dynamics proved to be too complex or elusive for us to readily understand what was 
going on in the model. A persistent problem with these early attempts at simulating 
market growth and expansion was that the positive loops that we knew would domi-
nate market growth seemed to be a too strong trap before the initial takeoff. We 
initially diagnosed this failure to take off as related to formulation problems in the 
Information Commons as shown in Fig.  A.8 . These initial formulations had failed 
to reveal what resources would be used to actually construct “system capabilities 
and processes”. 
 Fig. A.6  A preliminary conceptual model from the GMB session 
 
Appendix A: Methodology

182
 Tinkering with formulations for where the needed resources to build capability 
would come from led us “back into” an assumed business model stating that pro-
ducers (who would beneﬁ t ﬁ nancially from the operation of such a system) would 
supply the resources to construct system capability. Producer adoption was concep-
tualized to be the result of tracking the beneﬁ ts and costs of the system, but in order 
to get serious about how such adoption could yield a resource base, we needed to 
expand those equations in the model. 
 And so step-by-step, the detail complexity of the proposed simulation model 
grew. But still the reformulated simulation seemed to be unwilling to create a self- 
sustaining takeoff. We had modeled consumer adoption as a more or less standard 
word-of-mouth innovation adoption with an initial “boost” from marketing. We 
 discovered that a large enough marketing budget could force a consumer “takeoff,” 
but without some large source of external resources, the model did not easily kick 
into a self-sustaining market growth. We decided to pay attention to the general 
Supply Chain Sector
a
b
Data Commons
Sector
Developers Sector
Consumers Sector
Recommendation
Agents Sector
Policies/ Governance
Sector
Non-Green
Producers
Green
Producers
Green share of
producers
Consumer awareness
of environmental
issues
State of
economy
Household
income
Interest in
environmental issues
+ + +
Consumers wanting to
use system
+
Consumers
Consumers
using system
Fraction of consumers
using system
Network
participants
Number of
registered
prodcuts
Relevance of
informaiton
Green
sales
Consumer
trust
Number of
APPS / Recc
agents
Useability
of apps
Number of
developers
Network
participants'
trust
Reputation
results
Quality of
information
Network resources
invested in data
commons
Ability to
audit system
Greenwash
scams
Pressure to
regulate
Regulation
Threat of
regulation
Supply Chain Sector
Consumer Sector
RA Sector
Developers Sector
Data Commons Sector
 Fig. A.7  ( a )  A  preliminary conceptual model from  the  GMB session. ( b ) Model sectors 
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

183
admonition that “small models are beautiful models” (Ghaffarzadegan, Lyneis, & 
Richardson,  2010 ) and drop back and formulate a smaller reduced form model to 
get a better handle on overall model dynamics. The model is not reported in this 
book. However, the model is reported as a book chapter in a forthcoming title in the 
PAIT  series (Ran et al.,  2016 ). 
 A.4. I-Choose Prototype Design 
 A.4.1. Methods 
 We chose to develop our prototype as a semantic Web application. In order to 
develop ontologies and related semantic Web applications, the initial requirements 
are obtained through the development of use case scenarios (Gruninger & Fox, 
 1995 ). Such use cases were created to identify (1) the questions to be asked, (2) the 
resources that may be required to answer those questions, and (3) the methods by 
which to determine the answers (Fox & McGuinness,  2008 ). Table  A.1 , Step 1, 
 outlines the process used to determine the primary question to be asked of our sys-
tem: what constitutes  a  trustworthy certiﬁ cation and inspection process? To answer 
this question, we developed 28 questions that may be asked of certiﬁ cation and 
inspection data to qualify it as trustworthy. The questions were developed based on 
focus group discussions, interviews, and document analyses that the team con-
ducted with stakeholders from the coffee supply chain including researchers, certi-
ﬁ ers, members of producers’ associations, retailers, and NGOs active in promoting 
sustainable and ethical trading as we described in the previous sections of this 
appendix. 
System
capabilities &
processes
Capability
obsolesence
Capability
addition
Completeness
& relevance of
capability &
processes
Openness &
transparency of
capabilities &
processes
Effort to build
capabilities
& processes
Addition of
effort to build
Relevance
addition
Openness
addition
Effort to run
processes &
capacbilities
Addition of
effort to run
Ideal effort
needed to build
Resource gap -
build
Best system
Capability gap
Percieved value
of product
Ideal effort needed
to run processes
Resource gap
- run
Quality of
information in
system
Products
registered in
system
Effort to build
system
Addition of
quality
Product
registration
Quality information
in system - scale
Market share of
system - scale
Total products
Relevance
Governance
completeness
Governance
openness
 Fig. A.8  System map: sector I—Information Commons 
 
Appendix A: Methodology

184
 The focus group was designed to gather information and gain an understanding 
of the full context of the sustainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain, starting from the 
coffee producers and ending with the coffee retailers. Following the focus group 
discussions, targeted interviews were conducted with the stakeholders of the sus-
tainable certiﬁ ed coffee supply chain, including producers, roasters, and certiﬁ ers. 
The interview ﬁ ndings enabled the team to understand the challenges, information 
needs, and the process of certiﬁ cation and inspection for sustainable certiﬁ ed cof-
fee. Finally, document analyses were conducted to complement the results found 
from the interviews. These methods enabled the team to identify 28  questions that 
characterize the trustworthiness of the certiﬁ cation and labeling schemes. 
 Based on the use case scenarios, we developed three ontologies. These three 
ontologies were further tested, veriﬁ ed, and validated following two approaches 
(Sayogo et al.,  2016 ):
  (a)  Veriﬁ cation of ontology consistency. We used reasoners embedded in Protégé 
(Hermit ++ and Pellet) to verify our ontologies. To further evaluate the consis-
tency of the ontologies, we created individual instances in them and reran the 
reasoner (Wang, Horridge, Rector, Drummond, & Seidenberg,  2005 ). The pro-
cesses resulted in no inconsistencies in the ontologies.  
 Table A.1   Research methods and empirical evidence 
 Step  Description 
 Data collection method 
 Time and 
duration 
 1 
 Developing the use case  Focus group discussions with I-Choose 
network members 
 2011 
 Interviews with producers, roasters, 
and certiﬁ ers 
 May 
to Aug 2012 
 Document analysis 
 2012 
 Develop 28 trust questions 
 2 
 Map the structure 
of certiﬁ cation and 
inspection data 
 Interviews with certiﬁ cation body (Control 
Union, Fair Trade United Sates, and Fair 
for Life) 
 Nov 2012 
to Feb 2013 
 Archival analysis examining documentation 
of Flo-Cert 
 2012 
 Mining data content from exemplar and audit 
report 
 2012 
 3 
 Developing ontology 
of certiﬁ cation 
 Focus group discussion with I-Choose 
network members 
 2011 
 Interviews to reﬁ ne the focus 
 May 
to Aug 2012 
 Document analysis to identify semantic 
components 
 2012 
 4 
 Converting tabular data 
to triple data 
 Open source conversion tool csv2rdf4lod 
to convert the data format 
 2013 
 OpenLink Virtuoso to convert into triple data 
 2013 
 5 
 Analysis of the 28 use 
case questions 
 SPARQL query 
 2013 
 Inference-based retrieval of data 
 2013 
Appendix A: Methodology 

185
  (b)  Validating competency questions using the proposed ontology. We also vali-
dated our ontologies by querying the data using competency questions. We que-
ried using the DL query 1 plug-in available in Protégé and got satisfactory results. 
 A.4.2. How 28  Use  Case Questions Analyze Data 
Trustworthiness 
 The last step in our method uses the 28 use case questions (Table  A.2 )  to evaluate 
the overall  trustworthiness of certiﬁ cation and inspection data. We use these 28 
questions as a normative deﬁ nition of trustworthiness. The certiﬁ cation trustworthi-
ness evaluation system is based on two values, rightfulness and transparency of 
certiﬁ cation scheme. As such, our certiﬁ cation trustworthiness evaluation system 
consists of two major components: (a) trustworthiness evaluation criteria and (b) the 
data openness indicators. Ideal trustworthiness was assigned when all evaluation 
criteria were met. Inability to fulﬁ ll the criteria decreases the trustworthiness level.
 The assessment of trustworthiness is based on matching the evaluation criteria 
with the degree  of  data openness, meaning the ease of extracting data to fulﬁ ll the 
evaluation criteria. The degree of data openness consists of two competing factors, 
data availability (data source) and governance level needed to extract the data. The 
less transparent the data is, the higher the governance level is needed to extract the 
data and vice versa. If the criteria cannot be met using these two indicators, it will 
decrease the trustworthiness level of the certiﬁ cation scheme. The measurement for 
these two indicators is listed in Tables  A.3 and  A.4 . Data source (availability) mea-
surement consists of ﬁ ve possible sources of data, as shown in Table  A.3 . There are 
three different levels of governance with speciﬁ cation listed in Table  A.4 . A more 
complete discussion of how each of the 28 questions was classiﬁ ed according to the 
three categories below can be found at   https://github.com/jluciano/ichoose  .
 A.4.3. The Process  of  Examining CIDIBB 
 Generate a Fair-Trade Sample Data Set   To test how CIDIBB could work, we 
mapped the structure of fair-trade certiﬁ cation and inspection data. 2 We created 
data tables to represent: (a) a certiﬁ cation body database structure that supports 
certiﬁ cation and inspection and (b) data aggregated by an information aggrega-
tor. We classiﬁ ed the data tables representing certiﬁ cation data as the certiﬁ cation 
and inspection database (CID) to refer to a database that consists only of certiﬁ -
cation and inspection results.  
1  DL query is query language that is based on the Manchester OWL syntax. 
2  These data are available in our open access repository ( https://github.com/jluciano/ichoose ). We 
published these datasets on  http://ichoose.tw.rpi.edu/ with access through a SPARQL endpoint at 
 http://ichoose.tw.rpi.edu/sparql 
Appendix A: Methodology

186
 Table A.2   Twenty-eight use  case  questions 
 No. 
 Evaluation criteria 
 Assessment indicator 
 Data 
source 
(A ← → F) 
 Governance 
(1 ← → 3) 
 1 
 Is certiﬁ cation standard openly published (available on a 
website) 
 2 
 Is certiﬁ cation compliance criteria/control points openly 
published (available on a website) 
 3 
 Can know date of the inspection 
 4 
 Can know date of certiﬁ cation 
 5 
 Can know who is the inspector/auditor 
 6 
 Can know how nonconformities are handled by the applicant 
 7 
 Can know who is the standard-setting body 
 8 
 Can know what type of organization made the standard 
(government, private, nonproﬁ t) 
 9 
 Can know who gives accreditation to the  certiﬁ er 
 10 
 Can know when the standard-setting body was established 
 11 
 Is inspection report signed by an inspector 
 12 
 Is certiﬁ cate signed by the certiﬁ er 
 13 
 Can know location of audit/inspection 
 14 
 Is the list of nonconformity (measured score below standard) 
information available 
 15 
 Can know the accreditation body of the standard-setting 
organization 
 16 
 Can know the certiﬁ cation bodies of a particular standard-
setting organization 
 17 
 Can know the certiﬁ cation body of a particular applicant for 
particular products 
 18 
 Does inspector/auditor have license 
 19 
 Inspection/audit results openly published (available on 
request by FOIA or NGO) 
 20 
 Does certiﬁ cation standard conform to a government- backed 
standard, e.g., USDA, EU-ECO-regulation 
 21 
 Does certiﬁ cation standard conform to standard within an 
intergovernmental organization (e.g., ILO) 
 22 
 Who sponsor the development of the standard (consumer 
NGO, producer, manufacture) 
 23 
 Can know who translated the standard into compliance 
criteria/control points 
 24 
 Is standard-setting body independent from the accreditation 
body, such as ISO 
 25 
 Is certiﬁ er independent from the  accreditation body 
 26 
 Is certiﬁ er independent from the standard-setting  body 
 27 
 Is inspector/auditor independent from the standard- setting body 
 28 
 Is inspector/auditor independent from certiﬁ er 
Appendix A: Methodology 

187
 Table A.3   Data source (availability)  levels 
 A 
 If data is available by searching the Web 
 B 
 If data is available in the certiﬁ cation and inspection database. This is the database 
available in the certiﬁ er system speciﬁ cally to store information and data related to 
certiﬁ cation and inspection results 
 C 
 If data is available in regulator’s database. The regulator here could be government 
agencies such as USDA (United State Department of Agriculture) or self-regulated 
organization such as ISO (International Standard Organization) 
 D 
 If data is available in the information system of the certiﬁ er but not in the certiﬁ cation 
and inspection database. An example of this database is the human resource database 
 E 
 If data is available in the database of a standard-setting organization. In a majority of 
certiﬁ cation schemes, the certiﬁ er is independent of a standard-setting organization 
 F 
 If the source of this data is not explicit and  cannot be easily identiﬁ ed 
 Table A.4   Governance  levels 
 1 
 There is no need to appeal to higher governance authority to access the data. This assumes 
that the data is available in the certiﬁ cation and inspection database and the certiﬁ er 
agrees to release the data 
 2 
 May need to appeal to higher governance authority to access the data because this data 
might exist in multiple data sources and one of the sources is outside of the certiﬁ ers’ and 
standard-setting organization’s information system 
 3 
 Higher governance intervention is needed to be able to answer the question because the 
source of the data is not explicit or cannot be  easily   identiﬁ ed 
 We created a total of eight data tables to represent the data structure of Flo-Cert, 
the main certiﬁ cation body under FLO. The data tables are contact data, product 
code, certiﬁ cation status, audit status, audit results, audit workﬂ ow status, corrective 
measure and objective evidence, and inspection checklist data. These eight data 
tables consist of 81 data attributes with each table comprising 8–13 attributes. 
Finally, two data tables with 14 data attributes were created to represent the list of 
data collected by an information aggregator. We also created two synthetic 
 certiﬁ cation bodies that we named “Dave and Nic” certiﬁ cation body and 
“Nonviolent Dove” certiﬁ cation body. These two synthetic certiﬁ cation bodies were 
designed to follow practices less stringent than FLO practices and broadly congru-
ent with “light greenwashing” (David and Nic) and “heavy greenwashing” 
(Nonviolent Dove). 
 In addition to the database described above, we manually created data tables 
representing the data structure that might be created by an information aggregator. 
Information aggregators in our ecosystem search the Web to extract data, then they 
reﬁ ne and reformat the data for easy use. This dataset represents data about certiﬁ -
cation and standard bodies that are not within the more narrowly deﬁ ned CID con-
taining only information about direct certiﬁ cation activities. Hence information 
outside the CID contains data such as data tables which contain information about 
the governance and history of different certiﬁ cation and standard bodies. 
Appendix A: Methodology

188
 Publish Data Set as a RDF Triple Store   The data in our CID was formatted 
as standard tables of data such as those that might be found in a spreadsheet 
(such as EXCEL) or a relational database (such as ACCESS). Using the 
classes and relationships deﬁ ned by the CerTIN and FLO ontologies, we used 
standard semantic Web technologies to recast those tables of data as an RDF 
triple store that is searchable using SPARQL queries. 
 Run SPARQL Queries Against the Data    Testing the proof of concept 
begins by running a SPARQL query against the data  in  the triple store to see 
if the basic questions could be answered by such a direct  query (see Fig.  A.9 ). 
If the answer to the question could be retrieved using a SPARQL query or 
could be answered using the reasoning and inference tool, then we would 
examine the data source of the answer. Questions whose answers can be found 
directly in publicly available data or inferred by data provided by the certiﬁ ca-
tion and inspection agencies without any need to appeal to a higher authority 
were classiﬁ ed as “Level 1: No need to appeal for higher authority.” For 
example, “Can I know the date of inspection?”  
 A second class of questions can still be answered either by  a  SPARQL query or 
by using the reasoning and inference tool, but the answer to these questions does not 
originate with the certifying and inspecting processes and organizations per se. 
These questions seek information about the certiﬁ cation and inspection organiza-
tions and processes themselves. Hence, answers to these questions require that data 
be made available in the triple store that refers to  some higher authority. These ques-
tions were classiﬁ ed as “Level 2: May need appeal to a higher authority.” For exam-
ple, the question “Can I know the accrediting agency for the standard-setting body?” 
appeals to a higher authority to provide the name of the accrediting agency as this 
data is not available in the CID. 
 Finally, if questions could not be  answered by a  direct  SPARQL query nor could 
be inferred using formal inference tools or manual curations of the data, these ques-
tions were classiﬁ ed as “Level 3:  Requires governance intervention.” For questions 
in this category, the data sources of their answers are not explicit, and governance 
interventions are required to locate the answer and make it publicly available. For 
example, the question “Is the inspector/auditor independent from the standard- 
setting body?” cannot be answered without intervention by some form of gover-
nance. We ﬁ nally summarized how many of the 28  use  case questions could be 
answered at each level. 
Appendix A: Methodology 

189
 A.5. Survey 
 In this section of the appendix, we introduce the methods and procedures that we 
used in the survey that we conducted to assess trustworthiness in information pack-
ages attached to labels. Again, although the results are not reported in this book, 
they informed our conclusions and are also in the process of being published else-
where (Zhang, Liu, Sayogo, Picazo-Vela, & Luna-Reyes,  Forthcoming ). 
 A.5.1.  Data Collection 
 We sought to assess the  empirical relationships between six factors as independent 
variables and four control variables and the dependent variables in the form of trust-
ing belief on sustainability claim. A survey was distributed to students enrolled in a 
private university in Mexico and a private university in the United States in 
September 2013 and a total of 178 responses were received. To provide some 
 Fig. A.9  The process of examining CIDIBB usefulness in trustworthiness evaluation using 28 
questions  
 
Appendix A: Methodology

190
context for the research, a decision-making assignment was distributed among all 
students before answering the survey. The survey instrument was developed ini-
tially in English and revised by a panel of experts. It was applied in English and 
Spanish. The questionnaire was ﬁ rst translated to Spanish by a group of research 
assistants, and then it was translated back into English by two of the authors of the 
study to verify the accuracy of the translation. 
 After data cleaning, we excluded questionnaires with over 10 % missing values. 
Ten participants omit answering very few questions, and we substituted the missing 
values by the mean value of the missing item. At last, 167 observations were used 
for our analyses. 
 A.5.2.  Variable Development and Measurement 
 All measurements used in this study were adapted from previous literature and 
adjusted to ﬁ t the purpose and context of our study. Table  A.5 shows construct deﬁ -
nitions, number of items measured, and reliability measures. In terms of the internal 
reliability estimation, we used Cronbach’s α for all constructs.
 A.5.3. Dependent Variables 
 A.5.4.  Independent Variables 
 There are six independent variables of interest and four control variables with 
description as follows:
•  Disposition to trust label . This variable measures the tendency of respondents to 
trust information provided by sustainable claim regardless of other reasons.  
•  Brand and company reputation . This variable measures the importance of infor-
mation about product brand and company’s reputation for consumers.  
•  Certiﬁ cation reputation . This variable measures the importance of reputation of 
the sustainable certiﬁ cation scheme for consumers. 
 Trusting Beliefs   It consists of three sub-variables: competence, integrity, 
and benevolence.  Competence measures the degree by which consumers 
believe that sustainable product labels include reliable and valid information 
that is appropriate for making purchase decisions.  Benevolence measures the 
degree by which consumers believe that sustainable claim depicted in product 
label reﬂ ects the disposition of such claim to do something good and serve for 
the interests of consumers.  Integrity measures the degree by which consumers 
believe that sustainable claim depicted in product package and label reﬂ ects 
truthfulness, honesty, and other integrity values.  
Appendix A: Methodology 

191
 Table A.5   Construct deﬁ nitions and items measured 
 Constructs 
 Deﬁ nitions of this study 
 No. 
of 
items 
 References 
 α 
 Dependent variable 
 Competence 
(COM) 
 Information depicted in 
product labels is capable of 
guiding consumers to make 
purchasing decisions 
 4 
 Porter and Donthu 
( 2008 ) 
 0.76 
 Benevolence 
(BENE) 
 Information depicted in 
product labels reﬂ ects the 
consideration of welfare and 
interests of consumers 
 3 
 Porter and Donthu 
( 2008 ) 
 0.72 
 Integrity (INT) 
 Information depicted in 
product label reﬂ ects 
truthfulness, honesty, and 
upholding of other ethical 
 values 
 3 
 Porter and Donthu 
( 2008 ) 
 0.79 
 Independent variable 
 Brand and 
company 
reputation (BACR) 
 The importance of product 
brand and company’s 
reputation 
 2 
 Grabner-Kraeuter & 
Kaluscha ( 2003 ), De 
Pelsmacker, Driesen, & 
Rayp ( 2005 ) 
 0.80 
 Certiﬁ cation 
reputation (CR) 
 The importance of reputation 
of the sustainable 
certiﬁ cation scheme 
 3 
 Jiang et al. ( 2008 ), 
Jøsang et al. ( 2007 ), 
Grabner-Kraeuter & 
Kaluscha ( 2003 ) 
 0.54 
 Additional 
information to 
verify label (AI) 
 The importance of additional 
information to verify label 
 2 
 McKnight, Choudhury, 
and Kacmar ( 2002 ), 
Vance, Elie-Dit- 
Cosaque, and Straub 
( 2008 ) 
 0.60 
 Government 
endorsement (GE) 
 The importance of 
government endorsement in 
terms of legal  and  regulatory 
system and information 
source 
 2 
 Li, Hess, and Valacich 
( 2008 ), McKnight et al. 
( 2002 ) 
 0.68 
 NGO-based label 
(NGO) 
 The importance of label 
supported or developed by 
NGOs 
 2 
 Michaelidou & Hassan 
( 2010 ) 
 0.71 
 Disposition to trust 
label (DTT) 
 The tendency of respondents 
to trust information provided 
by sustainable certiﬁ cation 
scheme regardless of other 
reasons 
 3 
 Gefen ( 2000 ), Jiang, 
Jones and Javie (2008) 
 0.79 
(continued)
Appendix A: Methodology

192
•  Additional information to verify label   . This variable measures to what extent the 
existence of additional information to verify label is important for consumers.  
•  Government endorsement . This variable measures the importance of endorse-
ment by government in terms of legal and regulatory support and information 
source for consumers. 
•  NGO-based label . This variable measures the importance of label supported or 
developed by NGOs for consumers.  
•  Prior knowledge of label . This is a control variable measuring the extent of 
respondents prior knowledge of sustainable certiﬁ cation and labeling practices in 
general. 
•  Country . This is a control variable indicating the country of birth of the respon-
dent. We divided the country into three—US-born respondents, Mexican-born 
respondents, and other countries-born respondents.  
 In addition, in order to ensure the differences were not caused by gender and 
education level (graduate vs. undergraduate) of the sample, we use gender and level 
of education also as control variables. 
 A.5.5. Survey Instrument 
 Dear student, 
 We are currently conducting a research project funded by a grant from the 
National Science Foundation titled “Building Information Sharing Networks to 
Support Consumer Choice,” or “I-Choose” for short.  The main goal of the I-Choose 
project is to develop interoperable information system to support sustainable con-
sumption, using a case of coffee produced in Mexico and sold in the United States 
and Canada. 
 We have found that a  key  component of the project is related to consumer trust. We 
prepared this survey to better understand your position about a series of statements 
related to trust in product information, including elements present on product labels. 
Table A.5 (continued)
 Constructs 
 Deﬁ nitions of this study 
 No. 
of 
items 
 References 
 α 
 Control variable 
 Prior knowledge 
(PR) 
 The extent of respondents’ 
prior knowledge of 
sustainable certiﬁ cation and 
labeling practices in  general  
 3 
 Gleim, Smith, Andrews, 
et al. ( 2013 ) 
 0.83 
 Country (COU) 
 The country of birth of the 
respondent 
 1 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 Gender (GEN) 
 The gender of the respondent 
 1 
 N/A 
 N/A 
 Education level 
(EDU) 
 The education level of the 
 respondent 
 1 
 N/A 
 N/A 
Appendix A: Methodology 

193
 The survey will take approximately 15 min. Your participation is completely vol-
untary and you are free to quit the survey at any time or to not answer individual 
questions. Should you decide to participate, all information will remain anonymous. 
The survey asks only for some demographic information, and we will present only 
aggregated data in any publications based on the data. Although there will be no 
direct beneﬁ ts to you, this research will help to inform others about the role that 
trust plays in creating product packaging. There are no risks in answering the sur-
vey, and your answers will not affect your grades. 
 If you have any questions or are interested in knowing the results, please get in 
touch with any of us. Thank you for participating in our research project. 
 Sincerely, 
 Jing Zhang, Sergio Picazo-Vela, and Luis F. Luna-Reyes 
 Background Information 
 In today’s market, companies use product certiﬁ cation and labels, as well as infor-
mation in product packaging to convey product quality and inspire trust from con-
sumers.  Product certiﬁ cation refers to the label or logo endorsing that production, 
and distribution practices might comply with a speciﬁ c standard that avoids some 
negative externalities, such as child labor, non-fair trading, and non- environmentally 
friendly practices. Product certiﬁ cation is organized into three approaches, 1st party, 
2nd party, and 3rd party certiﬁ cation.  The difference between these certiﬁ cations is 
the degree of separation between the certiﬁ er and the company whose product is 
being certiﬁ ed.
•  First-party certiﬁ cation means self-declared adherence to voluntary policies or 
codes of conduct that emerge inside the company. An example of ﬁ rst-party cer-
tiﬁ cation is Nespresso AAA (Fig.  A.11a ). 
 Fig. A.11  Kinds  of  product certiﬁ cations. ( a ) First-party certiﬁ cation: Nespresso AAA, a self- 
declared adherence to Green practices by Nestle. ( b ) Second-party certiﬁ cation: SCAA sets the 
standards and certiﬁ es coffee brewing equipment. ( c ) Third-party certiﬁ cation: FLO labeling inter-
national, nonproﬁ t-based third-party certiﬁ cation 
 
Appendix A: Methodology

194
•  In  second-party certiﬁ cation , standards and certiﬁ cates are issued by an industry 
or trade association and adopted by ﬁ rms. An example of second-party certiﬁ ca-
tion is SCAA certifying coffee brewing equipment (Fig.  A.11b ). 
•  Third-party certiﬁ cation is when one organization sets the standard, and compli-
ance to the standard is tested and awarded by an independent third-party certiﬁ er, 
which audits ﬁ rms that want to adopt the standard. An example of third-party 
certiﬁ cation  is FLO labeling international (Fig.  A.11c ). 
 In addition to the adoption of one or more certiﬁ cates, companies also provide 
additional information in their product packaging to tell stories, including their pro-
duction practices or additional efforts to promote sustainable practices and trading. 
As an example, Fig.  A.12 demonstrates how equal exchange uses its product pack-
aging to convey a variety of information. 
 Instructions 
 Please read and answer the following questions. There are no correct or incorrect 
answers; we only wish to learn more about your beliefs and previous experience 
related to product information.
 Fig. A.12  Product information  in  the product packaging 
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

195
 A.  General questions/previous experience 
 
1.
How familiar are you with the following certificate labels?
Label
Never have seen it
I know it very well
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
2.
I buy sustainable/certified products. 
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Frequently
Always
3.
I use an information aggregator website to make buying decisions (e.g. GoodGuide, Barcoo).
Never
Rarely
Sometimes
Frequently
Always
4.
I am very self-conscious about my health when buying products and services.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
5.
I am very self-conscious about sustainability when buying products and services.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
6.
I consider myself an expert on identifying sustainable product labels and certifications.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
7.
I have a great deal of knowledge about sustainable product labels and certifications.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
8.
I generally know more than my friends about sustainable product labels and certification.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
 
Appendix A: Methodology

196
  B.  General belief. Please indicate to what degree you agree with the following 
statements. 
 
1.
I generally trust other people.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
2.
I generally trust information from government agencies.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
3.
I generally trust information from private companies.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
4.
I generally trust information provided by non-government organizations.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
5.
I generally have faith in third party certifications.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
6.
I generally trust information supplied by product labels and packaging
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
7.
I tend to count upon information supplied by product labels and packaging
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
8.
I generally have faith in humanity
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
9.
I generally trust information supplied by product labels and packaging unless they give me reason not to. 
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

197
  C.  Antecedents of trust. The following statements measure sets of conditions that 
could inﬂ uence how you trust information detailing sustainable practice (adher-
ence to economic, social, and environmental values). Please indicate to what 
degree you agree with the following statements. 
 
1.
The existence of any logo or label of third-party certification promoting sustainable practice is very important for my decision.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
2.
I tend to ignore information about sustainable and ethical practices in the product packaging if I see any label or logo from third-party 
certification.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
3.
It is important to me to have additional information about the certification process such as dates of inspection or the name of the 
inspector.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
4.
It is important to me to be able to verify certification information over the Internet or other apps.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
5.
Seeing a label from a well-known third-party certifier promoting sustainable practice assures me that the product adheres to promoting 
sustainable and ethical trading.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
6.
A label from a well-known third-party certifier contributes to a lessening of my perceived risk of not getting what I am paying for.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
7.
Seeing a label from a lesser-known third-party certifier increases my doubt and risks associated with the adherence to promote 
sustainable and ethical trading.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
8.
A self-declared label from a company (first party label) increases my suspicion and perceived risks associated with promotion of 
sustainable and ethical trading.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
9.
If the product is produced by a well-known seller/manufacturer, third-party certification becomes less important for my decision
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
10. If the brand of the product is well-known, third-party certification becomes less important to my decision
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
11. Pictures from producers or maps showing product origin included in the product packaging help my decision to buy a product.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
12. Text describing adherence to sustainable and ethical practices on the product packaging is useful in making buying decisions.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
13. I pay attention to specific product contents or ingredients provided in the product packaging before making buying decisions. 
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
14. A link on the product package to a company’s website describing its sustainable and ethical practices is useful in making buying 
decisions.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
15. I feel secure in relying on product labels and certifications by the government because legal systems exist to protect me from any 
falsification or forgery.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
16. A link on a product label to a government website verifying sustainable and ethical practices and certification is useful in making 
buying decisions.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
17. I feel secure in relying on product labels and certifications by NGOs such as Fairtrade or Rainforest Alliance.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
18. A link on a product label to an NGO’s website verifying sustainable and ethical practices and certification is useful in making buying 
decisions.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
19. Product labels and certifications recommended by my friends are important for my buying decisions. 
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
20. Product labels and certifications recommended by my family are important for my buying decisions.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
 
Appendix A: Methodology

198
 D.  Trusting belief   The following statements measure your beliefs about trusting 
information contained in a product’s label and package that refers to sustainable 
practices in producing the product. Please indicate to what degree you agree 
with the  following statements. 
 
1.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include information that is appropriate for me to make buying decisions.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
2.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging seldom include information that is misguiding.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
3.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include reliable information about sustainable practices.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
4.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include valid information about sustainable practices.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
5.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include information that considers my welfare.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
6.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include information with my best interests in mind.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
7.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include information related to my interests and values.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
8.
I trust that sustainable product labels and packaging include honest and truthful information. 
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
9.
I trust that sustainable product certifications ensure a set of standards about sustainable practices.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
10. I trust that sustainable product certifications can be counted on representing the right sustainable practices.
Strongly Agree
Agree
Neither agree nor 
disagree
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
 
  E.  Demographic  questions 
 
1.
Please indicate your gender.
Female
Male
Prefer not to answer
2.
Please indicate your current educational status.
I am an undergraduate student.
I am a graduate student.
3.
Please indicate the country where you were raised _______________________
4.
Are you currently employed part-time, full-time, or not employed?
Part-time
Full-time
Not employed
Prefer not to answer 
5.
Please indicate your age.
17 – 20 years
21 – 25 years
26 – 30 years
31 – 35 years
36 – 40 years
> 40 years
 
Appendix A: Methodology 

199
 References 
 Black, L. J., & Andersen, D. F. (2012). Using visual representations as boundary objects to resolve 
conﬂ ict in collaborative model-building approaches: Using visual representations as boundary 
objects.  Systems Research and Behavioral Science, 29 (2), 194–208.   http://doi.org/10.1002/
sres.2106   . 
 De Pelsmacker, P., Driesen, L., & Rayp, G. (2005). Do consumers care about ethics? Willingness 
to pay for fair-trade coffee.  Journal of Consumer Affairs, 39 (2), 363–385. 
 Fox, P., & McGuinness, D. L. (2008).  TWC semantic web methodology . Retrieved from   http://
tw.rpi.edu/web/doc/TWC_SemanticWebMethodology . 
 Gefen, D. (2000). E-commerce: The role of familiarity and trust.  Omega, 28 (6), 725–737. 
doi:  10.1016/S0305-0483(00)00021-9  . 
 Ghaffarzadegan, N., Lyneis, J., & Richardson, G. P. (2010). How small system dynamics models 
can help the public policy process.  System Dynamics Review , n/a–n/a.   http://doi.org/10.1002/
sdr.442  . 
  Gleim, M. R., Smith, J. S., Andrews, D., & Cronin, J. J., Jr. (2013). Against the green: A multi-
method examination of the barriers to green consumption.  Journal of Retailing, 89 (1), 44–61. 
doi:  10.1016/j.jretai.2012.10.001  . 
 Grabner-Kräuter, S., & Kaluscha, E. A. (2003). Empirical research in on-line trust: A review and 
critical assessment.  International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58 (6), 783–812. 
 Gruninger, M., & Fox, M. S. (1995). Methodology for the design and evaluation of ontologies. In 
 Proceedings of the workshop on basic ontological issues in knowledge sharing . Montreal. 
 Jiang, P., Jones, D. B., & Javie, S. (2008). How third-party certiﬁ cation programs relate to con-
sumer trust in online transactions: An exploratory study.  Psychology and Marketing, 25 (9), 
839–858. 
 Jøsang, A., Ismail, R., & Boyd, C. (2007). A survey of trust and reputation systems for online 
service provision.  Decision Support Systems, 43 (2), 618–644. 
 Komiak, Y. X. K., & Benbasat, I. (2006). The effects of personalization and familiarity on trust and 
adoption of recommendation agents.  MIS Quarterly, 30 (4), 941–960. 
 Li, X., Hess, T. J., & Valacich, J. S. (2008). Why do we trust new technology? A study of initial 
trust formation with organizational information systems.  The Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, 17 (1), 39–71. doi:  10.1016/j.jsis.2008.01.001  . 
 Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Roy, R., Andersen, D. F., Whitmore, A., & Andersen, D. L. (2013). 
Information strategies to support full information product pricing: The role of trust.  Information 
Polity, 18 (1), 75–91. 
 McKnight, D. H., Choudhury, V., & Kacmar, C. (2002). Developing and validating trust measures 
for e-Commerce: An integrative typology.  Information Systems Research, 13 (3), 334–359. 
 Michaelidou, N., & Hassan, L. M. (2010). Modeling the factors affecting rural consumers pur-
chase of organic and free-range produce: A case study of consumers from the Island of Arran 
in Scotland, UK.  Food Policy, 35 (2), 130–139. 
 Porter, C. E., & Donthu, N. (2008). Cultivating trust and harvesting value in virtual communities. 
 Management Science, 54 (1), 113–128. doi:  10.1287/mnsc.1070.0765  . 
 Ran, W., Jarman, H., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Zhang, J., Andersen, D. L., Tayi, G. K., et al. (2016). 
Supply-chain transparency and governance systems: Market penetration of the I-choose sys-
tem. In J. Zhang, L. F. Luna-Reyes, T. A. Pardo, & D. S. Sayogo (Eds.),  Information, models, 
and sustainability: Policy informatics in the age of big data and open government . Springer. 
Basel, Switzerland.  
 Sayogo, D. S., Ran, W., Tayi, G. K., Luciano, J. S., Luna-Reyes, L. F., Depaula, D., et al. (2016). 
Ontological 
modeling 
of 
certiﬁ cation 
and 
inspection 
process 
to 
support 
smart disclosure of product information.  International Journal of Public Administration in the 
Digital Age 3 (2), 87–109.  
    Sayogo, D. S., Zhang, J., Luna-Reyes, L., Jarman, H., Tayi, G., Andersen, D. L., et al. (2015). 
Challenges and requirements for developing data architecture supporting integration of sustainable 
Appendix A: Methodology

200
supply chains.  Information Technology and Management, 16 (1), 5–18. http://doi.org/  10.1007/
s10799-014-0203-3  .  
    Vance, A., Elie-Dit-Cosaque, C., & Straub, D. W. (2008). Examining trust in information technol-
ogy artifacts: The effects of system quality and culture.  Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 24 (4), 73–100. 
 Wang, H., Horridge, M., Rector, A., Drummond, N., & Seidenberg, J. (2005). Debugging OWL-DL 
ontologies: A heuristic approach. In Y. Gil, E. Motta, V. R. Benjamins, & M. A. Musen (Eds.), 
 The semantic web – ISWC 2005  (pp. 745–757). Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer. Retrieved from 
  http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/11574620_53  . 
 Yin, R. (1994).  Case study research: Design and methods . Newbury Park: Sage. 
 Zhang, J., Liu, H., Sayogo, D. S., Picazo-Vela, S., & Luna-Reyes, L. F. (Forthcoming). 
Strengthening institutional-based trust for sustainable consumption: Lessons for smart disclo-
sure.  Government Information Quarterly . 
Appendix A: Methodology

201
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2016 
H. Jarman, L.F. Luna-Reyes (eds.), Private Data and Public Value, 
Public Administration and Information Technology 26, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-27823-0
 A 
 Agenda 21 ,  26 
 APIs . See  Application programing interfaces 
(APIs)  
 Application programing interfaces (APIs) 
 shared information ,  158 
 web service ,  159 
 Assessment processes 
 audit ,  81 ,  83 
 4C ,  82 
 C.A.F.E. ,  84 
 certiﬁ cation process ,  81 ,  82 ,  85 
 competence ,  81 
 FLO ,  81 
 local knowledge and resources ,  85 
 RAN ,  82 
 strictness ,  85 
 USDA ,  84 
 UTZ ,  82 
 B 
 Bats’il Maya 
 Azúcar Morena and Capeltic ,  54 
 calculative trust ,  55 
 institutional trust ,  55 
 relational trust ,  55 
 trust pattern over time ,  57 ,  59 
 C 
 C.A.F.E. Practices 
 governance ,  80 
 market growth and coverage ,  77 
 Certiﬁ cates . See  Virtual certiﬁ cates 
 Certiﬁ cation ,  74–77 ,  145 
 CARTV ,  69 
 collaboration and trust ,  86 
 complexity ,  86 
 consumer trust ,  68 
 convention theory (see  Convention theory ) 
 coverage and scope ,  68 
 direct intervention ,  69 
 environmental and social sustainability ,  85 
 ethical and sustainable consumption ,  68 
 governance process ,  85 
 indirect intervention ,  69 
 internal production methods ,  70 
 and labeling ,  86 
 “market driven” ,  70 
 market growth and coverage 
 4C ,  76 
 C.A.F.E. ,  77 
 Fair Trade certiﬁ ed coffee ,  74 
 FLO ,  74 ,  75 
 RAN ,  74 ,  75 
 USDA ,  77 
 UTZ ,  74 ,  76 
 private regulation ,  70 
 product labeling ,  69 ,  70 
 semantic web-based technology ,  86 
 trust-inducing tool ,  68 
 trustworthiness ,  68 
 voluntary policies ,  69 
 Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data 
Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB)  ,  18 ,  61 ,  62 ,  97–100 
 broadcast information ,  93 
 Index 

202
 Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data 
Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB) ( cont. ) 
 CerTIN ontology ,  95 ,  96 
 CiTruST ontology ,  96 
 CJT ,  100 ,  101 
 components, ecosystem ,  92 ,  93 
 databases ,  102 
 empirical testing 
 Ideal Benchmark ,  98 
 steps ,  97 
 trustworthiness ,  98–100 
 FLO ontology ,  96 ,  97 
 information quality and integrity ,  105 
 product/service rating system ,  101 ,  102 
 sustainable products ,  102 
 TallMart platform ,  103 ,  104 
 universal applicability ,  105 
 Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Ontology 
(CerTIN)  ,  18 
 Certiﬁ cation ontology . See  Ontology 
 Certiﬁ cations and labels ,  29 
 CERTIMEX ,  38 ,  53 ,  62 ,  115 
 CIDIBB . See  Certiﬁ cation and Inspection Data 
Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB)  
 CJT . See  CyberJustTrade (CJT) 
 Coffee ,  3–5 
 environmental concerns ,  5 
 fair trade certiﬁ ed ,  4 ,  6 
 in Mexico ,  5 ,  6 
 in North America ,  6 
 organic ,  6 
 pesticides and fertilizers ,  5 
 prices ,  5 ,  6 
 producers ,  5 
 production and demand ,  5 ,  6 
 supply chain ,  7 
 Coffee and Farmer Equity (C.A.F.E.) 
 third-party certiﬁ cations and labels ,  84 
 Coffee certiﬁ cation information ,  
34–38 
 data challenges ,  34 
 producers ,  34 
 roasters ,  35 
 third-party certiﬁ ers ,  35 
 technology capability 
 producers ,  36 
 roasters and third-party certiﬁ ers ,  36 
 third-party certiﬁ ers challenges 
 conﬂ ict of disclosure policy ,  38 
 data ownership ,  37 
 Coffee certiﬁ cation process ,  34 
 Coffee supply chain ,  31 
 primary stakeholders ,  31 
 sustainable ,  32 
 convention theory (see  Convention theory ) 
 Commercially sensitive information ,  15 
 Common Code for Coffee Conducts (4C), 
third-party certiﬁ cations and 
labels  ,  82 
 Common Code for the Coffee Community (4C) 
 governance ,  79 
 market growth and coverage ,  76 
 Conﬁ dentiality . See  Information security 
 Consumer choice ,  150 ,  156 
 Consumer decision-making ,  29 
 Consumer demand disclosure ,  16 
 Consumer trust ,  18 
 Consumers ownership ,  14 
 Convention theory 
 agreement, compromise and 
relativization ,  133 
 certiﬁ ers and certiﬁ cation processes ,  135 
 civic, industrial, market and domestic 
orders ,  134 
 coffee cuppers ,  144 
 coffee standards ,  143 
 coordination mechanisms ,  133 
 “economies of worth” approach ,  132 
 Fair Trade certiﬁ cation programs ,  130 
 FLO ,  130 
 functions ,  132 
 information sharing platforms ,  130 
 institutional logics ,  131 
 interviews ,  136 
 lead ﬁ rms ,  142 
 medium-sized farmer supply chain ,  140 , 
 141 ,  144 
 mixed supply chain ,  138 ,  139 
 “models of evaluation” ,  132 
 NAFTA ,  131 
 product quality ,  132 
 public administration ,  145 
 semi-structured interview protocol ,  136 
 specialty/relational supply chain ,  140 
 stakeholders ,  135 
 system architecture ,  143 
 traditional fair trade supply chain ,  
137 ,  143 
 type II mixed supply chain ,  144 
 types, supply chains ,  142 ,  143 
 value chain governance theory ,  134 
 Creating Public Value ,  7 
 Customer-oriented systems . See  Full 
information product pricing (FIPP) 
systems  
 CyberJustTrade (CJT) ,  100 ,  101 
Index

203
 D 
 Data architecture ,  27 
 Data commons community 
 APIs ,  159 
 data sharing architecture ,  158 
 FDA ,  159 
 FIPP regimes ,  159 
 iterative development process ,  160 
 “non-keyed” data ,  159 
 public and interest group consultation ,  160 
 Data disclosure ,  149 ,  154–157 
 certiﬁ cation and labeling 
 consumer choice ,  156 
 direct and indirect intervention ,  154 
 ISO 14020 standard ,  155 ,  156 
 plaque reduction ,  155 
 principles, private sectors ,  156 ,  157 
 voluntary policies ,  155 
 collaborative and consensual system ,  148 
 data commons community ,  159 ,  161 
 governance (see  Governance processes ) 
 hard law and collaborative  s tandards , 
 161–162 
 “private” data sharing ,  148 
 private sector transparency ,  162–165 
 Data quality 
 data representation ,  121 
 deﬁ nition ,  112 
 features ,  112 
 information accuracy ,  119 ,  120 
 provenance ,  120 ,  121 
 E 
 Energy company customers ,  2 
 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) ,  69 
 F 
 Fair for Life certiﬁ cation ,  37 
 Fair Trade (FLO) Certiﬁ ed Coffee 
 governance ,  78 
 market growth and coverage ,  74 
 Fair trade certiﬁ ed coffee ,  4 ,  6 
 Fairtrade International 
 third-party certiﬁ cations and labels ,  81 
 Fairtrade Labeling Organization (FLO) ,  130 
 Farmer and disclosure policy ,  38 
 FDA . See  Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) 
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC) ,  162 
 FLO . See  Fairtrade Labeling Organization 
(FLO)  
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) ,  162 
 FTC . See  Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC)  
 Full information product pricing (FIPP) 
systems  ,  152 ,  159 ,  164 
 advanced technologies ,  60 
 CIDIBB ,  61 ,  62 
 development ,  63 
 information asymmetry ,  63 
 institutional trust ,  60 
 production ,  64 
 social computing ,  60 
 and trust ,  94 
 G 
 GoodGuide ,  3 
 Governance processes 
 challenges ,  150 
 consumers trust ,  150 
 dynamic process ,  151 
 EU’s Platform ,  153 
 hierarchical ,  151 
 international trade ,  152 
 models ,  152 
 network ,  152 
 nongovernmental regulation ,  154 
 policymakers ,  149 
 regulations prohibit/limit ,  154 
 state and non-state regulatory 
systems  ,  152 
 technology development ,  149 
 Government strategies and policies ,  2 
 H 
 Hard law collaborative  s tandards and , 
 161–162 
 I 
 I-Choose project ,  4–7 ,  27 ,  31 ,  158 
 Information assurance . See  Certiﬁ cation and 
Inspection Data Infrastructure 
Building Block (CIDIBB)  
 Information asymmetry 
 degree ,  28 
 reducing ,  29 
 supply chains ,  30 
 Information collection processes ,  33 
 cost ,  39 
 Information disclosure 
 integrity ,  39–41 
 policy approach ,  29 
 risks ,  38 
Index

204
 Information ﬂ ow 
 barriers ,  28 
 certiﬁ cation information ,  33 
 trading information ,  33 
 Information integration ,  31 ,  33 
 barriers ,  30 
 Information security ,  111 ,  112 ,  114–119 
 access rights 
 authentication and authorization 
process  ,  118 
 governance mechanisms ,  118 
 inference attack ,  117 ,  118 
 maintenance ,  112 
 protocols ,  119 
 repercussions, information 
sharing ,  117 
 stakeholders ,  116 
 access-control policies ,  124 
 beneﬁ ts, opening data ,  123 
 certiﬁ ed coffee domain ,  113 ,  114 
 challenges ,  111 
 complexity ,  110 
 conﬁ dentiality and privacy ,  123 
 data quality (see  Data quality ) 
 ﬂ exible trust management ,  125 
 legitimate access 
 data integrity ,  116 
 data ownership ,  115 
 description ,  111 
 disclosure policies ,  115 
 nutritious contents ,  114 
 monitoring and enforcement ,  124 
 policies and culture ,  122 ,  123 
 semantic web technology ,  110 ,  125 
 smart disclosure ,  110 
 International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) 
 certiﬁ cations scheme ,  155 ,  156 
 NATC ,  164 
 Interoperable data platform ,  39–42 
 conditions to development ,  39 
 business model creation ,  42 
 collaborative governance model ,  42 
 ensuring information integrity ,  
39–41 
 information policy design ,  41 
 semantic compatibilities ,  41 
 I-Choose ,  34 
 ISO . See  International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO)  
 ISO 14020 standard ,  155 ,  156 
 K 
 Key stakeholders ,  27 ,  41 
 L 
 Labeling 
 consumers ,  71 
 operational scope of a certiﬁ cation ,  
72 ,  73 
 Linked data ,  94 
 M 
 Mexican coffee ,  5 ,  6 
 N 
 NAD . See  National Advertising Division of 
the Better Business Bureau (NAD)  
 NAFTA ,  19 ,  27 ,  31 ,  131 ,  161 
 NATC . See  North American Traceability 
Council (NATC) 
 National Advertising Division of the Better 
Business Bureau (NAD)  ,  162 
 National Organic Program (NOP) ,  69 
 National Science Foundation funded study ,  4 
 Natural forest ecosystem ,  5 
 Nescafé Plan 
 calculative trust ,  56 
 Common Code for the Coffee Community 
(4C) ,  55 
 company history ,  55 
 institutional trust ,  56 
 relational trust ,  57 
 traceability system ,  56 
 trust pattern over time ,  59 
 Nestlé supply chain ,  32 
 New Public Management (NPM) paradigm ,  8 
 Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) ,  3 
 Nongovernmental regulation ,  154 
 North American Free Trade Agreement ,  5 
 North American Traceability Council (NATC) 
 peer-reviewed process ,  165 
 stakeholders ,  164 
 “virtual ISO” ,  164 
 O 
 Ontology ,  91 
 CIDIBB (see  Certiﬁ cation and Inspection 
Data Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB) ) 
 economic theory ,  90 
 FIPP systems and trust ,  94 
 information asymmetries, virtual 
certiﬁ cates (see  Virtual certiﬁ cates ) 
 organic market ,  91 
 semantic web applications ,  94 ,  95 
 Organic coffee ,  6 ,  36 
Index

205
 P 
 Policymakers ,  3 ,  12 ,  15 ,  16 
 Potemkin attributes ,  29 
 Privacy, information security 
 awareness ,  123 
 and conﬁ dentiality ,  123 
 policies ,  123 
 Private product data disclosure ,  4 ,  11 ,  12 ,  15 ,  16  
 barriers ,  14 
 access  vs. privacy ,  16 
 competition and commercial 
sensitivity ,  15 
 data quality ,  15 
 disclosure cost ,  15 
 interoperability ,  16 
 legal ,  15 
 beneﬁ ts to private  c ompanies ,  13 ,  14 
 citizen empowerment ,  11 
 innovation and economic growth ,  11 
 proﬁ table economic activity ,  12 
 public agencies beneﬁ ts ,  12 
 access to information ,  12 
 cost reduction ,  12 
 innovation and growth ,  12 
 public scrutiny ,  11 
 Private sector transparency ,  13 
 governance mechanism and principles , 
 163 ,  164 
 “institutional visibility” ,  163 
 NATC ,  164 
 “public and broad participation” ,  163 
( see also   Data disclosure ) 
 scholarship analyzing interest group ,  163 
 Product data disclosure ,  11 
 Provenance ,  48 ,  49 ,  51 ,  62 
 Public scrutiny ,  11 
 Public value ,  4 ,  7 ,  8 
 concept ,  7 
 concept tied approach ,  9 
 debates ,  9 
 enhance public sphere ,  9 
 Moore’s discussion ,  8 ,  9 
 participatory approach ,  9 
 strategic and long term approach ,  9 
 Purchasing decisions ,  29 
 R 
 Rainforest Alliance Network (RAN) 
 certiﬁ ed coffee ,  6 
 governance ,  78 
 market growth and coverage ,  74 
 third-party certiﬁ cations and labels ,  82 
 Rana Plaza factory ,  26 
 Roasters ,  35 
 S 
 Semantic compatibility creation ,  
41 ,  42 
 Semantic web applications ,  95 
 CIDIBB (see  Certiﬁ cation and Inspection 
Data Infra-structure Building Block 
(CIDIBB) ) 
 ﬁ eld inspector ,  95 
 linked data ,  94 
 speciﬁ cations ,  94 
 Shade-grown ,  5 
 Smart disclosure ,  27 ,  29 
 beneﬁ ts ,  29 
 policies ,  2 ,  16 
 Social computing ,  60 
 Soft law collaborative standards 
 FTC green guides ,  162 
 hybrid governance systems ,  161 
 international contexts ,  161 
 NAD ,  162 
 Streamlined information ﬂ ow ,  27 
 Supply chain management 
 attributes ,  30 
 infrastructure ,  31 
 Supply chain transparency ,  27 
 Sustainability ,  26 
 approach to improve ,  28 
 challenges ,  30 
 integrating into internal operations ,  30  
 promoting ,  26 
 supply chain partners ,  30 
 Sustainable coffee supply chain . See  Coffee 
supply chain  
 Sustainable consumption 
 literature review ,  28 ,  29 
 promoting ,  28 
 role of information ,  28 
 T 
 The Tragedy of the Commons ,  26 
 Third-party certiﬁ cation systems ,  70 
 Third-party certiﬁ ers 
 4C ,  79 
 C.A.F.E. ,  80 
 credibility and legitimacy ,  80 
 data collection challenges ,  34 ,  35 ,  37 
 decision-making process ,  78 
 FLO ,  78 
 governance mechanisms ,  78 
 vs . governance process ,  79 ,  80 
 indicators ,  78 
 RAN ,  78 
 USDA ,  80 
 UTZ ,  79 
Index

206
 Tosepan Titataniske (Together We Win) 
 calculative trust ,  53 
 fair trade ,  52 ,  53 
 institutional trust ,  53 
 relational trust ,  53 
 trust pattern over time ,  57 ,  59 
 Transparent data ,  13 
 Tropical forest ecosystems ,  5 
 Trust ,  52–56 ,  60 
 calculative ,  50 
 case selection ,  51 
 characteristics, collaborative traceability 
efforts in Mexico ,  57 ,  58 
 consumers, fundamental issue ,  48 
 data collection ,  51 
 description ,  49 
 FIPP systems (see  Full information product 
pricing (FIPP) systems ) 
 institutional ,  50 
 interview protocol ,  51 ,  52 
 Mexican Coffee supply chains 
 Bats’il Maya ,  54 ,  55 
 Nestlé Plan ,  55 ,  56 
 Tosepan Titataniske ,  52 ,  53 
 producers, roasters and retailers ,  48 
 product information ,  48 
 relational ,  50 ,  63 
 U 
 US Department of Agriculture (USDA) ,  69 
 USDA Organic 
 governance ,  80 
 market growth and coverage ,  77 
 third-party certiﬁ cations and labels ,  84 
 User conﬁ dence ,  60 
 UTZ Certiﬁ ed Good Inside 
 governance ,  79 
 market growth and coverage ,  74 
 third-party certiﬁ cations and labels ,  82 
 V 
 Virtual certiﬁ cates ,  92 
 CIDIBB (see  Certiﬁ cation and Inspection 
Data Infrastructure Building Block 
(CIDIBB) ) 
 FIPP systems ,  92 
 “Ideal Benchmark” ,  98 
 organizations ,  92 
 W 
 World Commission on Environment and 
Development (WCED) ,  26 
 World Trade Organization (WTO) ,  152 
Index

