PRIVACY 
MEANS
PROFIT
PREVENT
IDENTITY 
THEFT
 and Secure 
You and 
Your
Bottom
Line


Privacy Means
Proﬁt


Privacy Means
Proﬁt
Prevent Identity Theft
and Secure You and
Your Bottom Line
John Sileo
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

Copyright # 2010 by John Sileo. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning,
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400,
fax (978) 646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for
permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with
respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally
disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No
warranty may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You
should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author
shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any other commercial damages, including but not
limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support,
please contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974,
outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books. For more information about Wiley
products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
ISBN 978-0-470-58389-0 (cloth)
ISBN 978-0-470-77052-x (ebk)
ISBN 978-0-470-87224-1 (ebk)
ISBN 978-0-470-87225-x (ebk)
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

To my wife Mary,
the strongest, most courageous,
most important person in my life.
I’ve loved you since I was eight,
and will love you till the day I die.


Contents
Acknowledgments
ix
I Boot Camp: Privacy Means Proﬁt
1
1 Motivate the Troops
3
2 Deﬁne the Problem
16
3 Engage the Brain
35
II Basic Training: Think Like a Spy
43
4 The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
45
5 The Second Mind-Set: Destroy the Data
64
6 The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
73
7 The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs
94
8 The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk
107
9 The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy
125
10 The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs
139
III Field Combat: Target the Enemy
155
11 Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate,
Prioritize, and Adapt
157

12 Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud
174
13 Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility
194
14 Travel with Care: Business Trips and Vacations
203
15 Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails
212
16 Prioritize Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar
222
Resources
229
Notes
230
Index
233
About the Author
245
For an electronic version of The Privacy Calendar (with live links), visit
www.Sileo.com/privacy-calendar.
viii
Contents

Acknowledgments
D
uring the week that this book is published, it will have been 14 years
since I joined my family’s 40-year-old business. It will have been exactly
7 years since I found out I could be sent to prison for another man’s crimes,
and 5 years since those crimes destroyed the family business. This book is the
symbol of a delicious victory for so many people; it is tangible proof that we
took the bushel of sour lemons handed us and cooked up a sweet lemon pie.
You need to know the truth: One person doesn’t write a book. Not even
close. I am listed as the author, and get way too much of the credit; but in
reality, this accomplishment is as much about others as it is about me. And
therein lies the most enjoyable part of writing it: it brought us together like
well-written words. I owe everything to those people who stood with me
through the ugly times, serving as constant reminders that it is okay to trust
others.
To Mom and Dad, whom I get to work and play with every day at the busi-
ness we created out of the ashes. Thanks for being my perfect triumvirate—
loving parents, complementary business partners and best friends. (Mom, I
left out that comma in honor of you.)
To My Love, who is the coauthor of everything I do. To Sophie and
Makayla, you two give me all of the meaning I will ever need in life.
To Liz Crider, who brought this book to completion and kept our business
in order as I traveled the world for three months. You are a godsend to our
business, and a member of our family.
To Larry Winget, ﬁrst as my friend, second as my advisor, and third, for
getting me this book deal.
To my sister, Andrea, whose wisdom centers me and presence ﬁlls me
with joy.
To everyone on my team: You each deserve your own line of
acknowledgment:

Michael Zinanti, Brad Montgomery, Eric and Karen Peacock, Chris Rogers,
John and Kathy Robinson, Peter and Elisabeth Jacobson, Pat Connolly, Mark
Throndson, Scott Halford, Steve Spangler, Carly Reed, Lou Heckler, Scott
Friedman, Bill Morrow, Nancy Noonan, Diane Sieg, Howard Wallin, Pat
Lencioni, Lars Hanson, Michael Santarcangelo, Sue Gwillim, Brian Bostwick,
my amazing sister-in-law Julie Walters (who actually read my ﬁrst book),
Fran, Steve, Phil and Sparky Bellio, Jenny Fowler, Lesley Signal, Rachel and
Erin Batchelor, Suzanne Vaughan, Geoff Watson, Andrew Kilsby, Linda and
Jay Foley, Joseph Fanganello, Dave J., Frank E., Mary B., and everyone at the
Department of Defense, and all those mates I’ve missed. Thank you for your
patience, counsel, and friendship.
A special thanks to:
My editor, Daniel Ambrosio (and his team), at John Wiley & Sons, Inc., for
putting your faith in me and your hard work into this book.
Jim Van Dyke and everyone at Javelin Strategy & Research for your
wonderful reports, sound methodology, and ongoing help.
Larry Ponemon and Mike Spinney of the Ponemon Institute. More than
any people I know, you understand the importance of privacy.
All of the bureaus that keep my speaking schedule packed to the gills: Gail
Davis & Associates, Washington Speakers Bureau, Goodman Speakers
Bureau, FiveStar Speakers, Eagles Talent, Convention Connection, and many
others. Thank you for making privacy a proﬁtable profession.
To you, the reader, for being part of the solution.
x
Acknowledgments

I
Boot Camp:
Privacy Means
Proﬁt
People will do something—including changing
their behavior—only if it can be demonstrated
that doing so is in their own best interests as
deﬁned by their own values.
—Marshall Goldsmith,
What Got You Here Won’t Get You There


1
Motivate the Troops
P
eople don’t change bad habits until they have a compelling reason. Too
often that compelling reason is the result of a habit’s negative outcome;
but the promise of positive rewards resulting from the establishment of good
habits can be a strong motivator. In the workplace, aligning responsible infor-
mation stewardship with personal and professional gain can set the stage for
good privacy habits.
Let My Failure Motivate Your Change
At breakfast on the morning of August 12, 2003, a small and proﬁtable com-
puter company thrived at the foot of the Rocky Mountains. By lunchtime that
day, that same business was on its way to ruin. Within 12 months, due to the
theft of personal and company information, a 40-year-old family-business-
turned-software-startup was doomed, and John, heir to the prosperous enter-
prise, faced the prospect of prison for crimes he didn’t commit.
Beyond the specter of prison time for John, the situation held dire conse-
quences for his family and friends. There was a real threat that his wife and
two young daughters might be separated from their husband and father, if
John went to prison. John’s parents, who founded the company in 1964,
shouldered most of the ﬁnancial responsibility for the dying business and
experienced declining health from the resulting stress. In the end, the situa-
tion would expose a dark secret kept by John’s close friend, Doug, a recent
partner in the business.

It sounds like ﬁction, and sometimes when I’m recounting the ordeal in
front of an audience, it feels like ﬁction. But it’s 100 percent true. This is the
story of how a failure to understand the importance of data privacy not only
destroyed a healthy business, but nearly took down an entire family, as well.
If you haven’t already ﬁgured it out, I am John Sileo, the business leader
whose naı¨ve choices brought about the sad saga. Before I experienced it ﬁrst-
hand, I didn’t understand that both individual and business data privacy are
integral to running a proﬁtable company.
What happened to my business, and to me, is more common than you may
realize. The statistics throughout this book prove it. The stories I hear from
my audiences prove it. But the media headlines continue to ignore it. They
minimize massive breaches such as those that occurred at TJX, Heartland
Payment Systems, and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs with sterile,
unemotional language, and they talk about the risk of identity theft, but
rarely do these stories assess the true toll of identity theft and put a human
face on this crime.
Why is the human element missing from these stories? One reason is that
victims are often ashamed to openly share their mistakes and failures with the
world. Identity theft and its consequences can be humiliating, causing victims
to remain quiet. Another reason is that corporations don’t want the true emo-
tional costs of information crimes exposed, for fear doing so will awaken a
sleeping giant—the complacent public—and you and I might not stand for it
any longer. So they call the crime a ‘‘data breach,’’ to make it sound technical,
hence impersonal. We stay silent, and the business world makes it about
numbers instead of lives. But identity theft, or whatever you choose to call it,
is highly personal, incredibly invasive, and deeply violating.
There is a great irony underlying the division of this problem between
individuals like you and me, and businesses that experience data breach,
such as Heartland. We are one and the same. The CEO, responsible for the
corporation’s data at the highest level, has a Social Security number that is
vulnerable to theft. The executive in charge of computer systems that might
be hacked, and laptops that might be lost, has a family whose personal medi-
cal records could be on those systems. Every human resources administrator
responsible for employee records is also an employee whose private ﬁnancial
information is stored in similar ﬁles. Every janitor who disposes of sensitive
identity documents in the dumpster has identity documents of his own that
could be improperly discarded in the trash.
4
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Therein lies the ﬁrst step in our solution: You must recognize that you could
be the victim of this crime just as easily as you could be the source. You are
the CEO, the IT manager, the HR administrator, the janitor, the employee,
and the individual.
Corporate data privacy starts by training a roomful of potential identity
theft victims. Teach the CEO and the janitor to understand the destructive
emotional and ﬁnancial impact in personal, human terms that relate directly
to them (e.g., the loss of their own medical records) and you have the founda-
tion for an effective privacy leader at any level of the organization.
I was forced to make this connection between personal responsibility and
workplace responsibility by being the victim and the source. I share my story
here both as John Sileo, husband and father, and as John Sileo, business exec-
utive, so that my pain can guide your progress. Your responsibility is to let my
failures motivate and inform your change. I am the example you can hold up
to your employees and yourself so that all of you come to understand the
consequences of the apathy, ignorance, and inaction that make this a difﬁcult
crime to avoid.
This is why you need to read this book, whether you are an individual con-
cerned about guarding your ﬁnancial well-being or a business leader who is
responsible for maintaining the trust and reputation that your employees and
customers have placed in you. You could just as easily be the source as the vic-
tim, and it is your responsibility to protect against both.
The Three Enemies of Privacy:
Apathy, Ignorance, and Inaction
When it comes to identity theft and data breach, I’m guessing that your ﬁrst
response is to do nothing. After all, you think, it’s not your fault; it’s not your
responsibility; it’s too difﬁcult a problem. You have been trained in the behavior
of apathy: to care little about protecting your private information. In fact, you
have been conditioned to give it away without a second thought, armed with
excuses as to why you don’t need to act: ‘‘It won’t happen to me.’’ ‘‘I’ll get to it
later.’’ ‘‘It’s out of my control.’’
Rubbish.
It is human nature to invest time to prevent tragedy only after we’ve expe-
rienced the pain that results from apathy. We hop on the treadmill and order
from the healthy menu only after our heart screams for attention. We install a
Motivate the Troops
5

home security system only after we’ve been robbed. Pain motivates action,
but the damage is usually done.
If you know what matters to you, it’s easier to commit to change. If you can’t
identify what matters to you, you won’t know when it’s being threatened.
And in my experience, people only change their ways when what they truly
value is threatened.
—Marshall Goldsmith,
What Got You Here Won’t Get You There (pp. 29–32)
Similarly, we come to grasp the true value of our personal information only
after an identity theft or data breach incident occurs that affects us. When
your bank calls to tell you that your ATM number was skimmed and your
account emptied by a criminal in another state, or when the IRS informs you
that your recent tax ﬁling was incorrect because an undocumented worker
obtained employment using your Social Security number, the problem be-
comes personal and you’ve got a mess on your hands. The good news is that
your willingness to read Privacy Means Proﬁt sets you apart from the apathetic
crowd. By buying this book and learning more about the problem of identity
theft, you have taken the ﬁrst step toward protecting yourself, personally
and professionally.
I wasn’t so lucky: I ignored my ﬁrst minor identity theft ‘‘heart attack.’’ Just
months before my business was destroyed by data theft, I disregarded a warn-
ing that should have awakened me to this crime. Days after moving into a
new neighborhood, a woman stole my identity out of a garbage bag full of
unshredded home-loan documents. ‘‘They’re just harmless copies,’’ I thought
to myself as I threw them out. I didn’t even consider identity theft, and I cer-
tainly didn’t own a shredder.
Using my Social Security number to gain access to my credit proﬁle, the
thief purchased her ﬁrst home (my second) in another state. Unable to keep
up with the mortgage payments, she defaulted on the loan and started bank-
ruptcy proceedings—in my name. The police declined to investigate (too
much of a backlog, they claimed) and I was left alone to endure hundreds of
hours cleaning up the mess, ﬁling police reports, repairing my credit, dealing
with collection agencies—all on my dime. I ended up spending many weeks
of hard-earned vacation time recovering from a crime that could have been
prevented with only minutes of effort. My ignorance about the real costs of
6
Privacy Means Proﬁt

this crime, and even the most basic means of prevention, meant that I had to
learn ﬁrsthand, the hard and expensive way.
You can learn from my failures, and from the knowledge I gained in the
process. In my experience, the most successful people (as measured by happi-
ness, income, and peace of mind), and the most successful businesses (as
measured by proﬁtability, customer loyalty, and employee satisfaction) under-
stand that it is easier and far less expensive to prevent a disaster than to re-
cover from one. It’s why we exercise, teach our kids to respect ﬁre and avoid
strangers, diversify our ﬁnancial investments, and stay out of dark alleys in
rough neighborhoods. It’s why businesses back up data, perform criminal
background checks on job candidates, and provide employee training about
many types of risk prevention.
It’s no surprise then that successful corporations and insightful individuals
apply this same prevention-minded strategy to secure one of their most valu-
able assets: information. They realize that, in a world where information is
currency and knowledge is power, privacy means proﬁt.
Privacy means proﬁt applies to both individuals and businesses. The
more effectively you protect your private information, the more secure your
ﬁnances—your personal net worth or your organization’s bottom line—will
be. I lost nearly $300,000 to identity theft and data breach, and that doesn’t
even account for the two years I spent recovering rather than earning a salary.
Consider the following statistics that illustrate why privacy means proﬁt:
 The TJX data breach loss was estimated at $4.5–$8.6 billion,1 at $100 to
$182 per breached record, as estimated by experts.
 Heartland Payment Systems stock value declined 64 percent in the days
after it acknowledged a data breach.2
 The average data breach costs $6.75 million (see Figure 1.1).3
 The number of breaches are up 47 percent in a one-year period.4
 In 2008, 285 million records were breached.5
 Of individuals affected by a data breach, 31 percent will terminate their
relationship with the company that lost their information.6
The math behind the proﬁtability of privacy is as simple as a proﬁt-and-
loss calculation:
Revenues  Expenses ¼ Proﬁt
Motivate the Troops
7

Data Theft ¼ Signiﬁcant Expense (stock depreciation, customer attrition,
lawsuits, victim credit repair, brand damage)
Theft Recovery Expenses > Prevention Expenses
In other words, safe data is proﬁtable data. And protecting customer data,
employee records, and intellectual property isn’t just good business, it’s the
right thing to do.
Despite experiencing the actual costs of identity theft at a personal level at
the hands of a dumpster diver, initially I did nothing to further protect my-
self, nor did I adapt and apply my knowledge at a business level. I gave in to
the ﬁnal enemy of privacy: inaction. It was my refusal to adapt what I had
learned personally to a broader sphere of privacy as it applies to business that
brings us back to the sunny morning of August 12, 2003.
Inaction Destroyed My Business
It was my business decision to form a joint venture with Doug, a business
colleague who had become a close friend while consulting to my computer
company. Together, we built an Internet software business that was proﬁtable
by its third month, providing the lion’s share of revenue sustaining our opera-
tions and 11 employees. I was entranced by how proﬁtable we were, by the
ﬁnancial upside of being a successful entrepreneur in a hot industry, and by
how easily it all came together.
FIGURE 1.1
Average Total Cost of Data Breach by Year
Source: ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ 2010, Ponemon Institute.
8
Privacy Means Proﬁt

It seemed too good to be true. And so it was.
In the headiness of our success, I failed to verify the credentials of my new
friend and business partner. I didn’t thoroughly interview his references,
question his willingness to jump ship from a stable and lucrative job to a
highly risky venture, or perform even a simple criminal background check. It
didn’t seem necessary; after all, Doug worked harder and for longer hours
than anyone else in the company. Eventually, I gave him access to the com-
pany computer systems, accounting software, and bank accounts. He knew
many of my passwords, had access to personal ﬁles in my ofﬁce, and enjoyed
the privileges of trust with little monitoring of his activities. He was such a
good ﬁt as a business partner that my wife and father both commented pro-
phetically that he was too good to be true. At one point, my father even advised
that he wouldn’t put his trust in a business partner until that trust was earned,
and that earning trust should take at least ﬁve years.
I agreed, but thinking something and acting on it are two entirely different
things.
I realize that handing over so much control so quickly must seem terribly
naı¨ve to you—and it was (in this case, naı¨vete that was the by-product of
apathy, ignorance, and inaction). Yet I see the same story replay itself over and
over again in businesses much larger than mine. After all, Doug was a friend
and a very intelligent man, and he knew how to use those qualities to engineer
my trust. We worked together almost two years before he started taking ad-
vantage of me, all the while treating me like family.
Doug used my unprotected identity and the company’s private customer
data to embezzle nearly $300,000 from our clients over the course of 18
months. On August 12, 2003, during a phone call, our biggest client
threatened to put me in jail for the thefts, since it was my name that ap-
peared throughout the criminal paper trail. Several days later, an investiga-
tor from the Denver District Attorney’s ofﬁce contacted me and started
what would become a two-year battle to prove my innocence and stay out
of jail.
During that time, our software business failed (despite being proﬁtable
even without embezzled income), the 40-year-old family computer business
failed, and I lived under the constant cloud of possibly going to prison for
crimes I didn’t commit.
I was, however, guilty of one thing: refusing to take responsibility for the
safety of personal and business data.
Motivate the Troops
9

Despite the huge ﬁnancial losses we suffered, the most painful aspects of
this ordeal turned out to be the two years of quality time I lost with my wife
and kids while ﬁghting business battles, the negative effects it had on my par-
ent’s health, and the deep bitterness I felt at being betrayed by a close friend.
Money can always be earned back; time and relationships cannot.
After a stint in a psychiatric hospital, Doug eventually went to jail, but
for only 18 days. His sentence didn’t feel like justice to me; nevertheless,
and even after all he put me and my family through, I made the decision
to focus on what I could control rather than the severity of Doug’s punish-
ment. After two cases of identity theft and two years of recovery, I ﬁnally
took responsibility for protecting my identity and the identities touched by
my business.
Eventually, from the ashes of my former profession rose a new career, a
new life, and a new respect for privacy. Passing what I have learned on to
audiences around the world—and to you—is the only ﬁtting justice for
this ordeal.
Business Relevance
As a business leader, it is essential that you clearly understand the rela-
tionship between identity theft, data breach, and your bottom line. Here
is a crash course, from my perspective.
One of the costliest data security mistakes I see executives make is to
initially approach data privacy from the perspective of the company. They
don’t recognize the following reality: All privacy is personal.
In other words, no one in your organization will care about data secu-
rity, privacy policies, intellectual property protection, or data breach until
they understand what it has to do with them. If your employees and
executives don’t care about protecting their own identities (to prevent
identity theft), how can you expect them to care about protecting corpo-
rate identity (to prevent data breach)? Like the emergency oxygen masks
on a depressurized airplane, it’s important to put your own on ﬁrst, or
you’ll be worthless to those around you. Protecting yourself ﬁrst isn’t
self-centered; it’s effective and educational. Security begins at the
human level and expands outward to the group level.
10
Privacy Means Proﬁt

I recently delivered a speech at the Pentagon as part of an ongoing
ﬁnancial literacy campaign run by the Department of Defense. After the
speech, an Air Force commander asked me why he was having such a
hard time convincing his younger soldiers to protect sensitive military
data. Their risky behavior included inadvertently tweeting troop locations,
posting photos of fellow soldiers on their Facebook walls, and surﬁng on
unprotected wireless networks. The problem, which has been publicly
documented, has led the Pentagon to ban social networking from at
least one branch of the military (at time of publication).
When I asked the commander how many of his men and women had
been trained to understand the value of protecting their own personal
information (i.e., how many had just attended the ﬁnancial literacy
event), he immediately drew the connection: Good personal privacy
habits lead to good professional privacy practices. Change always takes
place at the personal level ﬁrst.
The end game for business leaders is to build a Culture of Privacy
within their organizations, to make security part of the daily fabric, part of
the mission and vision of their companies. A Culture of Privacy exists
when every member of the organization (especially the CEO) believes in
the need to protect his or her own private information, as well as cus-
tomer data, employee records, and intellectual property.
This foundation of belief is clearly lacking among corporate executives.
Look at the key ﬁndings of the Ponemon Institute/Ounce Labs study,
‘‘Business Case for Data Protection,’’ which surveyed C-level executives
(CEO, CFO, COO, CIO, CSO, etc.) about data protection inside of their
corporations (emphasis mine):
 Of the C-level executives surveyed 82 percent said that their organi-
zations had experienced a data breach, and many of them are posi-
tive they cannot prevent a repeat performance.
 Of the CEOs surveyed, 53 percent said that the CIO is responsible
for data protection, yet only 24 percent of the other C-levels would
point to the CIO as the one responsible for data protection overall.
 Of those who are said to be in charge of data protection, 85 percent
don’t believe that a failure to stop a data breach would impact
their job.
(continued )
Motivate the Troops
11

(continued )
In other words, C-level executives admit that a breach has already
happened, are fairly certain it will happen again, recognize they are un-
prepared to stop a recurrence, and yet can’t clearly identify who will be
held responsible; nor do they feel that they will be held accountable
when the inevitable happens. At this stage, building a Culture of Privacy
is mostly bluster.
The result is that many organizations try to implement privacy policies
and practices without actually believing in their mission. Instead of foster-
ing a voluntary Culture of Privacy, they end up force-feeding an in-
voluntary Regime of Privacy, and fall back into apathy when the fear
wears off.
The most effective way to build a Culture of Privacy is to break it down
into three simple steps (most corporations skip the ﬁrst step, dooming
them to failure):
1. Motivate the individual. Train your employees and executives on
how to protect their own information ﬁrst. Learning the basic princi-
ples of privacy at an individual level is a prerequisite for all subse-
quent forms of data security, and supplies the necessary
motivation to apply the same habits at work. All employees need to
overcome their own apathy, ignorance, and inaction before they
are equipped to protect corporate assets. This book is aimed at
making it personal. By learning to protect their own identities, your
executives and employees are acquiring the building blocks neces-
sary to construct a corporate Culture of Privacy. Identity theft train-
ing is good for their wellness, and is a means to a safer and more
proﬁtable end.
2. Empower the team. Employees alone do not have the authority or
resources to act. By empowering cross-departmental teams (who
already understand privacy at a personal level) with the authority
and resources to focus on low-hanging security fruit (e.g., laptop
computers, document shredding, wireless surﬁng), you make im-
mediate progress and win crucial organizational buy-in. In contrast,
organizations with a Regime of Privacy tend to force data security
into a silo (e.g., ‘‘It’s the IT department’s responsibility’’—see
12
Privacy Means Proﬁt

How to Get the Most Out of This Book
You will notice that this book is organized differently from other books on
identity theft, which are typically structured around tasks and to-do lists
(e.g., protecting your mail, shredding documents, etc.). While Privacy Means
Proﬁt covers all of those tasks in the Action Items feature of each chapter, it
embeds them within broader concepts of protection such as eliminate, destroy,
statistics cited previously), never taking into account the vital role
played by legal counsel, compliance ofﬁcers, the CFO, human re-
sources, and even facilities maintenance. In a Culture of Privacy,
the team is integrated, and the results are more enduring.
3. Lead by example. There is nothing that undermines a Culture of
Privacy faster than an executive team that doesn’t practice what
they preach. A CEO who surfs unprotected in the airport, or refuses
to invest in deskside shredders, will send a hypocritical message
echoing throughout the corporation: ‘‘Privacy doesn’t really matter;
we’re just going through the motions.’’ In the same manner, a CEO
who appoints some form of chief data protection ofﬁcer but
doesn’t supply the vision, budget, or authority to make it happen is
the same CEO whose data breach catastrophe shows up on the
front page of the Wall Street Journal.
Look closely at the Contents for Privacy Means Proﬁt. The chapter
headings provide a road map for the individual steps to take in building
your Culture of Privacy. Begin with a privacy boot camp, where you moti-
vate change before you demand it. Deﬁne what data is at risk, where it
lives, and why it needs to be protected. Engage your troops with simple,
memorable tools. During basic training, teach them to eliminate, destroy,
secure, lock, evaluate, interrogate, and monitor at-risk information. Don’t
try to implement the strategy overnight. Instead, target the enemy by
adapting, accumulating, and prioritizing your security campaigns. These
are the skills you will develop at a personal level by reading the remain-
der of this book.
Motivate the Troops
13

lock, and so forth. These mind-sets can then be easily adapted and applied in
the workplace.
By training you at the conceptual level and reinforcing what you learn with
very speciﬁc action items to complete, you will walk away with a much
broader and more ﬂexible understanding of protecting yourself and your
workplace. Giving you only checklists won’t protect you over the long term,
because identity thieves change their methods of attack, rendering any static
checklist obsolete as soon as it is printed. By learning the concepts, you will
have a dynamic skill-set to apply both today and in the future, at home and
at work.
Each chapter contains three features:
The Mind-set: The ﬁrst layer of protection is a mind-set, or a habitual way
of thinking about your private information that will trigger alarms in
your head when your identity is at risk. For example, instead of having
to remember to shred lists of speciﬁc documents, you will develop the
habit of destroying any private information that will be handled by
others. I describe this mind-set as ‘‘think like a spy,’’ and I will explain it
in detail in Part II.
Action Item Checklist: The second layer of protection is a series of speciﬁc
action items (to-do steps) that should be completed to protect your per-
sonal identity. I use the action items in each chapter to illustrate and
reinforce exactly how you start to think like a spy. When you are shred-
ding old bank statements, for example, you aren’t just checking an item
off your action list. You are reinforcing the habit of destroying anything
with a piece of your identity on it that you no longer need. These action
items are based on statistical data showing how identities are most com-
monly stolen and who steals them. The action items provide the most
immediate and practical form of protection.
Business Relevance: In relevant chapters, I bridge the knowledge of how
to protect yourself personally with how to expand that into your work-
place. For example, once you have learned to properly shred sensitive
documents at home, it is much easier to apply a more sophisticated
form of shredding at work. This feature is targeted primarily at business
leaders who are trying to protect their organizations against data breach
and workplace identity theft, but it will be informative for individuals as
well. If you are an employee at a corporation, association, university, or
14
Privacy Means Proﬁt

small business, you must realize that protecting organizational data is vital
not only to your company’s proﬁtability, but for your job security.
Give a man a ﬁsh and you feed him for a day. Teach a man to ﬁsh and you
feed him for a lifetime.
—Lao Tzu
By reading Privacy Means Proﬁt both for the concepts as well as the action
items, you will learn to ‘‘ﬁsh’’ for yourself. If you are anxious to complete
the checklists ﬁrst (i.e., feed yourself today), skip to Chapter 16, ‘‘Prioritize
Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar,’’ and return to the other chapters as you
have time.
Motivate the Troops
15

2
Deﬁne the Problem
U
ntil we know exactly what we need to be protecting, we are simply wast-
ing time and money. The most cost-effective and efﬁcient way to imple-
ment change begins with deﬁning terms and outlining a plan of attack. This
chapter looks at what makes up identity in its entirety, where it ‘‘lives,’’ and
how it is stolen.
What Is Identity?
In the realm of daily life, identity is how we deﬁne or describe ourselves—as a
mother, wife, piano player, author, and so on. But in the realm of privacy and
‘‘identity theft,’’ we focus on a subset of identity called data identity, which is
how others, usually companies, associations, or governments, deﬁne or refer-
ence us. For the purposes of this book, however, I will refer to data identity
simply as identity.
Identity is made up of any name, number, or attribute that provides informa-
tion on us or allows access into further personal data about us. Identity is almost
always used to link us to money, special privileges, or access. For example,
our Social Security number connects us to our credit ﬁle, retirement and un-
employment beneﬁts, and tax obligations. According to the ‘‘2009 Identity
Fraud Survey Report,’’ Social Security numbers top the list of compromised
data among victims, at 38 percent.1 Frequent-ﬂyer numbers give access to
our accrued mileage and membership beneﬁts; supermarket loyalty cards
to our buying habits and product preferences. Technology has made it easier

to replicate these forms of identity for fraudulent purposes. High-resolution
scanners and printers have made reproducing licenses, checks, and other
identity documents a simple affair for identity thieves.
Identity [f]raud is rising and has reported an increase in crimes of opportu-
nity mostly due to economic misfortune and the need for immediate gains.
This increase is supported by an increasingly global, hierarchal, specialized
criminal enterprise, as well as the upsurge of a secondary market for ﬁnan-
cial information and the availability of inexpensive toolkits for defrauding
that can make anyone a professional identity thief.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report’’ (p. 9),
Javelin Strategy & Research
As older identity technologies are compromised, newer forms will appear,
such as biometrics. For example, it is becoming more common that our ﬁnger-
prints and voice patterns are used to identify and distinguish us. These forms
of identity veriﬁcation mechanisms have drawbacks and can be compromised
as well, which is why we need to progress beyond simple checklists into
habits of privacy that apply to any technology.
The following is a comprehensive (but not exhaustive) list of the items,
numbers, and attributes that deﬁne our identities. I have left blank spaces at
the end for you to include additional pieces of your identity makeup. It is
important that you study this list, as it is the foundation for the rest of the
book. If you don’t know what comprises your identity, and deﬁne what is at
risk, you won’t be able to protect it from thieves.
Social Security number
Full name
Aliases, nicknames (‘‘nics’’), pseudonyms (‘‘nyms’’), also-known-as’es
(AKAs)
Current address(es)
Prior addresses
Family members’ names and contact information
Driver’s license number
Date of birth
Bank account number(s)
Deﬁne the Problem
17

Investment account number(s)
Computer password(s)
Internet password(s)
Credit card number(s)
Debit card numbers(s)
Insurance policy number(s)
ATM PIN(s)
Phone number(s)
Cell number(s)
E-mail address(es)
Username(s)
Mother’s maiden name
Historical information (high school mascot, etc.)
Biometrics
Photographs
Video
Fingerprint
Footprint
Iris scan
Retinal scan
Gait proﬁle (identiﬁes the particular and unique way you walk)
Facial scan
Voice pattern
Tissue samples
DNA
Height, weight, hair and eye color
Sex
Ethnicity
Nationality
Citizenship
Computer IP address(es)
Occupation
Loyalty numbers (e.g., frequent ﬂyer, grocery)
Garage door and alarm codes
Religion
Political afﬁliations
Memberships
18
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Professional associations
Military identiﬁcation
Vehicle VIN number(s)
License plate(s)
Personality proﬁles (e.g., Myers-Briggs)
Sexual preference
_______________
_______________
_______________
Common Sources of Identity
It is equally important to know where these individual pieces of identity can be
found. Once you start to think about it, you’ll realize the astounding number of
places where your identity exists. Please take the time now to indicate the
items on the list here that affect you or your family. For example, if you have a
driver’s license, put a checkmark in the box. This checklist will serve as a list
of the identity items that you need to protect as you complete each chapter.
In 2008, 43 percent of fraud victims had their names and addresses stolen,
while 38 percent had their Social Security numbers obtained. Your Social
Security number is the single most lucrative information to the criminal.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
On Your Person (wallet, purse, briefcase, cell phone, PDA)
Driver’s license
Proof of insurance
ID cards (military, student)
Checks
Social Security card
Cell phone
Credit cards
Debit cards
Personal digital assistants (PDAs)
Credit card receipts
Deﬁne the Problem
19

Medical cards
Address book(s)
Membership cards
Passport
Business cards
In Your Home (mail, desk, ﬁling cabinet, safe, trash containers)
Credit card statements
Bank statements
Credit union statements
Investment/brokerage statements
Insurance statements
Utility statements
Mortgage statements
Financial statements
Social Security statements
Insurance policies
Association and membership documents
Wills, deeds, and trusts
Power-of-attorney documents
Living wills
Cancelled checks
New checks
Pay stubs
Medical records
Tax records
Birth certiﬁcates
Passports
Mortgage/loan documents
Titles
Lease and purchase agreements
Death certiﬁcates
Adoption papers
Immigration, citizenship papers
Marriage license
Divorce papers
20
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Custody papers
Court orders
_______________
_______________
_______________
On Your Computer
Contact manager and e-mail programs (e.g., Outlook, Apple’s Address
Book, ACT)
Software (e.g., Quicken, Money)
CD-ROMS and DVDs
Floppy disks
USB thumb drives
Across wireless networks
Across Bluetooth devices
Spreadsheets
PDFs
Word documents
PowerPoint documents
Online
Online retailers (e.g., Amazon)
Financial institutions (e.g., banks, brokerages, credit unions, insurance
companies)
Google (e.g., Gmail, Contacts, Search History, Calendar)
Social networks (e.g., Facebook, MySpace, LinkedIn, Twitter)
Online bill pay services
Directory services (e.g., Spokeo.com, Zabasearch.com, Intelius.com,
Pipl.com, Whitepages.com)
Reunion websites (e.g., Classmates.com)
‘‘Find a friend’’ websites
In Your Car
Car registration
Proof of insurance
Deﬁne the Problem
21

Repair receipts
_______________
_______________
_______________
At Work
Customer data
Personnel records
Intellectual capital
Trade secrets
Computer
Identiﬁcation cards
Company cell phone
_______________
_______________
_______________
In Public
Government documents (e.g., birth certiﬁcates, driver’s license number,
addresses, real estate records, Social Security number, criminal records,
property tax rolls, income tax documents, vehicle registration, passport)
Licensing entities (ﬁshing, hunting, driver’s, marriage)
Property deeds and records
Criminal records
In Data Warehouses and Businesses
Businesses keep records on us to sell to other businesses for marketing
purposes or to market directly to us, such as:
Credit bureaus (e.g., Experian, Equifax, TransUnion, Innovis)
Data aggregators (e.g., ChoicePoint, Lexis/Nexis, Acxiom)
Retail stores
Credit card companies
In Our Brains!
We store much of our identity information in our heads and share
it verbally.
22
Privacy Means Proﬁt

How Individuals’ Identities Are Stolen
(It’s Not All Cybercrime)
From listening to the media, you would think that the Internet and cybercrime
are to blame for most cases of identity theft. Statistics, however, prove they are
not. Cybercrime accounts for only 11 percent of actual identity fraud cases,
according to the latest Javelin Strategy & Research study,1 and online shopping
accounts for a meager 1 percent! When it comes to victims having their identity
stolen when making in-store purchases, women have a 94 percent incidence
rate, and men only a 43 percent rate. This is attributed primarily to the fact
that women shop more in stores, whereas men shop more online (or not at all).
There is an important lesson in this confusion between reality and percep-
tion: Don’t automatically believe everything you hear, especially in the media
(see Chapter 8, ‘‘Evaluate the Risk’’). It’s sexy to write about cybercrime, but
the disproportionate amount of attention it receives gives us a false sense that
it is the leading cause of identity theft.
The following summarizes the results of the 2009 Javelin Strategy & Re-
search ﬁndings on how your identity information was obtained:2
 Technology plays a smaller role in identity theft than we perceive.
 Most known cases of fraud are committed when the criminal has direct,
physical access to the victim’s information.
 Of identity theft cases where the victims knew how their information
was obtained, 43 percent were the result of a lost or stolen wallet, check-
book, credit card, or physical document—which means you can remove
almost half of your risk by following the guidelines in Chapter 4, ‘‘Elim-
inate the Source,’’ alone.
 Thirty-one percent of identity theft cases happen because another institu-
tion mishandles a victim’s data (i.e., data breach).
 Friends and family members are the thieves in a signiﬁcant number of
identity theft cases.
With those statistics in mind, let’s apply the proﬁtability of privacy formula
to each layer of protection based on estimated percentages of reported cases
of identity theft gathered from a number of sources, as shown in the following
table. For the sake of this exercise, imagine that your identity is worth
$100,000. (On average, it is worth far more than that, but setting the value at
Deﬁne the Problem
23

this ﬁgure makes the math easier.) As you apply each layer of protection
(thereby lessening the dollar amount stolen by the corresponding percentage
of the crime), your risk diminishes to a point where stealing your identity is
no longer attractive to criminals. They are better served moving on to the
next victim, who has done nothing to protect his or her identity.
Proﬁtability of Your Identity to a Thief as You Begin to Protect Yourself
Solution
% of Risk
Reduction
Value of Your
Identity to a
Thief
No protections taken
NA
$100,000
Protect your wallet, checks, credit cards, and
take steps to minimize damage, in case they
are stolen. (Eliminate)
35
$65,000
Lock up or destroy identity lying around your
home, for friends and family to steal. (Lock,
Destroy)
15
$50,000
Protect your computer from viruses, spyware,
botnets, and hackers. (Secure)
20
$30,000
Know how to prevent retail identity theft in
restaurants, stores, and in any other
circumstance your credit card leaves your
sight. (Evaluate)
15
$15,000
Protect incoming and outgoing mail. (Lock,
Destroy)
5
$10,000
Cut in half the amount of data you make
available to businesses that could become the
source of data theft. (Evaluate, Interrogate)
5
$5,000
Your identity is now worth 1/20 of its original value, giving the thief greater
incentive to move on to another victim, rather than to continue to wring dollars out
of your data.
Deﬁning Common Methods of Theft
What methods do identity thieves use? Where are you vulnerable? The more
you know about criminal methods, the louder the alarms will ring when you
encounter one of these situations. In the list here I describe a number of the
common methods thieves use to steal identities. Following each method,
24
Privacy Means Proﬁt

enclosed in parentheses and set in boldface (e.g., Monitor) is the mind-set
you need to assume to help you combat the particular method.
ATM Skimming: A spy installs a ‘‘skimmer’’ on an ATM machine to capture
your card number, expiration date, name, and other valuable informa-
tion. Coupled with shoulder surﬁng (or a hidden camera), this gives a
spy everything he or she needs to drain your bank account. (Evaluate)
Cell Phone Cloning: A cloned cell phone is reprogrammed to transmit the
electronic serial number and telephone number of a legitimate cell
phone, which is then billed for the calls made from the cloned cell
phones. (Monitor)
Computer Hacking: A spy uses spyware, viruses, or hacking tools to access
the information on your computer—usually passwords, credit card
numbers, and bank accounts. (Secure)
Cross-site Scripting: An existing website’s vulnerabilities are exploited to
download malware onto the computers of users who visit the website.
(Secure)
Data Breach: An organization (corporation, nonproﬁt, association, govern-
ment, university) loses your private information (e.g., Heartland Pay-
ment Systems, TJX). Many times it is stolen by one of the other
methods. (Monitor)
Dumpster Diving: A spy (or thief) rummages through your home or busi-
ness garbage looking for documents that allow them to exploit existing
accounts or set up new credit card accounts, establish phone service,
drain bank accounts, take out loans, and more. (Destroy)
Evil Twinning: A spy sets up a wireless network identical to the one at
your favorite wireless hotspot (e.g., an Internet cafe). When you log on
to the network, the hacker is able to browse your computer and steal
data. (Secure)
Friendly Fraud: A friend, family member, contract laborer, or domestic
help (here, the spy) takes identity documents out of your home or busi-
ness, or copies down information and leaves the materials. These are the
most difﬁcult criminals to catch, and their crimes carry the highest price
tag. These types of thieves often use the information they steal to ﬁle
bankruptcy, take out a car loan, pay drug or gambling debts, or present
an alternate identity if they are arrested. (Eliminate, Destroy, Secure,
Lock, Monitor)
Deﬁne the Problem
25

Keylogging: Spyware that captures every keystroke an individual makes on
a computer (login information, passwords, account numbers, etc.). Key-
loggers are rampant on public computers (such as those in the library,
hotel business centers, and Internet cafes). (Secure)
Midnight Mailing: A spy cuts a hole in the bottom of blue U.S. Postal Ser-
vice mailboxes and regularly picks up mail, generally to ‘‘wash’’ checks
(using ﬁngernail polish remover to change the Pay To ﬁeld so that the
check can be made out to the thief). Many times, thieves just steal the
entire box in the middle of the night and replace it by morning. (Lock)
Old-fashioned Stealing: A spy steals or ﬁnds your lost wallet, purse, check-
book, credit card, driver’s license, passport, and so on. They also pick
up credit card receipts and checks left on restaurant tables. (Eliminate,
Evaluate)
Pharming: Computer hackers temporarily take over website addresses and
make you think you are entering information at your bank or other ﬁ-
nancial institution when you are actually doing so on the hacker’s data
collection site. They then use this data to break into your real accounts.
Knowing how they do this is less important than learning how to pro-
tect against it. (Secure, Monitor)
Phishing: A spy sends you an e-mail that appears to be from a familiar
source, such as your bank, PayPal, eBay, your brokerage, and the like.
The spy asks you to ﬁll out a form with your personal information and
uses it to break into your real account. (Evaluate, Interrogate)
Pretexting: A thief calls a ﬁnancial institution under false pretenses (pre-
tending to be someone he or she isn’t, including you). For example, a
pretexter might call a bank and pose as a customer, to obtain sensitive
information. (Secure, Lock)
Red-Flagging: A spy steals the mail from your home or business mailbox,
usually to apply for preapproved credit cards, intercept new credit and
debit cards, and to steal your new checks. Putting up the red ﬂag on
your home mailbox (hence, the name) signals identity thieves that it is
time to steal. Leaving incoming or outgoing mail stacked in your e-mail
inbox or work mailbox is an open invitation for workplace identity
theft. (Lock)
Shoulder Surﬁng: A spy peers over your shoulder at an ATM machine or
grocery store to obtain your PIN number. He or she often records your
actions using a cell phone video camera. (Evaluate)
26
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Skimming: A spy (in this case, a waiter, retail clerk, etc.) legitimately
processes your credit card but then swipes it through a handheld
‘‘skimmer’’ to subsequently use for credit card fraud. (Evaluate,
Monitor)
SMiShing: Phishing applied to the texting world. This type of theft uses
cell phone text messages to deliver the ‘‘bait,’’ which entices you to di-
vulge your personal information. The ‘‘hook’’ (the method used to actu-
ally ‘‘capture’’ your information) in the text message may be a website
URL, as in related phishing schemes. However, it has become more
common to receive a texted phone number that connects to an auto-
mated voice response system. (Evaluate)
Social Engineering: A spy manipulates data out of victims by convincing
the unwitting that they are trustworthy and have our best interests at
heart. (Evaluate, Interrogate)
Synthetic Identity Fraud: Identity thieves build a new identity by combin-
ing pieces of identity gathered from multiple sources (including you).
For example, they might use your Social Security number and someone
else’s name and address. These ﬁles are then tagged as subﬁles on vic-
tims’ credit reports, who generally won’t take notice until they apply for
credit, try to take out a loan, or, in some cases, are contacted by debt
collectors. (Monitor, Lock, Secure, Destroy)
Trojan Horse: A computer program is made to appear as a legitimate ﬁle or
software upgrade from a reliable source, thereby tricking the victim into
opening it. The Trojan horse gives intruders access to the personal infor-
mation stored on that computer. (Secure)
Vishing: A form of phishing that uses both e-mail and telephone, or just
telephone. Usually, the victim is urged to resolve an account issue and
divulge personal information to a thief posing as a representative of a
ﬁnancial institution. (Evaluate, Interrogate)
Wardriving: A spy (or war driver) drives around neighborhoods looking
for unprotected wireless networks. When such a network is discovered,
he or she uses the Internet connection to commit crimes (usually associ-
ated with pornography or methamphetamines) or to browse your com-
puter and steal information. (Secure)
Deﬁne the Problem
27

Figure 2.1 estimates the total dollar value gained by thieves using some of
these methods.
The Five Main Types of Identity Theft
The ﬁve main types of identity theft are:
 Financial
 Social Security number
 Character/criminal
 Medical
 Driver’s license
Financial
Financial identity theft is the most common and publicized form of identity
theft, and takes many forms. Some ID thefts occur when a credit or debit
card, bank account or brokerage account number, or checks are stolen.
$2,116 
$4,624 
$1,821 
$2,981 
$1,502 
$6,187 
$14,042 
$1,212 
$1,785 
$2,242 
$3,622 
$4,278 
$6,916 
$11,791 
$5,000
$0
$10,000
$15,000
Purchases or transactions
Phishing
Stolen from a financial institution
Viruses, spyware, hackers
Papermail
Lost or stolen wallet, checkbook, or
credit card
Friends, relatives, or in-home
employees
2008
2007
Q28: How was your information obtained? Keep in
mind "other" is an option. Was it obtained by Q32:
What is the approximate total dollar value of what the
person obtained while misusing your information?
October 2008, n = 157,144
Base: Victims who knew how their information was accesseds.
© 2009 Javelin Strategy & Research
FIGURE 2.1
Cost of Recovery by Source of Theft
Source: ‘‘Identity Fraud on the Rise But Consumer Costs Plummet as Protections Increase,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research, January 2009.
28
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Thieves taking a more tactical approach will complete a change-of-address
form at the post ofﬁce and have credit cards in your name sent to the new
address. Or a criminal may complete a preapproved credit card offer sent to
you in the mail, using your name, date of birth, and Social Security number,
but have the card sent to a different address they indicate on the application
form. Identity thieves also access your credit card and purchase information
through fraudulent or unsecured websites.
Check fraud often begins when the thief breaks into your mailbox. Sophis-
ticated thieves will forge your checks, or use the aforementioned check-
washing technique to change the amount and payee.
Other ﬁnancial forms of identity theft include: new account fraud, loan
fraud, payday loan schemes, Nigerian scams, and Social Security beneﬁts
fraud, among others.
Social Security Number
Your Social Security number can hold the key to your entire identity, both
personally and ﬁnancially. If a thief gets ahold of your Social Security number,
he or she can use it in a variety of ways. The most popular are to:
 Gain employment
 Open new lines of credit (loans, credit card accounts, bank accounts)
 Drain your Social Security beneﬁts so that at retirement you have
nothing.
Social Security identity theft is particularly difﬁcult to recover from.
Character/Criminal
A criminal can potentially take over your entire character and commit crimes
in your name. In these types of crimes, victims may not even know that their
identity has been hijacked until they are pulled over or receive a knock on
their front door, to learn from the police that multiple warrants are out for
their arrest.
Medical
Your medical insurance can be stolen, after which the thief racks up medical
bills in your name. This type of identity theft can be hard to detect, especially
Deﬁne the Problem
29

if you don’t make frequent visits to doctors. Not only can this type of identity
theft result in a ﬁnancial mess and be highly time-consuming, it can also be
life-threatening. If, for example, a thief’s blood type is appended to your
record, and you should one day need a transfusion, you could receive the
wrong type of blood.
Despite much of the hype surrounding ‘‘medical identity theft,’’ the data
shows that relatively few fraud victims are impacted by the theft of such
information. This area may expand as more American’s lose their employ-
ment and health insurance beneﬁts.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
In spite of the quote above, it would be unwise to assume that medical
identity theft can be ignored. It might not appear to be a signiﬁcant problem
now, but I am conﬁdent that it is becoming a more commonplace and de-
structive form of identity theft every day.
Driver’s License
An identity thief can steal your driver’s license then rent, purchase, or register
a vehicle in your name. If he or she subsequently gets into a car accident,
you could be held responsible. Even a simple trafﬁc violation or DUI will
be attached to your record, not the thief’s. Keep in mind, a stolen purse or
wallet is the major cause of identity theft, making driver’s license theft
rather common.
Business Relevance
Identity theft describes what happens to the individual, you and me,
when our private identifying information is stolen. Data breach describes
what happens when that same information is stolen from a corporation,
organization, association, university, or government agency. For the most
30
Privacy Means Proﬁt

part, the terms identity theft and data breach describe the same crime
from two different perspectives (one personal, the other corporate).
All the identity types and sources described in this chapter as being at
risk of theft are the same pieces of information that are at risk of data
breach. A criminal wants to steal your Social Security number whether it
is from you personally (identity theft) or from a corporate database (data
breach), in order to commit identity theft.
The point here for businesses is to teach their employees and execu-
tives to identify sensitive forms of business identity by ﬁrst understanding
the corresponding risks of exposing their own identity data. In other
words, if an employee at your company reads this chapter and learns to
deﬁne what makes up her own identity, so that she can protect herself
personally, she has also just familiarized herself with a majority of the
types of data that she needs to protect at your company.
(continued )
FIGURE 2.2
Average Rank of Data Believed to Be Most Critical to
the Organization’s Operation
Source: ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2010.
Deﬁne the Problem
31

According to the Ponemon Institute, more than half (56 percent) of an orga-
nization’s sensitive or conﬁdential information is contained on paper docu-
ments. Also, 53 percent of employees very often put this sensitive
information at risk by leaving these documents at communal printers, in
meeting rooms, or at meetings held outside of the ofﬁce.
—‘‘Security of Paper Documents in the Workplace,’’
Ponemon Institute, October 2008, p. 5
Failure to Deﬁne
Many organizations fail to deﬁne the problem as it relates to their company.
By answering the questions here, you will begin to familiarize yourself
with what you must know about the data inside your business in order to
protect it. Deﬁning the problem, even roughly, will begin to give you a
framework of risk against which to apply the remainder of the lessons pro-
vided in this book.
1. List exactly what sensitive information exists inside your business. Be
speciﬁc. Use the checklists given in this chapter as a starting point, then
customize the lists to meet the speciﬁc requirements of your organization.
(continued )
That said, there are several additional types of information that can be
stolen from businesses that don’t have a direct personal equivalent:
 Intellectual property
 Trade secrets
 Proﬁt-and-loss statements
 Balance sheets
 Cash ﬂow analyses
 Business strategies
 Marketing initiatives
 Pending mergers and acquisitions
 Organizational structure
32
Privacy Means Proﬁt

2. Itemize where that data ‘‘lives,’’ physically and digitally. List every possi-
ble source as speciﬁcally as possible (e.g., CRM database, accounting
system, point-of-sale system, HR ﬁles, ﬁling cabinets, computers, lap-
tops, servers, digital archives, CDs, DVDs, tape backups, thumb drives,
cell phones, ofﬁces, desks, documents, mailroom, employees).
3. Quantify the value of that data to your business. Until you know what it is
worth, you won’t be willing to protect it accordingly. To estimate the
value of your data, apply a value of $2043 to every customer record and
every employee record you collect, store, or transmit in any way. This is
FIGURE 2.3
Cost per Compromised Record of a Breach Compared by
Industry Classiﬁcation
Source: ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2010.
Deﬁne the Problem
33

the average cost per record of breach recovery. You will have to deﬁne
internally the business-speciﬁc identity (e.g., intellectual property),
according to your own formulas.
4. Identify the three most vulnerable sources of potential theft. For many busi-
nesses, the most common sources of theft are mobile data (laptops/
smart phones), document storage/disposal, and insider theft. To maxi-
mize your ROI, focus on these areas ﬁrst.
Results for the cost per data breach differ across industries, but according
to the Ponemon Institute’s Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study, the
cost to professional organizations is considerably higher than the overall av-
erage (see Figure 2.3). This suggests that these same organizations will realize
an even higher ROI than the average. Now that we have deﬁned the problem,
we are ready to begin implementing the solution, which begins when we
engage the brain in Chapter 3.
34
Privacy Means Proﬁt

3
Engage the Brain
I
f protecting data privacy is presented in the same old technical and boring
way, no one will listen or retain the knowledge long enough to put it to use.
Our task is to make data protection interesting and easy to remember. We
must ﬁnd a way to engage the brain. For attention and memory’s sake, we
almost want to make a game out of security, but without diminishing the seri-
ousness of our task. Have you ever used a mnemonic device (usually in the
form of a verbal memory aid) to help you remember the items on a test? A
classic example is using the name Roy G. Biv to remember the colors of the
rainbow (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet).
We are looking for a similar device to remind us of protecting our privacy,
only more sophisticated. We want a way to think about and react to privacy in
ways that are more natural to our current processes. We need a common lan-
guage that connects privacy to something we already know and understand at
an intuitive level. That is why I use the metaphor thinking like a spy.
Think Like a Spy
Let’s say that your worst enemy is on a mission to steal everything you have—
your private documents, home, investments, health, retirement, reputation,
even your time. The only way that your enemy can steal these items is by
spying on you, to exploit your vulnerabilities. Would that change the amount
of information you give out, and to whom? Would it beneﬁt you to under-
stand the way that your enemy is thinking and spying on you?

I’ve just described the reality of identity theft and data breach. An enemy
(dumpster diver, ruthless competitor, phisher, hacker, corporate spy, con art-
ist, social engineer) is trying to steal your identity (your credit, savings,
checking, investments, retirement, health insurance, reputation, and even
who you are) by draining you and others of your private information. In
many cases, the enemy is someone close to you, who steals from you to fund
a gambling or drug habit or other dishonest endeavor.
Thinking like a spy is a paradigm, or a lens through which we see the
world. This lens is designed to help you make a habit of privacy on a daily
basis and recognize when your identity is at risk, personally or professionally.
When identity is involved, we want to view the risk of losing it through the
more critical ‘‘lens’’ of a spy. When it is not, we can put the lens away.
Know Thine Enemy
Why view identity through the eyes of a spy? We need to change our perspec-
tive because the old way (checklists, privacy policies, boring statistics) isn’t
getting the job done. Just as we can’t remember the colors of the rainbow
without a memory device, so we don’t remember how to treat high-risk data
unless we ﬁlter it through our new perspective. Spies are trained to have a
heightened sense of awareness anytime they are in the ﬁeld. Adopting this
increased level of awareness will signiﬁcantly help us to prevent identity
theft. In its simplest form, thinking like a spy is nothing more than asking
yourself: ‘‘What would my worst enemy do with this piece of information?’’
Spies don’t like to share their information. We must learn to be as defen-
sive as they are when our personal information is on the table. This does not
mean that we need to be paranoid. Prevention is not about fear; fear is for peo-
ple who take no action. As our awareness, knowledge, and willingness to act
increases, our fear will decrease. The spy mind-set will grow as we actively
take steps to protect our privacy and expose less of our identity to danger.
Once we have learned these techniques at a personal level, applying them at
work becomes a natural response.
To summarize the ancient Chinese war strategist, Sun Tzu, author of The
Art of War: To defeat our enemies, we must be wise enough to learn from them. A
spy, unlike a simple thief, operates in two related worlds simultaneously: the
world of information collection and the world of information protection.
Spies go to great lengths and are well trained in protecting their real
36
Privacy Means Proﬁt

identities, as well as their aliases, informants, sources, agents, and network.
From these skills, we can learn how to protect our sensitive information,
whether it is physical (paper documents, credit cards, receipts), digital (lap-
tops, e-mail, Internet, social networking, wireless transmissions), or human
(what is in our brains). Spies are also masters of collecting information (‘‘in-
telligence’’) on their subjects. This makes them uniquely qualiﬁed to serve as
the lens through which we see how best to defend our privacy.
I have broken down our spy metaphor into seven distinct mind-sets that can
be applied to almost any type of information privacy: at home and at work.
The Seven Mind-Sets of a Spy
The seven mind-sets of a spy, which I describe in greater detail in the respec-
tive chapter devoted to each (indicated in parentheses), are:
1. Eliminate the source (Chapter 4).
2. Destroy the data (Chapter 5).
3. Secure the systems (Chapter 6).
4. Lock the docs (Chapter 7).
5. Evaluate the risk (Chapter 8).
6. Interrogate the Enemy (Chapter 9).
7. Monitor the signs (Chapter 10).
Eliminate the Source
Spies eliminate unnecessary information at the source. For example, most
spies are never told the end purpose of their missions, as it adds nothing to
their effectiveness and minimizes leaks. Elimination takes place before the
data is at risk. Applied to privacy, we can habitually eliminate exposed pieces
of identity that are no longer necessary. By canceling an account we no longer
use, we remove the risk of its theft. Inside organizations, eliminating un-
necessary data collection, retention, mobility, and transmission can drasti-
cally reduce the risk of data breach.
Destroy the Data
Once it serves no further purpose, spies destroy all sensitive information.
They use a device called a burn box that incinerates every last trace of
data, physical or digital. Our gadgets are easier to come by, less expensive
Engage the Brain
37

(shredders and digital shredding software), and serve the same purpose: to
destroy anything containing private information that we no longer need.
Destroying takes place after data has been exposed, as opposed to elimina-
tion, which takes place before the data has been exposed. For example, when
we are done with a bank statement, we should shred the document. In the
ofﬁce, we shred outdated personnel ﬁles, customer records, and extraneous
documents containing intellectual capital, trade secrets, or company ﬁnancials.
Secure the Systems
Secure technology has always been an important theme in the world of spies.
Encryption, wire-tapping, listening bugs, hacking, and surveillance—these
are all terms related to securing or compromising digital identity. As we con-
tinue to move our data online, securing our digital assets will become the most
important form of identity protection. Whether it is a company laptop, your
mobile phone, tape backups, wireless networking, or a server farm, technol-
ogy houses vast quantities of data, making it an ideal target for theft.
Lock the Docs
Any high-risk data assets that cannot be eliminated at the source, destroyed
upon completion, or digitally secured must be locked up or effectively con-
cealed. Locking is the default action when we need to keep information on
hand, yet accessible to only certain individuals. Lock the docs refers to locking
up paper documents such as passports, birth certiﬁcates, wills, deeds, trusts,
ﬁnancials, and other identity documents. In addition, lock the docs is meant to
refer to all types of identity that need to be physically locked up, not just paper
documents. Chapter 7 on this topic works in tandem with securing digital iden-
tity, as it is vital that digital data be physically locked, as well. For example, a
This chapter serves as a prerequisite to Chapter 12, ‘‘Defend Online
Identity,’’ and Chapter 13, ‘‘Protect Mobile Data,’’ both found in Part III,
‘‘Field Combat: Target the Enemy,’’ which covers protecting information
on social networking sites (e.g., Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn), infor-
mation stored in the cloud (e.g., Google Docs, Hotmail, SalesForce),
and mobile data (e.g., laptops, cell phones, thumb drives).
38
Privacy Means Proﬁt

laptop computer needs to be locked up physically (e.g., in the trunk of your car,
ofﬁce, hotel room—the most overlooked form of protection) and digitally (e.g.,
using passwords, security software, encryption, ﬁrewalls, etc.).
Evaluate the Risk
Spies have exceptional tools of observation, analysis, and evaluation that pre-
pare them to preempt fraud at many levels. They are trained to detect fraud or
social engineering (deﬁned as the act of obtaining conﬁdential information by
manipulation) before they expose valuable intelligence. By learning to evalu-
ate offers to share data, we arm ourselves against phishing and pharming
schemes, ﬁnancial scams, hacks, con jobs, and corporate espionage. Evalua-
tion is a process of applying common sense and natural instinct to the con-
stant barrage of information requests we receive. It establishes who we can
trust, and how much. And it protects the most commonly exploited data leak-
age source of all: the human source.
Interrogate the Enemy
Spies ask direct and aggressive questions to get answers. This is an essential
and foundational component of the evaluation process, described previously.
Fostering an attitude of curiosity (and by extension into the corporate world,
a culture of curiosity) is the most powerful critical thinking skill in your arse-
nal of information-protection tools. Employees who learn to think critically
and ask the right questions regarding data privacy weave the fabric that
makes up a Culture of Privacy.
Monitor the Signs
Spy networks monitor their assets (agents, information, safe houses) to detect
trouble at the earliest stages. By monitoring indicators of breach or wrong-
doing, they are able to contain information leakage before the damage be-
comes permanent. Correspondingly, by monitoring our identities (using
either the latest technological tools or paper-based methods), we detect fraud
and stop identity theft before it causes irrevocable damage. Tools you can use
to keep track of your identity vital signs include:
 Identity theft monitoring services
 Credit report monitoring
Engage the Brain
39

 Balancing your checkbook
 Financial account alerts
 Social Security statement monitoring
At the organizational level, monitoring may include:
 Video surveillance
 Software footprint tracking
 Access log ﬁles
 Key card access tracking
The most powerful form of monitoring at the corporate level is actually
performed by your customers.
Field Combat: Target the Enemy
Spies don’t just learn in the classroom; they attain mastery by practicing what
they have learned in the ﬁeld. And so must you. The seven mind-sets just
listed and discussed in Part II of the book don’t exist in a vacuum; to be effec-
tive, they need to be combined and adapted to your lifestyle and your busi-
ness. There is no silver bullet for protecting private information, but you will
grow progressively safer as you adapt, prioritize, and accumulate individual
levels of protection over months or years. Think of the process as securing
your home with deadbolts, an alarm system, motion-sensitive lights, and a
dog. Any one of these alone would be ineffective; but by layering security
devices, your risk level begins to approach zero. The chapters in Part III,
‘‘Field Combat: Target the Enemy,’’ apply the seven mind-sets in a more so-
phisticated, layered way to some of the highest-risk areas for identity theft
and data breach.
Part III begins with four short, action-oriented chapters that serve as a
bridge between the overlapping worlds of personal and professional privacy.
They are:
Chapter 11 Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt
This chapter gives a brief overview of how to target areas of risk. Spies
don’t operate ‘‘in theory’’; they have to operate under the pressures
40
Privacy Means Proﬁt

applied by the real world. To survive, they learn to adapt to whatever
threat faces them at the moment, to accumulate intelligence gradu-
ally, and to target the most valuable information ﬁrst. We apply the
same methods when targeting the enemies of data privacy.
Chapter 12 Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud
We store massive amounts of information assets online, whether on social
networking sites or more generally in the ‘‘cloud’’ (described fully in
Chapter 6, ‘‘Secure the Systems’’). It is no longer sufﬁcient to secure the
systems, which are mostly within our control. Those systems extend into
the online world, far beyond our reach.
Chapter 13 Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility
Whether we are traveling across the city or around the globe, anytime data
leaves our workspace, the risk of theft skyrockets. Protecting this infor-
mation outside of the ofﬁce will eliminate the single most damaging
source of data theft in the workplace. This chapter takes a life-cycle look
at protecting laptops, smart phones, and mobile computing devices.
Chapter 14 Travel with Care: Business Trips and Vacations
This chapter explains how travel heightens the risk of data theft. It com-
bines a concentration of identity (e.g., mobile computing, travel docu-
ments, passports, itineraries, work ﬁles) with a somewhat unpredictable
and unfamiliar environment (airports, hotels, taxi cabs, ofﬁces, confer-
ence rooms). Informed preparation is the key to safe travels.
Chapter 15 Recovering Your Identity: When All Else Fails
The second to last of the book, is for those who have already had their
identities stolen. Hopefully, you will never need the information con-
tained in this chapter.
Chapter 16 Prioritize Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar
The ﬁnal chapter summarizes the book into a prioritized, step-by-step ac-
tion item list for protecting your personal identity.
Engage the Brain
41


II
Basic Training:
Think Like a Spy
[Identity] lies at the core of a great deal of what
we do protecting our ﬁnancial security, our
personal security, and our reputational security.
In the 21st Century, the most important asset that
we have to protect as individuals and as part of
our nation is the control of our identity, who we
are, how we identify ourselves, whether other
people are permitted to masquerade and pretend
to be us, and thereby damage our livelihood,
damage our assets, damage our reputation,
damage our standing in the community.
—Michael Chertoff, U.S. Secretary of Homeland
Security, August 2008,
USC National Center for Risk Analysis of
Terrorism Event


4
The First Mind-Set:
Eliminate the Source
I
dentity thieves target wallets, purses, laptops and carry-on luggage because
they contain a high concentration of private information. The average
purse contains 20 pieces of identity; the average smart phone or laptop,
thousands.
Victim #9,437,988: Drop and Switch
Ashley wasn’t a professional meeting planner, but due to layoffs, she had been
forced to take on an additional role at her company: planning her industry
association’s largest event of the year. As a planner, Ashley had to travel.
Between her laptop bag and purse, she carried a goldmine of identity while on
the road, not all of it hers. In addition to her corporate-issued laptop and
BlackBerry, she carried client ﬁles, her passport, driver’s license, several
credit cards, an insurance card, her Social Security card, and several pieces
of vital information about her children.
Scheduled to ﬂy to Orlando, Florida, one day before the conference began,
Ashley arrived at the gate to discover that the last United Airlines ﬂight to
Florida had been cancelled. In a panic, she made her way to the customer
service counter midway down the concourse. The long, winding line, at least
30 people deep, bottlenecked at the two exhausted agents on duty. When asked
later by a policeman to describe the thief, she responded, in all seriousness,
‘‘I didn’t see anything; it was like a teacher-less kindergarten room on
(continued )

(continued )
Halloween.’’ At the time, she had exactly 14 hours before her ﬁrst precon-
ference event began.
While in line, Ashley had pulled her BlackBerry from her purse then set it
down next to her laptop bag in order to free her hands to write. Focusing hard
to hear the reservation agent who had found her an alternate airline and
ﬂight, Ashley barely paid attention when a woman put down her carry-on
bag next to her own. As Ashley scribbled the new ﬂight information on the
back of her boarding pass, she never even noticed the woman picking up a
handful of bags, including Ashley’s. She did realize she no longer felt her bag
leaning against her leg, but chose to ignore it—for only a split second.
The remains of Ashley’s purse and bag were found in a women’s restroom
nearby. Her laptop, client ﬁles, and wallet were gone. Later, her driver’s li-
cense and checkbook were used to purchase ﬁrearms at a traveling gun show.
With her debit card, the thieves purchased ammunition from a Wal-Mart,
which is also where they ﬁlled counterfeit prescriptions and billed them to her
insurance company. To date, the gun has not been identiﬁed in a crime. Ash-
ley spent approximately three months recovering her identity and her credit.
But the real devastation came from the loss of her company computer and
client ﬁles, which were sold by the original thief to a more sophisticated crime
ring. Because the computer had not been encrypted, and in accordance with
the compliance laws in her state, Ashley’s company was required to notify all
affected individuals of a data breach. Her laptop contained the names,
addresses, credit card numbers, and other undisclosed data on every one of
the 5,700 conference attendees. It also contained sensitive intellectual capital
about a pending merger and her employer’s organization chart (which even-
tually led to the capture of one of the members of the crime ring when he tried
to sell it to her company’s largest competitor, who called the police).
Ashley made it to the conference, but later lost her job. Her company lost
more than $4.1 million in lawsuits, victim recovery services, client defection,
stock value, and legal fees. In contrast, the estimated cost to have trained Ash-
ley on data privacy and to protect her laptop properly would have been ap-
proximately $194. The estimated cost to protect her entire company in the
same way?: $45,000. Let’s do the math to determine the return on privacy
investment:
($4,100,000  $45,000)/$45,000 ¼ 9011% Return on Privacy Investment
46
Privacy Means Proﬁt

It is impractical to think that we can prevent our wallets, purses, comput-
ers, and mobile phones from ever being lost or stolen. To protect the identity
and company information they hold, we need to minimize exposure across
the board. We do this, at home and at work, by eliminating the source.
Eliminate Mind-Set
Spies carry as little sensitive information with them as possible, and spy net-
works systematically eliminate all potential sources of data leakage. In many
cases, an agent knows only certain pieces of the information puzzle, making
it nearly impossible to reconstruct the larger picture when a single piece falls
into enemy hands.
By mirroring this process of elimination in our personal and professional
lives, we minimize the quantity and quality of data we carry with us on a
regular basis. It’s not possible to lose what we don’t have, and likewise im-
possible to steal what doesn’t exist.
Ask yourself this simple question: What pieces of identity can I remove or
eliminate (e.g., not carry it in my wallet, or store it in my ﬁling cabinet, cell
phone, or computer) before they cause me harm?
Spy networks operate on a need-to-know-basis. Spies are told no more
than necessary, carry no more than necessary, and talk no more than neces-
sary. Information is simpliﬁed because doing so makes it easier to track and
keep safe. In addition, spies travel light. They carry no ‘‘incriminating’’ docu-
ments with them unless absolutely necessary.
The same should be true of your identity. The fewer pieces of personal
information cluttering up your wallet, computer, ﬁling cabinet, and brain
(e.g., credit cards, bank accounts, brokerages, ID cards, passwords, etc.), the
lower your statistical risk of loss or theft. The elimination mind-set suggests
that if you don’t need a particular piece of identity, get rid of it at the source.
The source is whoever or whatever is generating the sensitive document.
This is a four-step process:
1. Eliminate your credit ﬁle as the number-one source of the most preva-
lent types of ﬁnancial identity theft.
2. Begin eliminating every piece of plastic, paper, and electronic identity
that you no longer use or need.
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
47

3. Reduce your online exposure by eliminating the buying and selling of
your identity.
4. Eliminate the habit of signing up for new accounts unless they are abso-
lutely necessary.
By keeping our identities simple, and sharing them only on a need-to-know
basis, we have less to lose, less to be stolen, less to shred, less to lock up, and,
consequently, more time and brain cells to protect items that we actually need.
Eliminate the Source
Source: Your Credit Report
Credit Freeze
If everyone in the country applied for a credit freeze, identity thieves would
lose their major source of income. A credit freeze is the single most signiﬁcant
and effective means of protecting your ﬁnancial identity, because it blocks
almost everyone from setting up new forms of credit in your name. It is the
equivalent of putting a password on your credit ﬁle.
While I recommend checking your credit report frequently for any signs of
identity theft (see Chapter 10, ‘‘Monitor the Signs’’), freezing your credit is a
more proactive way to prevent theft before it happens and protect your credit
information. The difference is similar to a house alarm being activated after
thieves have broken in and done damage, versus installing on the doors dead-
bolt locks that cannot be broken and better secure the home.
Every time you establish new credit (e.g., open up a new credit card, store
account, or bank account, or ﬁnance a car or apply for a home loan, etc.), an
entry is created in your credit ﬁle, which is maintained by companies like
Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion. The trouble is, with your name, address,
and Social Security number in hand, an identity thief can pretend to be you
and can establish credit (i.e., spend your net worth) in your name.
If you have been the victim of identity theft, don’t freeze your credit
until the problem has been resolved. It is very difﬁcult to access your
credit during the recovery process if it is already frozen.
48
Privacy Means Proﬁt

A credit freeze, also called a security freeze, is simply an agreement you
make with the three main credit reporting bureaus (the aforementioned
Experian, Equifax, and TransUnion). It means that they won’t allow new
accounts (credit card, banking, brokerage, loans, rental agreements, etc.) to
be attached to your name/Social Security number unless you contact the
credit bureaus, give them a password or PIN, and allow them to ‘‘unfreeze’’ or
‘‘thaw’’ your account for a short period of time.
This gives you control over who accesses your private information, and
effectively prevents identity thieves from opening new accounts in your
name. There is generally no charge to freeze your credit, though there may be
a small fee to unfreeze it (see below). Note that you must contact each of the
three credit reporting bureaus individually, as there is no way to freeze all
three at once. The bureaus may require that requests be submitted by mail, so
make sure that you use some form of package tracking to make sure they
have been delivered. The bureaus will require the following information:
your name, address, date of birth, Social Security number, copy of a valid ID,
proof of address (e.g., copy of utility bill), as well as a copy of a police report
if you have been the victim of identity theft.
The bureau will send you a letter conﬁrming the freeze, and will include
your PIN. Make sure you keep a record of your PIN in your dossier, as dis-
cussed in Chapter 10, ‘‘Monitor the Signs,’’ for future reference. You deﬁnitely
do not want to lose this number or have it fall into the wrong hands.
Temporarily reversing your credit freeze can be inconvenient, yes, but it
serves as a reminder to keep your identity simple. You won’t be signing up for
any accounts that you don’t absolutely need. To unfreeze your credit during a
transaction (e.g., when you are applying for a car or home loan), you simply
contact the credit bureaus (you are initiating the contact), give them your
PIN, and ask them to temporarily unfreeze your credit. It costs about $10
anytime you want to unfreeze your report, and you can generally choose
how long it remains unfrozen. Be sure to allow a couple of days to complete
the transaction.
Many times the credit bureaus will recommend that you place a ‘‘fraud
alert’’ on your credit ﬁle. Be aware that this alert lasts for only 90 days and is
not always taken seriously, because many thieves know about it as well, and
so may not try to use your stolen identity until after it expires. Also be aware
that this process relies on businesses to properly check and conﬁrm your
identity. Unfortunately, businesses do not always perform the proper checks
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
49

and so may unwittingly allow a thief to establish credit even when the fraud
alert is in place. This makes freezing your credit the safest and most secure
way to protect yourself.
However, by law, not all states allow you to freeze your credit, so the three
credit reporting bureaus have begun to offer credit freezes on a national basis.
Visit www.FinancialPrivacyNow.com for state-by-state details. You can also
learn more at each individual credit bureau’s website—though note that they
frequently change their credit freeze addresses:
Equifax Security Freeze
P.O. Box 105788
Atlanta, Georgia 30348
Toll-Free: 1–800–685–1111
www.freeze.equifax.com/Freeze/jsp/SFF_PersonalIDInfo.jsp
TransUnion
Fraud Victim Assistance Department
P.O. Box 6790
Fullerton, CA 92834
Toll-Free: 1–888–909–8872
https://annualcreditreport.transunion.com/fa/securityFreeze/landing
Experian Security Freeze
P.O. Box 9554
Allen, TX 75013
Toll-Free: 1–888–397–3742
www.experian.com/freeze/center.html
Make sure you store your credit freeze documents in your dossier, as
referred to earlier, so that you have easy access to them if you want to un-
freeze your credit.
Source: Wallets and Purses
A lost or stolen wallet, purse, checkbook, or credit card accounts for a major
portion of identity theft cases in which the victims knew how their identity
was stolen.1 That means we can protect a substantially large piece of the
50
Privacy Means Proﬁt

identity theft pie simply by safeguarding our wallets and purses. But this isn’t
always possible, so we must also learn how to minimize damage if it does fall
into the wrong hands.
The more pieces of identity you eliminate from your wallet, the less suscep-
tible you are to theft, and the easier it is to recover if you suddenly become a
victim. Just as spies prepare themselves in case they fall into the hands of the
enemy, you should be prepared to take action when your wallet or purse ends
up in the hands of a criminal.
1. Remove the following items from your wallet or purse:
Social Security Card (SSN): You only need this in rare circumstances
(e.g., your ﬁrst day on a new job). If stolen, it can be used to set up
new credit card accounts, driver’s licenses, loans, and bank accounts.
It can also be used to steal your retirement beneﬁts, draw un-
employment, or ﬁle for bankruptcy. Your Social Security number is
one of the pieces of your identity that you should protect most
ﬁercely. File your card as discussed in Chapter 7, ‘‘Lock the Docs.’’
Checks: Check fraud is one of the easiest forms of identity theft to carry
out, hence one of the most prevalent. Stop carrying checks, and in-
stead use your credit card or cash. Debit cards are not as safe, but
they’re better than checks. If you feel you can’t survive without
checks, carry them only when you go shopping, and make sure that
your account has as little in it as possible (transfer any excess into
your savings, until you need it). Don’t make excuses for skipping this
task, as doing so could have very negative consequences. Here is
more speciﬁc advice:
 Know what thieves are after. It is not just the physical check that the
thief is looking for, but the account and bank routing numbers on
the bottom of the check that allow the thief to make duplicate
checks or access the account electronically, so carrying only one
check in your purse or wallet isn’t going to protect you much.
 Do not have your SSN, driver’s license number, or home telephone
number printed on your checks. It is preferable to use a work address
and phone number, which doesn’t lead back to your home. Some
people advise that you use your ﬁrst and middle initials on the
check, not your full name. This does a good job of concealing
your name; the problem, however, is that most banks don’t verify
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
51

signatures on checks for less than $3,000 anyway, so taking this
step probably won’t stop fraud.
 Never put full account numbers or Social Security numbers on the
notes line of your check. Use the last four digits only—banks and
credit card companies can identify you from these numbers.
 Always sign your checks (and vital documents) with a felt-tip or gel pen
or permanent marker (like a Sharpie1). This helps prevent thieves
from ‘‘lifting’’ the ink from checks, mortgages, and other vital docu-
ments. I also recommend that you place a piece of clear plastic tape
over the Pay To ﬁeld so that it can’t be easily changed. If a thief steals
your check out of the mail and tries to tear off the tape to ‘‘wash’’ the
Pay To ﬁeld, it visibly damages the check and renders it void. If you
make bank deposits by mail, I recommend using this same tech-
nique to protect the ‘‘For Deposit Only in Account XXX’’ line.
PIN Numbers and Passwords: Remove all passwords and PIN numbers
from your purse or wallet for bank accounts, websites, debit cards,
computers, home alarms, garage doors, and so on. Refer to Chapter
6, ‘‘Secure the Systems,’’ for alternative ways to create and remember
passwords so that you won’t have to carry them with you.
Excess Credit and Debit Cards: We tend to accumulate credit cards and
bank accounts even though we don’t need them (usually because we
received a short-term ‘‘bribe’’ for signing up). Remove them from
your wallet; more, consider cancelling all of these excess accounts.
Keep in mind, however, that when you cancel credit card accounts, it
may lower your credit score, so check with your ﬁnancial advisor be-
fore taking this step. One simple way to avoid negatively affecting
your credit score is to lock up the extra card at home. If possible,
carry no more than two cards in your wallet. This will make posttheft
recovery much easier and less time-consuming.
Credit Card Receipts: File receipts securely if you need them for tax
purposes or expense tracking. Otherwise, destroy them. To learn
about how best to destroy documents, credit cards, CD-ROMs, and
other forms of identity, go to Chapter 5, ‘‘Destroy the Data.’’ And to
ﬁnd more information on what to lock up and how to secure your
documents, read Chapter 7, ‘‘Lock the Docs.’’
ATM Receipts and Bank Deposit Slips: Record the transactions and
shred them once they have cleared your bank.
52
Privacy Means Proﬁt

2. Remove your Social Security number from any identiﬁcation cards:
Driver’s License: In some states, SSNs still appear on your driver’s license.
Most states will allow you to remove it from your card, but doing so
may require getting a new driver’s license. It is worth the trouble.
Medical Cards: SSNs are still occasionally printed on medical insurance
or HMO/PPO cards. In many states, the insurance company is re-
quired to send you a new card with a non-SSN identiﬁcation number,
if requested. Make the request. Medicare/Medicaid cards use Social
Security numbers, so carry them only when necessary.
Student ID Cards: Some colleges and universities use your SSN as a stu-
dent ID number. Request a new card with a different method of
identiﬁcation.
Military ID/Government Cards: Many government-issued cards use your
SSN for identiﬁcation. Some branches of the military require you to
carry your card at all times, in which case you are out of luck. Check
with your speciﬁc agency or branch to ﬁnd out if you must carry your
card at all times. Otherwise, carry it only when necessary. Fortunately,
the military is actively working to remove SSNs from ID cards.
3. Take these precautions in case your wallet is stolen:
Use Both Signature and ‘‘Photo ID Required’’: Sign your credit cards
with both your signature and ‘‘Photo ID Required.’’ Also, write the
same message on the front of the card with indelible ink (since most
stores don’t even look at your signature on the back). Though it can
be removed somewhat easily, it helps to discourage thieves, as you are
sending the message that you are watching out for identity theft. Be
aware that you need to sign your name on the back of the card to be in
compliance with many credit card company contracts. Without your
signature, some of them can deny any claims of fraud and refuse to
reimburse what was stolen. Don’t simply write ‘‘Photo ID Required.’’
Photocopy: Make a photocopy (front and back) of every piece of identity
that you keep in your wallet. If it is lost or stolen, this will make it
easy to call the companies and cancel your cards, accounts, and so
on. File the copy in your dossier, as discussed in Chapter 10, ‘‘Moni-
tor the Signs.’’
4. Consider additional protection measures:
Rotate Credit Cards: If you have been a victim of data loss (where your
private data has been lost or stolen from a major corporation, as
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
53

happened recently at Heartland Payment Systems) or just want to
‘‘outdate’’ your credit card identity, once a year cancel the cards you
do keep. Call each credit card company, cancel your existing card,
and have the ﬁrm issue a new card with a new credit card number.
This means that all of those companies that have your credit card on
ﬁle now have old data. By opting out of a great deal of information
sharing (described in the next section), your new card number won’t
be in as many databases. Don’t forget to:
 Have any frequent-ﬂyer miles transferred to your new card num-
ber, or have your frequent-ﬂyer number attached to the new card.
You don’t want to lose miles just because you are being diligent
about your identity.
 Call any companies that have your credit card number on ﬁle for
auto-pay (phone bill, electricity, etc.) and let them know your new
number. Anyone who tries to use the old number will draw blanks.
This measure isn’t to protect against money loss (you only have a
$50 liability on any credit card if you report it as lost or stolen in
the company’s ‘‘acceptable’’ time frame); it’s to protect against hav-
ing to spend extra time if your credit card number is stolen.
Pay with Cash: This old-fashioned way of paying incurs absolutely zero
identity ‘‘creep.’’ Pay with cash when you don’t want to let your card
out of your sight or don’t want to share information that will ulti-
mately be stored in a database and sold to other businesses. Compa-
nies buy your credit card histories so they can market other services
to you. For example, certain businesses know that if you shop at a
particular store, you are likely to buy their product.
From today on, make your wallet a sacred place. Don’t add identity infor-
mation to it unless it is absolutely necessary. Use it as a control point to stop
identity creep (slow and unnecessary leakage of our personal information).
Lock it up at the gym (in private) and don’t leave it exposed in your car or at
work. Finally, don’t forget to have your spouse or partner and other family
members follow the same steps.
Source: Junk Mail, Telemarketing, and Information Commerce
Your personal information is collected, sold, and resold. It is generally used to
determine credit risk, and marketing departments use it to sell items to you.
54
Privacy Means Proﬁt

The more you eliminate this buying and selling of your private data, the lower
your risk becomes. As you learn of companies and organizations that collect
your data, opt out of their information sharing. You opt out by calling the
number on your statements or cards and asking the respective companies
about their privacy policies. If they are written in legal gibberish, tell them
that you don’t want your personal information to be shared with anyone
(including other subsidiaries of the same company). Ask to be removed from
all junk mail and marketing lists, telemarketing lists, and any other form of
marketing campaigns. Tell them to stop sending ‘‘convenience checks,’’ ‘‘cour-
tesy checks,’’ preapproved credit cards, or any other form of credit.
As you start to ‘‘go undercover,’’ you will begin reducing the quantity of
information you share within and between companies. This lowers your
chances of identity theft, and saves you time opening and shredding useless
but potentially dangerous mail.
In this section, I list a handful of places to opt out. Contact one or two a
day for the next few weeks and you will start to see your junk mail and tele-
marketing calls diminish. Alternatively, follow the instructions I give in
Chapter 16, ‘‘Prioritize Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar,’’ and you will
have opted out of these lists after only a month.
Credit Offers: Opt out of prescreened credit offers, which are frequently
stolen from mailboxes. Prescreened credit offers are sent after compa-
nies have checked your credit history with one of the three credit
bureaus (Equifax, Experian, or TransUnion) and offer you more credit
based on your good credit history. This could be a preapproved credit
card, loan, or line of credit. Call 1-888-5OPTOUT (1–888–567–8688),
or visit www.OptOutPreScreen.com. Because your credit is preapproved
on these offers, it is a very attractive target for an identity thief.
Credit Cards: For each credit card that you haven’t cancelled, contact the
issuer and tell the customer service representative that you wish to opt
out of all information sharing, both within the company and with other
companies. And while you have the CSR on the phone:
Many of the opt-out addresses change frequently (possibly so that peo-
ple have a harder time taking this protective step), so if the links given
here are no longer working, or you would like a centralized place for
all opt-out websites, please visit www.Sileo.com/opt-out.
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
55

 Direct the company to stop sending you convenience checks (which
are frequently stolen from mail boxes), marketing e-mails, and tele-
marketing calls. Ask whom else you need to contact within the com-
pany to get off all lists.
 Ask if you can receive your statements by e-mail only, as the paper
versions are another item routinely stolen from unlocked mailboxes.
If you aren’t comfortable using a computer to receive statements, or
don’t have a computer, you will learn in Chapter 7, ‘‘Lock the Docs,’’
other methods for protecting your mail. It is important to make the
seven mind-sets of prevention work within your lifestyle, as that is the
only practical way that you will follow through on the changes.
Financial Institutions: Contact your insurance companies, brokerages,
banks, and any other ﬁnancial institutions to opt out of all information
sharing. Switch to receiving online statements wherever possible. As the
paper statements arrive from each of these institutions, make the
changes.
Telemarketing: Place your name on the National Do Not Call Registry.
This will cut down considerably on telemarketing calls. Visit www.
DoNotCall.gov and ﬁll out the form for adding your phone numbers
(home, cell, business, spouse’s/family members’ cells).
Although most states have discontinued their individual do not call
registries, ﬁnd out whether your state still maintains a separate list
where you can register your phone number. For more information on
where to contact in your state, visit www.the-dma.org/government/
donotcalllists.shtml. Don’t forget to add any home phone numbers, as
well as cell phones, business phones, and your spouse or partner’s and
family members’ cell phones.
Junk Mail: Remove your name from the Direct Marketing Association’s
mailing list. This will cut down on the majority of your junk mail. To
learn more, visit www.DMAChoice.org and ﬁll out the form for remov-
ing your name. It costs $1 whether you register online or through the
mail. Don’t forget to remove your spouse’s/partner’s and other family
members’ names, as well.
While at this site, you can learn more about the types of marketing
mail sent to you and how to opt out of the majority of it that you re-
ceive. The site allows you to ‘‘customize your mailbox’’ and eliminate
any source of marketing mail that you no longer want to receive. Once
56
Privacy Means Proﬁt

you indicate you do not want to receive any type of junk mail, compa-
nies are required to remove you from their direct mailing lists.
Directories: Delete your phone number from Google’s reverse directory. To
see if your number is listed, go to www.google.com and type your phone
number into the search window. If it comes up with your name or ad-
dress, you’re listed! Visit www.google.com/help/pbremoval.html and ﬁll
out the form to have your information removed. Similarly, remove your
personal information from Zabasearch. To see if your personal informa-
tion is listed there, go to www.zabasearch.com and type your name into
the search window. If it comes up with your name or address, you’re
listed! E-mail info@zabasearch.com with your full name and address to
have your information removed. The site will answer back with a list of
options that you can take.
There are many websites like Zabasearch that aggregate data and of-
fer it for sale. Other examples are whitepages.com, intelius.com, pipl
.com, anywho.com, peopleﬁnder.com, people.yahoo.com, and ﬁndso-
meone.com. Removing your identity from these sites may seem like a
futile effort because new aggregators pop up constantly; therefore, I
recommend this step only for people who are very aggressive about
their efforts to eliminate exposure of their information.
The key is to remove your name from each search engine as you hear
about it. Start by searching for your full name in Google. For most peo-
ple, this will bring up all possible ‘‘people search engines’’ where you are
listed. Once you have obtained this list, e-mail each individual search
engine to have your name removed. In many cases you will be required
to ‘‘snail-mail’’ the request (to discourage people from doing it). Make
sure you mail safely. Request a conﬁrmation of removal so that you can
hold the sites accountable, if necessary.
White Pages: Call your local phone company and ask to have your phone
number delisted when the next edition of the White Pages is published.
You can also go to yellowpages.com and click on Find A Person. Enter
your information to search for yourself and, if your listing comes up,
click on Remove Listing below. This is where many mailing list compa-
nies collect data and sell it to other companies.
Discounts and Contests: Learn to say no. Stop signing up for new credit
cards, checking accounts, contests, discount cards, even if the ‘‘bribe’’ is
appealing. The amount of time you will save by keeping your identity
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
57

more private and by eliminating hours opening junk mail will more
than surpass the enticement you were being offered.
Warranty Cards: Stop ﬁlling out warranty registration cards unless it is
necessary to enact the warranty (it rarely is). Warranty cards are gener-
ally used by the company’s marketing department, which sells your
information to other businesses or attempts to sell you related items.
They often request a great deal of personal information that has nothing
to do with the warranty.
Surveys: Stop completing surveys, unless they are anonymous or very im-
portant to you. Check the back of ‘‘anonymous’’ surveys for a small bar-
code that links the survey to your identity.
Source: Your Mail
The more mail you stop, junk or legitimate, the less chance it will be stolen.
Mail theft is easy and very productive for identity thieves, especially when
you don’t have a locking box.
Not only is minimizing the mail you receive an easy way to simplify your
identity, it also serves as an excellent way to accumulate change—as long as
you act on mail items as soon as they arrive. Here’s how:
1. Receive statements online. Every time a piece of legitimate mail (credit
card, bank, insurance, telephone, energy, water, and sewage statements,
mileage points, etc.) arrives over the next few months, call the company
(you’ll ﬁnd the customer service number on the statement) and ask to
receive your statement online. Thereafter, review and store your state-
ments on your computer, if possible; doing so is much safer than receiv-
ing these documents through the mail and storing them in a ﬁling
cabinet. If you don’t use a computer, read the section on securing your
mail in Chapter 7, ‘‘Lock the Docs.’’
2. Simplify your mail. For each account you have, ask yourself how much
you use it, to determine if you absolutely need to keep it active. If you
no longer use the account, cancel it, just as you did for your wallet
items. If you miss one, catch it next month. This is the beauty of accu-
mulating change (as discussed in Chapter 11, ‘‘Deploy Targeting
Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt’’): it doesn’t have to occur
in one day.
58
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Because paper trails tend to be the most easily accessible source of private
information, avoiding the use of paper bills and banking statements alto-
gether is a sureﬁre way to eliminate paper-based theft.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Report,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research
Source: Cell Phones
Cell phones and digital assistants carry a treasure trove of information.
They often have passwords, Social Security numbers, bank account num-
bers, birthdates, addresses, and phone numbers stored in them (for you
and all of your contacts). To protect those valuable identity items, follow
these guidelines:
Passwords
Most cell phones (especially smart phones like iPhones and BlackBerrys)
have password protection. This simple step goes a long way toward protect-
ing the data on your phone and preventing a criminal from making calls on
your dollar. If nothing else, it slows down the thief long enough to have your
data remotely ‘‘wiped’’ or eliminated. Currently, many cell phones (like the
iPhone) allow you to log in to your phone from your computer and remotely
erase all data on the device, even if someone else has possession of it. Then,
when you get a new phone, you simply sync it to your computer and, voila,
your data is on your new handset.
 If you can’t lock your phone, use the password suggestions in Chapter 6,
‘‘Secure the Systems,’’ to conceal passwords and private information.
 If you have no way to protect the data in your cell phone, take private
information out of it.
Source: Website Data Leakage
Websites
When you are on an Internet site that offers you free content in exchange
for your personal information (e.g., newspapers, music downloads, and web
support), think twice before making the trade. Is the content really worth it?
If so, provide as little data as required to get the beneﬁt; also see if the site will
accept generic data (e.g., John Doe, 123 Main St . . . ). If you want to avoid
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
59

future spam (discussed next), give a fake e-mail address, like abc@def.com.
If, however, the site requires a conﬁrmation e-mail (one you have to open
and respond to), you will need to provide a legitimate address. Keep in mind,
the simpler you keep your response, the less identity you will have ﬂoating on
the Internet.
Make sure that the Internet sites that you visit regularly have your current
address and phone number. You don’t want these companies sending state-
ments or other information to an outdated address.
Spam
Set up a free e-mail account (e.g., on Gmail, Hotmail, or Yahoo! Mail) to use
when you don’t want to reveal your permanent or professional e-mail ac-
count. When setting these up, make sure that you opt out of all shared infor-
mation; and, again, give as little personal data as possible. When you start
receiving too much spam on this account, simply shut it down and register a
new, clean e-mail address.
Source: Your Car
Remove all identity documents out of your glove compartment. Ideally, lock
these documents up. If this is not practical, move your proof of insurance and
car registration to an out-of-the-way, unlikely place, but one that is easy for
you to remember, such as an Altoids or Band-Aid canister that ﬁts in the com-
partment between the front seats. Thieves who break into cars generally have
to work so quickly that they won’t take the extra time to search for docu-
ments that aren’t in the obvious places—in the glove compartment or behind
a visor.
For even greater protection, buy an AutoSafe, such as those sold by
SentrySafe, and lock your sensitive documents in there, and store the safe
in the trunk of your car. You can also store your computer hard drive or
any other valuables in the safe when you are traveling. If you get pulled
over, explain to the police ofﬁcer before you get out of the car why you
keep your information in the trunk.
Lock your car repair and oil change receipts in your home ﬁling cabinet.
You generally need these items only when you are selling or have a problem
with your car. They do not need to be in the car itself.
60
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Action Item Checklist: Eliminate the Source
Freeze your credit with Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion.
Remove the following items from your wallet or purse:
 Social Security card
 Checks
 PIN numbers and passwords
 Excess credit and debit cards
 Credit card receipts
 ATM receipts and bank deposit slips
Remove your Social Security number (SSN) from any identiﬁcation
cards.
Sign credit cards and include ‘‘Photo ID Required.’’
Photocopy every piece of identity in your wallet, and store the copies
safely.
Opt out of information sharing, telemarketing, and junk mail.
Place your name on the National Do Not Call Registry.
Remove your name from physical and online directories.
Reduce incoming paper mail and switch to e-mail statements.
Password-protect your cell phone (and PDA).
Reduce unnecessary Internet accounts and website access.
Eliminate all identity documents from your car, or lock them up in it.
For a complete, prioritized list of all of the action steps you can
take to protect yourself, read Chapter 16, ‘‘Prioritize Your Attack: The
Privacy Calendar.’’
Business Relevance
Avoiding mistakes is one of those unseen, unheralded achieve-
ments that are not allowed to take up our time and thought. And
yet . . . many times, avoiding a bad deal can affect the bottom line
more signiﬁcantly than scoring a big sale. . . . That’s the funny thing
(continued )
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
61

(continued )
about stopping some behavior. It gets no attention, but it can be
as crucial as everything else we do combined.
—Marshall Goldsmith,
What Got You Here Won’t Get You There (pp. 36–37)
Eliminating the source plays a vital role in protecting corporate data,
just as it does in protecting your personal information. In business, elimi-
nating the source is not only a tactical procedure (e.g., stop carrying sensi-
tive customer information on your laptop), it is also a strategic initiative,
one that prompts us to look at internal behaviors leading to unsafe data.
There are a handful of bad habits regarding data handling that, when elim-
inated, will make it substantially easier to implement a Culture of Privacy.
Take a few moments to think about how your organization can best
eliminate the seven deadly sins of data privacy:
1. Apathy: Apathy is a disturbing lack of care about and attention to a
crime you incorrectly believe will never seriously impact your bot-
tom line. If you have never had a corporatewide privacy education
initiative, you are a prime candidate for this weakness.
2. Ignorance: Many leaders refuse to admit that they don’t know what
they don’t know. For example, do you know the value, location, and
conﬁdentiality level of your ﬁrm’s sensitive data? Do you know how
it is protected, how long it is maintained, and why it is kept in the
ﬁrst place?
3. Arrogance: Some executives see themselves as champions of data
privacy because they have a strong IT department, but fail to recog-
nize that privacy doesn’t exist in a silo. Does your organization tend
to believe that data privacy is the realm of the IT department? If so,
you are overlooking other critical functions (human resources,
sales, intellectual property, legal compliance, facilities mainte-
nance) that are touched by privacy concerns on a daily basis.
4. Greed: External proﬁt pressures are so strong on most corporations
that leadership can’t see the forest for the trees. What percentage
of your proﬁts goes toward protecting your information assets? If
you don’t know, you are at risk.
62
Privacy Means Proﬁt

5. Hypocrisy: Many CEOs are the ﬁrst to violate the very privacy polic-
ies that they champion. Have you ever surfed unprotected at the
airport? Do you shred every piece of sensitive data that goes in
your trash? What passwords are stored in your BlackBerry?
6. Paralysis: Some companies and executives have difﬁculty breaking
old habits and, by default, choose to perpetuate high-risk data prac-
tices. Do you collect certain private information simply because you
always have? Have you ever reevaluated your hiring policies to take
into account corporate espionage, workplace identity theft, and in-
sider fraud?
7. Procrastination: Even some executives who care about, educate
themselves on, admit to, have the budget to invest in, and person-
ally practice data safety never get around to addressing it at the cor-
porate level. When you are ﬁnished reading this book, do you think
your behavior will change? Or will you still say, ‘‘I’ll get to it later?’’
This is not an easy topic, but running an organization isn’t an easy
task. Leaders who guide their corporations to develop a privacy strategy
that eliminates these security sins will achieve a long-term competitive
advantage in the marketplace.
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
63

5
The Second Mind-Set:
Destroy the Data
S
ometimes the people picking up your garbage don’t think of it as trash;
they think of it as cash. And sometimes the trash man is really a ‘‘broker,’’
selling bags of trash to the highest bidder. With such a high percentage of
identity theft being committed using traditional methods (e.g., physical docu-
ment theft), destroying paperwork you don’t use or need is an essential step
to take to prevent data breach.
Victim #2,010,336: The Cash Men
The Donaldsons had just purchased a new home. They closed on the house on
Thursday, removed the ‘‘For Sale’’ sign on Friday, and moved in over the
weekend. The following Wednesday was their trash pickup day, and by then,
they had plenty of it.
The garbage was picked up while they were at work. They assumed it
had all been taken by the waste and recycling company. They were wrong.
Little did they know that by removing the ‘‘For Sale’’ sign, they had inadver-
tently sent a signal to a local identity theft crime ring (referred to as the
Cash Men, a play on ‘‘trash men’’) to pay attention. The thieves had learned
that the trash of new homeowners often is, for several weeks, a good source
of copies of ﬁnancial documents. These docs typically contain every piece of
identity a thief wants and needs—Social Security numbers, birthdates,
addresses, phone numbers, bank accounts—and all available for pickup
from one convenient location.

Destroy Mind-Set
Spies cover their tracks by destroying the paper trail. When they no longer
need a piece of physical information, they throw it in a ‘‘burn bag,’’ where it is
incinerated.
We must follow their lead and systematically destroy any private informa-
tion that could lead to identity theft, if it were to fall into the wrong hands. We
do this by using document shredders, on-site shredding, and digital shredding.
Every act of creation is ﬁrst an act of destruction.
—Pablo Picasso
Identity thieves are experts at collecting data that is not properly de-
stroyed. They generally do this by digging through your trash (‘‘dumpster
diving’’) on the curbside or in a company dumpster. In some cases, this is
even legal, as trash is not necessarily considered private property once it
passes through your front door.1 Thieves also pick up credit card receipts on
restaurant tables once the guests have left and before the waiter has collected
them. Sometimes, the waiter is the thief. Few people realize that credit card
‘‘masking’’ (covering up all of the numbers except the last four) is required by
law only on the customer’s copy of the receipt, not the merchant copy. That
means the merchant copy often contains your entire credit card number.
To avoid looking suspicious, the Cash Men used a standard-looking trash
truck to pick up select bags of information throughout the neighborhood. After
ﬁnding what they wanted in the Donaldson’s trash, the thieves promptly
submitted a false change of address that routed the family’s mail to an un-
traceable post ofﬁce box. By ﬁrst ‘‘washing’’ checks and then applying for new
credit cards with one of the Social Security numbers they found, the Cash Men
were able to take out a loan to fund a full-scale methamphetamine lab.
The Cash Men were fully aware that because the Donaldsons had just
made a major purchase (the house), they probably wouldn’t be applying for
credit any time soon—which is when most people discover identity theft. And
they were right. It was 23 months and tens of thousands of dollars later when
the Donaldsons found out, and in the worst circumstance possible: when the
police showed up to arrest them for running a meth lab.
All because they had failed to purchase and use a $100 document shredder.
The Second Mind-Set: Destroy the Data
65

To increase your safety, you need to destroy historical records (old bank
statements, tax records, cancelled checks, computer ﬁles, etc.), as well as
current documents that would otherwise go out in the trash. The simple
rule of thumb is: Destroy anything with a piece of identity on it that will
be thrown out with the trash, left in someone else’s control, or can’t be
locked up.
Once you put your identity in someone else’s hands (the people who clean
your ofﬁce, the garbage man, the waiter, the sales clerk), your risk of identity
theft immediately escalates. This should trigger alarms and cause you to think
twice about releasing your information from your control. Use this rule of
thumb when you are uncertain of what to destroy: When in doubt, destroy it.
There are very few documents that can’t be re-created.
Destroy Physical Information: Files,
Documents, Credit Cards
A paper shredder is the best means of destroying documents, disks, and credit
cards. Tearing documents into small pieces is not sufﬁcient, as it simply sig-
nals to thieves which pieces of trash are worth reconstructing. Choosing
which documents to keep and which to destroy is a personal choice, and it
can be a difﬁcult one to make. To help make these decisions, keep in mind
that the more you destroy, the less you will need to secure (see Chapter 7,
‘‘Lock the Docs’’).
In terms of shredding, convenience is everything! Place the shredder near to
where you open mail or ﬁle documents, so that you will remember to shred
what you would otherwise automatically throw away. If there are several loca-
tions throughout your home where you keep papers, make it a practice to
collect them from each location and shred them once or twice a week before
they go into the trash. For even better results, buy a shredder for each loca-
tion where you handle sensitive information. The easier it is to shred, the
more likely you will do it.
One word of caution: Make sure to place the shredder out of reach of small
children; better yet, purchase a shredder that automatically shuts down when
small ﬁngers or pets get too close (I use Fellowes’ SafeSenseTM shredders).
Review the table here for an idea of what a thief can ﬁnd just in your mail-
box, and how it can be used to steal your identity.
66
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Piece of Mail
What It Contains
How It Is Used
Credit card
statements
Your name, address,
creditor’s name, account
number, and details
Make online purchases; change
the address where statements
are sent
Paycheck
stubs
Your name, pay rate,
employer details, and maybe
even your Social Security
number
To apply for new credit and
other accounts (especially
powerful with your Social
Security number)
New checks
Your name, address, bank’s
name, account number,
routing number, possibly
phone number, or Social
Security number
Write checks in your name and
access the money in your bank
account
Bank
statements
Your name, address, bank’s
name, account number, and
balance
Access your bank records and
the money in your bank
accounts
Investment
and brokerage
statements
Your name, address, account
number, balance, account
manager, Social Security
number
Cash out your investments, or
any of the crimes above
Preapproved
credit card
offers
Your name, address, and the
offer
Apply for a credit card in your
name, but sent to an
anonymous address
Utility and
phone bills
Your name, address, account
number
Set up service in thief’s name,
with you still listed as person
paying the bills
Convenience
checks
Your name, address, account
number, and balance
Write and cash checks in your
name and access your credit
card account
For a more comprehensive list of items that end up in the trash, refer back
to Chapter 2, ‘‘Deﬁne the Problem.’’ Also examine the table in Chapter 7,
‘‘Lock the Docs,’’ for suggestions on which documents to lock up.
The best way to determine which historical ﬁnancial documents to destroy
is to ask your tax accountant and/or lawyer. You will be well served to learn
from an expert in your area who is familiar with your needs. When this isn’t
possible, lock up the documents rather than destroying them.
The Second Mind-Set: Destroy the Data
67

Destroy Physical Information
The most important piece of advice I can give in regard to this important
piece of equipment is to purchase a high-quality document shredder. Go to
your local ofﬁce supply store, or visit www.Sileo.com/productreviews for our
reviews on the best shredders. I recommend you choose one with the follow-
ing features:
 Cross-cut confetti shredding that shreds in increments smaller than two
inches. Strip shredders make it too easy to reconstruct documents, and
often leave account numbers intact along one of the strips.
 Has a simultaneous feeding capacity of 10-plus pages. If the shredder
takes fewer sheets than 10 at a time, you are more likely to grow im-
patient with how long it takes to destroy documents, and give up.
 Allows shredding of stapled documents, CD-ROMs, and credit cards.
 Has jam-proof technology, to prevent you from overloading the shred-
ding mechanism.
Start shredding any papers that are going in the trash immediately. Be gen-
erous with what you shred—overcompensating won’t hurt you (unless of
course you shred something you need, which is why you need to ﬁrst consult
with an expert). For added security, throw the cut-up or broken sections of
credit cards into separate loads of trash to make it impossible to reconstruct
them.
As you ﬁle your latest statements, cancelled checks, tax information, and
so on, decide whether it is time to destroy outdated copies of these docu-
ments. Consult with your accountant ﬁrst, to ensure that you know what to
keep for tax purposes or other reasons.
Use your new shredder as the motivation to clean off the piles of identity
on your desk, in your ﬁles, and throughout the house.
Thirteen percent of identity theft is committed by someone the victim knows.
This number rises to 31 percent among low-income consumers, who are the
most severely impacted victims because they are less likely to be notiﬁed of
data breach than the average.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report’’ (pp. 46, 75),
Javelin Strategy & Research
68
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Domestic help, contract workers, guests, and even friends and family
often commit identity theft inside of the home. By shredding and locking
all sensitive documents, you lessen the temptation and opportunity for
dishonest visitors.
When you are in a restaurant or retail store, scratch out all but the last four
digits on the merchant copy of your credit card receipt (as I noted previously,
the law allows merchants to maintain it on their copy of the receipt, but they
no longer need it once the transaction has been processed). Tear up your
copy if you don’t need it for your records. Likewise, tear up any carbon paper
if the merchant uses manual-swipe receipts.
Destroy Digital Information: Disks,
E-mails, CDs
One of the main reasons we destroy old paper ﬁles is because they take up
space, which can be expensive, especially if you lock them up. With com-
puter ﬁles, this is less of an issue. As long as your computer is well protected
(see Chapter 6, ‘‘Secure the Systems’’) and has enough storage space (a large
hard drive), you gain less by deleting documents from your computer. If you
want to clean ﬁles off for the sake of organization, I recommend copying
them onto a CD or DVD disk that you protect with passwords or encryption
(more complex) or store in your ﬁre safe (easier). This is one of the many
factors that make a computer such a good tool for preventing identity theft.
By taking some basic measures, you can lock down your system (and there-
fore your identity) without going to great lengths. I discuss this further in
Chapter 6.
There are, however, a couple of exceptions. First, if you are donating or
throwing away a computer, you should electronically ‘‘shred’’ the hard drive
before you pass it on. This can be done using any number of programs or
by performing a low-level format on the hard drive. I recommend leaving
this to a computer technician, as it is a permanent and unrecoverable
means of destruction. The data on your computer may be worth thousands
of dollars, so having it professionally deleted or transferred to another com-
puter is a good investment. And if you have a notebook computer, I recom-
mend adding a second level of protection, called encryption. See Chapter 6
for details.
The Second Mind-Set: Destroy the Data
69

Before selling or donating your computer, make sure you have formatted
the hard drive so that your data cannot be reconstructed. Similarly, if you are
throwing away or selling a cell phone, be sure to reformat the memory card
before you do so.
Action Item Checklist: Destroy the Data
Purchase a high-quality, confetti document shredder, and shred every
document, disk, and credit card that you no longer need.
Scratch out all but the last four digits on merchants’ copies of your
credit card receipt (if they don’t mask it).
Before selling, donating, or passing on your computer or cell phone to
someone else, have it digitally shredded or low-level formatted.
Here is a quick list of some of the most vulnerable items that go out
in the trash, hence are good candidates for the shredder once you no
longer need them (consult with your accountant or attorney):
Preapproved credit card offers
Convenience checks from credit card companies
Copies of mortgage and loan documents
Credit card statements
Cancelled checks
Bank statements
Credit card receipts
Pay stubs
Utility bills
Phone bills
Cell phone bills
Insurance/medical statements
Car registration/insurance
Brokerage statements
Copies of tax records or notes that are no longer needed
Expired driver’s licenses
Expired credit cards
70
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Business Relevance
For businesses, shredding is low-hanging fruit (one of the easiest sour-
ces of data breach to eliminate). But businesses are so often focused on
electronic forms of data breach that they fail to heed the following statis-
tics highlighted in a recent Ponemon Institute study2 conducted for the
Alliance for Secure Business Information:
 More than 50 percent of sensitive business data is still stored on
paper documents.
 Forty-nine percent of data breaches reported in the survey were the
result of paper documents.
 Sixty percent of businesses admitted that they didn’t provide the
proper tools (e.g., shredders) to safely discard documents that
were no longer needed.
 The average data breach recovery cost according to this survey was
$6.3 million.
If you own a business, make sure to destroy sensitive documents prior
to discarding them, to decrease your legal liability. Businesses are re-
quired to destroy all consumer information before discarding it in the
trash. The Fair & Accurate Credit Transaction Act (FACTA) Disposal Rule
states that ‘‘any person who maintains or otherwise possesses consumer
information for a business purpose’’ must properly destroy the informa-
tion prior to disposal. FACTA further states that every person and/or busi-
ness must take ‘‘reasonable measures’’ to protect against unauthorized
access to the use of the information in connection with its disposal. The
Red Flags Rules dictated by the Federal Trade Commission raise this
standard even higher.
Here are a few document-shredding best practices to implement at
your organization:
 Provide employees with a list of common documents they should
be shredding.
 As in the home, when it comes to shredding, convenience is key.
Adhere to the three-second rule: If your employees can’t shred a
(continued )
The Second Mind-Set: Destroy the Data
71

(continued )
document within three seconds, the shredder is too far away to
encourage consistent shredding.
 For highest security, place a shredder at every workstation, as well
as near any photocopiers, printers, or common areas where docu-
ments are handled.
 Purchase high-quality shredders that won’t break down, that pre-
vent employees from overfeeding the shredder, and that warn you
when they need to be oiled or maintained.
 Resort to on-site truck shredders and locked shredding bins only
when you have massive quantities of shredding to complete (e.g.,
when you are purging historical archives). I don’t recommend bulk
shredding for everyday use because there are too many ways for
the data to be compromised before it is destroyed (e.g., the shred-
ding bins are broken into; the shredding company does not prop-
erly destroy or dispose of the documents).
 Train company executives to take shredding very seriously and to
become high-proﬁle users of the shredders (to set a positive
example).
72
Privacy Means Proﬁt

6
The Third Mind-Set:
Secure the Systems
I
n the very near future, digital identity theft will become more common
than identity theft via paper documents, stolen wallets, and dumpster div-
ers. Because of the vast quantities of data we store digitally (on computers,
cell phones, in the ‘‘cloud,’’ on thumb drives, etc.), it is becoming more cost-
effective for thieves to take control of one hard drive than 100 ﬁling cabinets.
Victim #4,900,003: Facebook Company
Identity Theft
As the bookkeeper for an Internet wine retailer, Gregg had access to nearly
every digital ﬁle, ﬁling cabinet, and ﬁnancial record in the corporation. If
someone in the company needed data, he had it. Gregg didn’t spend much
time on social networking sites like Facebook during working hours because
his boss, Stefanie, was said to have installed software surveillance on every-
one’s system to monitor how much work time they were spending on personal
matters. But he made an exception when he received an e-mail from Facebook
titled ‘‘Facebook Password Reset Conﬁrmation,’’ which asked him to log in to
his account directly (‘‘for security purposes—never click on a link in an
e-mail,’’ it said) where he read the full notiﬁcation in his Facebook inbox.
Because the warning mirrored the company’s established security procedure
(don’t click on links in e-mails; log in directly), he assumed it was legitimate.
(continued )

(continued )
And since he managed the company’s Facebook page, which had thou-
sands of wine-enthusiast fans, he wanted to make sure its proﬁle was
online.
He logged in to Facebook and read the message in his inbox, which asked
him to click on a link that would verify his login credentials. If he didn’t
update his login information quickly, it warned, he would be locked out of his
account. Because it wasn’t from a ﬁnancial institution (or eBay or PayPal)
and because it was in his Facebook inbox, Gregg didn’t think twice or con-
sider that it could be a phishing scam set up to capture his login name and
password. When he clicked on the link, it took him to a login page identical to
the one he had just left, so he reentered his information. There he noticed that
the URL address in the address bar had changed, but it still contained the
words ‘‘Facebook’’ and ‘‘login’’ as part of the address, so once again, he as-
sumed it was legitimate.
It wasn’t.
The minute he clicked on the link, a variant of the Bredolab Trojan
horse (described below) began downloading onto his computer. Because
his antivirus and antispyware software hadn’t yet been updated for Bre-
dolab, the Trojan went undetected. By the time Gregg had ﬁnished retyp-
ing his login name and password (which gave the thieves full access into
his Facebook account), the Trojan had already gone to work. By injecting
its own programming code into otherwise legitimate Windows processes,
the Trojan:
1. Bypassed the corporate ﬁrewall (allowing restricted private data to be
sent out of the ofﬁce);
2. Completely turned off all virus and malware monitoring (so that the
Trojan could operate in stealth mode, unable to be detected by security
software); and
3. Enabled a ‘‘bot,’’ which immediately began spamming more ‘‘Facebook
Password Reset Conﬁrmation’’ e-mails to everyone on the company’s
Facebook address list. This is a particularly dangerous and viral way
for the scam to propagate, as people tend to trust messages from their
‘‘friends’’ on Facebook.
In less than 30 seconds, Gregg had lost access to his Facebook account,
control of his hard drive, and ownership of his wine-enthusiast list.
74
Privacy Means Proﬁt

The Bredolab Trojan is a banking parasite, meaning that it searches
for online banking information stored on its host’s computer. In this case,
the bank account numbers stored on Gregg’s computer were company
accounts, not personal. Nevertheless, Gregg was still the ﬁrst to know
that the accounts had been cleaned out when he received an automatic e-
mail alerting him to the account activity. Gregg had unfortunately stored
the company’s checking and savings account numbers and password in
his Outlook address book.
After changing the password so that Gregg could no longer access the
Facebook account, the thieves began e-mailing his competitors to see if
they wanted to purchase his customer list. This wasn’t just a listing of
Facebook fans, but a full database of past customers sitting on Gregg’s
hard drive in an Excel ﬁle. Luckily, the ﬁle did not contain credit card
numbers for the company’s customers. Also fortunate was that the thieves
had little short-term use for the ﬁnancial statements from the company
that were also on Gregg’s hard drive, as stolen ﬁnancials arouse too
much suspicion when sold.
To each of the company’s Facebook fans, the thieves e-mailed a similar
scam, asking them to update personal data, including credit card numbers,
expiration dates, and security codes. Since it appeared to be a legitimate com-
munication directly from the wine company, many of them complied.
Gregg’s only consolation was that the thieves did not ﬁre the parting shot
that is fairly common on social networking account takeover cases: to cause
as much collateral damage to the breached company as possible. In the worst
cases, the thieves post a message on the target company’s Facebook wall stat-
ing that the company is ceasing operation because it failed to adequately pro-
tect customer data. In other words, the thieves alert all customers about the
data breach for which they are responsible. Occasionally, the wall posting
suggests that the customers initiate a class action lawsuit to sue the company
for data breach and identity theft. It can be a devastating ﬁnal blow.
In the wine company’s case, because the breached data didn’t include
customer Social Security numbers, the per-record breach-recovery cost was
less than half the average (see Figure 6.1): $91 per record. Still, at 87,436
breached records, the total recovery cost came to $7.9 million. Worse, the
company lost most of its customers in the process, and never recovered
from that.
(continued )
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
75

Secure Mind-Set
Secure technology is at the heart of espionage. Encryption is just sophisti-
cated code-making; hacking is nothing more than modern code-breaking. As
we continue to move more of our data online, securing our digital assets will
become the most important form of identity protection. Spies utilize technology
not only to steal information but also to protect it. If secured correctly, main-
taining information in a digital format can actually lower the risk of data theft
because it provides user-level access that is difﬁcult to replicate with physical
documents. Whether it is a company laptop, your mobile phone, tape back-
ups, wireless networking, or cloud computing (a term used to mean that your
data is stored outside of your home or ofﬁces on someone else’s computer,
such as Google’s Gmail), technology houses vast quantities of data, making it
an ideal target for theft or a sophisticated means of privacy.
The question you should ask yourself is: How can I ﬁrst protect and then
utilize technology to secure identity and intellectual capital?
Secure Your Computer
Digital identity exists in many forms: the data on your hard drive or cell
phone; the wireless network at the airport or your hotel; your proﬁle and
(continued )
FIGURE 6.1
Pre-record Cost of a Data Breach
Source: ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study’’, Ponemon Institute, 2010.
76
Privacy Means Proﬁt

posts on a social networking site; and the online applications you use, such as
like Gmail, Google Docs, and off-site data storage. Spies exploit all of these
sources to siphon bits of data (or bytes) and use them to build a complete
dossier on your identity, which can then be sold, cloned, or cultivated, all for
their ﬁnancial gain and your loss.
In the simplest form, there are three critical phases to secure your digital
identity. In this order, take steps to secure:
1. Your computer or computing device, such as an iPhone or BlackBerry
2. The network, including Ethernet, wireless, and Internet access
3. Your online presence, for example, Facebook, e-mail, the cloud, and on-
line applications (covered in depth in Chapter 12, ‘‘Defend Online
Identity’’)
Once you have secured your computer, the network, and your online pres-
ence, you can begin to use your computer effectively in the ﬁght against
data theft.
For many people, a personal computer serves as their primary ﬁling cabi-
net for ﬁnancial, legal, and personal records. Your computer can be either an
asset or a liability in protecting these records. Unprotected, it is a liability
because it is open to:
 Hackers, thieves who break in from your Internet or network connection
 Spyware, malware, and adware, software that broadcasts your personal
information to spies
 Viruses and worms, software such as the Bredolab Trojan described in the
case study that damages your data—accounting ﬁles, spreadsheets, con-
tact lists, word processing docs, tax records, and so on
 Friendly fraud, abuse by authorized users—friends, relatives, and
acquaintances—who take advantage of your lack of preparation
 Crimes of opportunity, committed by people who steal your unprotected
information because it’s there for the picking
Hire a Professional
I am a strong believer that you get what you pay for. Unless you are a profes-
sionally trained computer technician, securing your own computer is a recipe
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
77

for disaster. You wouldn’t ﬂy your own airplane simply because you had been
on one before, would you? Or take a wrench to your new electronically con-
trolled car engine just because you used to work on your ’72 Gran Torino?
Okay, so I didn’t even know how to work on my Torino, but you get my point:
technology changes too quickly for the average user to keep up with the latest
security trends. That is why we hire professionals. But before you do, do
your homework:
1. Ask people or businesses you trust who they use to maintain their com-
puters and networks.
2. Use a company that has been around long enough to have a track record
for honesty and reliability (ﬁve-plus years).
3. Be there—take time out of your day to closely monitor what the techni-
cians are doing to your systems and to verify that everything is above-
board (your presence in the room greatly decreases the chances that
they will defraud you).
I recommend that you make a photocopy of the 15 ways to protect your
computer that follow, highlight those items that you need to have completed
(many computers already have some of these protections installed on them),
and arrange for the technicians to visit you on-site (in your home or ofﬁce,
where you can observe them) to make the necessary upgrades. Don’t forget to
ask for an estimate of the work to be completed before they start. It won’t be
exact, but it will give you a general idea. Remember: You may spend tens or
hundreds of dollars to protect your computer, but you will be securing thou-
sands of dollars worth of data, and signiﬁcantly reduce your chances of iden-
tity theft in the process.
Fifteen Ways to Protect Your Computer
1. Lock It Up
Physically securing your computer (especially laptops) is the simplest and
most overlooked form of computer security available. If criminals don’t have
physical access to the computer in the ﬁrst place, theft becomes much more
difﬁcult. For further suggestions on protecting mobile data, like laptops, read
Chapter 13, ‘‘Protect Mobile Data.’’
78
Privacy Means Proﬁt

2. Deploy Security Software
Many different types of security software have been combined into security
suites, such as those provided by Symantec, McAfee, and AVG. Instead of pur-
chasing, installing, updating, and maintaining multiple pieces of software, you
can purchase a single suite containing all of the necessary pieces for each com-
puter that you need to protect. Whether you utilize a suite or install programs
piece by piece, your security software should be conﬁgured to continually
update, in order for it to be effective. Security software is generally made up of
antivirus, antispyware, ﬁrewall, and backup software (discussed, in turn, next).
Visit www.Sileo.com/productreviews for security software recommendations.
3. Install Antivirus and Antispyware
Viruses infect your computer either to destroy data or install spyware. Spy-
ware is any program that launches on your computer without your informed
consent and, most often, adversely affects your computer’s performance while
forwarding your personal information to identity thieves, advertisers, compet-
itors, or anyone with malicious intent (ex-spouses, former employees, etc.).
Spyware comes in many ﬂavors, including adware (spying in order to sell
you new stuff), malware (hijacking your private information), botnets (bor-
rowing your computer’s processing power to commit crimes), keystroke log-
gers (recording keystrokes you make, including bank login and password
information), and others. Spyware is one way that credit card numbers, cus-
tomer records, buying habits, Social Security numbers, and other pieces of
identity are stolen from your system.
Spyware Infection Symptoms
Among the common computer symptoms that you should regard as red ﬂags
that your system has been infected by spyware are:
 You begin to receive popup ads.
 Your computer or Internet connection runs slower.
 Your system or network crashes more often.
 The default home page in your browser changes without your consent.
 Your wireless network won’t connect.
 Your computer is just ‘‘acting strangely.’’
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
79

4. Use a Firewall
A ﬁrewall is a device that regulates who or what (from the Internet) has ac-
cess into your data. It can also be used to regulate what data can leave your
computer over the Internet. If you connect to the Internet, and especially if
you have high-speed Internet access (DSL, cable modem, T1), it is essential
to have a ﬁrewall installed and conﬁgured. Doing so keeps hackers from get-
ting into your system to steal information.
Many security suites integrate a ﬁrewall into their software. In fact, most
operating systems, including Windows and OS X also contain integrated ﬁre-
walls. Software ﬁrewalls are generally used for home computing, tend to do a
better job at keeping unnecessary information from leaving your computer,
and require more processing power (which means they slow your computer
down).
Hardware ﬁrewalls, by contrast, are commonly used by businesses because
they don’t sacriﬁce the performance of individual computers for the sake of
security. They can be used to block out speciﬁc websites (e.g., if you don’t
want your employees to visit social networking sites during work, etc.), in-
stant messaging, and ﬁle downloads. Your computer technician should be
able to make a recommendation based on your speciﬁc needs and style.
Points to keep in mind when installing a security suite, ﬁrewall, antivirus, or anti-
spyware software:
 Make sure you are installing a reputable software package or hard-
ware ﬁrewall. For a review of security suites, visit www.Sileo.com/
productreviews. Don’t settle for a free package. You get what you
pay for.
 Ensure that your ﬁrewall is conﬁgured properly (e.g., turned on by
default, set to limit trafﬁc in and data out, protected behind a secure
password, and automatically updated with the latest security
patches).
 Check that the security software has the latest security updates and
is set to auto-update without user intervention.
 Verify that the software is set to periodically run a full system scan
(at least weekly).
80
Privacy Means Proﬁt

5. Enable a Pop-up Blocker
Most Internet browsers (Firefox, Safari, Internet Explorer) come standard
with a pop-up blocker. If it isn’t already, instruct your technician to turn this
capability on, as it reduces the chances that you will accidentally download
spyware and viruses onto your system.
If you continue to get pop-ups on your computer, never give in to tempta-
tion to click on any buttons on the screen—including the ‘‘NO’’ or ‘‘Decline’’
buttons, which will also download spyware onto your system. Instead, click
on the Windows ‘‘X’’ at the top right corner of your browser to close the win-
dow. Pop-ups that show up even though you have a pop-up blocker active are
a sure sign that your computer is infected with spyware.
6. Back Up Data
One of the most overlooked forms of security is to make a backup copy of
your data. If your computer is damaged in a ﬁre, experiences a hard drive
failure, or is corrupted by a virus, malware, or a hacker, the only way to re-
trieve the data is in the form of a backup copy.
There are many forms of backup, but I recommend those that are con-
tained within a security suite because they make it easy to make regular
backups of your data. You can also back up your data to an external drive or
ﬂash memory card and store it in a ﬁreproof locked safe. Apple users have an
automatic back up utility built in to the computer’s operating system, called
Time Machine.
7. Conﬁgure for Automatic Operating System Updates
Instruct your technician to conﬁgure Windows or Mac OS X for automatic
security updates, and verify that you have the latest service packs and updates
for your operating system and ofﬁce software. Failing to keep your operating
system up to date is like leaving the doors to the castle wide open.
8. Encrypt Your Wireless Connection
Encryption is the process of converting data or information into a cipher (or
code) to prevent unauthorized access. It’s important to encrypt your wireless
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
81

network so that your data isn’t ﬂoating freely on the airwaves, where any
hacker can intercept it.
I recommend that you tell your technician to conﬁgure your wireless
router with WPA2 (not WEP) or an equivalent 802.11i certiﬁcation. WPA
encryption (Wi-Fi Protected Access) is superior to WEP (Wired Equivalency
Privacy) because it provides stronger encryption algorithms, and password
characters aren’t restricted to 0–9 and A–F, as they are on WEP. If, however,
you don’t have access to WPA, WEP is better than nothing. (Note: It is not
necessary to understand the intricacies of these encryption schemes if you
have hired a competent security technician who can conﬁgure the encryption
for you.)
Once your encryption has been enabled, don’t broadcast your Service Set
Identiﬁer (SSID), a 32-character sequence that uniquely identiﬁes the wire-
less network, as broadcasting the SSID makes your network visible to neigh-
bors or passersby who might exploit your network for identity theft purposes.
Your SSID is what pops up in the ‘‘Available Wireless Networks’’ or ‘‘Join Net-
works’’ section of your wireless device conﬁguration settings. There is no
need to broadcast this to others unless you frequently authorize people to
join your wireless network (as would a wireless hotspot like Starbucks).
Again, implementing these settings is best left to a professional technician
who is comfortable with wireless networks. You’ll also want to disable remote
administration to prevent hackers from altering your network security set-
tings. Use Media Access Control (MAC) address ﬁltering for access control.
Unlike Internet Protocol (IP) addresses, MAC addresses are unique to speciﬁc
network adapters, so by turning on MAC ﬁltering you can limit network
For those of you who are technically minded, WPA2 replaced WPA.
Like WPA, WPA2 requires testing and certiﬁcation by the Wi-Fi Alli-
ance, an industry group. WPA2 implements the mandatory elements of
802.11i (a universal standard of security), but it will not work with
some older network cards. In particular, it introduces a new AES-based
algorithm, CCMP, which was considered ‘‘fully secure’’ at the time this
book was published. Certiﬁcation began in September 2004; beginning
March 13, 2006, to bear the Wi-Fi trademark, WPA2 certiﬁcation be-
came mandatory for all new devices.1
82
Privacy Means Proﬁt

access to just your systems. This ensures that only approved computers can
get on your wireless network, which means criminals can’t sit outside your
ofﬁce committing Internet crimes (e.g., selling pornography or stolen identi-
ties) using your IP address and bandwidth.
9. Encrypt Your Hard Drive
When you encrypt your hard drive using special software, it means that only
someone with the key (in this case, a password) can unscramble (decode) the
cipher and read the documents. When you encrypt your wireless transmis-
sion (see number 8), you scramble the transmission of data until it reaches
its destination, where it is unscrambled with the key. That way it cannot be
intercepted as it travels through cyberspace.
Although hackers can ﬁnd ways to break encryption, the process elevates
the crime to a whole new level of sophistication, meaning that the average
thief will only be able to use the hard drive as a paperweight. In the time
it takes to crack the code, the thief could have stolen several more computers
that don’t contain encrypted hard drives.
Operating systems are beginning to come standard with encryption. You
can also purchase stand-alone software that does the job. Either way, you
should enlist the help of a seasoned professional to implement the encryp-
tion, as there are certain drawbacks and complications (slowing the perform-
ance of your system, locking out people who need access, etc.) if done
incorrectly.
10. Protect Your Passwords
Now that so much of our ﬁnancial and even personal lives exist online, pro-
tecting our passwords has become more crucial and difﬁcult. It is common
for the average Internet user to frequent more than 50 different sites that re-
quire login access. That is too many passwords to remember or even keep
track of manually, especially if you adhere to the three cardinal rules of pass-
word creation:
 Don’t use words that can be found in a dictionary, dates or numbers rele-
vant to your life (birthdays, phone numbers), or familiar names (e.g.,
your pet) as passwords.
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
83

 Don’t use the same password for multiple accounts.
 Change your passwords frequently.
In the past couple of years, it has also become less safe to simply substitute
numbers and characters for related letters. For example, I used to recommend
that instead of using a word such as ‘‘sunﬂower’’ for your password, you spell
it with numbers and symbols—for example, $unf10w3r—as this is a pretty
easy code to remember, and used to be hard to crack. If, then, you needed to
store this information in your address book, contact manager, or wallet, you
could simply jog your memory by writing ‘‘sun.’’
Unfortunately, it didn’t take thieves long to become wise to this simple
method of encryption, and they now regularly substitute @ for a, 1 for L or I,
3 for E, 0 for O, $ for S, and so on when they apply password-cracking soft-
ware. Thus, this method is no longer as safe as it used to be.
The safest alternative is to create a random, 13-plus character, alphanumeric
symbol, uppercase/lowercase password that you change frequently. For
example:
<Q6VXSd(Qi9Ftv
But who can remember that? No one! Especially if you have more than one
password to remember. And we all know that a theory is no good if it is too
much trouble to put into practice. Which brings us to a compromise . . .
Password Protection Software
Password protection software stores all of your login information (includ-
ing passwords) in a secure software vault inside your computer. It is sim-
ilar to having your web browser automatically save your passwords, but
much safer. Web browsers don’t typically password-protect your password
ﬁle, meaning that anyone with access to your computer has access to all
of your passwords!
Password protection software stores all your passwords in an encrypted
ﬁle, which is locked up. The key to unlock it is a single, master password that
you do have to remember. Once this software is installed, in order to log in to
any of your online accounts, you must type in your master password.
The beneﬁts of password protection software include:
 You will use it: It’s easy to create, use, and store a highly secure password
for every website that requires login information.
84
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Limits user-level access: Someone who has access to your computer won’t
automatically also have access to all of your passwords or ﬁnancial
logins.
 It’s easy to update: Changing passwords frequently is simple and fast.
 It reduces complexity: Managing multiple accounts at the same website is
a snap (e.g., two Twitter accounts, multiple bank accounts at the
same bank).
 It saves time: The time you save by maintaining all your passwords in one
neat, organized place is fairly signiﬁcant. Some password protection soft-
ware will also store other sensitive data, such as credit card numbers, So-
cial Security numbers, investment accounts, and more. This makes it a
convenient place to house all of your identity. (See Chapter 10, ‘‘Monitor
the Signs,’’ for more information about logging and tracking your identity.)
There are, however, some drawbacks to using password protection soft-
ware. These include:
 You have all your eggs in one basket: If someone learns your master pass-
word (and has access to your computer), he or she has access to all of
your logins, not just one. This is the same drawback to using your
browser to remember your passwords: it centralizes them all in one
place. (In the case of your browser, however, they are centralized and
not encrypted behind a password.)
 You run the risk of forgetting your master password: If you lose or forget
your master password, there is no way to access your individual logins
or passwords. You will have to reestablish them website by website,
login by login. Or, if something happens to you and no one else knows
your master password, your representatives will have trouble accessing
your accounts.
 It can be inconvenient: If you travel a great deal and are frequently away
from your computer (where your passwords are stored securely) and
need to get into password-protected accounts on the web (which you no
longer have memorized, if you are using passwords like the example just
shown), then password protection software can be frustrating. If this is
your situation, you might be better served using the software for the 90
percent of passwords that you don’t need while away from your com-
puter and memorizing sophisticated passwords for the 10 percent that
you need on a regular basis.
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
85

 You must climb a learning curve: Setting up login and password informa-
tion whenever you establish a new online account can occasionally be
challenging. Every login scheme is different, so it takes time to become
familiar with the program before it is a simple process. Once you have
mastered it, however, it becomes an automatic part of registering at a
website.
To learn more about password protection software, visit www.Sileo.com/
productreviews.
Password protection software isn’t for everyone. If you don’t use the soft-
ware, your passwords are probably shorter, more uniform, more common, and
somewhat easy for a professional to break. If you do use the software, all of
your passwords are centralized in a single location (albeit, behind a computer
login password, a password vault password, and at least one layer of encryp-
tion, if not more). The important point here is to evaluate the options based on
your surﬁng habits and preferences, balanced against convenience and security.
My ﬁnal piece of advice on passwords: If you currently use a single pass-
word for multiple sites, Windows or Mac logins, or ATM machines, or have
passwords made up of birthdates, children’s or pets’ names, phone numbers,
or that don’t incorporate both letters and numbers, change them now! Start
with your computer and website logins and passwords and then move on to
your ATM PIN, debit card, and the rest.
11. Recognize Phishing Scams
Learn to understand and recognize phishing scams. Brieﬂy, a phishing scam is
an e-mail disguised to look like it is from a familiar source, such as your ﬁ-
nancial institution (bank or brokerage), eBay, PayPal, Facebook, Twitter, or a
host of other ﬁnancial and ecommerce companies. The e-mail asks you to log
in to the website by clicking on a link within it. This link takes you to another
website that looks exactly like that of the legitimate ﬁnancial institution,
where you are asked to input personal information (your identity), which is
used by the thief to access your actual account.
To avoid phishing scams, categorically refuse to enter any information at a
website to which you navigated through an e-mail link. Instead, type the site
address into your web browser and go to your account from there. If you
have doubts about any correspondence you receive through an e-mail, pick
86
Privacy Means Proﬁt

up the phone and call the institution that e-mailed you directly. Keep in
mind, no reputable ﬁnancial or business website will ask you to click on a link
to update your account information. Visit en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phishing for
a more comprehensive explanation of phishing, and to see real-life examples.
Phishing schemes evolve so quickly that you need a dynamic way to keep tabs
on them, meaning that a book set in print is not the way to do that; a reliable
source for a regularly updated deﬁnition is.
12. Shop Securely
When shopping online, it’s advisable to purchase from a reputable, recogniz-
able company rather than the lowest-priced retailer. Look for these three dis-
tinguishing characteristics of secure websites:
 A web address that starts with https:// instead of http://—the ‘‘s’’ stands
for secure.
 In the bottom right-hand corner of your browser, look for the small pad-
lock symbol; the closed-lock icon indicates that the site you are buying
from uses SSL encryption, a type of computer security that protects your
data as it is transmitted. You can double-click on the padlock symbol to
see the SSL certiﬁcate.
 Increasingly, ecommerce and banking websites are implementing a tech-
nology that turns your address bar bright green if the website has ob-
tained an Extended Validation SSL certiﬁcation (meaning that it is safer
than other ecommerce sites). Green is good.
The rule of thumb here is: If the site is not operating on a secure server
(i.e., no https and/or no lock), consider shopping elsewhere; otherwise, your
credit card will be traveling across the Internet unprotected and you will have
no idea who has access to it at the other end. In the absence of these security
indicators, either call and make the transaction over the phone or e-mail the
company to see if it has a secure website where transactions can take place.
13. Protect Your Laptop
If you have a laptop or notebook computer, you must take extra precautions
to protect the data on it. Because of their portability, laptops have a much
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
87

higher risk of being lost or stolen. When this happens, a thief has as long as
he or she needs to crack your passwords. This might mean you should keep
sensitive documents out of your notebook entirely, or install disk encryption
software that further protects your portable computer. For a full discussion
on protecting laptop computers, please refer to Chapter 13, ‘‘Protect
Mobile Data.’’
14. Understand the Cloud
‘‘The cloud’’ is a catch-all term for all the data we store outside of our homes
and ofﬁces, on other people’s servers. Be aware of and try to limit the informa-
tion you share or store online, including at social networking sites (Face-
book, Twitter, LinkedIn, MySpace, YouTube, etc.), in online applications
(Google Docs, Hotmail, SalesForce, etc.), at peer-to-peer networking sites
(Kazaa, Morpheus, Gnutella, etc.), and on other online tools (blogs, wikis,
photo sharing, etc.). Read Chapter 12, ‘‘Defend Online Identity,’’ for more
about protecting your information in the cloud.
15. Protect Your Spouse/Partner and Children
Don’t forget to implement the same safeguards at work and on other comput-
ers in your home.
Use Your Computer to Help
Prevent Identity Theft
Once your computer is secure, it has many advantages over traditional ﬁling
systems:
1. It is locked anytime you are not using the computer (thanks to pass-
words and encryption).
2. You can allow different levels of access for different people (thanks to
user proﬁles that are based on usernames and passwords). With a ﬁling
cabinet, one key lets everyone into everything.
3. You can store vast quantities of data without taking up physical space.
This eliminates the need to destroy physical documents, which saves
you time.
88
Privacy Means Proﬁt

4. By using your computer, you can shut down one of the most vulnerable
avenues of identity theft—mail. By receiving statements and paying bills
online, you are less vulnerable to red-ﬂagging (mail theft).
5. When data arrives via e-mail, Internet, and other digital sources, it is
already partially ﬁled, as it already exists on your hard drive. You may
choose to save it in a different location, but either way, it is protected. It
never exists in an unlocked state, like mail does.
6. You can review online statements more quickly, enabling you to
catch inconsistencies faster than if you were notiﬁed by law enforce-
ment or a creditor. Identity theft victims who monitored their
accounts online discovered the fraud, on average, in eight days and
incurred an average loss of $3,927. In contrast, victims who were
contacted by a debt collector or creditor had an average of $8,522
stolen and it took them an average of 156 days to detect the fraud.2
Rapid detection is half the battle!
7. You can add additional layers of protection quite easily if your data is
extremely valuable. For less than $100, you can buy software that
encrypts your hard drive (turns your data into a collection of nonsense
to anyone who doesn’t have the encryption key or password).
Here’s my recommendation: Replace paper statements that arrive through
the mail, and that may subsequently be left exposed on desks for long periods
of time, with online statements that are automatically stored in your com-
puter. By replacing paper bills, statements, and checks with electronic ver-
sions (on the Internet), you eliminate the risk of their being stolen out of
your mailbox or off your desk (discussed in the tasks section of Chapter 4,
‘‘Eliminate the Source’’). The next time you receive a statement of any kind in
the mail, call the customer service number on the statement, or log on to the
company’s website and conﬁgure your account for electronic statements. Fol-
low up, to make sure that your paper statements are stopped. Over the course
of a month, you should have switched most of your account statements from
paper to electronic versions. Don’t forget to opt out of information sharing
while you are on the phone with the companies.
I also strongly urge you to stop paying bills through the mail with paper
checks. As you have probably noticed, I emphasize throughout the book that
one of the best ways to prevent identity theft is to stop using the mail system
to transmit sensitive documents.
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
89

There are several ways you can pay your bills that do not involve sending a
check through the mail.
 Auto-Pay: Set up auto-pay by credit card. You can generally do this with
most major companies (phone bill, utilities, cable TV, insurance, etc.).
You can also pay by credit card on a month-by-month basis on most
websites. This isn’t as convenient, but it gives you more control over
your charges. I prefer this option, as it gives you an easy method to dis-
pute charges, should you need to do so (you call the credit card com-
pany and freeze the payment until your dispute is settled). In addition,
your liability is only $50 if you report fraud in a reasonable time frame,
which is usually established by each individual company.
 Electronic Funds Transfer: Since you cannot pay a credit card with a
credit card (well, technically you can, but we won’t go into that), you
will have to pay by other means. You can set up an electronic funds
transfer between your bank and the bank of the company to which you
owe money. For example, many insurance agencies don’t allow credit
card payments, but they will automatically deduct your premium each
month directly from your bank account. I use this option when the
credit card option is not available, but only after I have established
a trusting relationship with the company that will be withdrawing
the funds.
Using Electronic Statements
Most electronic statements come in the form of an Adobe Acrobat (or PDF) ﬁle.
These can be saved directly to your hard drive in a folder named for their speciﬁc
purpose (e.g., 2009 Bank Statements—Account 4299).
When you are online viewing your ﬁrst statement, set up auto-alerts (if the
company offers them) that warn you about any major activity on the account.
For example, most ﬁnancial institutions let you set up auto-alerts, sent to you via
e-mail when certain transactions occur on your account. This is a very effective
way to monitor your ﬁnances on a daily basis without much time investment
(see Chapter 10, ‘‘Monitor the Signs’’).
90
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Bill Pay: You can use an electronic bill payment service, which is offered
by most banks, brokerages, and many other businesses. This is a good
third option. Most of the electronic bill payment services still cut paper
checks and send them through the mail. While this reduces the risk that
an outgoing check will be stolen from your mailbox, it does not lower
the risk of it being stolen from the bill payer’s mail, or in transit. The
good news is, the account number that generally appears on bill-pay
checks is the bank’s, not yours.
Action Item Checklist: Secure the Systems
Hire a professional to secure your computer.
Physically store your computer in a safe and secure place.
Implement a security software suite.
Use antivirus and antispyware software.
Back up your data regularly.
Enable a pop-up blocker.
Install a ﬁrewall.
Conﬁgure your computer to automatically update all protection and
antivirus software, pop-up blockers, and ﬁrewalls.
Encrypt your wireless connection.
Encrypt your hard drive.
Create random 13-plus character passwords, and protect them.
Look into password protection software.
Be aware of and learn to recognize phishing scams.
Shop securely online from reputable, recognizable companies.
Password-protect your computer, and lock it when you are not
using it.
Replace paper statements that arrive through the mail with online and
electronic versions.
Stop paying bills through the mail with paper checks. Instead use auto-
pay, electronic funds transfer, or online bill pay.
Implement all safeguards for your spouse or partner and family
members.
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
91

Business Relevance
Technology is the focal point of data breach and workplace identity
theft because corporations create, transmit, and store so many pieces
of information digitally that it becomes a highly attractive target.
This book is not intended to address the complex maze that larger
organizations face in protecting their technological and digital assets.
Rather, the purpose of this book is to begin to familiarize business
employees, executives, and vendors with the various security issues
facing them.
The task, then, is to develop a capable team (internal and external) to
address these issues. In my experience, the following technology-related
issues pose the greatest data-loss threats inside organizations:
 Laptop Theft: According to the Ponemon Institute, 36 percent3 of
reported breaches are due to a lost or stolen laptop.
 Mobile Data Theft: Thumb drives, CDs, DVDs, tape backups, smart
phones
 Malware: Software that infects corporate systems, allowing crimi-
nals inside these networks
 Hacking: Breaking into your computer system from the outside,
using networks, wireless connections, remote access, and your In-
ternet pipeline
 Wireless Theft: Wireless connections to the Internet in airports, ho-
tels, cafes, and conferences
 Insider Theft: When someone in the IT department (or elsewhere)
decides to make extra money by selling your data
According to the Ponemon Institute, ‘‘Thirty-six percent of all cases in
this year’s study involved lost or stolen laptop computers or other mobile
data-bearing devices. Data breaches concerning lost, missing, or stolen
laptop computers are more expensive than other incidents. Speciﬁcally,
in this year’s study, the per-victim cost for a data breach involving a lost or
stolen laptop was just under $225, over $30 more than if a laptop or
mobile device was not involved.’’ See Figure 6.2.
92
Privacy Means Proﬁt

In conjunction with the steps discussed earlier in this chapter, here are
some additional guidelines your business can follow to better protect
sensitive information:
1. Encrypt sensitive customer information.
2. Educate your customers on using sophisticated passwords (as
explained previously).
3. Create personalized identiﬁcation numbers that are not based on
customer identity (SSN, account numbers, etc.).
4. Use truncated account numbers or other identifying information in
customer e-mails to let them know the e-mail could only be com-
ing from you.
5. Adhere to the Payment Card Industry (PCI) Security Standards Coun-
cil and any legislation regulating how your industry controls data.
6. Eliminate embedded links in all e-mails to your customers so they
know that any links they do receive under your company’s name
are probably phishing attempts. Educate them about your link policy.
7. Enlist your customers to quickly detect fraud (see Chapter 10,
‘‘Monitor the Signs’’).
8. Prepare and implement a data breach response plan.
To learn more about products that can help you protect your com-
pany’s digital information, please visit www.Sileo.com/productreviews.
FIGURE 6.2
Lost or Stolen Device
Source: ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2010.
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
93

7
The Fourth Mind-Set:
Lock the Docs
T
echnology is a signiﬁcant source of identity theft and data breach. That
said, according to research, your risk of physical document theft is still
considerably higher than electronic theft. For one reason, as we all turn our
attention more toward protecting ourselves technologically, thieves are taking
advantage of good old-fashioned document theft.
Victim #1,477,377: The Inside Job
Carmen’s family was robbed when she was 11. She will never forget how sick
it made her feel that someone had been in her home, prowling around. That is
why Carmen, now 36 and with a house larger than most people dream of
owning, takes particular pride in, and spent a fortune on, home security. She
grew up ‘‘thinking like a thief,’’ and takes great precautions to protect her
home from the outside in.
She lives in a gated community with a security service that monitors resi-
dents’ homes 24 hours a day. She has installed a $20,000 motion-sensitive
burglar alarm and video surveillance system, and owns two German shep-
herds. On all of her doors are double-deadbolts, which are connected to a
thumbprint scanner. When someone wants to enter the house, they must press
their thumbs against a pad just outside any of the doorways. Four people have
access by thumbprint to Carmen’s house: her mother, sister, cleaning lady,
and best friend.

Lock up your vital documents as if they were cold, hard cash, because to
an identity thief, they are. Lock your docs!
Lock Mind-Set
Spies operate from a mind-set of secrecy and behind a perimeter of locks and
classiﬁcation systems. As we learned in the last two chapters, they keep only
what they need and destroy any information that has no further use. But
their secrecy goes even further. They operate out of ‘‘safe houses,’’ which are
information-tight despite often being in the middle of enemy territory. In the
world of espionage, nothing is more valuable, or damaging, than a top-secret
document. And nothing is more effective at keeping the enemy from access-
ing it than to physically lock it up.
Carmen describes her home as a ‘‘safe house.’’ She shreds every piece
of paper that leaves the house; uses encryption technology on her computer,
Internet connection, and wireless network; and only mails documents directly
from the post ofﬁce. Her wallet contains one credit card, her driver’s license,
and a picture of her nephew; she does not carry checks. The documents in
her car are locked up.
In spite of all her precautions, Carmen’s identity was stolen completely,
without her knowledge. She found out two years after it happened, when her
identity was given to the police during an arrest for a crime that she had noth-
ing to do with. The perpetrator (who was not the original identity thief, but
someone who had purchased a ‘‘new’’ identity on the Internet) held up a phar-
macy at gunpoint and was caught because of a ﬂat tire.
What was the weakness in Carmen’s security setup? The way she stored
private documents—or rather, the way she didn’t store them. She had left tax
documents on her desk for weeks before ﬁling them securely.
Who was the thief? It turned out to be a painter who had asked to use the
upstairs bathroom because the downstairs bathroom was wet with paint. The
police believe that the painter used the small photocopier in Carmen’s home
ofﬁce to make copies of several of her documents. And because none of her
papers were ever identiﬁed as missing, she never suspected foul play. The
painter was later caught stealing documents from another job site and con-
fessed to the police to stealing Carmen’s information, as well.
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs
95

Systematically classify and lock up all private documents that could lead to
identity theft if they were to fall into the wrong hands. Ask yourself in regard
to each identity document: How would you classify the damage done if this
speciﬁc document were stolen and sold? Lock accordingly.
Create a Safe House
A safe house is not just a physical location; it is also a way of thinking. Creat-
ing a safe house should prompt you to think about who has access into the
house (and, thus, your information) and what data leaves the house (access
in/data out). Let me explain.
Think of a safe house as a centralized repository of every piece of intelli-
gence that a spy has collected or is protecting. It contains dossiers (vital doc-
uments) on the spy’s targets and informants, information about his or her true
identity and aliases, and links to his or her employer and maybe even other
spies who are a part of the network. Because of the value of this information,
there are controls on who has access into the house (access in) and on what
data is allowed out of the house (data out). Creating a safe house by control-
ling access in and data out is a mind-set of its own.
These are the same controls that you must implement in your home and
ofﬁce. Simply put, anytime a piece of data goes out of the house (via trash,
telephone, mail, e-mail, wireless network, human carrier, etc.) or someone
is allowed (or illegally gains access) into the house (friends, family, guests,
contract laborers, domestic help, thieves), you should have safeguards in
place to protect your essential identity documents. Remember, the better
A quick note on the title of this chapter, ‘‘Lock the Docs’’: Locking tech-
niques take two basic forms, physical and digital. This chapter focuses
on the physical types of locks, including safes, locking ﬁling cabinets,
and even ofﬁce doors, whereas the previous chapter, ‘‘Secure the Sys-
tems,’’ described how to lock digital data using passwords, encryption,
ﬁrewalls, security software, and other tools. The two forms of locking
often work in conjunction with one another, as when you physically
lock your computer. Don’t apply either locking technique in isolation
from the other mind-sets.
96
Privacy Means Proﬁt

acquainted you are with the thief, the greater the damage he or she can do
to your identity.
Those victims who knew their perpetrator personally were less likely to be
notiﬁed of the breach, suffered from the more damaging debit fraud, and
spent more than twice as many hours (53 hours versus 22 hours) resolving
their frauds.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
In recent years, burglars have increasingly broken into homes in order to
steal documents, rather than electronics and jewelry. When you centralize all
of your documents in a single place (ofﬁce ﬁling cabinet or ﬁre safe), it makes
it that much easier for them to steal it. As a result, it is now imperative that we
physically secure our document storage so that it cannot be easily picked up
and carried away. This may mean having your ﬁre safe bolted into the founda-
tion of your home, utilizing a safe that is too heavy to move quickly and eas-
ily, or creating a safe room of your own.
Safe Room
You may ﬁnd it easier to designate an entire room or space in your home (or
in your ofﬁce) to store sensitive documents. Here is one example of how to
creatively protect your documents. Designate a small closet as your safe
room. If you have a closet in your ofﬁce, this is a convenient place to start. If
you would like greater security (and don’t mind sacriﬁcing a bit of conve-
nience), use a closet in your basement. After you have chosen your safe
room, I recommend taking the following precautions:
 Have a solid-core door installed on the closet, to increase the security.
 On the door, install a keypad lock that allows you and your family easy
access inside without having to use a key.
 Inside the closet, install your ﬁre-resistant ﬁling cabinets (or regular ﬁl-
ing cabinets if you are not concerned about protecting your documents
against ﬁre).
 File all of your identity documents (examples in the next section) in
these cabinets, and keep the door locked at all times, especially when
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs
97

you leave the ofﬁce or house. Remove documents only when you need to
work on them, and return them promptly when you are done.
I realize that creating a safe room may seem to you like overkill. I thought
the same thing—until my parents were robbed. In their case, the criminals
stole a ﬁling cabinet drawer full of documents, because the ﬁling cabinet itself
was connected to a desk and was too bulky to take in its entirety. Had the
ofﬁce door or even the ﬁling cabinet been locked, the thieves would not have
had time to break the locks and steal the docs.
Essential Identity Documents and How to
Lock Them
Table 7.1 lists some of your essential (vital) identity documents, where you
should store them, and where to store duplicate copies. For all documents,
consult with your lawyer, accountant, or tax advisor regarding how long you
need to store them, as times can vary.
Table 7.1
Essential Identity Docs and Where to Store
Type of
Storage
Document(s)
Keep a
Copy?
Where to
Store Duplicates
Bank safe
deposit box
Birth certiﬁcates;
death certiﬁcates;
marriage license;
adoption, citizenship,
divorce papers
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe room
Inventory and photos
of household property
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe room
Property deeds, titles,
bills of sale, car title,
mortgage documents
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe room
List of location of
important papers
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe
room, a secure off-site
location (friend or relative’s
ﬁre safe, attorney’s ofﬁce,
etc.)
Insurance policies
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe room
98
Privacy Means Proﬁt

The documents listed in Table 7.2 are those you need to protect against
ﬁre, ﬂood, and theft.
Table 7.2
Docs to Protect Against Fire, Flood, and Theft
Type of
Storage
Document(s)
Keep a
Copy?
Where to
Store Duplicates
Secured ﬁre
safe or ﬁre-
rated locking
ﬁling cabinet
Tax returns;
supporting
documents for past
seven years; Social
Security cards
No
—
Passports
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe
room; also, secure a copy of
your passport in a different
location from the original
when you travel
Bank account
information
Yes
Secure off-site location
List of passwords,
PINs, and account
numbers
No
It is too difﬁcult to keep an
updated version off-site
unless you use an electronic
solution (online document
vault).
List of all assets,
including brokerage
and mutual fund
accounts, stocks,
bonds, bank accounts,
real estate and
employee-beneﬁt
accounts
Yes
Secure off-site location
Backup copies of
computer documents
(CDs, DVDs, tape
backups, disks)
Yes
Secure off-site location
Lease agreements;
loan documents;
rental agreements;
vehicle purchase
agreements
No
—
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs
99

The documents speciﬁed in Table 7.3 are those you need to safeguard
against theft.
Lock Your Vital Physical Documents
Buy a ﬁre safe or ﬁre-rated ﬁling cabinet for your home. This is where you will
store your essential identity documents. Go to your local ofﬁce supply store, or
visit www.Sileo.com/productreviews for our reviews on the best ﬁre safes and
ﬁre-rated ﬁling cabinets. Save money by purchasing a ﬁling cabinet that is also
ﬁre-rated, eliminating the need for both a ﬁre safe and a locking ﬁling cabinet.
Table 7.3
Docs to Protect Against Theft
Type of
Storage
Document(s)
Keep a
Copy?
Where to
Store Duplicates
Locking ﬁling
cabinet or
secured
computer
Bank statements
No
—
Cancelled checks
No
—
Investments, securities,
mutual fund statements
No
—
Credit card statements
No
—
Monthly mortgage
statements
No
—
Phone, utilities, cable,
cellular statements
No
—
Wallet
Driver’s license or other
photo ID
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe
room
Auto insurance card
Yes
Secured in car
Emergency contacts
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe
room
Blood type, list of
allergies, medications
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe
room
Credit cards and other
cards
Yes
Secured ﬁre safe or safe
room
100
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Your safe or cabinet should meet these minimum requirements:
 Capable of withstanding 1500F for 30 minutes
 Lockable by key or combination
 Heavy enough to discourage theft, or capable of securing to the ground
 Preferably waterproof (in case of ﬁre, your house will get wet)
 Ideally, buy stackable units so that your safe storage can expand along
with your document requirements
Lock your essential identity documents according to Tables 7.1 to 7.3.
Take the following steps:
1. Collect all of the documents that you need to put in a bank safe
deposit box (banks charge about $50 per year for a document-sized
drawer).
2. Photocopy each of these documents and place the copy in your ﬁre safe
or ﬁre-rated cabinet. For easy reference, keep a log of every document
that is stored in your bank deposit box (especially for your spouse or
partner, who might not be as familiar with the contents).
3. Put the documents in the bank’s safety deposit box and put one key in
your ﬁre safe and another in a completely different location (e.g., in a
secure place at your ofﬁce). Make sure that your spouse or partner also
can get into the safety deposit box, as banks generally seal these boxes
upon death of the owner if there are no surviving cosigners. These doc-
uments are the most important ones in your life and should be kept
indeﬁnitely.
4. Collect and ﬁle the remainder of the documents that belong in a ﬁre
safe. Set up one hanging ﬁle folder per year, with documents separated
into manila folders by subject (bank, brokerage, home, etc.). I suggest
keeping seven years of records, because that is an easy number to re-
member and is an ample amount of time to store most documents. I use
a slightly larger ﬁre-rated ﬁling cabinet, to avoid having to purchase
both a ﬁre safe and a locking ﬁling cabinet.
5. Collect and ﬁle the remainder of the documents in a locking ﬁling cabi-
net. Each time you ﬁle the latest version of these documents, shred any
statements that have outlived their life span. Within months you will
have a ﬁling cabinet that is simpliﬁed and up to date.
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs 101

6. Clean up your desk, ﬁles, and mail area. Use safety as the mandatory
impetus for removing sensitive papers from your desk, drawers, and
elsewhere; centralize them in one secure location.
7. If you own a business, use only locking trash dumpsters, and give the
trash company a key to the padlock. Locking up your trash can greatly
decrease your legal liability. As of June 1, 2005, businesses are required
to destroy all consumer information before discarding it in the trash.
And as stated in Chapter 5, the Fair & Accurate Credit Transaction Act
(FACTA) Disposal Rule states that ‘‘any person who maintains or other-
wise possesses consumer information for a business purpose’’ must
properly destroy the information prior to disposal. FACTA further states
that every person and/or business must take ‘‘reasonable measures’’ to
protect against unauthorized access to the use of the information in
connection with its disposal.1
Securing Your Mail
In the modern world of espionage, a majority of communication between a
spy and his or her network takes place via computer. Sending documents
electronically is very low-proﬁle, easy-to-protect (encrypt), and immediate,
giving counterspies (thieves) little time to intercept the data. Still, there are
times when information cannot be sent electronically. In such circumstances,
spies use a ‘‘dead drop,’’ a secret location where materials can be left by one
person and retrieved by another.
The information in this section is doubly important for those readers
who do not have or choose not to use a computer to receive online
statements and pay bills.
As discussed earlier in the book, it is important to take preventive
steps that ﬁt with your lifestyle. If you choose not to receive statements
or correspondence on your computer, the chances are good that you
won’t implement the changes I recommend for securing your identity
electronically. Instead, you should implement the noncomputing ver-
sion of protecting your mail, described in this section.
102
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Many people still do not believe that mail can be stolen so easily. They
think of mail delivery as another public service that rarely falters (like the
electricity to your home, for example). Because it is so convenient to mail
documents, we continue to drop them in the box, ignoring the very real risk
of doing so.
Think for a minute about the risk of mailing sensitive documents
incorrectly:
 At a recent lecture sponsored by the U.S. Postal Inspection Service (the
mail police), the inspector responsible for my region of the country
strongly recommended that people not leave incoming or outgoing mail
in unlocked mailboxes, like the ones in front of their homes.
 He also recommended that we not put outgoing mail in the blue USPS
drop boxes, even those in front of post ofﬁces. He said that these boxes
are regularly broken into, or are too often ‘‘dummy boxes’’ that don’t
even belong to the mail service, or have had the bottoms cut out and
replaced by cardboard so that the contents can be picked up after dark
by ‘‘midnight mailmen’’ (identity thieves). Many of these crimes are
committed by members of methamphetamine drug rings that steal iden-
tities to fund their illegal drug activities.
Lock Your Mail Against Theft
The best solution is simple: Stop using the mail to send and receive identity
documents (as just described). Unfortunately, it’s not always possible to imple-
ment. Therefore, I suggest these alternatives:
 Install a lock box. Install a locking mailbox that only you can access.
These generally have a mail slot that allows the postal service to put
mail into them. Many newer neighborhoods already have some form of
locking mailboxes.
 Rent a P.O. box. If a locking mailbox is not possible for you, rent a P.O.
box at your local post ofﬁce and have sensitive documents sent there. It
is a little less convenient, but assures you much more privacy.
 Mail in person. When mailing sensitive documents, walk them into the
post ofﬁce and hand them to a postal worker. If it is after hours, drop
the mail through an internal slot in the building. If there is no internal
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs 103

mailing slot, wait and mail it the next day. This eliminates the most vul-
nerable stages of mailing.
 Use overnight delivery services. Have identity documents sent by UPS or
FedEx, and make sure to require a signature for delivery. Taking this
precaution makes the information harder to steal, and you can track
package location at any time, which will alert you if the document isn’t
delivered in a timely manner or has been diverted elsewhere.
 Send checks to the bank. Have sensitive documents (like new checks or
credit cards) sent to your bank rather than to your home address. Pick
them up there.
 Watch for cards. When you are expecting new credit cards through the
mail, keep an eye out for them and call the credit card company if they
don’t arrive in 7 to 10 days.
 Retrieve mail quickly. If you are unable to install a locking mailbox and
don’t have access to P.O. boxes, retrieve any mail you receive within
an hour or two of delivery. This lowers the theft-exposure time of
your mail.
Finally, review Chapter 4, ‘‘Eliminate the Source,’’ for tips on cutting down
the amount of mail that is delivered to your home.
Twenty-ﬁve percent of consumers have stopped using paper statements or
bills. Avoiding the use of paper bills and banking statements altogether is a
sureﬁre way to eliminate paper-based identity theft.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
Action Item Checklist: Lock the Docs
Create a safe house or a safe room.
Purchase a ﬁre safe or ﬁre-rated ﬁling cabinet and secure it to the
foundation of your home or ofﬁce (if feasible).
Lock your essential documents according to Tables 7.1 to 7.3.
Lock your mail (and mailbox) against theft:
104
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Use a locking mailbox or rent a P.O. box.
 Mail sensitive documents in person.
 Have identity documents sent by UPS or FedEx (with tracking).
 Have new checks sent to your bank for pickup.
 Retrieve mail within an hour or two of delivery, and watch for new
credit cards.
Business Relevance
Locking up sensitive documents is one of the most important and
underutilized ways to protect company data. Of the individuals surveyed
by the Ponemon Institute, 56 percent state that over 50 percent of their
company’s sensitive or conﬁdential information is contained within paper
documents.2 Since 49 percent of all breaches involved paper, locking up
what cannot be eliminated or destroyed is essential. To get you ﬁrmly
into the business mind-set of thinking like a spy, start with this simple
three-step classiﬁcation process:
1. Classiﬁcation: Set up a classiﬁcation scheme. For example, you
might have four levels of access: public, internal, classiﬁed, and top
secret.
 Public documents are the only documents meant to be seen by
outsiders (the public). This might include sales and marketing
materials, websites, public ﬁlings, and the like.
 Internal documents are those appropriate for employees of the
company to see, but inappropriate for outsiders. These are gen-
erally not high-risk documents, still it’s better to keep them conﬁ-
dential, just in case.
 Classiﬁed documents are a security risk if the wrong people see
them, either internally or externally. Only certain employees and
executives would have access to these documents (see step 2).
Classiﬁed documents might include human resource ﬁles,
(continued )
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs 105

(continued )
customer lists, product development papers, department ﬁnan-
cials, strategy frameworks, and so on.
 Top secret documents are those meant for only a small number of
very carefully vetted people at the company. Top secret documents
tend to include trade secrets (e.g., the recipe for Coke), intellectual
capital, merger and acquisition data, and proprietary ﬁnancials.
2. User-level Access: Set up a system of locking that grants only quali-
ﬁed individuals access to the corresponding level of conﬁdentiality.
Top secret documents would be stored in a safe accessible by, and
known to, a limited number of people. Conﬁdential documents
might be stored in locking ﬁling cabinets or in a safe room that is
managed or monitored by a gatekeeper. Internal documents would
probably be stored in ﬁling cabinets (preferably, locking) and not
be easily accessible to others, especially after hours (by cleaning
staff, visitors). Public documents need not be locked.
3. Education and Accountability: You must educate your employees
and executives on the classiﬁcation framework you develop, or it
will go unused. Because this type of classiﬁcation and user-level ac-
cess relies on the honesty of the participants (e.g., anyone can pick
up and read a top secret ﬁle if it is left out in the open), there has to
be fairly serious consequences if protocol is breached. Communi-
cate a clear picture of what action(s) will be taken against the of-
fending party when one of the following happens:
 You discover someone accessing documents above his or her
access level.
 You encounter documents that are unclassiﬁed or improperly
classiﬁed.
 You ﬁnd locking ﬁling cabinets unlocked, safe rooms unmoni-
tored, or classiﬁed documents out in the open.
106
Privacy Means Proﬁt

8
The Fifth Mind-Set:
Evaluate the Risk
I
n espionage, making rational, immediate decisions is paramount. A great
deal of preparation goes into making wise decisions with regard to sensi-
tive information. This chapter is the ﬁrst of two aimed at giving you the
tools to detect acts of fraud, social engineering, and identity theft in the
earliest stages.
Victim #6,777,763: Social Engineering at
the Gym
One day at the gym, a woman watched over Michelle’s shoulder while she
dialed the combination to her locker. Having observed her habits for several
weeks, the woman knew that Michelle drove a nice car and that she exercised
three times a week after work for approximately an hour. The following week,
just after Michelle left the locker room to work out, the woman broke into
Michelle’s locker and stole her wallet. And while she was at it, the thief took
an extra second to make a note of Michelle’s cell phone number. That’s how
identity thieves work: They collect small, imperceptible pieces of data until
they add up to a complete, valuable identity.
When Michelle returned from working out, she discovered that her wallet
was gone. She walked to her car to make sure she hadn’t left it there, and as
she was unlocking the car, received a call on her cell phone. The caller identi-
ﬁed herself as an agent from her bank, saying that they had caught someone
trying to use her debit card to cash out her account. The agent explained that
(continued )

Evaluate Mind-Set
Spies are aware of virtually everything happening around them. They are able
to make quick decisions because they are prepared at all times to confront the
enemy. Their skills of observation and evaluation prepare them to preempt
fraud and social engineering (deﬁned as the act of obtaining conﬁdential in-
formation by manipulation) before they expose valuable intelligence.
(continued )
the security guard at the bank had stopped the thief, taken her into cus-
tody, and needed Michelle to positively identify the contents of her wallet.
For security purposes, the bank agent asked Michelle to verify her account
information, including Social Security number and mother’s maiden name.
The agent then suggested that Michelle immediately change her PIN number
while they were on the phone together before any further damage could be
done. In a panic, Michelle gave the agent the information, including her cur-
rent PIN number. After all, the agent knew her name, her bank account, and
her cell phone number, so the request seemed entirely plausible.
The bank agent turned out to be another member of an identity theft ring,
and had just ‘‘socially engineered’’ (conned) Michelle into giving away even
more damaging information by establishing a relationship of trust using the
pieces of identity the ﬁrst thief had collected from her locker.
By systematically collecting Michelle’s identity, the identity theft ring
drained her bank account, charged thousands of dollars to her credit cards,
set up ‘‘ofﬁcial’’ driver’s licenses with her information (and other people’s pic-
tures), used the licenses to steal six rental cars in six different states, and
purchased plane tickets to ﬂy across the country under Michelle’s name.
Within months, warrants for Michelle’s arrest had been issued in sev-
eral states, and she subsequently spent more than two years battling mul-
tiple identities under her name across the country. Worse, because there
was no federal jurisdiction over the crime of identity theft (and at the
time of this writing, there still is no federal jurisdiction), Michelle had to
ﬁght the battle mostly alone (with the help of her lawyer), one local ju-
risdiction at a time.
Everything Michelle suffered could have been avoided if she had had a
keener sense of observation and evaluation.
108
Privacy Means Proﬁt

By learning to evaluate offers to share data before we act, we can arm our-
selves against all these types of social engineering:
 Identity theft: phishing, pharming, shoulder surﬁng
 Financial fraud: investment and get-rich-quick schemes
 Corporate espionage: the inside job, double agents, and the like
Evaluation is a process of applying common sense and natural instinct to
the constant barrage of information requests we receive. It helps us determine
whom we can trust and, more importantly, how we can trust. And it protects
the most commonly exploited source of data leakage of all: the human source.
The process of evaluation begins by asking questions:
 Why should I share this information?
 How do I know these parties are trustworthy?
 How will they use my data? What are my options?
The ﬁfth and sixth mind-sets, evaluate the risk and interrogate the enemy are
actually two parts of the same process, which, when combined, give you the
tools to stop social engineering and fraud in your home and your workplace.
We observe a situation, pause to make a judgment on what is happening, and
then act on what we conclude. For example, we see someone lurking in the sha-
dows of a doorway in the next block (observe), make the decision to cross the
street, away from potential danger (evaluate), and then cross the street (act).
Spies are masters at this process. When they are out in the ﬁeld spying,
they are hyperaware of their surroundings. Their skills of observation and
evaluation include:
 Monitoring any changes in their environment (which can signal trouble)
 Ignoring their assumptions about a situation (things aren’t always as
they appear)
 Watching their backs in the ﬁeld (you never know who the enemy is)
 Maintaining a healthy skepticism about sharing information
 Making snap judgments about issues of risk and safety
We must learn to use these same skills to protect our identity. But we are at
a distinct disadvantage, because we are distracted.
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 109

Social Engineers Exploit
Our Distracted Minds
Let’s be honest, many of us are walking around in a fog of distraction. We talk
on our cell phones between bites of a bagel as we steer the car to our next
destination, and have the nerve to ask our kids to pipe down so that we can
think. Yeah, right. To the outside observer, anyone who actually stops and
watches us, we must look like zombies.
To those of you who are not more or less constantly distracted, I con-
gratulate and envy you. James Woods, the actor, is one of those; he has acute
powers of observation, as the following story illustrates.
Just weeks before the tragic 9/11 attacks, James Woods ﬂew cross-
country to Los Angeles. On the ﬂight, he noticed four well-dressed
Middle Eastern men traveling together. In an interview with Seymour
Hersh of the New Yorker, in June of 2002, Woods commented ‘‘I watch
people like a moviemaker. . . . I thought these guys were either terror-
ists or FBI guys.’’
Woods, viewing the situation through the lens of a moviemaker,
observed what many of us wouldn’t have:
‘‘These guys were in synch—dressed alike. They didn’t have a drink
and were not talking to the stewardess. None of them had a carry-on or
a newspaper. Nothing.’’
Woods was suspicious that the four men were ‘‘casing’’ the plane, so
he alerted the ﬂight attendant. According to Hersh’s article, when
Woods was later shown photographs of the 9/11 hijackers, he thought
he recognized two of them—Hamza Alghamdi, who ﬂew on United
Flight 175, which destroyed the south tower of the World Trade Center,
and Khalid Almihdhar, who was on American Airlines Flight 77, which
struck the Pentagon.
Woods told Hersh that he recognized one of the men because of his
‘‘pointy hair,’’ and the other because he resembled one of the characters
in the movie version of spy novelist John le Carre’s The Little Drummer
Girl. James Woods’s heightened sense of observation and evaluation
triggered his instinct of danger. He had noticed other passengers acting
out of character (no luggage or reading materials, dressed identically,
and isolated from the ﬂight attendants), and took action. If his hunch
110
Privacy Means Proﬁt

had been taken seriously, the outcome of 9/11 might have been very
different.
The American poet Theodore Roethke said, ‘‘A mind too active is no mind
at all.’’ Identity thieves take advantage of our distracted minds. We must slow
down and learn to observe our surroundings and evaluate what we see, espe-
cially when our identity is ‘‘in play.’’
Some people are naturally more observant. They notice when the tire on
their car is low without consciously thinking about it. They look to see if
someone is behind them at the ATM machine as a matter of habit. The rest of
us need help developing and using our powers of observation. Because we are
in a hurry or have other things on our mind, we act without thinking things
through much of the time.
Observation is a difﬁcult and intangible skill to teach (and learn), because it
is really nothing more than seeing what is already in front of us. For example,
look at the diagram in Figure 8.1 and quickly count the number of squares.
Before I reveal the answer, let me ask you: Were you able to come up with
your number in ﬁve seconds or less? I have found when speaking to audien-
ces that people tend to be more concerned with the speed of arriving at an
answer than with its accuracy. Here, though, I preconditioned you to answer
rapidly by the way that I gave the instructions.
If your answer was fewer than 17 squares, take more time with the puzzle—
but after reading through the following heightened observation process:
The author just suggested that many people are distracted. Could that
be me? He is attempting to teach me about the powers of observation
and is giving me a test to see if my answer is preconditioned.
FIGURE 8.1
How Many Squares Do You See?
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 111

Don’t answer immediately; there is something that I am probably
missing here. What haven’t I thought of? Could there be a different
number of squares than the obvious answer?
Get out now. Not just outside, but beyond the trap of the programmed
electronic age so gently closing around so many people at the end of
our century. Go outside, move deliberately, then relax, slow down, look
around. Do not jog. Do not run. Forget about blood pressure and ar-
thritis, cardiovascular rejuvenation and weight reduction. Instead, pay
attention to everything that abuts the rural road, the city street, the
suburban boulevard. Walk. Stroll. Saunter. Ride a bike, and coast along
a lot. Explore.
—John Stilgoe, Outside Lies Magic
The squares can be counted in groups of 1 (for a total of 16 squares), as
well as be combined into squares made up of 4 smaller squares (9 combi-
nations), 9 smaller squares (4 combinations), and 16 smaller squares (1
combination). The correct answer is 30. If you didn’t get it right, don’t
feel bad; it took me ﬁve tries and several sheets of paper. My powers of
observation used to reach about as far as my eyelashes. If you counted all
30 on the ﬁrst try, perhaps you should look into espionage as a full-time
profession.
The point of this exercise has little to do with arriving at the correct an-
swer. It is to demonstrate that our assumptions, biases, and natural precondi-
tioning are very powerful, and can get in the way of effective observation. In
this example, we were preconditioned to ﬁnd the answer to the puzzle
quickly rather than to think about it. Is it because we believe that the faster
we answer, the smarter we appear? Is it our competitive nature? A desire to
impress others?
Regardless of the source of preconditioning, pointing it out tends to elimi-
nate the conditioning. If I were to give you a second puzzle, you would exam-
ine it more closely, I assure you. Voila! Your powers of observation have
already been sharpened.
To increase our powers of observation in regard to our identity, we must
ﬁrst know what to look for, what preconditions exist, and how to respond
to them.
112
Privacy Means Proﬁt

The Privacy Reﬂex:
Trigger, Reﬂex, and Response
When I am training corporate executives, managers, and employees how to
detect fraud and social engineering (manipulative information-gathering
techniques), I take them through what it feels like to be conned. In other
words, I actually socially engineer them several times throughout the presen-
tation so that they begin to sense reﬂexively when more fraud is coming.
There is no substitute for experiencing this ﬁrsthand.
The Trigger: Requests for Identity
Spies are trained to react instantly when anyone asks for information of any
kind, whether it is theirs or someone else’s. The trigger, or what causes you to
be on high alert, is actually very simple: It is the appearance of your identity
in any form (wallet, credit card, tax form, passport, driver’s license, etc.).
Anytime someone requests or has access to any of the names, numbers, or
attributes that make up your identity, or to the paper, plastic, digital, or hu-
man data where your identity lives, the trigger should trip, sounding an alarm
in your head.
Here are some examples of triggers:
 When you are pulling out your wallet, purse, checkbook, or credit card
 When you are putting a document into the trash or ﬁling cabinet
 When someone is requesting information about you on Facebook,
LinkedIn, and other such sites
 When someone requests information about your company, logins, or
coworkers
 When you are sending a piece of mail
 When you are clicking on a link in an e-mail
Experience social engineering for yourself by taking three minutes to
watch the social engineering video at www.Sileo.com/social-engineering.
I urge you to do so, as this will better prepare you to apply the trigger,
reﬂex, and response techniques discussed in this section.
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 113

 When you are entering data into a website
 When you are using an ATM machine or PIN pad
 When you receive a call requesting information
 When you notice sensitive documents lying on your desk at home or
work
 When you are opening an account
 When anyone requests your personal information
 When you are voluntarily sharing any piece of your identity
 When you are involved in any sort of money or credit transaction
 When you are answering a survey or entering a contest
 Anytime you ﬁll out forms that request a piece of your identity
When your identity is being requested in any way, slow down and ask
yourself: Is the risk of giving this piece of identity away in this speciﬁc situation
worth the beneﬁt?
The Reﬂex: Hogwash!
By training, when a spy’s trigger has been, well, triggered, a speciﬁc word,
phrase, or picture automatically pops into his or her head, whether he or she
thinks consciously about it or not.
If the word (also called a trigger) is a bit out of the ordinary and the picture
is humorous, you almost can’t help noticing when it appears. The trigger that
I use in many of my keynote speeches is the word Hogwash! Here is my deﬁ-
nition of ‘‘Hogwash’’:
When the word ‘‘Hogwash’’ pops into your head, picture a pig feeding at a
trough. Better yet, picture the person who is requesting your information
Hog-wash jh_og-w_oshj n. 1. A gut reaction that someone is manipulating you
for his or her own gain, or feeding you a line of bull in order to deceive you
(e.g., I’ll just borrow your password for a short time); 2. healthy skepticism
that persists until the person requesting information from you proves he or
she is worthy of your trust (e.g., Until you prove to me that you actually need
my Social Security number, I think you are full of hogwash).
Synonyms: baloney, malarkey, nonsense, horse manure, prove-it-to-me
114
Privacy Means Proﬁt

feeding at a trough. The image is what makes it fun and memorable, so don’t
be afraid to be silly—it works. As the person provides legitimate reasons for
needing the information, and adequate reassurance that your data will be
handled securely, you can let him or her begin to rise from the trough. But
don’t let the person out yet, because social engineers are masters at using
your natural biases against you.
Overcoming Emotional Biases That Cloud Our Reactions
Like Pavlov’s dogs, which followed their owner’s directions in exchange for
doggy biscuits, we humans have been preconditioned to give our private in-
formation away in exchange for short-term rewards. We have been desensi-
tized to the value of our data. We give it away to access social networks, win
contests, download free software or music, gain access to websites, receive
discounts, avoid confrontation, gain convenience, earn points . . . . As we
add to our pile of doggy biscuits, we weaken the strength of our privacy.
Social engineers, con artists, and identity thieves employ a common set of
phrases time and again to extract information from unsuspecting victims.
Once you begin to tune in to these manipulative phrases (shown in italics in
the following list) and detect the emotional biases they arouse (shown in
bold), you will learn to more easily spot how and when you are being engi-
neered out of your data:
1. Trust me . . . Trust Bias: We have a tendency to suspend our momen-
tary skepticism (the correct instinct) and trust people (short-sighted)
when they ask for our trust directly. We think, ‘‘Surely they must be
legitimate if they are courageous enough to ask me for it.’’ Anytime
someone asks directly for your trust, ‘‘Hogwash it’’ (think Hogwash,
picture Hogwash, and don’t trust anyone until you’ve cleared the
Hogwash).
2. It’s for your safety . . . Security Bias: Someone asserts that what he or
she is doing is for the ‘‘sake of security.’’ Just like the Trust Bias, the
social engineer is removing any doubt of legitimacy by ‘‘naming the
evil.’’ You think: ‘‘If someone is acting on behalf of my security, he or
she couldn’t possibly be a fraud. He or she wouldn’t just bring it up!’’
Hogwash! That’s why these social engineers bring it up—they know
exactly how your brain has been trained to react (‘‘Thanks for making
me safe . . .’’). In some cases, they are legitimate; in others, they might
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 115

be playing the role of the ‘‘double-agent.’’ If someone involved with
your identity uses the words ‘‘security,’’ ‘‘fraud,’’ ‘‘safety,’’ ‘‘help,’’ or any
other term that is meant to make you feel like he or she is doing you a
great service, be suspicious. The person is probably either committing
the fraud or selling you something.
For example, when a computer technician calls your ofﬁce and
starts requesting information about your computers for the sake of se-
curity or to help you avoid fraud, you should turn up the volume on
your observation power.
3. We need to hurry . . . Rush Bias: Someone rushes you through the
decision-making process by telling you about a negative consequence
if you don’t act quickly. Con artists do this so that you don’t have time
to think about the decision you are making. If you ever feel rushed into
divulging information, stop and think, ‘‘Hogwash!’’ Reveal sensitive in-
formation only as you become comfortable with the situation and the
person.
4. If you do this, I’ll give you . . . Bribe Bias: Someone wants to give you a
gift in exchange for your information. The precondition operating here
is that too many of us undervalue our personal data and consequently
exchange it for impulse-based rewards that are of lesser value but sat-
isfy a short-term desire. To combat this, recognize, and protect, the
monetary value of your information. The individual pieces of your
identity are as valuable as the assets connected to them. Your Social
Security number can be attached to your credit rating, your home, your
retirement beneﬁts, unemployment, and more. As my father taught me
at a young age, at least in the business world, there is no such thing as a
free lunch. If you are getting something, you are giving something.
For example, when someone offers you a 10 percent discount on
your purchase if you sign up for the company’s credit card, calculate
how much you will be saving in exchange for granting access to
your credit history, address, telephone number, and so on. This may
be a legitimate company, but the alarm should sound anyway to pro-
tect you initially from identity creep, not immediate identity theft. If
you are purchasing $200 worth of clothing, ask yourself whether the
$20 discount is worth one more company having access to your
information—or possibly many companies, if the information is
subsequently sold.
116
Privacy Means Proﬁt

5. If you don’t do this, then . . . Fear Bias: Someone threatens to take away
your privileges or rights of access if you don’t comply with his or her
request, perhaps threatening to close, suspend, or cancel your account.
For example, if you receive an e-mail that threatens to close or sus-
pend your account if you don’t comply with the enclosed request for
information, red ﬂags should appear and you should suspect a scam.
No proﬁt-driven, reputable company wants to lose your business,
especially if you are a good customer. If you suspect the e-mail might
be legitimate, conﬁrm this with the company by phone, or visit your
account on the company website.
6. I need your help . . . Distress Bias: Attackers will often pose as some-
one needing help because it lowers your defenses. You think: ‘‘How
could they mean me harm if they are asking for my help?’’
For example, this is how ‘‘Friends in Distress’’ scams work on social
networking sites. You believe that a friend of yours is appealing for
help (e.g., usually asking you to send money), when actually it is a
thief who has taken over your friend’s account for the purpose of per-
manently separating you from your savings.
7. Sharing one piece of data won’t hurt . . . Slippery Slope Bias: You think:
‘‘Giving this small piece of information, by itself, can’t hurt me.’’ But it’s
not a single piece of information that puts us at risk. It’s the accumula-
tion of data over time that puts us in danger.
8. Do I need to speak with your supervisor . . . Authority Bias: Don’t ques-
tion people who should know more than I do or have more power or
status than I do. This derivative of the Fear Bias purposely leverages
any lack of conﬁdence you have regarding your superiors. Tell them
they are welcome to speak to your superiors.
9. I’m important . . . Flattery Bias: Sharing information or access makes
me feel important (I’m an expert). We all want to be in control of
something, and con artists are all too ready to give us that control (in
exchange for something).
10. I just need a little bit of your information . . . Nonconfrontation Bias:
This is the most commonly used and most subtle of all of the social
engineering tactics. Someone uses our discomfort with confrontation,
our unwillingness to tell people no, and our fear of being disliked to
manipulate us into giving out information that we would otherwise
protect. We are so habituated into giving away our information that we
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 117

barely think twice when it happens. Part of this maneuver is to ask for
innocuous, seemingly meaningless information ﬁrst, to get you to let
down your guard. Then, the thieves utilize the information ‘‘morsels’’
they have collected to appear believable and legitimate when they ask
for further information (often, from another victim inside your com-
pany). In this way, they extract volumes of information without arous-
ing your suspicion.
To be blunt, you must overcome your fear of confrontation—at least
when it comes to protecting your identity. In instances of potential
identity leakage, treat confrontation, saying no, and being disliked as
the price of privacy. There are very few privileges that are worth having
your identity stolen.
The more a social engineer can make his contact seem like business as
usual, the more he allays suspicion. When people don’t have a reason to be
suspicious, it’s easy for a social engineer to gain their trust.
—Kevin Mitnick and William Simon, The Art of Deception
Additional Social Engineering Techniques
Keep your eyes open for these other social engineering techniques. Social
engineers will often:
 Use charm. Social engineers present themselves as likeable, charming
people. This is what enables them to make you feel good about giving
away information you shouldn’t. To protect yourself against this tact,
think of charm as C-harm (see harm) any time you suspect you are being
charmed for nefarious purposes. Chances are, if you are giving informa-
tion away, you are being C-harmed.
 Impersonate someone who has access or power (e.g., a repairman, IT
support, a manager, an executive assistant, an account manager, etc.)
 Lower your guard ﬁrst with ﬂattery (‘‘You are so capable . . .’’).
 Accumulate important data over several conversations or sources.
 Rush you by simulating a ‘‘crisis’’ so that you neglect to think.
 Use fear to scare you into acting when you should be thinking.
 Intimidate you into backing down.
 Lower your self-esteem by demonstrating superior authority.
118
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Assuage your doubt by claiming that it (whatever ‘‘it’’ is) is for your own
good.
 Name-drop, especially using names that carry authority (your boss or
superior).
 ‘‘Prime the pump’’ by baiting you with accurate background data (gath-
ered earlier).
 Divertyour attention by startingthe conversation withsmall talk, and clos-
ing with a memorable, totally unrelated story (our brain remembers the
beginning and ending of a conversation, but tends to forget the middle).
The Response: Slow Down and Observe
When an outsider has access to your identity, your trigger should automati-
cally activate without thinking about it. (Hogwash!) Your ﬁrst response
should be to heighten your level of observation. View the situation as a child
would—with curiosity. You can even borrow from what we teach our chil-
dren: to be more aware in dangerous situations—stop, look, and listen:
 Stop what you are doing. Reject the pressure or temptation to multitask
in an attempt to be more efﬁcient. Don’t talk on your cell phone or think
about the next item on your to-do list. Reject the assumption that faster
is better. Slow down and be present only to what is happening around
you right now. Don’t answer questions, hand over forms, or type a re-
sponse until you are comfortable with the situation.
 Look, really look, at the world around you. Take out your spyglass and
be more critical. Is someone peering over your shoulder at the ATM or
while you are entering a password into the computer? Does the ATM
machine look like it usually does? Is someone hanging around your
mailbox or looking at your purse? Does the document on your desk con-
tain sensitive or conﬁdential information? The best way to remind your-
self to look is to stand where you are, with nothing else to do but look.
 Listen to what your instincts are telling you. Ask yourself if your identity
is safe. Is there a change in the environment that makes you uneasy or
uncertain? What is your gut saying? Would a spy give away this infor-
mation? Is the beneﬁt you are receiving worth the data you are sharing?
Do you feel as if you shouldn’t ask questions (which generally means
you should)? Be a healthy skeptic—not paranoid, but aware—of anyone
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 119

who is requesting your identity. Act on your instincts, as James Woods
did in the example at the start of the chapter.
Examples of Evaluating the Risk
The best way to learn to observe and evaluate situations more closely is to walk
though several scenarios and implement the concepts as we go. With enough
practice, this mind-set should become a habit, and no longer require conscious
thought. In these examples, we will apply the skills of trigger (request for infor-
mation), reﬂex (hogwash!), and response (stop, look, and listen).
I warn you that, at ﬁrst, this approach may seem to you to be a bit para-
noid. That’s only because we are using it as an educational tool to develop
good habits. Recall that when you learned math, you did so by understanding
each step in the process independently, as opposed to someone saying, ‘‘Do
math.’’ Once you have completed this process a few times, I assure you it will
become second nature and you won’t have to think through or name the indi-
vidual steps. Until that happens, though, we need to make the learning pro-
cess a conscious effort.
Now let’s begin with the scenarios.
Shoulder Surfers
You approach an ATM (trigger 1) and pull out your wallet
(trigger 2). You remove your debit card (trigger 3). Thanks to the three trig-
gers, you can’t help but think, ‘‘Hogwash!’’ (reﬂex), a humorous but helpful
warning to put your guard up.
Your level of observation increases and you begin to evaluate the situation
(response). You take a few seconds (stop) and check to see if anyone is watching
over your shoulder to steal your PIN number (look). You examine the ATM
machine to make sure that there aren’t any devices (skimmers or cameras) that
aren’t normally there (look). You check for anything out of place or any people
who shouldn’t be there; your instincts tell you that you are safe (listen).
If you are still in doubt, you apply the techniques that you will learn in
Chapter 9, ‘‘Interrogate the Enemy.’’
Credit Card Skimming
You are in a restaurant having dinner with friends
and are about to pay the check with a credit card (trigger 1). The waiter has
to take your credit card to another part of the restaurant to run the charges
and will therefore be alone with your identity (trigger 2). You are aware that
this is one of the most popular ways for thieves to steal your identity (by
120
Privacy Means Proﬁt

skimming your information on a pocket scanner), so you think, ‘‘Hogwash!’’
(reﬂex).
You are uncertain about how to react (respond), because you worry that
you might look foolish to your friends if you make a big deal out of letting
your credit card disappear. You have several options:
 Pay with cash. Remember, the old-fashioned way of paying has abso-
lutely zero identity creep. Pay with cash when you don’t want to let your
card out of your sight or don’t want to share information that will ulti-
mately be stored in a database and sold to other businesses (as I pointed
out earlier, companies buy your credit card histories so that they can
market other services to you. They know that if you like to eat at certain
restaurants, you will also probably be interested in their products).
 Keep your card in sight. If the waiter stays in view, watch to make sure
your card is safe. And even if someone thinks you look foolish, take
comfort that your identity will be safe.
 Pay at the counter. Take your credit card up to the cashier and pay there.
That way, your card will never be out of your sight (control).
 Monitor the signs. Despite all of our training, probably what most of us
will still do is let our card disappear with the waiter. Breaking this dan-
gerous habit seems to be particularly difﬁcult for many of us; therefore,
we need another way to protect our identity when our information is out
of our control. We do this by having a backup plan—a way to protect
ourselves when all else fails. By monitoring our credit card statements
and setting up automatic account alerts, we will catch any fraudulent
charges before any damage is done. Read Chapter 10, ‘‘Monitor the
Signs,’’ for full details.
Phishing E-mail Scams
You receive an e-mail from your bank (trigger 1)
saying that your account information (trigger 2) is out of date and you need
to click on the link (trigger 3) to make updates; your account will be can-
celled if you don’t comply (trigger 4). All of these contacts with your identity
trigger you to think, ‘‘Hogwash!’’ Your instincts tell you that this is a legiti-
mate request because it displays the bank’s logo, and the link you are clicking
has the website address of the bank on it. Regardless, you evaluate the request
by applying these interrogation techniques (which you will learn more about
in the next chapter):
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 121

 You were not the one to initiate the request and are therefore not in control
of the situation. You have no idea of who will have access to this informa-
tion, whether at the bank or elsewhere. You don’t know what information
you will be giving access to, as you haven’t clicked on the link to ﬁnd out.
From your accumulated knowledge, you suspect that it will be fairly sensi-
tive information, including account numbers and passwords.
 You ask yourself if it is really necessary to share the information in this
way (necessity). Because you have been educated about phishing, you
know there are other ways to verify whether your account is out of date.
Therefore, you close your e-mail and log in to your bank account di-
rectly to check for alerts from the bank that your information is in-
correct. There are none, so you visit the My Account page and conﬁrm
there that everything is up to date. Finally, you call the bank to ask (in-
terrogate) what the e-mail was all about. You are told that it is a phishing
scam and that you should ignore further requests.
Action Item Checklist: Evaluate the Risk
Slow down, and learn to observe what is going on around you.
React to requests for identity of any type with healthy skepticism.
Think ‘‘Hogwash!’’ when anyone asks for access to your data.
Look for the signs of social engineering (fear, rushing, bribery, ﬂat-
tery, trust, security).
Stop, look, and listen when your hogwash reﬂex triggers.
When in doubt, interrogate the enemy (see Chapter 9).
Business Relevance
As I mentioned, this chapter, ‘‘Evaluate the Risk,’’ and the next one, ‘‘In-
terrogate the Enemy’’ are two parts of the same process. In pure busi-
ness terms, these comprise the most important skills that your
executives, managers, and employees must learn in order to effectively
protect your organization’s sensitive information. Why?
122
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Because no matter how secure your computer systems, no matter
how much physical security you deploy, humans will always be your
weakest links. The tightest classiﬁcation system, the most expensive soft-
ware, the most secure safes are only as strong as the weakest link, which,
again, is always the human factor. The more technological security you
implement, the quicker data thieves will be to attempt to socially engineer
those inside your company (or pose as an insider) to capture your data.
As I said before, there is no substitute for learning these skills in actual-
ity, as it helps to experience the techniques ﬁrsthand. Lacking experiential
training, there are some guidelines you can follow that will begin to mini-
mize the impact of the human factor:
1.
Raise the awareness of, ﬁrst, your executives, then your manag-
ers, and ﬁnally your employees to the risks associated with mis-
handling private company information. Do this in person, not by
distributing a privacy policy, which many people won’t read.
2.
Inform the entire staff that dishonest people are out to get your
company’s private information, whether in the form of customer
records, employee ﬁles, trade secrets, or other intellectual capital.
Your competitors and, more recently, other countries will pay
high sums for such high-quality intelligence.
3.
Communicate to your team the emotional impact, in addition to
the technical fallout, on victims of ignoring these policies. You
must connect this experience to real-life consequences.
4.
Motivate the troops by sharing with them in detail the conse-
quences of data theft, loss, or leakage. Communicate this in no
uncertain terms (e.g., they could lose their job, their bonus, their
raise, etc.).
5.
Deﬁne the problem by telling employees exactly what informa-
tion you are trying to protect; emphasize that just because some-
one seems to have insider knowledge of company processes,
language, and intellectual property doesn’t mean they have a
legitimate need to know the information they are requesting.
6.
Avoid using language such as ‘‘privacy policy’’ and ‘‘information
security,’’ as people tend to stop listening when language gets
(continued )
The Fifth Mind-Set: Evaluate the Risk 123

(continued )
technical or bureaucratic. Speak in metaphorical terms, such as
‘‘need-to-know basis.’’
7.
Prohibit the release of information such as internal phone num-
bers, which makes social engineering much easier.
8.
Set up a classiﬁcation system (public, internal, conﬁdential, top
secret) under which all internal information is, by default, consid-
ered to be, at minimum, conﬁdential. This establishes clear
guidelines that leave no room for interpretation and sets the
tone for a Culture of Privacy.
9.
Train employees to recognize and pay attention to: triggers, hog-
wash, emotional biases, and control, justify, options, and beneﬁts
(Chapter 9). These form the basis for recognizing and respond-
ing to social engineering. Conduct this training in a lighthearted
but highly effective manner, to leave no question in employees’
minds about what they are supposed to do when information is
being requested from them.
10.
Give your team the authority and budget to implement proper
solutions; Band-Aids and short-term solutions are not enough.
11.
Set up a clear legitimacy veriﬁcation process for your employees
to follow anytime someone requests sensitive information from
them. This process should include verifying the requestor’s
employment status (e.g., was he or she terminated?).
124
Privacy Means Proﬁt

9
The Sixth Mind-Set:
Interrogate the Enemy
S
pies often get information simply by asking for it. Unfortunately, it
really is that simple. Fortunately, the same technique—asking the right
questions—can stop them in their tracks.
Victim #8,113,903: Social Engineers
Go Corporate
Not long after Dr. Yamitori shared her username on a handout at a medical
conference, she received an invitation to become friends with Dr. Xavier on a
social networking site built for the medical community. Dr. Yamitori had
shared her impressions of the conference on the site, and Dr. Xavier had been
taking note. Over the course of the next month, the two never communicated
directly via the network; rather, they received regular updates and comments
posted by the other doctors in the network.
On Friday afternoon at 2:00 PM, Dr. Xavier (Dr. X) posted a comment di-
rectly to Dr. Yamitori (Dr. Y). Dr. X explained that he was in the process of
researching software packages for his ofﬁce and, knowing from the conference
that Dr. Y ran an efﬁcient operation, wanted to ﬁnd out what software she
used to manage her patient ﬁles.
Dr. Y happened to be at her computer and responded immediately to the
query. Because both were part of a doctor’s network, and concluding that the
questions were innocuous, Dr. Y shared that she used Patient Relation 10.0
(continued )

(continued )
and was very happy with it. Dr. X thanked her, asked no further ques-
tions, and concluded the thread somewhat abruptly.
At 2:06 PM, Dr. Y’s assistant sent an internal instant message (the silent
and preferred form of communication in the ofﬁce) to her saying that Dr.
Xavier was on hold and had a quick follow-up question to their online chat.
When Dr. Y picked up, Dr. X apologized for any trouble he was causing, but
said he had one last question and thought it was a ‘‘good excuse to meet in
person.’’ Dr. X then asked Dr. Y if she would mind sharing the name of the
software technician from Patient Relation Software who had installed the
package for her so that he could ask some technical questions. Dr. Y gladly
told him that her contact at the software company was Kenneth, and gave
him Kenneth’s phone number.
On Monday morning, before most doctors are in their ofﬁces, Dr. X’s accom-
plice called Dr. Y’s ofﬁce and reached the receptionist, Priscilla. He told her that
his name was Terry, that he was from Patient Relation Software, and that he was
ﬁlling in for Kenneth, who was out sick. After ﬂattering her (‘‘Dr. Y says you’re
the real brains of the operation’’), Terry explained that he needed to make a criti-
cal security update (version 10.1) to Dr. Y’s software system. If it didn’t happen
right away, he added, her system could be the one that allowed hackers access
into patient ﬁles. Immediately, Priscilla felt personally responsible.
Because Kenneth was out sick, Terry explained, he didn’t have the user-
name and password to dial in to Dr. Y’s server and make the changes. He told
Priscilla that as soon as the changes were made, he would call her back and
let her know so that she could change her password. It was critical, he said, to
change it as soon as he called in order to maintain security. In fact, he added,
he would just send her a message on the social networking site, if she told him
her username. She shared that as well, thereby giving him access to all of her
friends who ﬁlled a similar role at other medical ofﬁces.
Knowing that Patient Relation was in fact the software package her ofﬁce
used to track patient records, that they were currently using version 10.0, that
Kenneth was the name of their regular technician, and that she didn’t want to
be responsible for a data breach, Priscilla never suspected she was being so-
cially engineered into revealing highly sensitive information. She gave Terry
her password and, thus, full access to more than 17,500 private patient re-
cords, including their Social Security numbers, insurance data, medical histo-
ries, and even blood types.
126
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Everyone is so vulnerable to social engineering attacks that a company’s
only effective defense is to educate and train your people, giving them the
practice they need to spot a social engineer.
—Kevin Mitnick (former social engineer) and
William Simon, The Art of Deception
Interrogate Mind-Set
Spies ask direct and aggressive questions to get answers. Most people are only
too willing to share their vast knowledge on private matters. Effective ques-
tioning is such an essential and fundamental component of the evaluation
process that it warrants its own chapter (refer back to Chapter 8).
Fostering an attitude of curiosity (or in the corporate world, a culture of
curiosity) is the most powerful critical thinking skill to have in your arsenal
to protect sensitive information. Employees who can think critically and ask
the right questions regarding data privacy make up the fabric that supports a
Culture of Privacy. Interrogation is the art of questioning someone thor-
oughly and assertively to verify intentions, identities, and facts.
Here are the questions to ask:
 Who’s in control?
 Can I verify?
 What are my options?
 What are the beneﬁts?
When spies need information, they ask for it. They ‘‘socially engineer,’’ or
con, their victims with a variety of tools (as we saw in Dr. Y’s scenario). This
chapter will help you learn to detect and repel those tools.
No man really becomes a fool until he stops asking questions.
—Charles P. Steinmetz
The average recovery cost of a breached medical record is $2941 which put
the data breach recovery costs at Dr. Y’s ofﬁce at an estimated $5.2 million. The
average cost of training a medium-sized medical ofﬁce to recognize and repel
social engineering: less than $25,000. Return on investment: 195 percent
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy 127

The primary tool for evaluating risk once your reﬂexes have been triggered
(remember: Hogwash!) is to interrogate the person or institution asking for
your information. I want to quickly point out that in this context interroga-
tion does not refer to forceful or physically abusive questioning. I deﬁne in-
terrogation here as clear, aggressive questioning used to establish whom you
can trust, how far you can trust them, and with what information.
Sticking with the language of espionage, an enemy is anyone or anything
(including a computer, fax machine, e-mail, letter, etc.) that requests your in-
formation, information about someone you know, or information about your orga-
nization. My intent here is not to make you confrontational or assume a
warlike mind-set—that is taking the metaphor too far. Once you have estab-
lished a trusted relationship, you are no longer in enemy territory.
The Four Phases of Interrogation: ConJOB
There are four phases of interrogation, and four corresponding questions,
that, when implemented, effectively begin to expose most forms of fraud:
1. Control: Who is in control of this interaction?
2. Justify: Can the person requesting information justify his or her
legitimacy?
3. Options: What options do I have, other than sharing the data?
4. Beneﬁts: What are the beneﬁts of the particular choice I’m making?
1. Control
Anytime you are approached for information, whether by a person, an e-mail
or paper mail, a fax, survey, contest, computer, or other source, the ﬁrst ques-
tion to ask is one of yourself:
Who is in control of this interaction?
Are you the one who initiated the process, or was it started by someone else
(potentially a thief)? Most cases of identity theft happen when an outsider
initiates contact with you, not vice versa. The thief calls you on the phone,
sends you an e-mail, visits you at home or work, or approaches you in a pub-
lic space, real or virtual.
If you did not initiate the exchange of information, you are not in control
and your risk of fraud skyrockets. Initiate or terminate, I say. If you didn’t
128
Privacy Means Proﬁt

initiate the transfer, take back control by terminating the exchange until you
know what your next step will be. It is imperative that you maintain tight
control over what sensitive data you release, to whom and in what manner.
If Dr. Yamitori had asked herself who was in control of the exchange of
information, the answer would have been Dr. Xavier, and that would have
been her ﬁrst red ﬂag.
Follow-on questions that will help you establish, or regain, control
include:
 Why do you need this information, and how will you use it?
 Can you show me your written policy detailing this request for
information?
 Will this information be discarded when it is no longer needed? How?
 Who will have access to my information, and how will it be protected
against unauthorized access and use?
Access
Part of effectively controlling information ﬂow is to understand levels of
access. Spies give out information only on a need-to-know basis. In other
words, they differentiate by user and type of information. This is particu-
larly important in a business setting, as vendors and third parties are of-
ten allowed access to records with even less need to know and fewer
controls than would govern the information internally. Information lost
to third parties results in a higher per-breached-record recovery rate, as
you can clearly see in Figure 9.1.
Am I Allowing Access On a Need-to-Know Basis Only?
Public data is different from classiﬁed data, so your response will be inﬂu-
enced by how sensitive the data is that you are giving away. You will, for
example, interrogate someone requesting a Social Security number far more
aggressively than you would someone asking for a ﬁrst name. And don’t for-
get that spies are experts at accumulating small pieces of information over
time—they may ask you for one piece of identity here, another there. So also
be aware of how much access you give to any one source over time.
When you enter a contest by giving your name, address, and yearly in-
come, literally hundreds of people will see that information. Your data is col-
lected, combined with credit records (purchased from other sources), and
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy 129

aggregated into a proﬁle of who you are, what you are worth, and which
products and services you might buy. Your information is not going to one
person on the other end of the transaction; it is being sold to anyone who is
willing to pay to know more about you.
When you mail a check, anyone with access to your mail has the potential
to obtain your bank account number, name, address, and signature. When
you post your phone number on a social networking site, anyone you have
granted ‘‘friend’’ status to can see it, unless you have blocked it when you set
up your permissions. In addition, you probably signed a contract with the
social networking site (without knowing it when you accepted its terms and
conditions) that allows the site to sell your private information.
In the case of Dr. Y’s ofﬁce, access didn’t play a very prominent role until
Priscilla was asked to share her computer login access. That was the red ﬂag,
though Dr. Y should have veriﬁed Dr. X’s credentials earlier in the process.
He is educated who knows how to ﬁnd out what he doesn’t know.
—George Simmel
2. Justify
When someone else is controlling the ﬂow of information, or to establish a
higher level of trust, follow up with this question:
FIGURE 9.1
Did the Data Breach Involve a Third-party Flub?
Source: ‘‘Fourth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2009.
130
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Can the person requesting this information justify (or verify) his or her
legitimacy?
In other words, ‘‘Prove to me that you need it and deserve it.’’ Can the per-
son on the phone asking for your private information prove who he or she is
and that he or she actually deserves the information? Companies spend good
money assigning credentials to their employees.
The most common information that a social engineer wants from an
employee, regardless of his ultimate goal, is the target’s authentication
credentials.
—Kevin Mitnick and William Simon, The Art of Deception
One of the easiest ways to spot a fraud is to verify these credentials before
allowing access. Can these people prove their identity and their need to know
the information? If it is a work situation, do you recognize their voice? Are
they dialing from an internal number? Can they e-mail the request from a
company e-mail? Will their superior verify the legitimacy of their request?
Most of us are vulnerable to social engineers because we are trained to
trust ﬁrst, ask later. This is an acceptable perspective when the stakes are
noncritical. Ronald Regan had a signature phrase, especially when dealing
with the Soviet Union: ‘‘Trust but verify.’’ It is a translation of the Russian
proverb, ‘‘Doveriai, no proveriai,’’ and suggests that it is ﬁne to extend trust,
as long as you verify the worthiness of the party to whom you are giving it.
But with information, which can be digitally copied and communicated in an
instant, I contend that the proverb needs to be reversed to strengthen it:
Verify legitimacy before you trust others with sensitive information.
Priscilla could have easily justiﬁed whether to give the information to
Terry by verifying his credentials (with a medical association or licensing
body, or even with Dr. Yamatori, to ﬁnd out whether she had veriﬁed he was
trustworthy).
3. Options
Social engineers are counting on the chemicals in your brain (cortisol, gener-
ally) to override your common sense. When they put you in a state of panic,
ask for your help, or ﬂatter you, they know that your emotions are likely to
override your logic and lead you to make rash decisions. When you interrupt
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy 131

this cycle and force yourself to think through your options, your brain has
time to catch up and rationally evaluate the situation.
To slow down the interaction and remind your brain that there is more
than one course of action you can take, ask:
What options do I have other than sharing the data or following the reques-
tor’s directions?
This is nothing more than a risk/reward analysis. Am I receiving something
of equal or greater value for what I am giving? Can I give less than the person
is asking, or nothing at all, and still receive the service he or she is promising?
Remember, we have been preconditioned to think of our identity as less valu-
able than the assets to which it is connected.
Can you still receive the long-term beneﬁt without giving the information?
Will you still have an effective Facebook proﬁle even if you don’t share your
birthdate? Could you pay the bill without sending a check through the mail?
Will you still have a warranty on your refrigerator if you don’t ﬁll out the
warranty survey card? In most cases, the answer is yes.
Five Advanced Interrogation Techniques
Interrogation is a form of regaining control over your information. When in
doubt, ask more questions and explore more options. Here’s how Priscilla
could have done this with Terry, the bogus technician:
1. Ask how. How did you get my name and number? How do you know
about our ofﬁce? How do I know that you are who you say you are?
This stall tactic gives you time to think, to listen for your hogwash re-
sponse, and to evaluate the answers. If he is a fraud, he will be well
practiced at answering questions of this sort. But as you continue to ask
more detailed questions, fraudulent stories will begin to deteriorate.
2. Bait him. Feed him a piece of credible, but false, information to see if he
takes the bait. For example, Priscilla could have said: ‘‘Oh, you are the
one who ﬁlled in for Kenneth when he went on vacation last year, right?
You’ve worked with Patty, our ofﬁce manager before, haven’t you?’’
3. Get proof. Make him prove that he knows more about you or your com-
pany than he disclosed in the ﬁrst conversation. For example: ‘‘Hey, can
you tell me the last time I made a purchase on that credit card? How
long has our ofﬁce used this software? How many of our systems is your
software installed on?’’ If he is a spy, he generally won’t know any of the
132
Privacy Means Proﬁt

real answers. When he hesitates or says that he doesn’t know that infor-
mation because he’s not the ‘‘regular guy,’’ tell him to ask his superiors
and get back to you with an answer.
4. Call back. Take back control of the interaction by telling him that you
need to give him a ring back. Say: ‘‘I’ve got to take another call. What’s
the number where I can give you a call back?’’ An identity thief will
almost never give you a legitimate number (crime rings sometimes have
temporary phone numbers). Or say: ‘‘Can I call you back using the num-
ber listed on my credit card [bank statement, phone book, etc.]?’’ When
he says that he doesn’t have a direct line, and will have to call you back,
it’s time to move on to more confrontational questions.
5. Call the bluff. Ask straight out: ‘‘Are you an identity thief? Let’s assume
you are an identity thief [chuckle]. How can you prove to me you are
not? How can you prove to me that you are who you say you are? If I
can’t call you at the number I always use to call our tech support, why
should I trust you? Why is your area code on my caller ID showing a
different location from where you guys are based?’’ These types of ques-
tions tend to throw anyone off, so give the person a minute to recover.
In espionage, this is called ‘‘requesting their bonaﬁdes’’—proof that they
are who they say they are. This is how spies keep from giving informa-
tion to counterspies. You need to validate the person’s information until
you are comfortable that the person is legit.
Don’t be afraid to ask more questions—as many as you need until you have
no doubts about the person. Fraudulent stories tend to crumble about three
or four questions deep.
Finally, don’t be afraid to say no! Tell the person that you need to check on
some things and will get back to him/her. Anyone who can’t give you time to
conduct due diligence is either a fraud or too high-strung to be dealing with.
4. Beneﬁts
Your ﬁnal question is:
What are the beneﬁts of the particular choice I’m making? Do they beneﬁt
my lifestyle? Do they beneﬁt my company?
You have to assess how the options you are evaluating ﬁt into your
lifestyle. Does it beneﬁt the way you live? If it doesn’t, you will quickly
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy 133

tire of the solution and stop implementing it. For example, if you buy a
shredder and put it in your ofﬁce even though you sometimes open your
mail in the kitchen where there is no shredder, recognize that you proba-
bly won’t walk to your ofﬁce to shred every single document. More likely,
you will make the excuse that throwing this one piece of identity in the
trash won’t cause problems. Over time, this will become your habit. So
putting a shredder only in your ofﬁce does not beneﬁt your convenience-
oriented lifestyle. Better to purchase two shredders so that you will con-
tinue implementing the solution.
As you probably noticed at the beginning of this section, the ﬁrst letters of
control, justify, option, and beneﬁts form the acronym ConJOB. It has two
purposes: (1) It’s easy to remember and (2) it serves as a form of shorthand to
help you remember the concepts involved in exposing a con job by using ag-
gressive questioning.
Risk Scenarios: Practice Interrogating
the Enemy
In the situations I provide in this section, assume that you have already
observed and evaluated the situation but haven’t yet been able to deter-
mine if you are at risk. Possibly your instinct is prompting you to inquire
further. Interrogation is a perfect tool for situations that aren’t black and
white.
Scenario 1
You are buying a new car and plan to pay cash. The sales rep, Susan, asks for
your Social Security number. What questions should you ask?
 Why do you need my Social Security number if I am not paying with
credit?
 Can I still get the car without giving the number?
 Are you prepared to have me walk out on the sale if I don’t give it to you?
If you are still not convinced that you should divulge your SSN, ask:
134
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 May I speak with the owner of the business, please?
 Does the Better Business Bureau agree with your right to require this
information?
In this situation, you are not preventing immediate identity theft. You are
avoiding identity creep by giving out only the information that is absolutely
necessary.
Scenario 2
A woman calls and says she is from your credit card company. She believes
that your card is being used fraudulently and needs to ask you a couple of
questions. Before you answer her questions, ask some of your own:
 May I ask more questions about why you need this information?
 Can you verify the last three purchases I made on my account?
 Can you tell me how long I have been a card member?
 May I give you a call back using the phone number on my credit card?
Scenario 3
Someone comes into your ofﬁce wearing the standard uniform of your regular
computer technician, but you don’t recognize her. Still, she has a plausible
story and asks for access to your server. In this case, ask:
 Weren’t you guys just in here yesterday? (Bait them.)
 May I see your ID badge, please? (Verify credentials.)
 Can you hold on a minute while I call to verify your credentials?
(Slow down.)
 Who within our company ordered the service call? (Ask more questions.)
Scenario 4
As you drive up to your ATM machine, you see a repairman there. He says
that everything is ready to go; you just need to insert your card and get
started. No questions needed here; just say politely, ‘‘No thank you,’’ and ﬁnd
another ATM or go directly into the bank.
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy 135

Action Item Checklist: Interrogate the Enemy
Implement the four phases of interrogation by asking four revealing
questions:
 Who is in control of this interaction?
 Can the person requesting the information justify his or her
legitimacy?
 What options do I have other than to share the data?
 What are the beneﬁts of the particular choice I am making?
Implement the ﬁve interrogation techniques:
 Ask everyone who requests data how they came to be in posses-
sion of any of your private information.
 Bait them to see if they reveal themselves as untrustworthy.
 Make them prove that they deserve the data.
 Call them back on a published, dependable number.
 Call their bluff by asking if they are an identity thief.
Practice interrogating the enemy by expressing curiosity anytime
someone has or wants your information.
Don’t be afraid to say no.
Business Relevance
From a business perspective, an automatic privacy reﬂex (Hogwash),
controlling the ﬂow of information (control), verifying credentials
(justify) and evaluating various alternatives (options and beneﬁts)
are the fundamental concepts underlying a Culture of Privacy. This is re-
ally just a process of formalized awareness and inquiry about the origin,
ﬂow, storage, transmission, and destruction of your data in a non-
technical manner. When taught correctly, data curiosity becomes a
game—albeit, a high-stakes game. By the time your employees reach
this point in the book (or in-person training), they should be prepared
for and receptive to transitioning data privacy from their personal lives
into their professional lives.
136
Privacy Means Proﬁt

By likening it to a game, by couching it in terms of thinking like a spy, I
am proposing a vastly different approach to the data security discussion
from the norm. Generally, data theft and loss is dealt with only after the
fact (after the breach occurs) and in a negative way (someone or some
department is punished, admonished, improperly blamed, etc.). To cre-
ate a constructive and preventative Culture of Privacy, securing a custom-
er’s Social Security number or the company’s ‘‘secret recipe’’ must be a
proactive and positive initiative. It should be a point of pride for each and
every executive and employee to protect the company’s assets, not just to
fear the consequences of failing to do so. Fear, of course, plays a part, as it
serves as a vital ‘‘smoke signal’’ for the instincts, but in a supporting role.
Imagine, if you will, the customer loyalty generated by a best-in-class
company that treats customer data with the sanctity that it extends to the
rest of the customer relationship. What if your company treated cus-
tomer identity like Ritz-Carlton treats its customers? A Culture of Privacy
is not an entirely separate initiative from other forms of strategy and mar-
keting. It is the extension of those strategies, to include information pro-
tection. It is the ultimate recognition that privacy means proﬁt. It might
even provide differentiation and a competitive advantage as customer
awareness of data safety increases.
Mike Spinney, a senior privacy analyst at the Ponemon Institute, pro-
vided an apt analogy in a recent blog post:2
I was in an industrial facility recently and noticed large banners on
the walls proclaiming, ‘‘12 Years without a Safety Incident.’’ I also
saw certiﬁcates honoring individual employees who had eclipsed
certain thresholds without a time-lost safety event.
It struck me that this is the kind of simple program that privacy
and compliance ofﬁcers can use as a model to create a ‘‘culture of
privacy’’ throughout the entire employee community and instill a
basic awareness of each employee’s responsibility to protect sensi-
tive information. Such programs would be relatively simple and in-
expensive to implement because the model has already been
used successfully for decades by safety ofﬁcers to educate and
reward employees for demonstrating effective safety practices in
(continued )
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy 137

(continued )
their jobs. A quick look around the organization reveals other pro-
grams that can be replicated by privacy and compliance ofﬁcers.
Human resources executives, for example, already offer training
and awareness programs to prevent sexual harassment or various
forms of discrimination.
Mr. Spinney goes on to suggest that it will probably take lawsuits like
those already routine in the workplace arsenal (e.g., sexual harassment,
safety violations, etc.) to give privacy the ‘‘teeth’’ accorded to other issues
of workplace safety. Once again, we see the role of fear (costly lawsuits)
reinforcing a proactive program of change (a positive Culture of Privacy).
138
Privacy Means Proﬁt

10
The Seventh
Mind-Set:
Monitor the Signs
A
s an added layer of protection, we must keep close tabs on the various
red ﬂags that indicate our identity may have been stolen. Generally, the
best strategy is to catch identity theft in its earliest stages, before it becomes a
more difﬁcult problem to solve.
Over the past three years, stolen data that was subsequently used in less
than one week jumped from 33 to 71 percent.1 Clearly, identity thieves are
counting on our lackadaisical attitude toward monitoring our wealth.
Victim #3,903,392: Friendly Fraud
Dixie’s sister, Danny, came to live with her for the spring. Recently out of drug
rehab, Danny didn’t have a way to make ends meet and needed help getting
back on her feet. Dixie, a deeply caring and religious person, decided to ﬁll
that role. Unfortunately, it didn’t take Danny long to revert to her old habits.
Danny began using drugs almost immediately after her release, and steal-
ing petty cash from Dixie’s home that she believed would never be missed, to
support her habit. This source quickly ran out, however, and because she was
left alone while Dixie was at work, Danny had access to virtually every docu-
ment and piece of information in the house. Dixie and her husband had taken
no special preventative steps to protect their sensitive information, and Danny
thought this was careless of them; more, she believed they were deliberately
tempting her.
(continued )

Monitor Mind-Set
Spy networks monitor their assets (agents, information, safe houses) to detect
trouble at the earliest stages. By monitoring indicators of breach or wrong-
doing, they are able to contain information leakage before the damage be-
comes permanent. Correspondingly, by monitoring our identities (using
either the latest technological tools or paper-based methods), we can detect
fraud and stop identity theft before it causes permanent damage.
Tools for keeping track of your identity vital signs include identity theft
monitoring services, credit report monitoring, balancing your checkbook,
ﬁnancial account alerts, and Social Security statement monitoring. At the
organizational level, monitoring may include video surveillance, software
footprint tracking, and tracking log ﬁles and key card access. But the most
powerful form of monitoring at the corporate level is actually performed by
your customers.
(continued )
In April, Danny was able to look through the couple’s tax documents, which
had been left on the ofﬁce desk waiting to be sealed and mailed. They con-
tained all the information Danny needed to set up accounts on Dixie’s credit
without alerting Dixie what she was up to. And because they looked alike, it
was simple for Danny to get a driver’s license in Dixie’s name. In short, Danny
was able to fully adopt an alternate identity without being detected.
In most such cases, detection would have taken years, as all of the accounts
that Danny set up were entirely new and covered by Dixie’s spotless credit.
But unbeknownst to Danny, Dixie had been monitoring her identity ‘‘vital
signs,’’ which fortunately would save her hours of recovery time. She had
read an article in the newspaper about getting a free annual credit report
from each of the three credit bureaus, and had ordered her ﬁrst copy in May.
She was curious to see what a credit report looked like. Imagine her surprise
to learn how much money it looked like she had been spending!
Dixie alerted the credit bureaus the same day she received her ﬁrst credit
report, followed the guidelines put out by the Federal Trade Commission
(FTC) for identity theft victims, and stopped her sister before she could make
full use of her identity. Recovering her identity took less than 30 hours and
cost her only $15 in notary fees.
140
Privacy Means Proﬁt

It is, of course, impossible to stop every form of identity theft. It is, how-
ever, realistic to catch theft before it becomes a major problem. The quicker
you catch identity theft, the less time and money you will spend recovering
from it. Prepare for the worst by having a backup plan—a way to detect fraud
early in the game. Monitor the signs!
Over half of fraud cases are self-detected. Nearly 4 in 10 victims discovered
the fraud while they were actively monitoring their accounts. Self-detection
by electronic means [e-mail or Internet statements] resulted in lowest loss
of money compared to other methods of detection. Victims who electroni-
cally monitored their accounts (either online banking or an ATM)
accounted for the discovery of 15 percent of existing card fraud, and the
fraud amounts for these detection methods are the lowest compared to any
other means of discovery. [See Figure 10.1.]
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research (p. 53)
32
26
7
120
52
48
114
140
175
152
59
8
34
40
45
109
156
225
264
0
100
200
300
Or, did you find out some other way (Specify)
When you reported your lost or stolen cards or other
documents to your financial institution
By monitoring accounts through the Internet, ATM,
or other electronic means
When denied for a payment or transaction
By monitoring accounts through review of paper
statements
When you were notified by companies such as a
bank or credit card provider
By reviewing your credit report or using a credit
monitoring service
When you were contacted by a debt collector or
creditor
When you were turned down for credit
Notified by police, law enforcement, or other
government agency
Q24: How did you first discover you were a victim of identity theft?
Was it by Q25: From the time the misuse of your information first
began, how long did it take you to discover it had been misused?
October 2008, n = 475, 445
Base: All victims
© 2009 Javelin Strategy & Research
Days to Detect Fraud
NA
2008
2007
FIGURE 10.1
How Fraud Was Detected and Length of Detection
Source: ‘‘Identity Fraud on the Rise But Consumer Costs Plummet as Protections Increase,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research, January 2009.
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 141

It is just not possible to observe and ward off every threat to our identity.
There will be documents that you forget to destroy or lock up, unused
accounts that you neglect to cancel, checks that you continue to mail, and
waiters you will allow to disappear with your credit card. Nor is it practical
to believe that we can cover every situation that threatens the safety of our
identity. Finally, there will always be some situations that are completely out
of our control, such as data loss by large companies. Fortunately, we are not
helpless, even in these situations.
Like experienced spies, we can institute a solid backup plan. It is
extremely important to monitor the key components of our identities even as
we eliminate, destroy, secure, lock, evaluate, and interrogate in every way
possible. This plan is our safety valve, and once implemented, it is simple
and effective to maintain. It starts with a dossier (French for ‘‘ﬁle’’), which is
nothing more than a collection of critical information on a single individual.
It is like a report card on your credit identity. Unlike spies, who use dossiers
to understand the people they are spying on, you will be collecting informa-
tion on yourself.
Create a Dossier
Your dossier will comprise a collection of documents that are stored securely
in your home or bank (see Chapter 7, ‘‘Lock the Docs’’) and that you regularly
review and update. It is a paper summary of your identity as the outside
world sees it (businesses, organizations, and government agencies). It is
made up of several key documents: your credit report, bank and credit card
statements, Social Security statement, wallet photocopies, and your password
list. Virtually any of your vital documents could be included in your dossier,
as well (birth certiﬁcates, marriage licenses, etc.).
A dossier has two purposes. First, it is a place where you can quickly access
a complete record of your vital information, in case your identity is stolen. You
will have the necessary account and phone numbers at hand to quickly cancel
credit cards and bank accounts, and to ﬁle credit disputes.
Preparedness prevents peril.
—Chinese proverb
Second, by keeping the documents in a single place, you are able to com-
pare them over time, to spot changes or inconsistencies. For example, if you
142
Privacy Means Proﬁt

review your previous credit history report against the latest version, you can
quickly spot any changes that have occurred.
Build a dossier in the way that suits you best. Whether you use a three-ring
binder, hanging ﬁle folders, or a large envelope doesn’t matter. What is impor-
tant is that you lock up your dossier in the safest way and place possible, to
keep it from becoming a casualty of identity theft. The safest place is probably
a bank safe deposit box or a waterproof safe that is mounted into the founda-
tion of your home. If this sounds overly protective to you, keep in mind that
many burglars target the documents or ﬁles in your home. As mentioned ear-
lier, refer back to Chapter 7, ‘‘Lock the Docs,’’ for more on this.
Monitor Your Credit Report Consistently
A credit report records a history of how you repay money you borrow from
others. As I noted earlier in the book, there are currently three main credit
bureaus in the United States: Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. Credit
bureaus track your credit history, generate credit scores, and produce credit
reports—all for sale to other businesses. If you own a home, have a credit card,
lease a car, or apply for or use credit of any sort, this information is reported to
one, two, or all three of these credit bureaus. In addition, they collect informa-
tion on how timely you pay your bills, how often you are tardy, how frequently
your credit is checked by companies, and any changes of address, employment,
or other personal information.
By monitoring these reports closely, you will know when someone else is
using your credit ﬁle to their beneﬁt. If an identity thief opens a new credit
card or loan on your Social Security number, you will see it on your report.
The quicker you spot the problem, the less trouble it will cause. Monitoring
your credit report is one of the most effective tools for preventing minor iden-
tity theft from turning into full-scale identity fraud. It is very simple and takes
only a few minutes to do, which may be why so many people tend to give in
to their apathy and fail to follow through on this important task. Don’t be one
of them.
Order your credit report from the ﬁrst of the three agencies. By law, you are
entitled to one free report from each agency once a year. The easiest way to
get a report is to visit www.AnnualCreditReport.com, or call 1–877–322–
8228. Make sure that you request your free annual credit report from one
credit agency only, as you will order the other two reports throughout the
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 143

remainder of the year. By spreading the reports out over time, you will be
monitoring your ﬁles consistently and frequently.
When your call or log on to the bureaus, have your account information
handy. Even when applying for a free credit report online, you will often reach a
screen that instructs you to call in to ‘‘conﬁrm your identity.’’ If you call, the
representative will ask you a series of questions that range from your current
and past addresses, bank and credit card account numbers, the date the accounts
were opened or closed, your mother’s maiden name, and date of birth. The rep
may also ask you the amounts you have taken out in loans. Don’t get discour-
aged by this process. This is just another way the bureaus protect your identity,
ensuring they provide yourcredit information to only you and not an imposter.
Probably, your evaluation trigger is going off right now, and you are wonder-
ing why you should give out all of this information, given what I’ve been telling
you so far. Good for you. Let me explain. There are two reasons: First, the three
credit bureaus already have your personal information; they just want to verify
(or authenticate) that it is really you requesting the report, not an impostor. So
you are not sharing any new information with them. Second, the beneﬁts (being
able to monitor for signs of identity theft) outweigh the risks (sharing private
information that isn’t actually private to this particular vendor).
Skip ahead four months from today on your calendar and set up a recur-
ring event that happens every four months (yes, that is how often you need to
monitor your credit for fraud, and that is how often you can receive the re-
ports for free). Again, to request and review your next credit report, go to
www.AnnualCreditReport.com, or call 1–877–322–8228.
The second time you request your report, choose a different credit agency
from the one you chose the ﬁrst time (e.g., if you chose Equifax ﬁrst, choose
Experian second, TransUnion third, and return to Equifax one year from to-
day). By month 12, you will be requesting the report from the same credit
bureau from which you requested it the ﬁrst time.
Ordering your credit report may not be the easiest or most hassle-free pro-
cess, but it is very effective and very inexpensive.
What to Monitor
When you receive your ﬁrst credit report, follow these steps:
1. Read through the entire report, including the deﬁnitions supplied by the
credit reporting agency, to ensure that you understand how to interpret
144
Privacy Means Proﬁt

the information. For a better understanding of how to interpret a credit
report, visit www.Sileo.com/reading-credit-reports.
2. Review your report a second time, this time using a highlighter to mark
any accounts that you don’t recognize or that appear to contain in-
accurate information (e.g., negative credit feedback where there should
be none); use a different-colored highlighter to identify any accounts
that you no longer need or use.
3. Contact the credit bureau regarding the accounts that you have high-
lighted, whether because you don’t recognize them or because of erro-
neous information. Be aware that some company credit cards (like
Sears) are issued by another company (e.g., GE Capital), so you may
need to do some research on your credit card statements to ﬁgure out
which company actually issued the cards. The credit bureau representa-
tive should be able to help you work through the questionable informa-
tion. To reach a human being more quickly at the credit bureau, go
through the fraud department, which has greater motivation to answer
your call in a timely manner.
4. Call and cancel all of the accounts on your credit report that you no
longer need or use. In this regard, please remember what I pointed
out earlier in the book: cancelling credit accounts could affect your
credit score (it could lower the amount of credit you have available),
so do this only in conjunction with your accountant or ﬁnancial
counselor. If done over time, and in the right way, it won’t adversely
affect your credit score. When doing this, be sure to call the com-
pany that issued the card or loan, not the credit bureau. For example,
if you have ﬁve credit cards that you no longer need (and probably
have forgotten you even had), call each credit card company, settle
any balances, and cancel the accounts. This is another means of
eliminating the source. It minimizes the number of places that a thief
can take advantage of your credit. If, on the other hand, you do not
want to lose the credit value from those accounts, simply monitor
them to make sure that no money is ever spent on them.
5. The next time you review your report, look for any changes against the
previous report. If there are changes, verify that it is credit you applied
for, and not a new account set up by an identity thief. You will probably
have very little work to do on future versions of your credit report, as
you will have done most of the hard work on the ﬁrst round. Think of
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 145

the ﬁrst review as a way to educate yourself about credit reports and to
clean up the years of neglect and identity creep.
After you have completed the process yourself, encourage your spouse or
partner to order and monitor their credit reports, which are mostly indepen-
dent of yours. If you have children older than 16, I recommend that they
monitor their credit reports as well, with your help. Review Figure 10.2 to
see the differences between victims who detected identity theft themselves,
versus those who were notiﬁed by an outside party, such as law enforcement
or a credit card company.
Identity Monitoring Services
To detect many types of identity fraud in the earliest stages (and thereby min-
imize further damage), you can subscribe to one of the identity monitoring
services now offered by a host of providers. For a monthly or yearly fee, these
FIGURE 10.2
How Victims Discovered Fraud (Self Detection vs.
Detected by Others)
Source: ‘‘Identity Fraud on the Rise But Consumer Costs Plummet as Protections Increase,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research, January 2009.
146
Privacy Means Proﬁt

services will notify you by e-mail of any changes or activity relating to your
identity. Sorry to say that many of these services are a waste of money (they
do what you can do for yourself, for free), but several of them are very well
worth the investment (I use CSIdentity.com). The best of them provide the
following features:
 3-in-1 Credit Report Monitoring: Includes credit inquiries, delinquencies,
judgments and liens, bankruptcies, new loans, and more. The ‘‘3-in-1’’
means that the service monitors all three bureaus, Equifax, Experian,
and TransUnion for changes in your report, not just one of them.
 Court Record Monitoring: Flags criminal actions associated with your
name, birthdate, and/or Social Security number.
 Public Record Monitoring: Lists names and addresses afﬁliated with your
Social Security number, address history, and any changes to same.
 Noncredit Loan Monitoring: Highlights short-term, high-interest payday
loan activity that doesn’t require a credit inquiry.
 Internet Surveillance: Monitors Web sites, chat rooms, and bulletin
boards for illegal selling or trading of your personal information online.
 Sex Offender Reports: Alerts you to sex offenders residing in your zip
code or moving in to your neighborhood, as well as any use of your
identity by known offenders nationally.
 Identity Theft Insurance: Offers a $25,000 insurance policy, with $0
deductible.
 Identity Theft Restoration Services: Staffs full-service identity theft resto-
ration experts to provide hands-on assistance to restore your credit and
identity while you get on with your life. It is important that the monitor-
ing service you are using provides this service ‘‘in house’’so that they feel
the need to take responsibility for your recovery in order to keep your
business. Companies that outsource the restoration process tend to lose
interest in you once you become a victim.
I recommend these services for everyone with a Social Security number,
but especially for individuals who are too busy to regularly check their credit
reports (which includes most of us, based on how few people consistently
monitor their reports manually), who would like the peace of mind that
comes from consistent monitoring, or who are already victims of identity
theft. If you are among the latter, I can assure you that using one of these
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 147

services is an easy way to track whether or not identity thieves are still taking
advantage of your good name. These services have been invaluable in main-
taining the health of my identity after I suffered several cases of identity
theft. For recommendations on the best services, visit www.Sileo.com/
productreviews.
Many insurance companies also offer identity theft insurance as an en-
dorsement on your homeowner’s policy. This insurance tends to be relatively
inexpensive and covers many of the fees associated with identity theft recov-
ery. The biggest recovery expense is usually in legal fees, as you probably will
need an attorney to help you recover your credit and ﬁght any criminal
actions. Every company’s policy is slightly different, so make sure you under-
stand which legal fees are covered and which are not.
Monitor Your Financial Transactions
Effortlessly
There are four ways to monitor your ﬁnancial transactions. I describe them in
turn, according to effectiveness, from safest to most risky.
Account Alerts
Account alerts are the safest choice. Most credit card companies, banks, and
investment ﬁrms allow you to set these up, and they comprise one of the
most powerful methods for monitoring at your disposal—plus, they are com-
pletely free of charge. You generally set up account alerts by logging in to
your online account (e.g., where you do your online banking, investing, etc.)
and going into the alerts or notiﬁcation section of the website. If you have
trouble ﬁnding it, contact the ﬁnancial institution and a representative will
help you set up this feature.
Account alerts notify you automatically by e-mail or text message (to your
cell phone) when a transaction is made on your account. For example, if you
make a purchase on your credit card, an alert will automatically be sent to
you detailing how much you spent, where you spent it, and on what date.
The alert will also tell you when a payment is due or has not been received
on time, or when private information has been changed on the account (of-
ten, a sign of fraud). Alerts are a simple way to keep track of credit card
148
Privacy Means Proﬁt

usage, bank transfers, low account balances, investment moves, and a handful
of other helpful tasks, without doing any extra work. You just verify that each
e-mail or text is legitimate. If it isn’t, you call the ﬁnancial institutions and
inform them that you think you are the victim of fraud. They will help you
handle it from there. By catching the signs early, you eliminate your liability
and cost.
Online Statements
As you will see in Figure 10.3, the cost of the crime to the victim decreases
substantially when the victim catches identity theft him- or herself (by effec-
tively monitoring their paper or electronic statements). This is the second
safest choice, because it isn’t quite as convenient or timely as being alerted at
the moment of the transaction (see below). If you aren’t comfortable using, or
don’t want to receive, account alerts, consider monitoring your credit card,
bank, and investment statements online. The key here is, the more often you
monitor them, the more quickly you will detect foul play.
$0
$2,000
$4,000
$6,000
$8,000
$10,000 $12,000
Monitoring paper statements
Internet, ATM, or other electronic
monitoring
Notified by companies such as a bank or
credit card provider
When you were turned down for credit
When reported to your financial institution
Credit report or using a credit monitoring
service
Notified by police, law enforcement, or other
government agency
Contacted by a debt collector or creditor
When denied for a payment or transaction
Q24: How did you first discover you were a victim of identity theft?
Was it...by Q32: What is the approximate total dollar value of what
the person obtained while misusing your information?
October 2008, n = 475,445
Base: All fraud victims
© 2009 Javelin Strategy & Research
2008
2007
$3,997
$4,672
$5,525
$10,189
$7,122
$3,729
$5,606
$4,400
$1,040
$2,309
$3,927
$4,565
$5,848
$7,922
$8,073
$8,280
$8,522
$10,344
FIGURE 10.3
How Fraud Was Detected and the Corresponding
Recovery Costs
Source: ‘‘Identity Fraud on the Rise But Consumer Costs Plummet as Protections Increase,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research, January 2009.
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 149

Using online statements offers two beneﬁts. First, it eliminates paper state-
ments from your mail. Second, because there is very little lag time between
making a charge on your card and being able to view it online, you speed up
detection time signiﬁcantly. It’s an excellent way to keep identity fraud from
spinning out of control.
Mailed Statements
The third safest choice is to receive mailed statements. If you would rather
receive paper bills or statements, follow this advice:
 Review them as soon as they arrive.
 Use an electronic calendar (like the one in Microsoft Outlook, Apple
iCalendar or on your cell phone) to track your billing cycles. Most state-
ments arrive at about the same time each month, so put a reminder in
your calendar to watch for the statement in the mail.
 Use the recurring events feature in your electronic calendar to remind
you of the statement every month. If the statement doesn’t show up on
time, call the company that issues the statement and ask when it was
mailed.
 Review every transaction on the statement and make sure that you rec-
ognize where the charge is coming from and that the amount is correct
or at least reasonable. Remember that identity thieves are usually smart
enough to charge small amounts (or write small checks) each month,
knowing they are harder to detect.
 If you ﬁnd a discrepancy, immediately ﬁle a dispute with the credit card
company or bank. If it turns out to be legitimate, you can always remove
the dispute. In the meantime, protect yourself. You probably won’t want
to ﬁle your individual statements in your dossier (there would be too
many), but it is a good place to ﬁle end-of-year statements and
summaries.
Do Nothing
It hardly need be said that the riskiest choice is to ignore your statements and
hope for the best. From my point of view, this is no choice at all. And one day,
you will be sorry.
150
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Monitor Your Annual Social Security
Statement
Every year you should receive an account statement from the Social Security
Administration. If you don’t, you should contact them. The statement details
your yearly earnings record, expected retirement beneﬁts, and disability ben-
eﬁts. If your Social Security number has been stolen and someone is taking
advantage of your beneﬁts, you should be able to detect it by monitoring any
changes in the statements. Do the following:
 Verify that your yearly Earnings Record on the statement matches your
taxable income on your tax return.
 Verify that your beneﬁts are increasing each year as you contribute more
to retirement, not decreasing because someone is prematurely redeem-
ing them.
 Encourage your spouse or partner to monitor his or her Social Security
statement, as well, as it is completely independent of yours.
Keep these annual statements in your dossier or ﬁled with that year’s taxes.
Make Photocopies and Logs
In Chapter 4, ‘‘Eliminate the Source,’’ I recommended that you make a copy of
every piece of identity in your wallet. This copy should be stored in your dos-
sier (which is kept securely in your home) and updated any time there are
signiﬁcant changes. These copies will enable you to quickly ﬁnd and contact
credit card companies, motor vehicle departments, banks, and other institu-
tions if your wallet is lost or stolen.
As you opt out of marketing lists and information sharing, add the docu-
ments noting those changes to your dossier for future reference and veriﬁca-
tion. Keep a to-do list at the front of your dossier to track any future action
items and the dates they need to be performed. For example, many of the opt-
out programs stay in effect for only ﬁve years and so need to be renewed peri-
odically. Write yourself a note on this page and include the date when you
should renew your request.
Make a log of all of the important accounts, account numbers, login
names, and passwords for each and every account you have. This should
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 151

include bank accounts, brokerage accounts, insurance accounts, utilities and
phone accounts, and any other ﬁnancial institutions that require passwords
or PIN numbers on their websites, phone systems, or ATMs. If your identity
is stolen, you will have all of your account information in a convenient and
safe place for quick access. It also provides a centralized place for your spouse
or partner to ﬁnd ﬁnancial information if something should happen to you.
Action Item Checklist: Monitor the Signs
Create a dossier.
Order and monitor your credit report.
Set up regular calendar reminders every four months to request your
next credit report.
Sign up for an identity monitoring service and identity theft insurance.
Set up account alerts for bank, credit card, and investment accounts.
Monitor your monthly statements.
Use an electronic calendar (like Microsoft Outlook) to track your
billing cycles.
Monitor your annual Social Security statement.
Make photocopies and logs.
Business Relevance
Monitoring the signs is the most effective way for businesses to minimize
the damage done by data breach or workplace identity theft. The best
people to monitor the signs of data theft are your customers.
The best defense against identity fraud is a partnership with your
customer: Half of all fraud is discovered by customers.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
152
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Seven Monitoring Tools Businesses Should Implement in
Partnership with Customers
1. Educate your customers (and employees) to recognize the signs of
identity theft at your company. The more they know, the quicker
they will be able to detect fraud.
2. Encourage your customers to go paperless and monitor their
accounts online, as this eliminates risky physical records, greatly
speeds the detection process, and lowers the ﬁnancial damage to
all concerned.
3. Offer identity theft monitoring to your customers and employees
(you might also consider subsidizing the cost), as this speeds de-
tection of identity theft and lowers the costs. This function can be
outsourced to an identity monitoring company.
4. Make sure that your systems detect and notify customers when
they utilize inappropriate identifying information as their logins,
passwords or PINs (SSNs, birthdates, etc.). Employ strict controls to
verify address changes, as this is the most frequently used way to
take over an account.
5. Offer e-mail or text account alerts that notify your customers of
possible fraud (e.g., address changes, e-mail address changes,
bank transactions, balance thresholds, foreign transactions, suspi-
cious buying patterns, online or wire transfers, alert shutoff, etc.).
6. Give customers the tools to deﬁne limits and situations under
which the transaction requires prior approval (e.g., no single bank
transfer of greater than $1,000).
7. Reward your customers when they detect a problem. This pro-
motes loyalty, reinforces their positive habits, and encourages
them to forgive the fraud because you are taking active steps to
minimize the effects.
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs 153


III
Field Combat:
Target the Enemy
No one starts a war—or rather, no one in his
sense ought to do so—without ﬁrst being clear in
his mind what he intends to achieve by that war
and how he intends to conduct it.
The ﬁrst and most important rule to observe in
order to accomplish these purposes is to use our
entire forces with the utmost energy. Any
moderation shown would leave us short of
our aim.
The second rule is to concentrate our power as
much as possible against that section where the
chief blows are to be delivered and to incur
disadvantages elsewhere, so that our chances of
success may increase at the decisive point.
The third rule is never to waste time. Unless
important advantages are to be gained from
hesitation, it is necessary to set to work at once.
—Carl von Clausewitz, Principles of War
(Emphasis Added)


11
Deploy Targeting
Strategies:
Accumulate,
Prioritize, and Adapt
I
n Part II, I presented the ﬁrst seven mind-sets of thinking like a spy, to
establish what we do to protect private data (eliminate, destroy, secure,
lock, evaluate, interrogate, and monitor). In this part, I introduce targeting
strategies to demonstrate how to go about applying those mind-sets in the
most efﬁcient (time-related) and effective (quality-related) manner possible.
The most lasting safety changes emerge from building layers of security
organically, beginning with the most important steps ﬁrst, then customizing
them to your particular requirements. By targeting the enemy in this way, you
will reap the maximum return on your investment.
Victory #1: Building a Culture of Privacy from
the Ashes of Failure
Rather than illustrating the principles of this chapter with another case study
of corporate data breach, I’d like to share the steps my executive team and I
took (and continue to build upon) to protect our data inside a new profes-
sional speaking and training business. Incorporating what we’ve learned over
the past ﬁve years, this case study is an accurate representation of how we
have accumulated, prioritized, and adapted our privacy processes to build a
successful Culture of Privacy.

Phase 1: Deﬁning the Problem (Pinpointing Our Risk)
Our data breach was grounded in the human factor, a potential risk at so
many businesses. Our problem was a people problem—in our case, one per-
son. Doug, an insider (or double-agent, to apply the spy metaphor), took ad-
vantage of our trust to turn private information into his own proﬁtable
enterprise. Needless to say, after Doug was caught, left the business, and went
to jail, we shed a certain amount of the risk—but only for the time being. It
didn’t account for minimizing that same risk going forward as we began to
build a new business. Our most pressing task now was to redeﬁne how we
brought people into our circle of trust, including partners, employees,
and vendors.
Phase 1, our ﬁrst priority, quickly became about adapting our hiring
process with data privacy in mind. All employees, current and future,
would be screened according to a new process. We instituted detailed
background checks, both criminally and ﬁnancially, as well as character-
based testing, to better understand our candidates. We veriﬁed and inter-
viewed references—personal, professional, and educational—using a vigorous
process to expose fraud, deceit, and dishonesty. We implemented privacy
education, beginning during the interview process so that job applicants
knew the standards to which they would be held. And we enacted a moni-
toring system (including continual background checking services) to auto-
matically update us on the levels of trust we could extend to each
individual inside the business. In short, over the course of about a year, we
accumulated a robust process that enabled us to hire (employees and ven-
dors) with privacy in mind.
Phase 2: Motivating/Engaging the Troops
(Establishing Personal Buy-in)
All the members of our executive team had experienced the consequences of
data breach and identity theft ﬁrsthand, so motivation was not much of an
issue. All of us clearly understood that privacy means proﬁt and that it was
our responsibility to build privacy into our corporate vision. Many businesses
that fail to implement a genuine Culture of Privacy skip this step; they don’t
recognize that motivating employees, executives, and vendors to maintain
data privacy is an ongoing process, not a one-time ﬁx.
158
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Phase 3: Destroying the Data
We had years’ worth of back records sitting in banking boxes on storeroom
shelves: past invoices, employee records, tax documents, ﬁnancials—you
name it. To reduce the volume of data that we no longer needed or wanted to
store, we hired an on-site shredding company to help us completely destroy
these archives, rather than do it ourselves. We worked with the company’s
staff every step of the way to make sure we were in control of the destruction
process and that it was carried out to our speciﬁcations.
Once the bulk of the data had been destroyed, we purchased Fellowes’
shredders for every desk in the ofﬁce. We found that if our employees couldn’t
access a shredder within two to three seconds of their desks, the documents
had a far greater chance of being thrown out without being shredded. We also
placed commercial-grade shredders next to the photocopiers and printers
throughout the ofﬁce so that any unneeded documents being handled in
those areas could be shredded on the spot.
Finally, we instituted a reward and disciplinary process to ensure that
shredding became a part of our culture, and not just a fad. First, we instituted
trash audits, where I would personally dig through the trash to see if any sen-
sitive documents were being thrown out intact. This alone demonstrated a
level of commitment to privacy that started at the top of the company. A posi-
tive inspection (no data exposed) resulted in some form of reward (e.g.,
everyone goes home early with pay on Friday). A failed inspection was also
dealt with in a positive way: additional privacy training. It didn’t take long
for everyone to ﬁgure out that paid leave was more rewarding than falling
behind with work because they had to attend privacy training. Once everyone
bought in to the culture, we adapted the program to a long-term reward sys-
tem (no failed audits this year affects bonus levels, etc.).
Phase 4: Securing the Systems
Our immediate response to address the security of our electronic systems was
to pull our servers ofﬂine (only allow access from within the ofﬁce, not from
outside via the Internet) while we identiﬁed our electronic risks and formu-
lated a plan to eliminate or at least minimize them. We found this to be such
an effective strategy for keeping hackers from penetrating our systems that
we never fully reconnected our ﬁle servers to the Internet.
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 159

Instead, we adapted server security to ﬁt our demands; speciﬁcally, we
moved the two mission-critical applications to which we needed remote
access onto a completely different server and protected it behind an
extra-tight ﬁrewall. The ﬁrewall was conﬁgured to allow only certain
computers (via MAC addressing and VPN) into the server through one
port (allowing us to close risky ports commonly used in hacking
attempts) and into the two aforementioned applications. We also imple-
mented encryption on our servers, our computers, our sensitive e-mails,
and the wireless network. We took extra precautions on protecting our
wireless network since this is such an effective and unobtrusive way to
break into a business’s data systems. In addition to WPA2 and SSID
Masking, we also implemented MAC addressing so that only speciﬁc
computers had access to our network (all of these solutions are discussed
in further detail in Chapter 6, ‘‘Secure the Systems’’).
Now, instead of needing just our IP to attempt a hack, a hacker would have
to know 7 to 10 pieces of key information about our system to get in from the
outside. Few of our employees even knew all of the pieces of this puzzle,
which added tighter security against an inside job. Additionally, most of our
critical customer and employee data never left our ofﬁces.
By prioritizing how we protected different levels of conﬁdential data, we
eliminated almost 90 percent of the identity that came in contact with the
outside world. In other words, we lowered our immediate risk by 90 percent,
with minimal investment.
In the process of accumulating these layers of technological security, we
switched our workstations to an Apple OS X platform in order to minimize
the chances of malware letting a hacker through our security net (Apple com-
puters, while not immune to viruses, malware, etc., have a far lower share of
the computer market, and therefore attract fewer hackers).1 Our research had
led us to conclude that the OS X platform was better suited to data privacy for
our speciﬁc type of small business.
To protect ourselves against internal threats, we established four groups of
user-level computer and document access: public, internal, conﬁdential, and
top secret.
Finally, we began to treat our laptops and mobile data devices with
more respect (which you will learn more about in Chapter 13, ‘‘Protect
Mobile Data’’).
160
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Phase 5: Locking the Docs
Ours is a small ofﬁce and we adapted effective document locking techniques
to ﬁt our size and culture. First of all, we installed a high-quality alarm sys-
tem in our ofﬁces to discourage break-ins. We equipped every ofﬁce with a
locking ﬁling cabinet and a locking ofﬁce door. Executive ofﬁces also in-
cluded a locking ﬁre-resistant safe and digital storage unit for securing highly
sensitive information.
We only occasionally have visitors to our ofﬁce, so we don’t require every
classiﬁed-level document be locked up (this is an example of adapting best
practices to the pragmatics of running a business). Consequently, public and
internal documents may be in full view, unless someone is visiting our ofﬁces,
in which case we attempt to ﬁle or remove internal documents if an outsider
is going to be on site for an extended period of time. Conﬁdential documents
are locked up after use, remain with the party responsible for their safety, or
are worked on only in an ofﬁce with a locking door. The door is shut and
locked when the ofﬁce owner is not present. Top secret documents either
stay with the individual responsible for their safety, or are locked up, period.
Before a cleaning service or other outside vendor is given access to the ofﬁce,
we do a ‘‘data sweep’’ for all potentially sensitive documents, locking or dis-
posing of them appropriately.
Most of our client contact takes place in a neutral space where no docu-
ments or computers are easily accessible. We often hold meetings in a nearby
cafe, to minimize trafﬁc through our ofﬁces. It’s convenient, enjoyable,
and safe.
In addition, we created an outdoor locking enclosure for our trash dump-
sters to discourage dumpster diving (deﬁned in Chapter 2). This is such a
common and easy target for thieves that we felt we needed to minimize access
to our garbage.
Phase 6: Social Engineering Training
Each of our employees and executives is highly attuned to spotting a scam.
Through ongoing experiential training, this cumulative process ensures that
everyone on the team recognizes new forms of fraud and theft before they
even become part of the public consciousness. Once individuals have been
trained to recognize the signs of fraud, trust their instinctive emotions that
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 161

signal trouble, and implement the appropriate response to any request for
information (hogwash!), the danger that social engineering will occur is
much reduced.
We had to adapt our training to a special contingency—a riskier environ-
ment. A side effect of being in the business of training people to detect fraud
is that you are also teaching them how to commit fraud without being de-
tected (because the social engineers learn the tools just as well, or even better,
than the honest students). Consequently, we often see our skills being used
against us. This won’t, of course, be the case for most people reading this
book, but it is certainly a sign of what is to come. In other words, keep in
mind that none of what you are learning is static. Your knowledge must
evolve with time, as it does for criminals.
For example, the minute a social engineer knows that a company has
trained its employees to be on the lookout for ﬂattery, bribery, and charm
techniques, he or she might instead use the opposite tools to their advantage.
The point is, there will always be new tools of deception, which is why we
implemented phase 7.
Phase 7: Ongoing Monitoring, Education, and Improvement
We now utilize independent, outside experts to monitor ﬁnancials, employee
records, system security, and privacy practices. This gives us an impartial and
ongoing look at the health of our Culture of Privacy. We conduct regular
training sessions and assessments of best practices for data security, and con-
stantly update our technology, to stay as far ahead of the curve on identity
theft and data breach as possible. We also provide personal identity theft
monitoring services to our employees as a beneﬁt so that they don’t log sick
time resolving their own experiences of this crime.
In conclusion, I want to say that not only are these privacy practices proﬁt-
able and beneﬁcial to our business, they are, simply, the right things to do.
Target the Enemy: Three Principles
Targeting the enemy breaks down into three simple principles:
1. Accumulate layers of data security over time, rather than all at once, to
form a safety net of privacy.
162
Privacy Means Proﬁt

2. Prioritize your efforts to focus ﬁrst on protecting the most valuable data
and eliminating the greatest sources of risk.
3. Adapt the seven mind-sets to the particular needs of your home or
business, rather than applying it in a formulaic, one-size-ﬁts-all way.
1. Accumulate
Spies collect data with a great deal of patience and focus. They typically begin
by capturing a kernel of information then add to it over time, focusing on the
most valuable data ﬁrst. Each piece of data, by itself, may appear to be worth-
less; but taken as a whole, the identity proﬁle that emerges is well worth the
investment.
You can use this same strategy to protect your private information. By
accumulating privacy in layers (and focusing on the most important measures
ﬁrst), you will build a strong, multidimensional defense against identity theft
and data breach.
Continuously ask yourself this question: What is the next data security step?
Little strokes fell great oaks.
—Benjamin Franklin, Poor Richard’s Almanac
Over time, we have been giving away our privacy, often without even real-
izing it. We commonly trade our personal information for access to website
content (e.g., free downloads, social networking pages), the chance to win a
contest (iPods, vacations), or to cash in on a one-time 10 percent discount at
a clothing retailer. I call this slow and unnecessary leakage of our personal
information identity creep, and the people who collect our data, identity creeps
(also referred to throughout the book as spies and thieves). These creeps
request our information in a subtle way, and because the immediate beneﬁts
we are offered seem substantial and, often, harmless, we overlook the
downside—that we are gradually broadcasting our identity to those who
shouldn’t have it.
One source at a time, we must reverse our bad habits and guard informa-
tion, rather than give it out thoughtlessly. Understandably, we cannot stop
sharing our information entirely. What we must do instead is determine what
to share and with whom; and that is where thinking like a spy can help. By
adopting a mind-set of accumulation, you will begin regaining your privacy
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 163

immediately, one step at a time. This incremental approach also keeps pre-
vention from becoming an overwhelming task and reminds you to consider
the risk any time your identity is involved.
2. Prioritize
Some data is more valuable than other data, meaning that accumulating lay-
ers of security shouldn’t be a random process. You need to begin with the
most important items ﬁrst. Social Security numbers are much more valuable
than phone numbers, for example. Likewise, some sources of data breach
pose a greater risk than others. Laptop computers, because of their mobile
nature, are at a higher risk of theft than stationary workstations or servers.
Every home and every business will have to differentiate one level of risk
from the next. Your job is to prioritize how you systematically eliminate or
minimize those risks. Chapters 4 through 10 on the ﬁrst seven mind-sets are
organized in the order in which you should apply them, in most situations.
For example, you should always attempt to eliminate the source before you
destroy the data. If you can’t eliminate or destroy, then secure. And so on.
To circle back to where we started, this is the order in which you should
attempt to prioritize your privacy protection:
1. Eliminate the source.
2. Destroy the data.
3. Secure the systems.
4. Lock the docs.
5. Evaluate the risk.
6. Interrogate the enemy.
7. Monitor the signs.
Prioritizing ensures that you spend time ﬁrst on those items that will pro-
duce the highest degree of safety. Thanks to the power of accumulating pri-
vacy by priority, you can spend just a few minutes a day taking steps toward
protecting your data and still make substantial progress over time. As I said
before, prevention is not a one-time ﬁx. I strongly discourage you from sitting
down one weekend determined to regain control over your identity all at
once, or call a meeting at which you attempt to solve the ‘‘security problem’’
in a single session. This approach will prove to be too daunting, and chances
164
Privacy Means Proﬁt

are you’ll quit before you accomplish what you need to. Instead, your goal is
to accumulate small pieces of change over many months, so that, in the end,
you protect sensitive data in an enduring and effective way. Think about
accumulating privacy as Benjamin Franklin did about saving money—put a
little away every chance you get and, before long, you will have amassed
a fortune.
The question to ask of yourself and your business colleagues at this juncture
is: What is the next step we can take to deliver the most bang for our security buck?
Think about how we accumulate security by priority to protect our homes
and families:
1. We move to a safe neighborhood (eliminating a portion of the risk).
2. We install deadbolts on the doors (locking up our valuable assets).
3. We install an alarm system (or get a dog) to alert us to intruders (secur-
ing our ‘‘system’’).
4. We pay taxes to fund our local police department (monitoring).
Taken individually, the steps would be inadequate to give you true protec-
tion; but taken together, they form a safety net that greatly lowers your chan-
ces of theft. You may spend days or weeks implementing all of the solutions,
but each step gives you greater safety.
On a personal level, freezing your credit is the highest-priority item for pro-
tecting yourself against identity theft. This is where you should begin your
accumulation process. In business, the priorities change depending on the
size, type, and nature of the business. The chart demonstrates the difference
in where priorities should lie between Financial Institutions (FIs) and other
types of businesses. Clearly, insider theft should be a top priority of non-
ﬁnancial companies. This also demonstrates the need to adapt these (or any)
suggestions to your speciﬁc environment.
3. Adapt
None of the tools or suggestions provided in this book will work well for you
if you don’t take the time to adapt them to your situation. Solutions are most
effective when they are customized to the particular needs of the individuals
or businesses involved. Figure 11.1 demonstrates some of the common ways
that data is compromised, but it is important to determine how your business
varies from the norm.
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 165

In the seven phases I and my colleagues went through to protect our busi-
ness, we adapted the mind-sets to suit the design of our business:
 We invested little in motivation, as we had experienced the crime ﬁrst-
hand. We were already motivated and primed for action.
 We adapted our hiring and human resources processes to suit a small
business, not a Fortune 500 company.
 Instead of spending vast resources on hardening our computer network
to keep hackers out, we adapted the plan and took most of our sensitive
information ofﬂine. This was a very nontraditional and highly effective
modiﬁcation.
 We have a low volume of trafﬁc through our ofﬁces, so we invested more
in keeping thieves out of our building (an excellent security system),
opportunists out of our ofﬁces (locking doors), dumpster divers out of
our trash (a locking dumpster enclosure), and war-drivers out of our air-
waves (a highly encrypted wireless network).
20%
7%
3%
8%
12%
6%
11%
14%
14%
21%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Insider theft
Subcontractor (third-party vendor
or service provider)
Accidental exposure
Hacking
Data on the move (laptop, thumb
drive, PDA, etc.)
All institutions
FIs only
n = 59; 516 data breaches
Q: How was the information breached?
FIGURE 11.1
How Sensitive Information Is Exposed
Source: Identity Theft Resource Center. Accessed September 30, 2008.
166
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 We are frequently the target of social engineering, therefore we adapted
our training to include tighter protocols for controlling the ﬂow of infor-
mation and verifying the legitimacy of requestors. This is important to a
business of any size.
 We are a small business and don’t have the manpower for internal audit-
ing, therefore we outsourced that function to people and businesses that
have earned our trust over many years.
Action Items: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt
To illustrate the changes in mind-set I have been recommending you
work toward, here are examples of how you might cope with several
high-risk identity theft scenarios before and after learning the seven
mind-sets of a spy (including accumulate, prioritize, and adapt). Note
that there is a natural overlap, or redundancy, between mind-sets, so
that privacy may be approached from many directions. The seven
mind-sets (as well as targeting techniques) appear in (bold).
Identity
Exposure
Former
Mind-set
Think Like a
Spy Mind-set
Someone reputable
asks for your Social
Security number
(at home) or your
computer login and
password (at work).
You know that these
are sensitive pieces
of information, but
don’t want to
embarrass yourself
or slow things down,
so you share the
information.
Your identity is ‘‘in play,’’
triggering a higher level of
consciousness (Evaluate).
You ask a series of pointed
questions until you are
comfortable with your level
of safety (Interrogate). If
sharing the information
cannot be justiﬁed, you don’t
give it (Eliminate). If it is
justiﬁed, you verify that your
data will be used only for its
intended purposes by
monitoring it after the fact
(Monitor).
(continued )
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 167

A ‘‘friend’’ on your
Facebook page says
that he/she is in
trouble and needs you
to send money.
This is a very close
friend, for whom
you would do
anything, so you
mail him/her
money.
While this isn’t a case of your
identity being stolen (it’s a
case of your friend’s Facebook
identity being taken over),
your suspicions are triggered
(Evaluate). Before you do
anything else, you call your
friend directly (Adapt) and
ask him/her if he/she
contacted your through
Facebook and actually needs
help (Interrogate). As you
learn more about social
networking fraud, you begin to
apply what you’ve learned
about phishing and malware
attacks to this new medium of
communication (Adapt).
Since you utilize social
networking in your
corporation, you decide to
train your employees on safe
social networking at your next
privacy meeting (Prioritize
and Accumulate).
A credit card
statement arrives in
the mail.
You look it over
quickly, pay the
balance, and ﬁle it
away.
You verify each transaction as
legitimate (Evaluate). If you
are uncertain, you call the
credit card company and ask
questions until you are
satisﬁed (Interrogate).
If the statement refers to a
card that you no longer need
Identity
Exposure
Former
Mind-set
Think Like a
Spy Mind-set
(continued )
168
Privacy Means Proﬁt

or use, you cancel it
(Eliminate) and then shred
the document (Destroy). If
it is a necessary piece of
identity, you contact the
company and request online
statements to replace mailed
statements (Adapt). You set
up account alerts to notify
you about any transaction
problems (Monitor). Finally,
you ﬁle it in a locked cabinet
(Lock). You implement the
same basic procedure for all
ﬁnancial statements that arrive
in the mail and apply the same
tools at your workplace
(Adapt).
You sign up for a new
credit card, personal
or business.
You take no
additional steps.
You opt out of the company’s
information-sharing policy and
request that you not be sent
convenience checks or
marketing materials
(Eliminate). You set up
online statements instead of
paper statements (Secure).
You turn on account alerts to
monitor for fraud (Monitor).
You receive an e-mail
from one of your
ﬁnancial institutions
(e.g., your bank)
asking you to update
account information.
You read it and
potentially ﬁll it out
since it has your
bank’s logo and
e-mail address on it.
You delete the e-mail
(Destroy) and log in to your
bank account directly to look
for any online alerts or notices
about the request. If you still
have questions, or your
instincts suggest fraud
(Evaluate), you call the bank
(Interrogate).
(continued )
Identity
Exposure
Former
Mind-set
Think Like a
Spy Mind-set
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 169

A department store
offers a one-time 10
percent discount if
you sign up for its
credit card.
If you aren’t in a rush
and don’t already
have the store’s card,
you accept.
You perform a cost-beneﬁt
analysis: How much value will
you receive by selling your
personal information
(Evaluate)? If it is worth it, you
will proﬁt from the sale of your
identity. Unfortunately, it is rarely
worth it in the long term (you
get a one-time discount; the
store gets data on you that can
last a lifetime).
You notice customer
data, sensitive
intellectual property,
or employee
documents out in
the open at work.
You are relieved that
you are not the one
legally liable for the
safety of those
documents. But you
clean up your own
desk because you
know the personal
consequences of
being irresponsible.
You assess the level of risk that
the theft of these sensitive
documents would cause the
business (Deﬁne) and either
lock them up (Lock) or shred
them (Destroy). You educate
your staff on the seven mind-
sets to protect the business’s
assets, including your
employee information
(Accumulate, Prioritize,
and Adapt).
You have only a few
minutes to take steps
to protect your
identity.
You think, ‘‘One little
change won’t make a
difference anyway,’’
so you do nothing.
You understand that taking
even a single step is better
than doing nothing
(Accumulate) so you
proceed to Chapter 16,
‘‘Prioritize Your Attack: The
Privacy Calendar’’ to start
accumulating changes by
priority (Prioritize).
Identity
Exposure
Former
Mind-set
Think Like a
Spy Mind-set
(continued )
170
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Business Relevance
Your business has a ﬁnite budget to protect private information. To
maximize your return on investment, it is imperative that you target
the enemy. You cannot possibly eliminate all sources of risk, so you
must approach data privacy in a systematic way. Building a lasting
Culture of Privacy takes time (which is why we accumulate changes
over months or years), money (which is why we prioritize how we
allocate resources to the cause), and active leadership (someone to
adapt theory to reality). Figure 11.2 illustrates how businesses invest
in data safety after a breach, which serves as a pretty good real-
world indication of where businesses should be investing before the
breach.
Clarity, ﬂexibility, and longevity are what set successful privacy ini-
tiatives apart from those that fail. According to the Ponemon Institute,
more than 88 percent of all data breach cases in 2008 involved in-
sider negligence.2 Implementing security that sticks on a gradual basis
is more effective than attempting to make every employee read and
follow a lengthy privacy policy in one fell swoop. Target these
changes ﬁrst:
(continued )
FIGURE 11.2
What Preventative Measures Have Been
Implemented after the Data Breach?
Source: ‘‘Fourth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2009.
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 171

(continued )
 Motivation: Make privacy personal. Employees need to know that
protecting the company’s data is as important to the health of the
business as protecting personal data is to their well-being. Make
sure they understand that their jobs depend on data privacy.
 Education: Train employees on breach awareness, social engineer-
ing, and how to use preventative tools. At least 88 percent of this
problem involves human error or negligence. As you can see from
the chart on the previous page, the ﬁrst step breached companies
take is to properly train their executives and employees.
 Deﬁnition: It is imperative to know what information is at risk and
where it lives inside your organization, both physically and digitally.
According to the ‘‘2008 Global State of Information Security Study,’’
published by Javelin Research, ‘‘. . . 71% of respondents say their
organization does not have an accurate inventory of where personal
data for employees and customers is stored.’’3
 Protect Mobile Data: Read Chapter 13 on locking down laptops and
other mobile devices.
 Encryption: Encrypt every digital device utilized to receive, store, or
transmit information or identity (laptops, wireless, backups, e-mail,
etc.). According to the Identity Theft Resource Center’s ‘‘2009
Breach Report,’’ out of 498 breaches, only 6 companies reported
that they had either encryption or other strong security features in
place to protect the exposed data.4
 Insider Theft: Perform thorough background checks to weed out
dishonest employees before they join your organization. Don’t stop
doing these character checks when your employees start work,
either; many crimes are committed after people have been hired.
 Shred: Install high-quality shredders in locations convenient to all
employees.
 Classiﬁcation: Implement a classiﬁcation scheme (physical and
digital tiered user-access levels) and hold people accountable.
 Elimination: Where possible, stop using personal identifying infor-
mation on mailers, forms, and the like. At a minimum, use accepted
172
Privacy Means Proﬁt

The next three chapters discuss in greater detail ways to target several of
the most pressing and current sources of data breach and identity theft. For
suggestions on ways to motivate, educate, and train your employees, and
increase their awareness of how to accumulate, prioritize, and adapt to
the ever-changing world of privacy, visit www.Sileo.com/training.
methods of truncation and redaction to mask your customers’ or
employees’ personal data.
‘‘C-level executives believe the cost savings from investing in a data
protection program of $16 million is substantially higher than the
extrapolated value of data protection spending of $3.7 million. This
suggests a very healthy ROI for data protection programs.’’5
In other words, the average ROI for data security spending, according
to the ‘‘Ponemon Business Case for Data Protection Report’’ is approxi-
mately 332 percent.6
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize, and Adapt 173

12
Defend Online
Identity: Social
Networking and
the Cloud
A
mong the latest and most potent tools that enable fraud are the vast col-
lections of personal information we accumulate, centralize, and share
with the world in Web 2.0 applications like Facebook, Twitter, MySpace,
LinkedIn, YouTube, Flickr, wikis, blogs, and other social networking sites.
Protecting your identity doesn’t stop at your computer; good privacy habits
must extend into the online world.
Defend Mind-set
Spy networks build dossiers on their subjects until they know enough to ma-
nipulate and exploit them. As explained in Chapter 10, ‘‘Monitor the Signs,’’ a
dossier is simply a comprehensive collection of personal and professional in-
formation on a particular person. When we share that same information on a
social network, even if it is only with ‘‘friends,’’ or when we insecurely store
that data on someone else’s servers (‘‘in the cloud’’), we have effectively done
the legwork for them.
There is no more appropriate place to apply the seven mind-sets of a spy
than when sharing information about yourself on the Internet. Unfortunately,
no matter how hard you try, you will never be fully in control of your informa-
tion nor be able to accurately verify how your information is being used after
it is stored and being managed on someone else’s servers.
Before you share information online about yourself or your workplace, ask
yourself this question: What would the consequences be if this information fell
into the hands of my worst enemy or competitor?

Facebook, and social networking sites in general, are in an awkward stage
of development, between infancy and maturity—capable in some ways, help-
less in others. Lurking on the darker side of sites like Facebook, LinkedIn,
and Twitter are scammers and identity thieves, who drool at the sight of what
to them is an unchecked data playground. In contrast, most social networkers
have become committed to all of the friendships they are creating and
renewing.
There is no denying that Facebook and other social networking sites have
a very luring appeal, as well as a great deal of functionality. From the comfort
of your own home you can engage in a thriving social life. You can look up
old friends, make new ones, build business relationships, and create a proﬁle
for yourself that highlights only your talents and adventures and leaves out all
your ﬂaws and troubles. If you are a businessperson, you can take the pulse of
your customers on these sites, and ﬁnd out what they want from your com-
pany. It is easy to understand why the number of Facebook users has skyrock-
eted from 1 million to more than 300 million worldwide in just over ﬁve
years.1 The speed of this tremendous social network growth helps explain
why safety on these sites is still so immature: they have grown too fast for
security technologies to keep up.
That said, Facebook isn’t the problem; Twitter isn’t the problem. True, they
and other sites like them share responsibility, but so do we. To some degree,
you and I are the problem.
Unfortunately, most people dive headﬁrst into this world of social con-
nectedness without thinking through the ramiﬁcations of divulging all their
personal information, which then travels at warp speed through cyberspace.
It’s like being a guest at a worldwide cocktail party, full of fascinating
new acquaintances and delicious new drinks. We can’t possibly resist the
cocktails because they are so fun and tempting—besides, everyone seems to
be having one.
The downside? No one talks about the information hangover that comes
from such overindulgence. No one likes to focus on the fact that what you
put on the Internet stays on the Internet. Worse, it also travels: it might show
up on the front page of the Wall Street Journal, on the desk of your local law
enforcement ofﬁcer, in the hands of a prospective employer, or in your super-
visor’s inbox. All the personal information you post on proﬁles—names,
birthdates, children’s and pet’s names, photographs, (all common password
reminders), addresses, opinions on your company, your friends, and your
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 175

enemies—is on display in a one-stop shop for identity thieves. There it is, all
in one neat little package, and all a scammer has to do to access it is become
your ‘‘friend.’’ Or, if you’ve left your proﬁle open to the outside world, the
thief doesn’t even need to be your friend.
Social Networking’s Secret Weapon: Trust
Social networks, to varying degrees, are based upon an underlying assump-
tion of trust among interlinked members. When the posts and links come
from friends or acquaintances, they appear to be more credible than a spam
e-mail from a stranger. You are connecting, or socializing, with people who
associate with a group whose members you tacitly trust in general—‘‘friends,’’
colleagues, classmates, and others. There is no way, however, to verify speciﬁ-
cally who in those networks you really can trust. On the whole, networks
consist of honest, genuine members; but as the adage goes, it takes only one
bad apple to spoil the bunch.
People are used to receiving spam and malicious messages in their e-mail,
but it is much less common on Facebook. They are lulled into a false sense
of security [and community] and act unsafely as a result.
—Graham Cluley, quoted in ‘‘5 Facebook Schemes
That Threaten Your Privacy,’’
J. R. Raphael, PC World, February, 25, 2009
When you get down to solutions, protecting your data depends upon
maintaining as much control of that information as possible, and verifying
who is using it and how it is being used. Social networking, in its current
state, does not provide either of those assurances. You never fully understand
who is on the other end of your digital communications.
Thirteen Hazards of Social Networking
The proﬁle shown in Figure 12.1 is an example from a seemingly simple but
highly complex social networking site. For the sake of this discussion, we’ll
assume this proﬁle exists on Facebook, the most popular social networking
site, with almost 350 million members at the time of writing. But it could be
176
Privacy Means Proﬁt

any social networking site. This proﬁle is what the outside world sees, but it’s
not what an identity thief sees; he or she sees a world of ﬁnancial opportunity.
In addition to using the data in your proﬁle to defraud you, other risks
exist in the social networking sphere, which have been adapted from mail,
e-mail, fax, phone, and ﬁnancial scams of all sorts. Not all of them constitute
identity theft, but all of them can result in fraud:
1. Proﬁle Building: An identity thief might already have certain pieces of
your proﬁle from another source (e.g., the last four digits of your Social
Security number that he or she obtained from your trash, a payroll
stub, a piece of mail, an e-mail). Your Facebook proﬁle provides the
missing pieces of information that enable him/her to ﬁll in the gaps
and take ﬁnancial advantage of your identity. In other cases, social net-
works allow businesses (including the social network itself) to build
proﬁles on whom you are connected to, which products you search,
and what marketing information you provide (through ‘‘quizzes,’’ con-
tests, and surveys).
2. Social Security Number Capture: Congress allows the last four digits of a
person’s SSN to be used as identiﬁcation on public documents. Know-
ing people’s date of birth and the city in which they were born are ef-
fective keys for ‘‘unlocking’’ the remaining ﬁve digits of their Social
Security numbers. In a study published in the journal Proceedings of
Name: John H. Smith
Birthday: 01/02/1973
Current City: New Orleans, LA
Hometown: Abilene, TX
Employer: XYZ Pharmaceuticals
E-mail: John.H.Smith@XYZPharma.com
Phone #: 555–555–5555
About Me: I have a cat named Samuel. I’ve lived in the French Quarter of
New Orleans for three years (love Mardi Gras) and currently work in research
and development for a pharmaceutical company. I’m interested in friendships,
relationships, and professional networking.
FIGURE 12.1
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 177

the National Academy of Sciences, researchers correctly predicted the
ﬁrst ﬁve digits of a person’s Social Security number about 40 percent of
the time, just by knowing his or her hometown and birthdate. Given
just those two pieces of information, they could predict all nine digits
of the individual’s SSN 8.5 percent of the time in fewer than 1,000
attempts.2 An article in Information Week presents the ﬁndings in terms
of real life implications:
The accuracy with which SSNs can be predicted in 100 attempts
varies, based on the availability of online data and on the sub-
ject’s date and place of birth, from 0.08% to over 10% for some
states. Such odds may not seem particularly dangerous, but an
attacker could easily use a computer program to guess and guess
again, over and over. With 1,000 attempts, a SSN becomes as easy
to crack as a 3-digit PIN. Among those born recently in small
states, the researchers were able to predict SSNs with 60% accu-
racy after 1,000 attempts.3
Once a thief has your Social Security number and a few additional
pieces of information, available from almost any social networking
proﬁle, obtaining credit or services in your name is relatively simple.
3. Password Hacking: By using something obvious such as your dog’s
name as your password for the e-mail address you list on a social net-
working site, you facilitate an e-mail account takeover. Most people
use only one or two passwords across all websites for each account
they have. The personal information you input on Facebook may be
the same that you use as your password or password reminder (moth-
er’s maiden name, birth city, pet’s name, favorite sports team, etc.).
4. Social Engineering: The best way to socially engineer people is to ﬁrst
obtain enough information about them to make it look as if they can
trust you. When someone is familiar with the most personal aspects of
our lives, we tend to let down our guard. Remember Dr. X from the
case study in Chapter 9, ‘‘Interrogate the Enemy’’? It is an excellent
example of how identity thieves use a social networking proﬁle as a
beachhead for launching a full-scale social engineering attack.
5. Impersonation: It is easy for a thief to become a virtual imposter of you
when you have provided personal information, photos, and pertinent
178
Privacy Means Proﬁt

facts about your life. Think about it: With all that identity in hand,
what’s to keep a thief from cloning your Facebook proﬁle on another
social networking site (like a class reunion site) and pretending to be
you? Then, once he or she has ‘‘become you’’ virtually, the imposter can
do anything he or she wants with/to your reputation. Social networks
are not the only places where dishonest people can obtain this infor-
mation; it’s just the easiest and most comprehensive.
6. Hijacked Proﬁles: Account takeover is relatively common in the world
of social networking. If, say, someone takes over one of your friend’s
accounts and then contacts you through the account to ask for money
in an emergency, you have little way of knowing who is at the other
end of the transaction. This is known as a ‘‘friend in distress’’ scam.
Even though you appear to be in control of the interaction, you are
not. Scammers have discovered that while your account might not be
directly connected to money, it does provide enough information to
enable them to steal from your friends.
7. Malware: Just as computer viruses and worms can be delivered
through an e-mail or a website, they can also be delivered via social
networking sites. Clicking on a link you don’t recognize (or, all too
often, one you do recognize but e-mailed by someone you can’t trust)
can lead to the download of software that gives hackers access into
your system. Take, for example, the Koobface virus (the word ‘‘Face-
book’’ rearranged), which infected PCs after users clicked on an entic-
ing link that appeared to be from a friend. Once your computer is
infected, the virus starts sending messages or wall postings to all of
your friends and contacts, directing them to ‘‘a scandalous video of a
mutual friend’’ or an equally enticing link. Anyone who clicks on the
link in turn infects their own machines, further propagating the virus.
8. Misleading Quizzes: When someone invites you to take a survey (‘‘10
Things Others Don’t Know About You,’’ ‘‘My Favorite Things,’’ to name
just two), beware! These are usually designed to harvest your data, not
share yourself with others. When they ask you the name of your child-
hood pet, or cities you’ve lived in, they are usually looking for clues to
your passwords.
9. Malicious Widgets: Most social networking sites allow you to install
third-party applications to increase the functionality of the site. Un-
fortunately, several of these applications were designed with evil
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 179

intentions, such as to harvest your personal information. Currently,
Facebook does not approve applications before making them available
on the site, so there is no general control over quality. Some time ago, a
widget named Secret Crush, which circulated widely, installed spyware
on the computers of the unsuspecting, rather than helping them con-
nect with virtual admirers, as promised.
10. Phishing: Most of us are by now familiar with phishing requests that
arrive in our e-mail asking us to click on a link to update some form of
personal information, and then deposit us at a website that looks like a
legitimate page but is used to collect our data for sale on the black
market. We are less prepared for similar requests that come via a wall
post or direct message inside Facebook or that seems to be from Face-
book itself, asking us to log in to accept its new privacy terms. When
we attempt to log in, the thieves use the information to take over our
account. By studying our proﬁles, cybercriminals can pretend to be
from genuine organizations with which we afﬁliate (because we have
listed those connections on our proﬁles), making phishing a custom-
ized endeavor.
11. False Communities: Anyone can form a group on a social networking
site. But how do you know that the group you just joined wasn’t built
for the purpose of harvesting your information and then marketing to
you or, worse, defrauding you?
12. Malvertisements: These are malicious advertisements designed to de-
fraud you, collect your precious data, or install malware on your system.
13. Breach: How does your social networking site protect your proﬁle and
posting data? Is it susceptible to bots such as ZombieSmiles that allow
hackers into your Facebook proﬁle through the site’s own client inter-
face? Every computer system is theoretically penetrable. Think about
what would happen if everything you’ve posted on Facebook were to
go public.
Almost any scheme that can be enacted via older forms of media (e-mail,
fax, phone, website, in-person) can be carried out via newer media (social
networks, blogs, instant messaging, text messaging, photo sharing, video
sharing, wikis, etc.). You also need to know that social networking sites don’t
exist just for the purpose of connecting individuals to like-minded people.
They are building proﬁles on you so as to sell your information to others and
180
Privacy Means Proﬁt

market products and services to you. Most important to keep in mind,
though, is the one factor that makes social networking sites a more effective
fraud tool than all the others: trust.
No matter how many privacy options the site offers . . . it’s hard to escape
the fact that information sharing is what makes Facebook users valuable to
marketers. And the company has a powerful ﬁnancial incentive to discour-
age its users from becoming too private.
—Martin Kaste, NPR News, January 4, 2010
Ten Steps to Safer Facebooking
The good news is that most social networks operate similarly, so once you
have learned how to protect your information on one site, such as Facebook,
it is easy to replicate on others (assuming they provide the same security and
privacy tools). To that end, in this section, I provide 10 steps to take on Face-
book to protect your identity, which you can then adapt to other social net-
work sites.
1. Limit access: If they are not your friends, don’t pretend. Don’t accept
friend requests unless you are absolutely sure you know who they are
and that you would associate with them in person. Yes, it’s ﬂattering to
have a lot of friends, but it also increases your exposure to dishonest
elements; it may also become overwhelming and annoying to receive
communications you don’t actually care to accept.
2. Limit exposure: Don’t join every social networking site, and don’t allow
just anyone to become your friend. Choose one or two sites that suit
your needs, are well respected, and show their respect for you by pro-
viding privacy controls to protect you and notifying you that they
exist. Then, share limited amounts of information. Be cautious about the
personal information that you post on any social networking site, as
there is every chance in the world that it could spread beyond your
original submission. It may be fun to think that an old ﬂame might
ﬁnd and contact you; it’s less fun to think about the scammers and
thieves now clammering to access that personal information as well.
Think twice about discussing your pet, or sharing your date of birth,
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 181

current home address, e-mail address, or cell phone number. Remem-
ber, what you share becomes public information. And if you also use
any of those details as part of a username, password, or password re-
minder, be doubly sure to keep it secure and off social networks.
3. Secure privacy settings: According to ‘‘The Privacy Jungle: On the Mar-
ket for Data Protection in Social Networks,’’ ‘‘Despite signing up being
considered legal acceptance of the Privacy Policy in every site studied,
only 5 of the 29 general-purpose sites required actively checking a box
to indicate acknowledgment of the privacy policy . . . [and] very few
sites encouraged users to read it.’’4 Facebook actually does a good job
of explaining how to lock down your privacy (and, by default, is start-
ing to require you to pay attention to privacy settings). To make it easy
for you, follow these steps:
a. Spend 10 minutes reading the Facebook Privacy Policy (or the pri-
vacy policy for the social network you are joining). Doing so is an
education in social networking privacy issues. Once you have read
through even one privacy policy, you will never again view your
private information in the same way. As you read, look for answers
to these questions: Does the site own any information that you pub-
lish there, including posts, photos, videos, and so on? If not, does
the site have unlimited rights to copy, publish, or reproduce it? (It
probably does, as this is what gives these sites license to publish this
information in the ﬁrst place.)
b. Visit the Facebook Privacy Help Page, which has a wealth of
information—if you take the time to read it. It explains how to
minimize all possible personal information leaks, which you should
have read about in the privacy policy. Once you understand how to
do this on one social networking site, it should become automatic
on most of the others.
c. Customize your Facebook Privacy Settings to suit your needs; spe-
ciﬁcally, you want to conﬁrm that only the information you want
shared is shared. This simple step will reduce your risk of identity
theft dramatically. Items to leave out: your real birthday, address, or
phone number.
4. Exclude unwanted outsiders: First, modify your privacy settings so that
search engines can’t index your posts and photos. Unless you want all
of your personal information cataloged by Google and other search
182
Privacy Means Proﬁt

engines, you have to restrict your proﬁle so that it is not visible to these
data-mining experts. At the better social networking sites, you can set
this in the privacy settings. Second, limit the number of add-on appli-
cations you allow to access your Facebook proﬁle. The more applica-
tions and, therefore, individuals that have access to your data, the
greater the chance it will be stolen.
5. Be wary of quizzes, surveys, and causes: Many Facebook quizzes and
causes are used to harvest your private information for marketing or
theft purposes. When you agree to take a quiz or join a cause, you are also
agreeing to give that program access to your account and your information.
A popular quiz currently making the rounds on social networking sites
was designed to assign you a ﬁcticious ‘‘adult movie’’ (i.e., porn star)
pseudonym. It asks for your very ﬁrst pet’s name and either the street
you grew up on or your mother’s maiden name, which happen to be
three of the most common password reminder questions. Again, it is in
your best interest to give Facebook and the applications on Facebook as
little information as possible. As security technology matures, these will
once again become safe and useful tools, but until then, protect yourself.
6. Click wisely: What may look like a status update or message from a
friend, with a cool new video attached, could be a phishing attack that
will lure you to a fake website and trick you into revealing personal
details and passwords. And as I’ve warned previously, if you receive a
post requesting money to help out a friend, do the smart thing and call
the friend in person. Thieves use ‘‘friend in distress’’ schemes to take
over someone else’s account and then make a plea for ﬁnancial help to
all the victim’s friends (who think that the post is coming from the vic-
tim). As with all matters of identity, verify the source.
7. Remember the ﬁrst law of social networking: Posting is public. Seemingly
obvious, this precaution is constantly overlooked. When you post (I
use the term ‘‘post’’ to encompass tweeting, blogging, commenting,
writing on a wall, publishing to a website, and certain types of texting,
instant messaging, etc.), you are making the information available to
everyone on the Internet (unless you somehow restrict access). Com-
pare this concept to in-person relationships, which are often much
more discreet.
For example, you wouldn’t tell your boss about the successful job
interview you just had at another company, whereas you probably
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 183

would tell your sister or best friend. But when you post this type of
item online, you are collapsing those layers of distinction, or access,
down to a one-dimensional view, where everyone has equal and identi-
cal access to your job news, whether you wish it or not. Denying, ig-
noring,
or
misunderstanding
this
basic
principle
of
social
networking—that posting is public and will be seen by others—is
what leads teenagers to populate MySpace with pictures and content
that they would never want their future employers, college admissions
ofﬁcers, or parents, to see. To date, it has already led to the derailing of
mergers, the scrapping of highly conﬁdential marketing strategies, and
the ﬁring of employees.
8. Learn the second law of social networking: Posting is permanent. When
you post, you are producing a permanent piece of digital DNA that, for
all practical purposes, never disappears. Your words, photos, and vid-
eos are forwarded, replicated, backed up, and quoted, hence become a
permanent part of the Internet ﬁrmament. In other words, before you
post, ask yourself if you’re willing to claim ownership of the piece for
the rest of your life. It is very hard to think a week in advance, let alone
20 years.
9. Know the third law of social networking: Posts are exploitable. Whether
they are used against you in a court of law (yes, posts have been treated
as admissible evidence), corrupted by identity thieves and social engi-
neers, or aggregated by companies that want to sell you something,
posts can and will be used in ways that the average user is not cur-
rently considering. Once again, ask yourself what your worst enemy,
your ex-spouse, or your chief competitor might do with the informa-
tion you are sharing.
Without question, social media and social networking are killer
apps, and are here for the long term; they fulﬁll too deep a need in our
lives and are too proﬁtable for businesses to write off as a passing
trend. But their efﬁciencies and beneﬁts are not reasons to ignore the
safety features that can help protect you against their just-as-real disad-
vantages. Neglecting to follow these steps is like refusing to wear a
seatbelt when you get in your car.
10. Maintain a healthy skepticism of social networking: Apply the hogwash
mind-set to every piece of information you share on the Internet,
topped with an additional dose of skepticism. Social networking sites
184
Privacy Means Proﬁt

are currently fraud hot spots, and being aware of this reality will take
you a long way toward preventing a data breach hangover.
E-mail
Protect your e-mail address just as you would your home address. As your
e-mail address becomes more public, you receive more spam (junk e-mail).
Eventually, one of the spam e-mails will be realistic enough to trick you into
entering information you shouldn’t. Approximately 94 percent of all e-mails
received are considered spam,5 and while most are just marketing offers, some
contain spyware, viruses, and malicious links that attack your computer and
allow access to your personal information. Here are a few points to remember:
 Set your e-mail privacy and spam controls high.
 Never reply to a spam e-mail, even to request being removed.
 Research links before you click, including clickable images.
 Don’t trust offers that seem too good to be true.
 Never enter personal or ﬁnancial information into pop-up windows.
Google
What started in 1997 as a research project and mission to organize the world’s
information has turned into the world’s largest search engine.6 Google has
given anyone with an Internet connection access to more information than
they ever imagined was possible. With such quick access to so much data,
you need to be careful what you put on the World Wide Web.
Have you ever searched your name in Google? You might be surprised to
ﬁnd information about yourself that you had no idea was out there—and that
you wish wasn’t. For example, a crime you committed in your younger years,
and that you were told had been expunged from your record, may still turn
up on Google. How is this possible? The most common way is through news-
paper articles that have been archived on the Internet and are easy to access
with a simple search. Remember, posts are permanent.
Here are a few privacy issues to keep in mind when it comes to Google:
Google’s Cookie and Toolbar: Each time you use the Google search engine,
the program automatically inserts a self-renewing cookie with a unique
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 185

ID number on your hard disk. As you surf websites, Google records
your activity and saves your searches. The advanced features on Goo-
gle’s new toolbar for Internet Explorer not only update automatically,
but also track which websites you visit. There are, however, ways to
change your Internet options to stop cookie tracking; to learn more
about this, visit www.google.com/support/accounts. Remember, nothing
you do on the Internet is private; it is all tracked, aggregated, analyzed,
sold, and used for a variety of purposes (many of them good).
Google Maps and Google Earth: Google acquired Keyhole in 2004 and, in
2005, turned what was called EarthViewer 3D into Google Earth.7 This
program has been criticized as constituting an invasion of privacy and a
threat to national security, as it gives any individual the ability not only
to look up your address but also to see an actual street view. Although a
few high-security locations have been pixilated out of Google Earth, this
program essentially gives individuals the ability to point and zoom in on
any location in the world. Combine this with ‘‘geo-tagging,’’ and you
have a disaster waiting to happen. An example of geo-tagging is when
you take a digital photo and it captures your physical location as part of
the photo data (iPhones do this automatically). Then, when you upload
it to, say, your Facebook or Flickr proﬁle, anyone in the world can map
where you are, versus where you live. You have just given a potential
thief the tools to track your movements while you’re on vacation. Even
simpler, websites like FourSquare.com and other location-based social
networking sites make your physical location available to everyone.
Google Mail: Google’s mail service, or Gmail, offers users free webmail.
Upon sign-up, most users notice right away the targeted ads that appear
on the right side and above their e-mail listing. According to Google’s
privacy page, ‘‘Google believes that showing relevant advertising offers
more value to users than displaying random pop-ups or untargeted ban-
ner ads. In Gmail, users will see text ads and links to related pages that
are relevant to the content of their messages. . . . No e-mail content or
other personally identiﬁable information is ever shared with adver-
tisers.’’8 Although Google may not be sharing the content of your e-mail
messages directly with advertisers, the messages are being scanned for
content, and populated with relevant advertising. Most people and busi-
nesses probably don’t consider an e-mail that has been scanned by
others to be truly private.
186
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Google Docs: Google Docs is an amazingly powerful platform that essen-
tially replaces Microsoft’s Ofﬁce on your computer. It has many advan-
tages: It is considerably less expensive, is always up to date, and is
available from any computer connected to the Internet. It also gives you
a level of freedom to work on your computer, share, and collaborate that
is not possible when your documents are available only on a physical
hard disk. Google Docs is rapidly being adopted as the ofﬁce suite of
choice by government agencies, educational systems, and businesses.
But as with any web-based application, there are privacy concerns.
For further details, read the Business Relevance box at the end of this
chapter.
Google’s proﬁt model is based on collecting, indexing, and sharing as
much information as possible about everyone who uses its suite of tools. Be-
cause Google dominates the search engine market, websites, businesses, and
individuals are highly dependent on it. This dependency, unfortunately,
makes us more likely to overlook privacy issues with the company (e.g.,
‘‘Gmail is so useful, I couldn’t live without it, even though I know I’m forego-
ing some of my privacy’’). I’m not suggesting that the solution is to stop using
Google, the Internet, or web-based tools. What I am saying is, be aware and
discriminating when you use these tools.
Action Item Checklist: Defend Online Identity
Know what information about you is on the World Wide Web.
Google your name, phone number, address, e-mail address, and any
other personal information you are curious about.
Leave out all these identity pieces when building your social net-
working proﬁle:
 Date of birth
 Address
 Phone number(s)
 Any password reminders you use (high school, city born, pet’s
name, etc.)
(continued )
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 187

Read and understand your privacy settings in Facebook, Twitter,
LinkedIn, MySpace, and other social networking sites; adjust them
to protect your identity information.
Vary your passwords online and make them more complex (see
Chapter 6, ‘‘Secure the Systems’’).
Be alert to and wary of ‘‘friends in distress’’ scams, posted links, and
other social engineering scams.
Only ‘‘friend’’ your actual friends
Understand both the beneﬁts and drawbacks of responding to
quizzes and surveys, and utilizing widgets, groups, and third-party
applications, before you add them.
Don’t forget that posts are permanent, public, and exploitable.
Protect your e-mail by:
 Setting your e-mail privacy and spam controls high.
 Never replying to a spam e-mail, even to request being removed.
 Researching links before you click, including clickable images.
 Not trusting offers that seem too good to be true.
 Never entering personal or ﬁnancial information into pop-up
windows.
Become knowledgeable about Google search engines, cookies, and
the Google toolbar. Extend what you learn to other search engines
and websites.
Read, understand, and adjust your privacy settings in Google,
Google Docs, Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo!, or other online accounts.
Business Relevance
Defending online identity is rapidly becoming the most overlooked pri-
vacy issue facing corporations big and small, even though it has the po-
tential to be the most devastating. The issue isn’t limited to employees
and executives using social networking in unauthorized or damaging
ways to the corporation. Social networking is, in fact, a subset of a larger
computing trend called ‘‘cloud computing.’’
(continued )
188
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Because the average individual is familiar with social networking, it is
an easy way to communicate the beneﬁts and drawbacks of cloud com-
puting with employees and executives. Simply put, when you teach your
employees to understand the risks of social networking, you are also
educating them on the fundamental risks associated with social network-
ing’s more complex relative: public cloud computing. Both computing
trends bring to the forefront a single question: Who controls your data?
To help answer that, read this succinct deﬁnition of cloud computing
provided by the World Privacy Forum:
For present purposes, cloud computing involves the sharing or stor-
age by users of their own information on remote servers owned or
operated by others and accessed through the Internet or other
connections.9
In other words, cloud computing is the outsourcing of your computer
processing, storage, data backup, or applications—your computer server
in the sky, protected or not. Here, I am referring to public cloud comput-
ing, where the services are available to the general public. Private cloud
computing, where a corporation builds an internal cloud that cannot be
accessed by the public, has different privacy and data security concerns.
Examples of prominent public cloud computing platforms
include:
Productivity Applications: Google Docs, Google Calendar, Gmail,
Yahoo!Mail, Hotmail
Off-site Backup and Sharing: iBackup, @Backup, Xdisk, DataProtector,
DropBox
Vertical Applications: Salesforce.com, Quickbooks Online
Social Networking: Facebook, LinkedIn, MySpace
Blogging: Wordpress, Typepad, Blogger
Micro-Blogging: Twitter, Facebook Status Updates, LinkedIn Status
Updates
Photo Sharing: Flickr, Photobucket, Picasa, SmugMug, Yahoo! Photos,
Facebook
Video Sharing: YouTube, 12Seconds, Viddler, Facebook
(continued )
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 189

The advantages of cloud computing are signiﬁcant:
 Cost. You get all the power of an application developed for a large
corporation at a small fraction of the cost. You pay only for what you
use.
 Scalability. Adding users is simple, even when they are in multiple
locations.
 Automation. Software upgrades, hardware maintenance, and con-
nectivity issues are handled by the cloud service, lightening the bur-
den on your technical staff.
 Reliability. Computing in the cloud increases your service levels to
that of a corporation, meaning less downtime for system or network
issues.
 Mobility. Data available in the cloud is generally accessible from
anywhere you have an Internet connection and a web browser.
 Redundancy. Your data is generally backed up by the cloud service
provider, providing you off-site data redundancy should problems
arise.
 Collaboration. Sharing data and tracking changes is easy when it is
centralized and accessible from any Internet connection.
The disadvantages of cloud computing have not yet been fully cata-
loged or understood, but a list of data privacy concerns assembled by
the World Privacy Forum include:
 Ownership. In many cases, it is unclear who owns the data stored
on external servers. Many cloud service providers do not address
this issue. Others claim ownership of the data when you agree to
use their services (but they bury this distinction in legalese). Still
others maintain the right to copy, use, change, publish, display,
distribute, and share with afﬁliates or the outside world what you
have placed in the cloud, again burying the details in a legal con-
tract that the average user never reads (have you read Facebook’s
or Google Docs’ privacy policy?). In other words, you no longer
have strict control over what happens to your data. Data owner-
ship becomes even more obscure when the cloud provider:
(continued )
190
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Is a blind subsidiary of a competitor, a government agency, a foreign
agency, or an Internet news service.
 Is sold to another company (along with your data).
 Goes bankrupt (and its assets—your data—are sold for transfer of
assets).
 Merges with or is acquired by another company (adopting the new
company’s terms of service).
 Modiﬁes its terms of service to its advantage (which you agree to
simply by visiting the website).
 Terminates your contract (without providing you a copy of your data).
From a personal standpoint, photos of your children could legally
end up in a national advertising campaign without your consent (the
provider owns the photo or, at least, the rights to the photo). From a
corporate standpoint, the secret recipe or intellectual property you
detail in a Word document backed up on a cloud-based storage site
is no longer clearly your sole property.
For example, a trade secret shared with a cloud provider may
lose some of its legal protections. When a person stores infor-
mation with a third party (including a cloud computing pro-
vider), the information may have fewer or weaker privacy
protections than when the information remains only in the
possession of the person. Government agencies and private
litigants may be able to obtain information from a third party
more easily than from the original owner or creator of the
content.10
The World Privacy Forum also states:
The more activity that a user conducts in the cloud, the greater
the risk of third-party disclosure. Consider the user who
employs a cloud provider to provide a complete backup for the
user’s hard disk. The provider would, in essence, maintain a full
record of the user’s computer activities. Anyone seeking access
from the provider might obtain all of the user’s records. For
(continued )
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 191

(continued )
example, in a divorce, a lawyer for one party might seek useful
information such as documents, videos, photographs, e-mail,
and other data from the other party’s cloud provider.11
 Disclosure. Regardless of ownership, what data can the person or
business operating the server on which your data is stored disclose
to others (third-party vendors, government agencies, suing parties,
competitors) without your consent or notice?
For information that would have otherwise been in the sole
possession of a user, the transfer of the information to a cloud
provider creates new opportunities for the information to end
up in government hands without notice to the user and with-
out the user having an opportunity to object. For many users,
the loss of notice of a government demand for the data is a
signiﬁcant reduction in rights.12
A private litigant or other party might seek records from a
cloud provider rather than directly from a user because the
cloud provider would not have the same motivation as the
user to resist a subpoena or other demand.13
 Location. When you store data in the cloud, you cannot be certain
of where your data lives. It could be stored in other countries or,
more likely, in multiple locations.
Any information stored in the cloud eventually ends up on a
physical machine owned by a particular company or a person
located in a speciﬁc country. That stored information may be
subject to the laws of the country where the physical machine
is located. For example, personal information that ends up
maintained by a cloud provider in a European Union Member
State could be subject permanently to European Union Privacy
laws. . . . Information in the cloud may have more than one
legal
location
at
the
same
time,
with
differing
legal
consequences.14
192
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Compliance. Certain professions (doctors, lawyers, clergy, counsel-
ors, accountants) require that client data be handled in a certain way.
For example, health record privacy laws may require a formal
agreement before any sharing of records is lawful. Other pri-
vacy laws may ﬂatly prohibit personal information sharing by
some corporate or institutional users. Professional secrecy obli-
gations, such as those imposed on lawyers, may not allow
the sharing of client information. Sharing information with a
cloud provider may undermine legally recognized evidentiary
privileges.15
Customers of tax preparers enjoy some statutory and regula-
tory privacy protections. These customer protections in turn
limit the ability of a tax preparer to use a cloud provider.16
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking and the Cloud 193


13
Protect Mobile Data:
Laptop Responsibility
W
hy, you might wonder, does the subject of protecting laptop computers
and mobile data devices warrant an entire chapter when I’ve already
discussed laptop protection throughout the book? Part of the answer is
proﬁt-driven: Laptops are currently at the bull’s-eye of targeting the enemy
and, therefore, protecting your bottom line. No single information asset is
targeted so consistently by thieves, compromised so frequently inside corpo-
rations, or reported on more vociferously by the media. Keeping customer
records, employee data, and proprietary intellectual capital safe and secure is
essential to running a proﬁtable company. In other words, a data breach can
easily destroy customer trust, stock value, brand reputation, and, on occa-
sion, the business itself.
The second part of the answer lies in the fact that most of us can empathize
with the experience of having a laptop stolen. Just the thought of your laptop
being stolen, loaded with mission-critical and sensitive personal information,
is enough to cause night terrors. Moreover, it turns out, most of us are very
emotionally attached to our laptops; consequently, even the prospect of hav-
ing them compromised (dare I say, violated?) elicits a protective response.
Because we treat laptops almost like an extended member of our families
(we bring them on vacation, take them in for checkups, upgrade their capa-
bilities, occasionally spend more time with them than our children), laptops
provide an excellent shortcut to stimulate data responsibility. If we fail to protect
them properly, they may become a major threat to the safety of important
personal and professional information. Therefore, the laptop is an excellent

privacy-training tool. Protecting this single repository of identity requires us
to utilize all seven mind-sets plus the skills discussed in Chapter 11, ‘‘Deploy
Targeting Strategies.’’
The laptop’s greatest strength is its mobility; it’s also its greatest weakness.
According to the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, the records of 250 million
U.S. residents have been exposed to identity theft due to security breaches
since 2005.1 A 2009 study conducted by the Ponemon Institute sets the aver-
age cost per data breach at $6.75 million per reporting company; and the theft
of a laptop or mobile data device accounts for 36 percent of reported data
breaches.2 I repeat: Laptops are at the bull’s-eye of targeting the enemy (see
Figure 13.1).
Employees and executives alike are the primary sources of data breach.
While technology often enables the breach, it is generally a poor data-
handling decision made by a company employee that is ultimately the root
cause.
FIGURE 13.1
Sources of Greatest Risk to Sensitive Data
Source: ‘‘Fourth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, January 2009.
Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility 195

It is our responsibility as employees, executives, and individuals to under-
stand the steps we can take to protect our mobile data devices, then take
them. I deﬁne a mobile data device as any piece of equipment or medium
that allows you to electronically store quantities of personal identiﬁcation in-
formation (name, address, phone number(s), Social Security number, pass-
words, account numbers, important and conﬁdential e-mails, etc.). Laptop
computers, or laptops, are the most common of these devices to be breached,
since their hard drives often carry vast quantities of identity data. (Note: I use
the term ‘‘laptop’’ in this chapter to signify all the various mobile computing
devices that currently exist, as well as new ones that are constantly being in-
troduced, like the iPad.) Smart phones (e.g., BlackBerry, iPhone), PDAs (e.g.,
Palm), USB drives, CDs, DVDs, tape drives, and ordinary cell phones also
qualify as mobile data devices.
The rest of this chapter is made up of a series of comprehensive
checklists of your responsibilities regarding mobile data devices (all of
which, for convenience here, I refer to as ‘‘laptops’’) and the correspond-
ing mind-sets (shown in italics) to apply in protecting them. Although it
is written from the perspective of the person responsible for the laptop, it
can also serve as a framework for designing a companywide laptop pri-
vacy policy.
Mobile Data Device Responsibilities
and Best Practices
Before employees can be expected to protect their laptops, the executive team
must:
 Deﬁne what is at risk and the potential problems and consequences the
business faces by mobilizing data.
 Motivate staff at all levels to follow security best practices.
 Engage your employees and executives in a Culture of Privacy by mak-
ing an emotional connection to the cause (i.e., make it personal), utiliz-
ing a common language of understanding (e.g., think like a spy), and
leading by example.
 Prioritize and adapt the following suggestions to maximize both your
short- and long-term plans for accumulating mobile security.
196
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Before you save sensitive data to the mobile device, it is your responsibility
to:
 Verify acceptable use and alternative options:
 Determine if your organization allows you to remove the data in ques-
tion from the ofﬁce in the ﬁrst place. Do you have permission to save
the desired database, Excel ﬁle, Word document, customer list,
employee record, intellectual capital, ﬁnancial statement, or market-
ing strategy, on your laptop, thumb drive, or other mobile device?
 Decide if it is absolutely necessary to remove the ﬁle(s) from the more
tightly controlled and secure environment of the ofﬁce. In many of the
major cases of reported data breach, the data stored on the mobile de-
vice did not actually need to be there in the ﬁrst place.
 Verify that you have been authorized by your supervisor to place a
copy of the data on your device. When in doubt, check with your
manager, supervisor, or privacy ofﬁcer to determine the correct course
of action.
 Exhaust lower-risk options for accessing the data ﬁrst. In many cases,
it is possible to utilize a secure remote connection to access the data
so that it never leaves the company premises. You lower your personal
liability when you access the data through centralized, highly secure
methods.
As you save sensitive data to the device, it is your responsibility to:
 Control exposure and eliminate unnecessary transport:
 Minimize the number of records you transfer. If you don’t need the
entire contact database, take only the records that you need. In case
of a breach, this minimizes exposure.
 Minimize the corresponding ﬁelds for each record transferred. If you
need only names and phone numbers, don’t transfer additional ac-
count information such as addresses, account numbers, and so on.
 Consider ‘‘de-identifying’’ the data, to render it anonymous. For exam-
ple, if you track medical records using a Social Security number but
are transferring the data to do a high-level analysis of overall proﬁt-
ability, there is no need to include the SSNs in your transfer. Exclude
that column from the data you take with you.
Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility 197

Before you leave the ofﬁce, it is your responsibility to:
 Verify that your system is digitally secure:
 Attempt to encrypt the individual data ﬁle. In addition to encrypting the
data device itself, it is possible in many software programs to encrypt
the individual data ﬁle for an added layer of protection. This will pro-
tect the individual sensitive ﬁles with a separate, strong password.
 Make sure your data device storage unit (e.g., hard drive, SIM card,
SD memory card) has been encrypted. This will most often be the re-
sponsibility of your IT department, but it is your responsibility to ver-
ify that they have done their job.
 Protect your device with a strong password that utilizes letters, num-
bers, symbols, and upper/lowercase characters, where possible. Keep
your passwords separate from the computer itself.
 Ensure that you have the proper tools to connect to a wireless net-
work securely, as necessary.
Once you have left the ofﬁce, it is your responsibility to:
 Defend your online communications:
 Utilize a secure wireless Internet connection only (e.g., in airports,
hotels, coffee shops, etc.). Make sure your IT department has enabled
WPA2 wireless encryption on your wireless device and that you are
utilizing a wireless access provider with strong encryption. See Chap-
ter 6, ‘‘Secure the Systems,’’ for more details. USB wireless sticks,
which are the equivalent of adding a cell phone to your computer,
tend to be more secure than the average wireless network. For a re-
view of these devices, visit www.Sileo.com/productreviews.
 Run a secure ﬁrewall between your laptop and your connection to the
Internet.
 Utilize SSL-encrypted e-mail or a proprietary e-mail encryption sys-
tem. E-mail sensitive data only when absolutely necessary.
 Lock your laptop:
 Physically secure (lock down) the device when in transit (e.g., in your
car, at the airport, in your hotel room). Other attendees at a confer-
ence could be trustworthy or they could be foreign competitors look-
ing for insider secrets.
198
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Utilize the safe in your hotel room. It’s not a perfectly ‘‘safe’’safe, but it
is far better than the alternative.
 If there is no safe in your hotel room, hang the ‘‘Do Not Disturb’’ sign
on your door and notify housekeeping that you will not be leaving the
room and don’t want to be bothered. This tends to keep extraneous
people out of your room (though I have still had hotel employees ac-
cess my room after I requested they not—the bed was made when I
returned).
 Keep the laptop on you. Notice I say ‘‘on,’’ not ‘‘with.’’ While keeping it
with you might seem safe, it rarely is. We tend to set things down for
‘‘just a minute,’’ and that is all it takes for theft to happen. If you have
it with you, have it on you. Utilize a backpack, messenger bag, or
other carrying case that you can physically wear and that encourages
you to keep it on your person until you reach your destination.
 Use one of the various locking and alarm devices that exist for laptops
and mobile computing devices. They are not perfect, but they elimi-
nate easy theft and might encourage a criminal to move on to an easier
target. To learn more about these products, visit www.Sileo.com/
productreviews.
 Monitor your laptop:
 Especially as you go through security at an airport, you must keep an
eye on your laptop. Security checkpoints are a mass confusion of what
belongs to whom. Don’t put your laptop on the X-ray belt until you
are ready to walk through the metal detector. Then follow it visually
until you get to the other side of the X-ray machine. Laptops fre-
quently disappear before their owners have made it through security.
 Don’t put your laptop down as you check in at the airport or your
hotel or buy a cup of coffee. It takes only a fraction of a second to
steal. Likewise, don’t leave it in a conference or meeting room while
you step out for a cup of coffee.
 Utilize one of the LoJack-type software programs (or MobileMe for
Apple Macbooks) to track your stolen computer once it connects to
the Internet. Some of these security devices will also allow you to
erase your hard drive remotely.
When you no longer need the sensitive data on your device, it is your re-
sponsibility to:
Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility 199

 Destroy the data:
 Remove and electronically destroy all remnants of the sensitive ﬁles
on your device (e.g., digital shredding, low-level formatting, and, oc-
casionally, as in the case of DVDs, CDs, and tape backups, complete
physical destruction). If this task falls under the responsibility of your
IT department, it is your responsibility to make sure, to the best of
your ability, that they do their job.
If your laptop has been stolen, it is your responsibility to:
 Report it to the local authorities.
 Report it to your company (if it is a company laptop or mobile device).
Most likely, data breach notiﬁcation laws will dictate how your company
will respond to the loss of information.
 Alert anyone who might be affected. If it is your personal laptop, it is
your responsibility to alert anyone whose data was stored on your com-
puter. At the business level, those decisions should be made in conjunc-
tion with legal counsel.
 Take the proper precautions, if possible, to track your laptop or re-
motely erase the hard drive and mobile information (iPhone, Black-
Berry), if you have software installed that allows you to do so.
Utilizing a laptop comes with a great deal of responsibility, as does han-
dling any type of sensitive information. In an information economy that re-
volves around technology, our most valuable asset is the information we
collect, store, transmit, and protect every day. As executives or employees of
our respective organizations, not only is it proﬁtable for us to protect sensi-
tive information, it’s also the right thing to do.
Action Item Checklist: Protect Mobile Data
Know what is at risk on your mobile data devices.
Verify acceptable use of your mobile data devices with your
company.
200
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Control exposure and eliminate unnecessary transport of your mo-
bile data devices.
Verify that all of your systems are digitally secure:
 Encrypt individual data ﬁles, as well as your hard drive, SIM card,
and SD memory card.
 Protect laptops and mobile devices with security software and
strong passwords.
Defend your online communications:
 Utilize a secure wireless Internet connection.
 Run a secure ﬁrewall.
 Utilize SSL-encrypted e-mail and e-mail sensitive data only when
absolutely necessary.
Physically secure your mobile device while in transit:
 When traveling, utilize the hotel room safe to store your mobile
devices.
 Use a backpack or other carrying case to keep your mobile devices
physically on you.
 Consider adding a locking or alarm device to your laptop and mo-
bile computing devices.
 When going through security at the airport, don’t put your laptop
on the X-ray belt until you are ready to walk through the metal
detector, so that you can keep an eye on it until you reach the
other side.
Utilize a LoJack-type software program to track your laptop if it is
stolen.
Destroy any sensitive ﬁles that you keep electronically after you are
done using them.
Take the proper recovery steps if your laptop or mobile device has
been stolen.
 Report it to local authorities.
 Report it to your company.
 Alert anyone who may be affected.
 Track your laptop remotely, if possible.
Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility 201

Business Relevance
I have spent most of this book attempting to build a bridge between the
worlds of personal data protection (to avoid identity theft) and profes-
sional privacy (to minimize data breach). The recurring theme is simple:
good personal data habits instilled at a human level lead to good data
privacy habits at the organizational level. The laptop is an ideal example
of where these two worlds meet, and how to connect them. Mobile
computing has become so powerful and ﬂexible—used one moment to
administer a million-dollar corporate website from the beach, the next to
post vacation photos on your Facebook wall—that effectively protecting
the information on the device requires the application of every mind-set
explored in this book. And that’s what makes the laptop an ideal training
vehicle: you use it at home, at work, and on the road. It contains personal
information as well as company data, and it is quite possibly the single
most proﬁtable target for thieves. My best advice is to use it as a training
tool, as it appeals to both the individual and business sides of our
personalities. If you can educate your staff to avoid data theft from a lap-
top, or at least minimize the collateral damage, you are well on your way
to building a Culture of Privacy.
202
Privacy Means Proﬁt

14
Travel with Care:
Business Trips
and Vacations
T
raveling safely and preventing data theft go hand in hand. Because we
carry so much identity with us when we travel and are much less orga-
nized when on the road, and because thieves target travelers, the likelihood
of identity theft or data breach increases drastically while we’re on vacation
or traveling for business.
A Dream Vacation Turns into a Nightmare
You are planning the vacation of your dreams on the back end of a business
trip to Europe. You can almost taste the pasta Bolognese you read about at
that out-of-the-way trattoria halfway down an ancient blind alley in Tuscany.
But there’s one area you overlooked that can turn that long-anticipated
adventure into a nightmare: The potential theft of your most-valuable
travel companion—your identity.
Fast-forward: You found the trattoria, and have savored the last bite of
pasta, drained your pitcher of vino rosso, and happily presented your debit
card to the waiter. He looks concerned as he walks back to your table to
tell you that your card has been declined. It doesn’t take long to discover
that a thief has emptied your bank account and there is nothing left to pay
for your dream vacation. Likewise, you discover, your credit cards are
useless, frozen tight due to maxed-out credit limits. Hopefully, you have a
backup plan (cash) to pay for the meal. Hopefully, the thief hasn’t also
(continued )

Travel is where the worlds of personal and corporate data loss commonly
overlap, and so can be difﬁcult to distinguish. Passports can be stolen in the
same moment as customer ﬁles or laptop computers. The time you spend
recovering identity on a business trip can translate into thousands of dollars
for your company. The point is, traveling with care beneﬁts individuals and
businesses alike. Preparing wisely to protect identity can save you money,
and prevent headaches, while on your trip.
Before You Leave Home
Follow these three guidelines before you walk out the door (the associated
mind-sets are enclosed in parentheses):
1. Travel Light (Eliminate)
Simplify and minimize what you bring with you. Take only those identity
items that are absolutely necessary. If possible, leave the following items be-
hind when you travel:
 Laptops. As discussed in Chapter 13, ‘‘Protect Mobile Data,’’ the safest
place for your laptop while traveling is locked up at work or home. Un-
fortunately, this is not practical for most business travelers; it is, how-
ever, very practical on vacations. If you must have access to your e-mail,
use your iPhone or BlackBerry.
 Client Files. Take with you only those parts of client ﬁles that are neces-
sary. Don’t automatically grab the entire ﬁle for any one project or client;
(continued )
stolen your passport and isn’t travelling under your identity with com-
plete immunity.
But the news only worsens when you get back to your hotel room. You
haven’t thought much about your laptop computer since you completed
your business obligations days ago and became preoccupied with explor-
ing. Now you realize your laptop is missing, and with it, thousands of
pieces of customer identity. Your vacation is over, and your carelessness
has caused not only your pain but someone else’s as well. You’ll be lucky
to save your job.
204
Privacy Means Proﬁt

by doing so you are increasing exponentially the amount of data that can
be stolen.
 Company Data. Leave ﬁnancials, trade secrets, intellectual capital, cus-
tomer lists, employee records, organization charts, and sales and mar-
keting strategies in the ofﬁce whenever possible. These may be in the
form of paper documents, USB thumb drives, CDs, DVDs, SD cards, or
other media. If this data is highly sensitive, you are safer storing it on a
well-encrypted laptop.
 Checks and Checkbooks. Resist the temptation to carry checks; or take
only one or two for an emergency, and carry them with your cash in your
money belt. Checking account takeover is one of the simplest crimes to
commit and one of the most devastating types of ﬁnancial fraud from
which to recover. The easy alternative? Use a credit card or cash.
 Debit Cards. You can reduce your vulnerability to having your checking
account emptied while on vacation by leaving all debit cards (check
cards) at home. Don’t be lulled into thinking that debit/ATM cards are
safe just because they require a PIN or password. In fact, the only time a
PIN is needed to use the card is when it is being used at an ATM. PINs
are often not required when used at a store as a debit or credit card. Be
aware, too, that debit cards don’t have the same ﬁnancial fraud protec-
tions as most credit cards. The solution? Ask your bank for an ATM-
only debit card (you can’t use it in stores, only at cash machines) and
make sure your password isn’t overseen when you are at an ATM. Re-
gardless, it is best to use a credit card or cash. The exception to this is
when you are traveling in a foreign country and your debit card is the
most economical method of obtaining cash from an ATM.
 Extra Credit Cards. Every piece of identity you take with you represents
another source of potential fraud to which you are exposed. If you are trav-
eling with another adult, I recommend that you each take one credit card
(from two separate credit card companies). Notify your credit card com-
pany of the dates and places where you are traveling, so that it doesn’t shut
down your card when charges are made out of town. Also, make sure you
have a large enough credit line to cover your purchases while traveling.
 Social Security Cards and Other Identity Documents. You do not need your
Social Security card while traveling (or at any time other than your ﬁrst
day of work with a new employer), so leave it locked up at home. Leave
birth certiﬁcates, passports (unless travelling internationally), library
Travel with Care: Business Trips and Vacations 205

cards, receipts, and so on at home while you travel. The rule of thumb is:
Leave anything you don’t absolutely need locked away at home (Lock). If
you can travel with only a credit card, driver’s license, and health insur-
ance card (as long as it doesn’t have your SSN on it), you will be much
safer.
 Bills. Don’t take bills to pay with you while traveling. Instead, set up
electronic bill pay through your bank, or pay these bills before you
leave town.
2. Protect Your Home (Accumulate)
There are a few layers of protection to implement before leaving town to help
ensure that your home, valuables, and other important belongings will be safe
while you are away. Identity theft is one of the most common reasons burglar-
ies are committed while people are away from home.
 Hold newspapers and mail (Eliminate). Your mailbox is an identity bo-
nanza. Before you leave, place a ‘‘postal hold’’ on your mail so that your
mailbox isn’t vulnerable while you are gone. Arrange with your post of-
ﬁce that only you (or your spouse) can pick up your mail. Don’t have it
‘‘mass-delivered’’ the day after you return, as this puts everything at risk
all at once. Instead, pick it up at the post ofﬁce when you return to town.
 Make it look like you are home when you’re not (Defend). Leave a light on
here or there in the house, or put a main light on a timer, set to turn on
at the same time every day. Ask a neighbor to remove any ﬂiers that may
accumulate at the front door, and bring in trash cans from the street.
This will give the impression that you are home even when you are
away for weeks at a time.
 Lock all entry points (Lock). Lock all windows and doors securely. Fix
any broken or damaged locks before you leave, and cover up any doggie
doors or other entry points into your home. Lock your identity docu-
ments and other valuables in a bolted-down ﬁre safe or safe room.
 Photocopy the contents of your wallet (Monitor). This includes your pass-
port if you are traveling internationally. Give one copy to a trusted friend
or relative while you are away so that he or she can send you the neces-
sary information in an emergency. Bring another copy with you, and
carry it in a secure place while you travel. This simple step will save you
hours of frustration if anything is lost or stolen.
206
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Don’t publicize your trip on social networking sites (Defend). Don’t post an
‘‘Away on Vacation’’ note on your Facebook, MySpace, or Twitter pages,
or on any other social networking site. Broadcasting this information is
tantamount to inviting criminals to use that information while you are
away. As a general rule, you should think twice about any information
you share on social networking sites. Suspend your account on location-
based social networking sites like FourSquare.com that alert thieves that
you are traveling.
3. Protect Your Ofﬁce (Accumulate)
Your home isn’t the only target of theft while you are away traveling. You need
to take similar steps before leaving your ofﬁce.
 Physically lock up your computer (Lock). Physically limiting access to
your computer while you are away is the easiest and best way to protect
your system and system-stored passwords.
 Clean your desk (Eliminate). Remove all data, physical and digital, from
your desk. Place it in a locking ﬁling cabinet or other secure place.
 Lock your ofﬁce door (Lock). Don’t overlook this simple, very effective
step. If you think someone might need access into the ofﬁce while you
are gone, leave a copy of the key with someone you trust completely.
Make that person the gatekeeper to your ofﬁce while you are away.
During Travel
Three guidelines apply while you’re on the road, too.
1. Lock It Up (Lock and Secure)
I can’t stress enough the importance of using the in-room safes that are now
features of most hotel rooms. Hanging a ‘‘Do Not Disturb’’ sign on the door-
knob is no guarantee that the hotel staff will not enter the room. Always use
the in-room safe to store anything of value. They are simple to use and drasti-
cally increase traveling safety. Also, make sure all of your electronic devices
are password-protected. Lock up the following items:
 Laptop Computers (Lock and Secure): Carry your laptop with you only
when absolutely necessary. The rest of the time, place your laptop (or
Travel with Care: Business Trips and Vacations 207

just the hard drive if your laptop is too big) in the safe when you aren’t
using it. Before using your laptop to access online banking or other
password-protected services from Wi-Fi networks, verify that the Wi-Fi
hot spots are secure.
 Client Files (Eliminate and Lock): Unless it is absolutely necessary, don’t
travel with any client ﬁles. They might not seem particularly sensitive
until they go missing and a client sues your company. Take only those
individual documents that you will need and leave the rest locked up in
your ofﬁce.
 Public-Access Internet Facilities (Secure): If you plan to use a public com-
puter in hotel business centers or cybercafes, never access any sensitive
information on them. Keylogging software can track your keystrokes,
which lets thieves follow everything you are doing.
 Cell Phones (Lock): When you go down to a conference meeting or off to
the pool, store your cell phone in the safe, along with your laptop, pass-
port, jewelry, extra cash, iPod, thumb drive, and other valuables.
 Passports (Lock): Unless you are traveling in a country where you are
required to keep your passport with you at all times, lock it up in the
safe the entire time you are staying at the hotel.
 Other Identity Documents (Lock): Store your plane tickets, receipts, and
any other identity documents (birth certiﬁcates, extra credit cards, visa,
etc.) in the safe when not in use.
2. Carry Your Belongings Safely
When you cannot keep your important documents, cash, credit cards, and
passports in a secure safe, carry them with you in a secure way.
 Carry a travel pouch (Lock): Put all of your identity documents (pass-
port, credit card, driver’s license, tickets, etc.) in a travel pouch that ﬁts
around your neck or your waist (and inside your clothing), when they
are not locked in a safe. This is a minor inconvenience, yes, but it lowers
the risk of both pickpocketing and unintentional misplacement. Thieves
have unbelievably nimble ﬁngers, which they can slip into your pocket
or purse undetected, so just before you leave your hotel room (especially
in cities), verify that your money pouch is securely fastened around your
waist or neck, under your clothes. Also, keep some change or a small
208
Privacy Means Proﬁt

amount of cash in a different and easily accessible inner pocket. You
don’t want to reveal where you keep your travel pouch when paying for
a $5 train ticket in a public area.
 Use a backpack (Lock): When possible, carry laptops and other large
identity-storing items in a backpack that stays zipped and on your back
at all times. It is easy to set down a purse, book bag, or piece of luggage
while at a ticket counter or retail store. Backpacks, on the other hand,
are easy to keep on our person at all times, and are harder to break into
without alerting the wearer. When traveling in a very crowded city, or on
a subway, or at a train station or airport, consider wearing your back-
pack in front of you instead of on your back.
 Don’t lose sight of your credit cards (Monitor): When paying with a credit
card in a restaurant or store, try to keep your eye on the card. If the server
removes it from sight, he or she may be able to create a ‘‘clone’’ by using a
portable card skimmer that will copy the information from the card’s mag-
netic strip. Many restaurants are now able to process the card at your ta-
ble; or take it to the register, where you can observe the transaction.
3. Bank Safely (Monitor)
Use your ATM-only card (one that requires a PIN and does not contain a Visa
or MasterCard logo) at cash machines located in banks or credit unions and
that are in well-lit areas. Be sure to examine the ATM machine carefully for
signs of tampering. Be on the lookout for anything that looks suspicious.
Save all transaction receipts in an envelope for that purpose, to make it easy
to reconcile your bank statement when you arrive home.
Upon Returning Home
As soon as possible after you return home, take these protective measures:
 Monitor your accounts (Monitor): While traveling, and as soon as possible
after you return from your trip, pay special attention to your account state-
ments, to make sure that nothing out of the ordinary appears. If a credit card
number or bank account number was stolen during your trip, this is how
you will catch it early and keep it from becoming a waking nightmare. Con-
tact your provider and alert the representative to the breach immediately.
Travel with Care: Business Trips and Vacations 209

 Rotate your account numbers (Eliminate): If you suspect your identity
might have been compromised (e.g., your credit card number stolen)
while you were traveling, call your ﬁnancial institution and ask to be
issued a new card. This makes the old number obsolete, should anyone
try to use it in the future.
 Pick up your mail (Eliminate): Don’t leave your mail in anyone else’s
hands any longer than necessary. Don’t forget to shred any mail that you
don’t need to keep.
 Retrieve copies of identity documents (Monitor): Retrieve any copies of
your credit cards, driver’s license, and passport that you gave to a trusted
friend or relative, and shred them. There is no reason to keep those extra
copies once you have returned home safely from your trip.
Like physical safety, data safety has become a necessary part of preparing
to travel. By spending a few minutes protecting private information before,
during, and after your travels, you will be sure to fully enjoy your time away.
Action Item Checklist: Travel with Care
Travel light; simplify and minimize what you bring with you.
Take precautions to protect your home.
Take precautions to protect your ofﬁce.
Travel with a copy of your identity documents, and give a copy to a
trusted friend.
While traveling, securely lock up client ﬁles, laptops, cell phones,
passports, and other identity documents.
Carry a travel pouch, use a backpack, and keep an eye on your credit
cards while out of your hands when traveling.
Don’t announce you are traveling on social networking sites.
Bank safely, using well-lit ATMs in bank or credit union buildings.
When you return home, monitor your bank accounts, and possibly
rotate your account numbers.
Pick up your mail as soon as possible; likewise, retrieve any copies of
identity documents that you left with friends.
210
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Business Relevance
All of the suggestions on the previous page apply equally to individuals
traveling on vacation and businesspeople traveling for work. The difﬁculty
for corporations is that people are naturally inclined to protect their own
possessions (e.g., home, valuables, identity), but less willing to take the
necessary extra steps when it comes to sensitive company information
(which generally belongs to someone else). In other words, it is impera-
tive that you ﬁnd a way to make your executives and employees take
ownership for company data.
In many ways, this requires the same skills that managers use to
establish buy-in to sales targets, quarterly numbers, customer retention
and so on. Building a Culture of Privacy requires a system of assigning
responsibility, monitoring accountability, rewarding success and minimiz-
ing mistakes. Incorporating a reward/training program for compliance/
non-compliance reinforces the mission critical nature of data safety in a
positive manner.
For example, performing a periodic laptop spot check on an employ-
ee’s computer prior to their travels accomplishes several things. First, it
sends a deﬁnitive message that privacy matters to the organization. If the
spot check turns out favorable, the responsible employee might be given
a gift card for use during his or her trip. Second, it clearly delineates the
consequences if the employee and laptop fail the inspection. Conse-
quences should be determined on a business by business basis, but the
most effective consequence I have witnessed is when the employee is
required to do further training about the importance of privacy. This isn’t
meant to be a punishment, but a positive, educational response to in-
adequately fulﬁlling company requirements. The employee quickly
learns how to protect the company asset (and keep themselves out of
further training).
Travel with Care: Business Trips and Vacations 211

15
Recover Your
Identity: When All
Else Fails
T
his chapter lists the ﬁrst and most crucial steps you must take if you are a
victim of identity theft. It is important that you consult other resources
and take more detailed action for your individual situation.
Consumers are spending considerably more time on fraud resolution, up to
an average of 30 hours in 2008. This increase may be attributed to the in-
creased sophistication of fraud schemes.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
Most cases of identity theft are discovered by the victim, which reinforces
the importance of monitoring your various accounts for suspicious behavior.
Here is a list of the 15 most common warning signs suggesting that you might
be a victim of identity theft or data breach.
Top 15 Ways to Detect Identity Theft
1. You receive a data breach notice in the mail from a company you do
business with.
2. Your bills or statements are not arriving in your mail (or e-mail) on
time.
3. You notice unauthorized charges on your credit card bill or debit card
statement.
4. You notice new accounts or erroneous information on your credit report.

5. You are denied credit for a purchase.
6. You receive credit card bills for cards you don’t own.
7. You are contacted by a collection agency about an item you didn’t
purchase.
8. You receive bills for unknown purchases, rental agreements, or
services.
9. Businesses won’t accept your check or credit card.
10. You are unable to set up new bank, loan, or brokerage accounts.
11. You notice withdrawals on your checking, savings, or brokerage ac-
count that you didn’t make.
12. The checks listed on your bank statements don’t reconcile with those
listed in your check register. Many times these checks are made out to
‘‘Cash.’’
13. You notice a downward trend in beneﬁts on your annual Social Secu-
rity statement.
14. The police show up at your door.
15. A subpoena to appear in court arrives in the mail.
Action Items Checklist: Take Action Now
As you go through this checklist, I recommend that you keep a log of every
step you have taken, whom you spoke with, the date and time of your conver-
sation, and the results of your call. This log of contacts will become part of
your dossier and will help you prove your ﬁnancial, civil, and criminal inno-
cence, should they be questioned. I also strongly suggest that you take these
steps in order (there are 17), as several of them become more difﬁcult once
your credit is frozen. Finally, I urge you to take the ﬁrst ﬁve within 24 hours
of the theft or suspected theft.
1. Deactivate the Affected Accounts
If it is a speciﬁc account that you believe has been violated, shut that account
down ﬁrst. For example, if your credit card has been stolen, alert that credit
card company and deactivate the card. Don’t necessarily cancel the card yet,
as doing so might make it more difﬁcult to track the crime. If it is a bank or
brokerage account, have the company suspend all capabilities on the account
until you notify a representative of next steps. For credit cards, under federal
Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails 213

law, you only responsible for a maximum of $50—if you report the fraudulent
charges immediately.
Eventually, you will want to obtain a new credit card number, account
number, password on the account, and so on; or potentially cancel the ac-
count altogether. When you are speaking to the ﬁnancial institution,
explain to the agent that a thief has used your identity and direct him/her
to suspend or close the account. You can also request more details about
the unauthorized account or use of the account, since the company will
know more than you do. Request that any negative entries be removed from
your credit report. You may be required to send an ID Theft Afﬁdavit or
other documentation. Make sure you follow up with the company; and as
an added measure of protection, also submit this request in writing and
keep a copy for your records.
For bank accounts, you will probably have to visit your local branch to
cancel the old accounts and set up the new ones. Don’t delay in doing this as
the bank only covers theft that is reported in a ‘‘reasonable’’ amount of time.
100% of banks surveyed adopted zero-liability policies for signature debit
purchases, and 96% of the top twenty-ﬁve ﬁnancial institutions offer zero-
liability for PIN debit purchases.
—‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’
Javelin Strategy & Research
2. Alert New Creditors About Fraud
Immediately contact all new creditors that have been set up fraudulently. If
the identity thief took out a home loan, call the loan agency and alert them to
the problem. Request that they close the account or transfer it to a new ac-
count number immediately. They may ask for supporting documents, such as
fraud afﬁdavits and police reports (see numbers 4 and 5, respectively). If debt
collectors contact you, respond immediately in writing and keep a copy of
your letters. Explain that you are the victim of identity theft and that you
don’t owe the money. You have the right to ask the debt collectors for the
name of the business that is owed the debt. Include your theft or fraud afﬁda-
vit and a copy of the police report with your letter. Immediately contact the
creditors and explain what happened; offer to send them your police report
and ID Theft Afﬁdavit.
214
Privacy Means Proﬁt

3. Place a Fraud Alert on Your Credit File
Immediately place a fraud alert with all three credit-reporting bureaus (I list
their phone numbers and websites at the end of this entry). A fraud alert re-
quests that creditors contact you before issuing credit or opening new
accounts in your name. If you report it to one bureau, it is supposed to report
it to the other two. However, this could take days or weeks, so play it safe and
report it to each agency yourself. Keep in mind, this is only a temporary solu-
tion. You will be freezing your credit in an upcoming step, but that is not
always an immediate process; the fraud alert will lower your liability and in-
crease your safety until the freeze takes effect. Make sure to cover the follow-
ing points with the credit bureaus:
 Let them know that your identity is being used by a criminal to fraudu-
lently obtain credit in your name.
 Ask them to place a fraud alert on your credit ﬁle. This is temporary and
will last for 90 to 180 days only. I recommend that you eventually take
the additional step of freezing your credit.
 Instruct them to add a victim’s statement to your report; for example:
‘‘My identity has been stolen and used to fraudulently apply for credit.
Please call me at [your phone number—cell phones are generally best
because you carry them with you] to verify all applications.’’
 Verify with the bureau that you will be receiving a current copy of your
credit report as well as instructions on how to ﬁle an extended multiyear
fraud alert, should you want one. Review your credit ﬁle thoroughly to
expose any fraudulent new accounts or existing account abuse.
Equifax: 1–800–525–6285; www.equifax.com.
Experian: 1–888–397–3742; www.experian.com.
TransUnion: 1–800–680–7289; www.transunion.com.
4. Submit an ID Theft Afﬁdavit
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) makes a copy of this document availa-
ble at www.FTCComplaintAssistant.gov, or call 1–877–438–4338. Make sure
you keep a copy for your ﬁles because you will use this document repeatedly
in the next few weeks.
Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails 215

5. File a Police Report
Report the crime to your local police department immediately upon realizing
it has been committed. The chances that they will pursue the criminal are
small, but you need a copy of the police report to begin proving your inno-
cence to creditors and law enforcement agencies. I warn you, some law
enforcement agencies see so much identity theft these days that they make
ﬁlling out a report quite a chore for the victim. Stick with it until you have a
legitimate report in hand. Make sure that you bring the following items with
you to include in your report:
 A copy of the FTC ID theft complaint
 A copy of a government-issued ID and proof of residency (e.g., a utility bill)
 Any fraudulent account numbers that were established, as far as you
know them
 Any and all documented proof you have that the accounts are fraudulent
 Any information that you have on the thief or the crime
Don’t leave the police station without getting a copy of the report; you will
need it repeatedly during the process of straightening out your credit and ad-
dressing legal issues.
6. Sign Up for Identity Theft Monitoring
I highly recommend identity theft monitoring services if you have been a vic-
tim of identity theft, as it will afford you an extra level of identity surveil-
lance. Should the thief use your identity again in the future, you will have a
far better chance of catching it early if you are using monitoring services.
(To learn more about monitoring services, please visit www.Sileo.com/
productreviews.) It is important that you take this step before you freeze your
credit; if you do it beforehand, it will make the sign-up process more difﬁcult.
If you already have a reputable identity theft monitoring service, contact
it immediately to help you resolve your case of identity theft. Most of the ser-
vices include recovery and restoration services as part of their offerings. Some
of them will even help you restore your identity if you sign up for their
service after the theft. But don’t take any chances: sign up for identity mon-
itoring before you become a victim.
216
Privacy Means Proﬁt

7. Monitor Statements Very Closely
Since you know that at least one ﬁnancial account has been violated, make
sure that you monitor other accounts for similar abuse. Many victims ﬁnd
that their identities are being used for multiple fraudulent purposes and catch
the additional crimes by closely monitoring their statements.
8. Contact Check Veriﬁcation Services
Contact your bank to place stop payments on all missing checks. If your
checks were stolen, or new checking accounts were established in your
name, call the check veriﬁcation companies and report the fraudulent checks.
Here are their phone numbers:
 Certegy Check: 1–800–770–3792
 ChexSystems: 1–800–428–9623
 CrossCheck: 1–800–552–1900
 Global Payments: 1–866–850–9061
 National Check Fraud Service: 1–843–571–2143
 Shared Check Authorization Network: 1–800–262–7771
 TeleCheck: 1–800–366–2425
9. Freeze Your Credit (or Extend Your Fraud Alerts)
The best way to ensure that a thief cannot use your credit record anymore is
to place a security or credit freeze on your account, as discussed in Chapter 4,
‘‘Eliminate the Source.’’ A credit freeze places a password on your credit ﬁle,
meaning that no one will have access to your information unless you grant it.
Freezing your credit is free, though unfreezing it when you need to establish
new credit sometimes requires a small fee (generally no more than $10).
Make sure that you wait until after you have resolved the identity theft
issues to place a freeze on your credit, because doing so makes it more difﬁ-
cult for creditors to clean up the ﬁnancial mess. Also be aware that a credit
freeze can slow down your ability to apply for new credit in the future (by
only a few minutes), but it is well worth the peace of mind it will give you.
If you do not wish to freeze your credit, I recommend that you extend your
fraud alerts. After you receive your credit reports, follow the instructions from
Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails 217

each bureau on how to extend your fraud alert for a longer period of time. You
will generally have to submit your request for this in writing, and may need to
include supporting documentation such as a fraud afﬁdavit or police report.
Make sure you reference the unique ID number that the bureau assigns to your
case, and use certiﬁed, return-receipt mail when you send the requests. This is
how you will know that the bureaus are processing your request and that action
is being taken. Fraud alerts can be removed from your account at any time.
In your written letters to each bureau, request:
 The names and phone numbers of the credit grantors that were fraudu-
lently established by the identity thief. This will save you time research-
ing contact information.
 That the bureaus remove inquiries on your account that appeared as a
result of the fraudulent activities.
 That the bureaus remove fraudulent accounts if you include a copy of
the police report, if you live in one of the states where the bureaus are
required to do this.
 That the bureaus notify any companies that have received your errone-
ous credit reports in the past few months, to alert them to the disputed
information.
When you have been granted an extended alert, you are allowed two free
copies of everything in your credit ﬁle for the ﬁrst 12 months. Take advantage
of the second report to conﬁrm that you have cleared everything to your
satisfaction.
Please be aware that these measures will not necessarily stop new fraudu-
lent accounts from being established by the identity thief. Credit issuers
(credit card companies, car dealers, lending companies, etc.) are not required
by law to observe fraud alerts. Consequently, it is your responsibility to moni-
tor your credit report from this point, on with increased diligence to spot any
suspicious activity.
10. File an Identity Theft Victim’s Report with the FTC
Visit www.Consumer.gov/idtheft to learn how to ﬁle an identity theft report
and to verify that you have taken all of the steps suggested by the Federal
Trade Commission.
218
Privacy Means Proﬁt

11. Notify the Postal Inspector
If you know or suspect that you are the victim of mail theft or a fraudulent
change of address, contact the Postal Inspector’s Ofﬁce, U.S. Post Ofﬁce, at
1–800–275–8777 to obtain your regional number. You should also consider
renting a locking mailbox or P.O. box, and drop off any sensitive outgoing
mail to USPS collection boxes.
12. Contact the Social Security Administration
If your Social Security number has been stolen and is being used to exploit
your beneﬁts or commit unemployment fraud, contact the SSA. Report fraud
to the agency’s hotline at 1–800–269–0271, or visit the SSA website at www
.SSA.gov. You can also visit your local Social Security ofﬁce for a replacement
card, if necessary. While you are there, ask about any additional steps you
should take in response to a stolen Social Security card.
13. Contact the Passport Ofﬁce
Whether or not you have a passport, alert the passport ofﬁce to alert them
to the potential of fraudulent passport applications being submitted in
your name. Reach the passport ofﬁce at www.Travel.State.gov/Passport/
Passport_1738.html.
14. Secure Your Phone Service
Call your phone companies (local, cell, and long distance) and ask them to
password-protect your accounts. It is advisable to follow this same step with
every company with which you conduct ﬁnancial transactions.
15. Safeguard Your Driver’s License
If someone is using your driver’s license number to write bad checks, contact
your state’s Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to see if another license has
been issued in your name. Instruct them to place a fraud alert on your license,
if possible. If not, ask about the procedure in your state for ﬁling a complaint.
You can ﬁnd your local ofﬁce at www.OnlineDMV.com.
Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails 219

16. Visit the Theft Resource Center
If you have been the victim of identity theft, I urge you to pay a visit to the Iden-
tity Theft Resource Center website, at www.IDTheftCenter.org. This consumer-
oriented website provides many victim resources, including guides, contacts,
laws, and detailed information to help you in the recovery process.
17. Consider Hiring an Attorney
If you continue to have problems proving your identity, or cannot resolve the
damage done by the identity thief, consider hiring an attorney to help clear
your name.
One of the greatest motivators for protecting your identity is to see how
much more work it is to recover from this crime than to avoid it in the ﬁrst
place. If your identity has been stolen and your recovery process is complete,
don’t do what I did and convince yourself that it won’t happen again. Use
what you have been through as fuel to keep it from happening again. I prom-
ise, you won’t be sorry.
Business Relevance
The business equivalent of recovering from identity theft is recovering
from data breach. But data breach brings with it a great deal more cost
and responsibility for a variety of reasons:
 State and federal compliance laws dictate that the organization
(e.g., corporation, association, university, or governmental depart-
ment) notify every affected customer of the breach and take mean-
ingful steps to rectify the situation. That can be interpreted in many
different ways, but all of them add up to the same basic conclusion:
the average breach recovery cost runs about $2041 per breached
record.
 Companies that experience breach generally end up on television,
or on the front page of the paper. Poor publicity erodes the public’s
220
Privacy Means Proﬁt

trust in the offending company and often leads to customer defec-
tion, stock value decline and legal lawsuits.
 In addition to covering the costs of recovery, the offending company
is simultaneously forced to implement the privacy principles out-
lined in this book and elsewhere in order to protect against future
breach. Instead of accumulating security over time (and spreading
the investment), public perception demands that they resolve their
weaknesses immediately. Just like any complex task that must
be completed quickly, rushing to build a Culture of Privacy on an
already declining company will almost certainly compromise the
strength of the solution, and will deﬁnitely cost more.
Recovering from, or even preparing for, a data breach is more detailed
than the scope of this book. I recommend that you hire professional
breach planning and response consultants to develop a breach response
plan (or to respond to a breach that has already taken place). There are
too many legal, ﬁnancial, and ethical sinkholes along the way to be able
to navigate it without an experienced partner. In the short term, it will cost
your company more. But in the long term, you will recover more com-
pletely and correctly and will live to do business another day.
Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails 221

16
Prioritize Your Attack:
The Privacy Calendar
T
his chapter lists all of the action items that are important to take to pro-
tect your identity. In the Privacy Calendar, however, they are listed by
priority rather than mind-set. The order was determined according to three
criteria:
1. Which steps need to be taken ﬁrst to make the process simple?
2. Which actions are most effective at preventing identity theft?
3. Which items are you most likely to complete given time and resource
constraints?
The detailed information for taking each of the steps given in this chapter
is contained in the individual mind-set chapters, which are shown in italics
and enclosed in parentheses following the steps, for easy identiﬁcation.
Salient points of each step are shown in boldface. I strongly recommend that
you refer back to each chapter for in-depth explanations of each step.
I also highly recommend that you set up a schedule for yourself and com-
plete the items phase by phase. Take 10 minutes a day, one hour per week, or
one weekend a month and schedule time to ‘‘accumulate privacy.’’ If you have to
wait on one of the action items—for example, you order your credit report but it
will be 10 days before you receive it—move on to another of the items further
down the list and return to the item you skipped when you receive the report.
I’ve said it before, but it bears repeating: There is no silver bullet in the
world of fraud or identity theft prevention. If someone tells you there is, he

or she is probably trying to sell you something. Rather, the layered approach
enumerated here will provide you with a base level of privacy, which you can
add to over time.
For an electronic version of the Privacy Calendar (with live links), visit
www.Sileo.com/privacy-calendar. Go there now to implement Phase 1.
Phase 1: Credit
1. Order and monitor your free credit report, and set up regular calendar
reminders every four months to review your updated report. This can be
completed online at www.AnnualCreditReport.com or by calling
1–877–322–8228. This step is not necessary if you take step 2 and sub-
scribe to an identity monitoring service, which has the added beneﬁt of
providing convenient, consistent surveillance delivered directly to your
e-mail box. (Monitor)
2. Sign up for a reputable identity monitoring service with 3-in-1 credit
monitoring, cybertracking, theft restoration services, and recovery in-
surance. To learn more about speciﬁc surveillance products, visit www.
Sileo.com/productreviews. (Monitor)
3. Freeze your credit with Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. This step,
while the most important for protecting your credit, makes it more difﬁ-
cult to take the two previous steps, which is why it is listed third. Visit
www.FinancialPrivacyNow.com to begin the process. If you do not wish
to place a security freeze on your credit, at least place an extended fraud
alert on your ﬁle. (Eliminate)
4. Set up online account alerts for all of your banking, credit card, mort-
gage, and investment accounts. At the same time, reduce at-risk mail
and switch to online statements, which allow you to easily and consis-
tently monitor your accounts for signs of fraud. Begin using online bill-
pay instead of sending checks through the mail. (Monitor)
Phase 2: Wallet
1. Protect your wallet or purse by keeping it with you or locked up at all
times and by removing the following items (Eliminate):
 Social Security card
 Checks
Prioritize Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar 223

 PIN numbers and passwords
 Excess credit and debit cards
 Credit card receipts
 ATM receipts and bank deposit slips
 Any cards containing a Social Security number that you are not
required to carry
2. Sign your credit cards and include Photo ID Required on both the back
and front. (Eliminate)
3. Photocopy every piece of identity in your wallet and store the copies
safely, in case the wallet is stolen and you need to shut down accounts
quickly. (Eliminate)
Phase 3: Databases
1. Opt out of information sharing, telemarketing, and junk mail by visiting
www.OptOutPreScreen.com or calling 1–888–5–OPT–OUT. (Eliminate)
2. Place your name on the National Do Not Call Registry by visiting www
.DoNotCall.gov. (Eliminate)
3. Place your name on the Direct Marketing Association’s Do Not Mail list
by visiting www.DMAChoice.org. (Eliminate)
Phase 4: Computers
1. Physically lock your computer in a secure place when in transit or when
you are not using it. (Secure)
2. Protect your desktop, laptop, or server computer with the following
software security tools (preferably by hiring a professional to help you
implement them) (Secure):
 Sophisticated alphanumeric/symbol login password that you change
regularly
 Security software suite with antivirus and antispyware
 Hardware or software ﬁrewall with a strong, unique password that
you change regularly
 Data backup software that consistently and automatically backs up
your ﬁles
 Up-to-date Internet browser, with pop-up blocker and phishing alerts
enabled
224
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Automatic software updates and security patches for all programs, in-
cluding operating system, antivirus, antispyware, pop-up blockers,
and ﬁrewalls
 WPA2-encrypted wireless connection
 Encrypted hard drive
 Password protection software to protect online login information
3. Have your computer or cell phone digitally shredded or low-level
formatted before selling, donating, or passing it on to someone else.
(Destroy)
4. Visit www.Sileo.com/productreviews to learn more about the best tools
to implement.
Phase 5: Mobile Computing
1. Deﬁne what is at risk on your mobile data devices. (Protect)
2. Verify acceptable use of your mobile data devices with your company.
(Protect)
3. Control exposure and eliminate unnecessary transport of your mobile
data devices. (Protect)
4. Encrypt individual data ﬁles, as well as your hard drive, SIM card, and
SD memory card. (Protect)
5. Utilize a secure wireless Internet connection. (Protect)
6. Utilize SSL-encrypted e-mail, and e-mail sensitive data only when
absolutely necessary. (Protect)
7. Use a backpack or other carrying case to keep your mobile devices
physically on you. (Protect)
8. Consider adding a locking or alarm device to your laptop and mobile
computing devices. (Protect)
9. When going through security at the airport, don’t put your laptop on
the X-ray belt until you are ready to walk through the metal detector;
keep an eye on it until you reach the other side. (Protect)
10. Utilize a LoJack-type software program to track your laptop if it is
stolen. (Protect)
11. Password-protect your cell phone and PDA with a sophisticated
alphanumeric/symbol login. (Eliminate)
12. Destroy any sensitive ﬁles that you store electronically after you are
done using them. (Protect)
Prioritize Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar 225

Phase 6: Physical Documents
1. Purchase a high-quality, cross-cut document shredder and shred every
document, disk, and credit card that you no longer need. Place the
shredders conveniently, for easy access. (Destroy)
2. Create a safe room, or purchase a ﬁre safe or ﬁre-rated ﬁling cabinet and
have it secured to the foundation of your home or ofﬁce. Lock your
essential documents according to the chart. (Lock)
3. Lock your mail and mailbox against theft. (Lock)
 Use a locking mailbox or get a P.O. box.
 Mail sensitive documents in person.
 Have identity documents sent by UPS or FedEx (with tracking).
 Have new checks sent to your bank for pickup.
 Retrieve mail within an hour or two after delivery and watch for new
credit cards.
Phase 7: Online
1. Research your online identity. Google your name, phone number, ad-
dress, e-mail address, and any other information you would like to ver-
ify. (Defend)
2. Withhold or mask identity information when building your social
networking proﬁle, including: date of birth, address, phone number(s),
and any password reminders that you use (high school, city born, pet’s
name, etc.). (Defend)
3. Read and understand your privacy settings on Facebook, Twitter,
LinkedIn, MySpace, and other social networking sites; adjust them to
protect your identity information. (Defend)
4. Vary online passwords and make them more sophisticated by using
alphanumeric/symbol passwords. (Secure)
5. Be alert and wary of ‘‘friends in distress’’scams, posted links, and other
social engineering scams. (Defend)
6. Only ‘‘friend’’ your actual friends, and understand both the beneﬁts
and drawbacks of responding to quizzes and surveys, and utilizing
widgets, groups, and third-party applications, before you add them.
(Defend)
7. Don’t forget: posts are permanent, public, and exploitable. (Defend)
8. Protect your e-mail (Defend):
226
Privacy Means Proﬁt

 Set your e-mail privacy and spam controls high.
 Never reply to a spam e-mail, even to request being removed.
 Research links before you click, including clickable images.
 Don’t trust offers that seem too good to be true.
 Never enter personal or ﬁnancial information into pop-up windows.
9. Become knowledgeable about information collection performed by
search engines, cookies, and toolbars. (Defend)
10. Read, understand, and adjust your application privacy settings in
Google, Google Docs, Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo!, or other online
accounts. (Defend)
11. Be aware and recognize phishing scams. (Secure)
12. Shop securely online, patronizing only reputable, recognizable compa-
nies. (Secure)
Phase 8: Travel
1. Travel light; simplify and minimize what you take with you. (Travel)
2. Take precautions to protect your home and ofﬁce while away. (Travel)
3. Travel with a copy of your identity documents and give a second copy
to a trusted friend. (Travel)
4. While traveling, securely lock up client ﬁles, laptops, cell phones, and
passports and other identity documents. (Travel)
5. Carry a travel pouch, use a backpack, and watch your credit cards while
out of your hands when traveling. (Travel)
6. Don’t announce to strangers on social networking sites when you will be
traveling. (Travel)
7. Bank safely, using only well-lit ATMs in banks or credit union buildings.
(Travel)
8. When you return home, monitor your bank accounts and possibly
rotate your account numbers. If possible and safe to do so, monitor
your accounts while traveling. (Travel)
9. Pick up your mail as soon as possible after you return; likewise retrieve
any copies of identity documents that you left with friends. (Travel)
Phase 9: Social Engineering
1. Learn to observe what is going on around you by slowing down.
(Evaluate)
Prioritize Your Attack: The Privacy Calendar 227

2. React to requests for identity of any type with healthy skepticism.
(Evaluate)
3. Think ‘‘Hogwash!’’ when anyone tries to access your data. (Evaluate)
4. Look for signs of manipulation (fear, rushing, bribery, ﬂattery, trust,
security). (Evaluate)
5. Stop, look, and listen when your hogwash reﬂex triggers. (Evaluate)
6. When in doubt, interrogate the enemy. (Evaluate)
7. Implement the four phases of interrogation by asking four revealing
questions (Interrogate):
 Who is in control of this interaction?
 Can the person requesting the information justify his or her
legitimacy?
 What options do I have other than sharing the data?
 What are the beneﬁts of the particular choice I am making?
8. Don’t be afraid to say no. (Interrogate)
Phase 10: Extras
1. Create a dossier, complete with photocopies and logs of all crucial iden-
tity documents, for future reference. (Monitor)
2. Use an electronic calendar (like Microsoft Outlook) to track your bill-
ing cycles. (Monitor)
3. Guard against shoulder surﬁng (someone peering over your shoulder or
recording you on a cell phone video camera) to steal your PIN while at
an ATM or retail checkout. (Evaluate)
4. Monitor your annual Social Security statement. (Monitor)
5. Eliminate or lock up all identity documents in your car. (Eliminate)
6. Remove your name from other physical and online directories.
(Eliminate)
7. Scratch out all but the last four digits of any unmasked credit card num-
bers on the merchant’s copy of your credit card receipt. (Destroy)
8. Implement all safeguards for your spouse or partner. (Secure)
228
Privacy Means Proﬁt

Resources
Information on John Sileo and The Sileo Group:
www.Sileo.com
www.PrivacyMeansProﬁt.com
www.ThinkLikeASpy.com
Information on Privacy Protection Products
www.Sileo.com/productreviews
Electronic Privacy Calendar
www.Sileo.com/privacy-calendar
Electronic Privacy Information
www.EFF.org
www.EPIC.org
Consumers Union: Financial Privacy Now
www.FinancialPrivacyNow.org
Federal Trade Commission: Identity Theft Site
www.FTC.gov/idtheft
ID Theft Resource Center
www.IDTheftCenter.org
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse
www.PrivacyRights.org

Notes
Part I
Boot Camp: Privacy Means Proﬁt
Chapter 1
Motivate the Troops
1. ‘‘Estimates Put T.J. Maxx Security Fiasco At $4.5 Billion,’’ Information Week,
May 2, 2007, citing research conducted by IP Locks, a compliance and data-
base security company, and the Ponemon Institute, an independent research
company. www.informationweek.com/news/security/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=
199203 277.
2. www.ﬁnance.yahoo.com, February 24, 2009.
3. ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2010, p. 4.
4. ‘‘Data Breach Defense 2009,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research, March 3, 2009.
5. ‘‘2009 Data Breach Investigations Report,’’ Verizon Business, April 15, 2009.
6. ‘‘Data Breach Defense 2009,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research, March 3, 2009.
Chapter 2
Deﬁne the Problem
1. ‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research, p. 42.
2. Ibid., p. 46.
3. ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2010, p. 4.
Part II
Basic Training: Think Like a Spy
Chapter 4
The First Mind-Set: Eliminate the Source
1. ‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research, p. 46.
Chapter 5
The Second Mind-Set: Destroy the Data
1. See California v. Greenwood, U.S. Citation 486 U.S. 35 (1988) Docket 86684:
Conclusion: Voting 6 to 2, the Court held that garbage placed at the curbside is
unprotected by the Fourth Amendment. The Court argued that there was no rea-
sonable expectation of privacy for trash on public streets ‘‘readily accessible to

animals, children, scavengers, snoops, and other members of the public.’’ The
Court also noted that the police cannot be expected to ignore criminal activity
that can be observed by ‘‘any member of the public.’’
2. ‘‘Security of Paper Documents in the Workplace,’’ Ponemon Institute, October
2008, p. 5.
Chapter 6
The Third Mind-Set: Secure the Systems
1. ‘‘WPA2 Security Now Mandatory for Wi-Fi CERTIFIED Products,’’ www.wi-ﬁ.
org/news_articles.php?f=media_news&news_id=16, March 13, 2006.
2. ‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research, p. 60.
3. ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, 2010, p. 5.
Chapter 7
The Fourth Mind-Set: Lock the Docs
1. Federal Trade Commission press release, www.ftc.gov/opa/2005/06/disposal.
shtm, June 1, 2005.
2. ‘‘Security of Paper Documents in the Workplace,’’ Ponemon Institute, October
2008, pp. 2, 5.
Chapter 9
The Sixth Mind-Set: Interrogate the Enemy
1. www.ponemon.org/blog/post/use-what-works-to-create-a-culture-of-privacy,
December, 20, 2009.
Chapter 10
The Seventh Mind-Set: Monitor the Signs
1. ‘‘2009 Identity Fraud Survey Report,’’ Javelin Strategy & Research, p. 58.
Part III
Field Combat: Target the Enemy
Chapter 11
Deploy Targeting Strategies: Accumulate, Prioritize,
and Adapt
1. http://news.cnet.com/8301-13579_3-9914753-37.html
2. ‘‘Fourth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, January
2009, p. 7.
3. ‘‘Global State of Information Security Study, Javelin Strategy & Research, 2008.
4. ‘‘2009 Breach Report,’’ Identity Theft Resource Center, 2009.
5. ‘‘Ponemon Business Case for Data Protection Report,’’ Ponemon Institute,
July 15, 2009, p. 3.
Notes 231

6. Ibid. Average cost savings or revenue improvements resulting from data protec-
tion efforts = $16 million. Average data protection spending = $3.7 million.
($16M – $3.7M)  $3.7M = 332% ROI.
Chapter 12
Defend Online Identity: Social Networking
and the Cloud
1. www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics, January 4, 2010.
2. Alessandro Acquisti and Ralph Gross, ‘‘Predicting Social Security Numbers from
Public Data,’’ Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences of the United States
(PNAS) 106:10975–10980, 2009; published online before print version, July 6,
2009, doi: 10.1073/pnas.0904891106.
3. www.informationweek.com/news/security/privacy/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=
218400854, January 4, 2010.
4. Joseph Bonneau and S€oren Preibusch, ‘‘The Privacy Jungle: On the Market for
Data Protection in Social Networks,’’ University of Cambridge, May 26, 2009,
pp. 14–15.
5. http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/03/31/spam-back-to-94-of-all-e-mail,
January 4, 2010.
6. www.google.com/corporate/history.html, January 4, 2010.
7. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Earth, January 4, 2010.
8. http://mail.google.com/mail/help/about_privacy.html, January 4,2010.
9. Robert Gellman, ‘‘Privacy in the Clouds,’’ World Privacy Forum, February 23,
2009, p. 4.
10. Ibid., p. 6.
11. Ibid., p. 22.
12. Ibid., p. 11.
13. Ibid., p. 14.
14. Ibid., p. 7.
15. Ibid., p. 6.
16. Ibid., p. 9.
Chapter 13
Protect Mobile Data: Laptop Responsibility
1. See the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse website, www.PrivacyRightsClearingHouse
.org, for further details.
2. ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study,’’ Ponemon Institute, January, 2010,
p. 22.
Chapter 15
Recover Your Identity: When All Else Fails
1. ‘‘Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach Study’’, Ponemon Institute, 2010, p. 19.
232
Notes

Index
A
Access, 129, 181
Account alerts, 148–149
Accumulating data security, 162–164,
167–170
home protection during traveling,
206–207
Adapting, 165–170
Alghamdi, Hamza, 110
Alliance for Secure Business Information,
71–72
Almihdhar, Khalid, 110
American Airlines Flight 77, 110
AnnualCreditReport.com, 143, 144
Antispyware, 79, 80
Antivirus, 79, 80
Apathy, 5–8, 62
Arrogance, 62
The Art of Deception (Mitnick and Simon),
118, 127, 131
The Art of War (Sun Tzu), 36
ATMs, 25, 52–53
Attorney, hiring, 220
Authority bias, 117
Automatic operating system updates, 81
Auto-pay, 90
AutoSafe, 60
B
Backing up data, 81
Bank deposit slips, 52–53
Banking during travel, 209–210
Beneﬁts phase of interrogation, 133–134,
136
Bill payment:
computer, 89–91
traveling, during, 206
Brain, engaging, 35–41
enemy, knowing, 36–37
mind-sets of spy, 37–40
spy, thinking like, 35–36
Brains. See also Brain, engaging
as sources of identity, 22
Bribe bias, 116
‘‘Business Case for Data Protection,’’
11
Businesses, sources of identity, 22
Business relevance:
deﬁning problem, 30–32
destroying data, 71–72
documentation, locking, 105–106
interrogating enemy, 136–138
laptop, protecting, 202
monitoring signs, 152–153
motivation, 10–12
online identity, defending, 188–193
recovering identity, 220–221
risk, evaluating, 122–124
securing systems, 92–93
source of information, eliminating,
61–63
targeting enemy, 171–173
traveling (business trips and vacations),
211

C
Car as source of information, 60
Cash, paying with, 54
CDs, destroying, 69–70
Cell phones:
cloning, 25
protecting, 225
as source of information, 59
travel, during, 208
Charm, 118
Checklists:
destroying data, 70
documentation, locking, 104–105
interrogating enemy, 136
laptop, protecting, 200–201
monitoring signs, 152
online identity, defending, 187–188
recovering identity, 213–220
risk, evaluating, 122
securing systems, 91
source of information, eliminating, 61
targeting enemy, 167–170
traveling (business trips and vacations),
210
Checks:
fraud, 51–52
traveling, during, 205
Check veriﬁcation services, 217
freezing credit, 217–218
Chertoff, Michael, 43
Children, protecting, 88
Classiﬁcation of documents, 105–106
Classiﬁcation scheme and targeting enemy,
172
Clausewitz, Carl von, 155
C-level executives, Ponemon Institute
Study, 11–12
Client ﬁles during travel, 204–205, 208
‘‘Cloud computing,’’ 88, 188–193
Cluley, Graham, 176
Company data during travel, 205
Computer:
antispyware, 79, 80
antivirus, 79, 80
automatic operating system updates, 81
backing up data, 81
bill payment, 89–91
children, protecting, 88
‘‘cloud computing,’’ 88, 188–193
electronic funds transfer, 90
encrypting hard drive, 83
encrypting wireless connections, 81–83
ﬁrewalls, 80
hacking, 25
laptop, protecting, protecting, seeie
Laptop
mobile computing, 224–226
paper statements, replacement of, 89
partner, protecting, 88
passwords, protecting, 83–86
phishing scams, recognizing, 86–87
pop-up blockers, 81
protecting identity, prioritizing, 224–225
securing, 76–79
security software, 79
sources of identity, 21
spouse, protecting, 88
use of to prevent identity theft, 88–91
Contests, 57–58
Control:
access, 129
interrogating enemy, 128–130, 136
mobile data device responsibilities and
best practices, 197, 198
need-to-know basis, 129–130, 136
Cookie (Google), 185
Cost per compromised record of breach, 33
Court record monitoring, 147
234
Index

Credit cards:
canceling, 145
destroying, 66–67
in mail, 104
offers of, 55–56
receipts, 52
rotating, 53–54
skimming, 120–121
traveling, during, 205
Credit ﬁle:
fraud alert, 215
Credit freeze, 48–50, 165, 217–218
protecting identity, prioritizing, 223
Credit, generally
protecting identity, prioritizing, 223
Credit offers, 55
Credit report, 48–50. See also Credit
report, monitoring
checking, 215
Credit report, monitoring, 143–148, 223
identity monitoring services, 146–148,
223
what to monitor, 144–146
Critical data, average rank of, 31
Cross-site scripting, 25
Culture of Privacy:
building, 11–13, 157–162
empowerment of team, 12–13
failure, building from, 157–162
interrogating enemy, 136–137
and interrogation, 127
leading by example, 13
and motivation, 12
Curiosity, 127
D
Data breach, 4, 5. See also Identity theft
cost of average, 7, 8
cost percompromised record of breach, 33
described, 25
Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach
Study, 34, 94
pre-record cost of, 76
prevention of, 10
primary sources of, 195
social networking, 180
third-party error, 130
use of term, 30
Data, destroying. See Destroying data
Data identity, 16
Data warehouses, 22
‘‘Dead drop,’’ 102
Debit cards, 52
traveling, during, 205
Deﬁning problem, 16–34
business relevance, 30–32
common methods of theft, deﬁning,
24–28
failure to deﬁne, 32–34
how identities are stolen, 23–24
identity, deﬁning, 16–19
sources of identity, 19–22
types of identity theft, 28–29
Deﬁnition and targeting enemy,
172
Destroying data, 37–38, 64–72
business relevance, 71–72
CDs, 69–70
checklist, 70
credit cards, 66–67
digital information, 69–70
disks, 69–70
documents, 66–67
failure, building culture of privacy from,
159
ﬁles, 66–67
laptop, protecting, 200
physical information, 66–69
Index 235

Detection:
fraud, 141, 149
identity theft, 212–213
Digital assets, securing, 38
Digital information, destroying, 69–70
Directories, 57
Discounts, 57–58
Disks, destroying, 69–70
Distraction, 110–112
Distress bias, 117
Documentation. See also Documentation,
locking; Physical documents
destroying, 66–67
Documentation, locking, 94–106
action item checklist, 104–105
business relevance, 105–106
classiﬁcation of documents, 105–106
essential documents, how to lock,
98–100
failure, building culture of privacy from,
161
ﬁre, documents to protect against, 99
ﬂood, documents to protect against,
99
inside jobs, 94–95
mail, securing, 102–104
physical documents, 100–102
safe houses, 96–97
safe rooms, 97–98, 226
storage, 98
theft, documents to protect against,
99, 100
Dollar value gained by thieves, 27–28
Do Not Call Registry, 224
Do Not Mail list, 224
Dossier, creation of, 142–143
Driver’s license, 30, 53, 219
Drop and switch, 45–47
Dumpster diving, 25, 64–65
E
Education:
failure, building culture of privacy from,
162
and targeting enemy, 172
Electronic funds transfer, 90
Eliminating the source. See Source of
information, eliminating
E-mail:
phishing, 121–122
protection of address, 185
Emotional biases, 115–118
Empowerment of team, 12–13
Encryption:
hard drive, 83
and targeting enemy, 172
wireless connections, 81–83
Enemies of privacy, 5–8
interrogating, 39
knowing, 36–37
Equifax, 49, 143, 144
address, 50
Essential documents, how to lock, 98–100
Evaluating risk. See Risk, evaluating
Evil twinning, 25
Excess credit, 52
Experian, 49, 143, 144
address, 50
Extended Validation SSI, 87
F
Facebook. See also Social networking
development stage, 175
‘‘5 Facebook Schemes That Threaten
Your Privacy’’ (Cluley and Raphael),
176
and identity theft, 73–75
privacy settings, 182
protecting identity, 226
236
Index

quizzes, 179, 183
safety, steps to, 181–187
surveys, 183
FACTA. See Fair & Accurate Credit
Transaction Act (FACTA)
Failure, building culture of privacy from,
157–162
deﬁning problem, 158
destroying data, 159
documentation, locking, 161
improvement, ongoing, 162
monitoring, 162
and motivation, 3–5, 158
securing systems, 159–160
social engineering training, 161–162
Fair & Accurate Credit Transaction Act
(FACTA), 71, 102
False communities, social networking, 180
Family. See Friends and family
Fear bias, 117
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 140
identity theft victim’s report with, 218
Red Flags Rules, 71
Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach
Study, 34, 94
Files, destroying, 66–67
Financial institutions, opt-out information,
56
Financial transactions, monitoring, 148–
150
Fire, documents to protect against, 99
Firewalls, 80
‘‘5 Facebook Schemes That Threaten Your
Privacy’’ (Cluley and Raphael), 176
Flattery bias, 117, 118
Flood, documents to protect against, 99
Franklin, Benjamin, 163, 165
Fraud:
detection, 141, 149
friendly fraud, 25
recovery costs, 149
self-detection, 141, 146
‘‘Fraud alert,’’ 49–50, 223
Freezing credit. See Credit freeze
Friends and family:
Facebook, 226
and identity theft, 23, 25, 139–140
FTC. See Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
G
Gmail, 76, 77
Goldsmith, Marshall, 6, 61–62
Google, 185–187
cookie, 185
gmail, 76, 77
Google Docs, 187
Google Earth, 186
Google Mail, 186
Google Maps, 186
toolbar, 185–186
Government cards, 53
Greed, 62–63
H
Hacking, computers, 25
Heartland Payment Systems, 4, 7
Hersh, Seymour, 110
Hijacked proﬁles, social networking, 179
‘‘Hogwash’’ reﬂex, 114–119, 136
Home, production during traveling,
206–207
Home sources of identity, 20–21
Hypocrisy, 63
I
Identity. See also Identity theft
attributes of, 17–19
data identity, 16
Index 237

Identity. See also Identity theft (Continued)
deﬁning, 16–19
sources of, common, 19–22
Identity creep, 163
Identity monitoring services, 146–148,
223
Identity theft. See also Data breach
character/criminal, 29
common methods of theft, deﬁning,
24–28
computer, use of to prevent, 88–91
driver’s license, 30
and Facebook, 73–75
ﬁnancial, 28–29
friends and family, 23, 139–140
how identities are stolen, 23–24
medical, 29–30
monitoring, signing up for, 216
proﬁtability of identity to thief, 24
restoration, 147
Social Security number, 29
and technology, 23
types of, 28–30
use of term, 31
warning signs, 212–213
Identity theft insurance, 147
Identity theft victim’s report with FTC,
218
ID theft afﬁdavit, 215
Ignorance, 5–8, 62
Impersonation, 178–179
Improvement, ongoing, 162
Inaction, 5–8
example of, 8–10
Information commerce, 54–58
Information Week, 178
In public, sources of identity, 22
Inside jobs, 94–95
Insider theft, 172
Internet:
surveillance, 147
travel, during, 208
Interrogating enemy, 39, 125–138
action item checklist, 136
beneﬁts phase, 133–134, 136
business relevance, 136–138
control phase, 128–130, 136
justify phase, 130–131, 136
phases of, 128–134
risk scenarios, 134–135
techniques, 132–133
J
Javelin Strategy & Research. See
2009 Identity Fraud Report
Junk mail, 54–58
Justify phase of interrogating enemy,
130–131, 136
K
Kaste, Martin, 181
Keyhole, 186
Keylogging, 26
Koobface virus, 179
L
Laptop, protecting, 41, 88,
194–202
action item checklist, 200–201
business relevance, 202
destroying data, 200
locking up, 198–199
monitoring, 199
and traveling, 204, 207–208
Leading by example, 13
Lock boxes, 103
Locking documents, 38–39
Logs, 151–152
238
Index

M
Mail:
securing, 102–104, 226
as source of information, 58–59
Mailed statements, 150
Malicious widgets, 179–180
Malvertisements, 180
Malware, 179
social networking, 79
Media Access Control (MAC), 82–83
Medical cards, 53
Medical identity theft, 29–30
Midnight mailing, 26
Military ID cards, 53
Mind-sets of spy, 37–40
destroying, 67–68
and destroying data, 64–72
eliminating, 47–48
and evaluating risk, 107–124
interrogating enemy, 125–138
and locking documentation, 94–106
monitoring signs, 139–153
online identity, defending, 174–176
and securing systems, 73–93
Mitnick, Kevin, 118, 127, 131
Mobile data device responsibilities and best
practices. See also Laptop, protecting
and targeting enemy, 172, 196–200
Monitoring signs, 39–40, 139–153
action item checklist, 152
business relevance, 152–153
credit report, monitoring, 143–148
dossier, creation of, 142–143
failure, building culture of privacy from,
162
ﬁnancial transactions, monitoring,
148–150
logs, 151–152
photocopies, 151–152, 206
Social Security statements, monitoring,
151
tools to implement, 153
Motivation, 3–15
business relevance, 10–12
and failure, 3–5, 158
and inaction, 5–10
and targeting enemy, 172
MySpace, 184
N
Name-dropping, 119
National Do Not Call Registry, 56
Need-to-know basis, 129–130
New Yorker, 110
Nonconfrontation bias, 117–118
Noncredit loan monitoring, 147
O
Observation, 109, 111, 119–122
Ofﬁce, production during traveling,
207
Online identity, defending, 41, 174–193.
See also E-mail; Facebook; Google;
Social networking
action item checklist, 187–188
business relevance, 188–193
mind-set, defending, 174–176
prioritizing, 226–227
sources of identity, 21–22
Online receipt of statements, 58
Online statements, 149–150
On person, sources of identity,
19–20
Opt-out addresses, 55
Opt-out information, 56
Outside Lies Magic (Stilgoe),
112
Overnight delivery services, 104
Index 239

P
Paper statements, replacement of, 89
Paralysis, 63
Passport Ofﬁce, contacting, 219
Passports, 208
Passwords:
cell phones, 225
computer, 83–86
hacking, 178
as source of information, 59
in wallets and purses, 52
Pentagon, 11
terrorist attack, 110
Pharming, 26
Phishing, 26
e-mail scams, 121–122
recognizing scams, 86–87
social networking, 180
Phone service, securing, 219
Photocopies, 53, 151–152, 206
Photo ID required, 53, 224
Physical documents, 100–102. See also
Documentation
protecting identity, prioritizing, 226
Picasso, Pablo, 65
PIN numbers, 52
P.O. boxes, 103
Police reports, 216
Ponemon Institute:
documentation, locking, 105
Fifth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach
Study, 34, 94
Fourth Annual U.S. Cost of Data Breach
Study, 130, 171
interrogating enemy, 137
Ounce Labs Study, 11
‘‘Ponemon Business Case for Data
Protection Report,’’ 173
pre-record cost of data breach, 76
‘‘Security of Paper Documents in the
Workplace,’’ 32
Poor Richard’s Almanac, 163
Pop-up blockers, 81
Postal inspector, notiﬁcation of mail theft,
219
Pretexting, 26
Prevention, 36
Principles of War (von Clausewitz), 155
Prioritizing, 164–165, 167–170. See also
Protecting identity, prioritizing
‘‘The Privacy Jungle. On the Market for
Data Protection in Social Networks,’’
182
Privacy reﬂex, 113–110
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 195
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 177–178
Procrastination, 63
Professional, hiring, 77–78
Proﬁle building, social networking, 177
Proﬁtability of identity to thief, 24
Protecting identity, prioritizing, 41, 222–228
account alerts, 223
computers, 224–225
credit, 223
credit freeze, 223
identity monitoring services, 146–148,
223
mail, securing, 226
mobile computing, 224–226
online, 226–227
photo ID required, 53, 224
physical documents, 226
social engineering, 227–228
Social Security statements, monitoring,
228
travel, 227
wallets, 223–224
240
Index

Public record monitoring, 147
Purses. See Wallets and purses
Q
Quizzes, social network sites, 179
R
Raphael, J.R., 176
Reagan, Ronald, 131
Recovering identity, 41, 212–221
action items checklist, 213–220
attorney, hiring, 220
business relevance, 220–221
check veriﬁcation services, 217
cost of by source of theft, 28
credit ﬁle, fraud alert, 215
creditors, alerting, 214
deactivating accounts, 213–214
driver’s license, safeguarding, 219
identity theft monitoring, signing up for,
216
identity theft victim’s report with, FTC,
218
ID theft afﬁdavit, 215
Passport Ofﬁce, contacting, 219
phone service, securing, 219
police report, ﬁling, 216
postal inspector, notiﬁcation, 219
Social Security Administration,
contacting, 219
statements, monitoring, 217
Theft Resource Center, 220
warning signs of identity theft, 212–213
Red-ﬂagging, 26, 71
Requests for identity, 113–114
Risk, evaluating, 39, 107–124
action item checklist, 122
business relevance, 122–124
examples of, 120–121
mind-set, evaluating, 108–109
and observation, 109, 111, 119–122
privacy reﬂex, 113–110
requests for identity, 113–114
social engineering, 107–108, 110–112
Risk scenarios, interrogating enemy, 134–
135
Roethke, Theodore, 111
Rush bias, 116, 118
S
Safe houses, 96–97
Safe rooms, 97–98, 226
Secret Crush widget, 180
Securing systems, 38, 73–93
action item checklist, 91
business relevance, 92–93
computer, 76–79
failure, building culture of privacy from,
159–160
professional, hiring, 77–78
Security, 10–11
bias, 115–116
Security freeze. See Credit freeze
‘‘Security of Paper Documents in the
Workplace’’ (Ponemon Institute), 32
Security software, 79
Sensitive information, exposure, 166
SentrySafe, 60
September 11, 2001, 110–111
Service Set Identiﬁer (SSID), 82
Sex offender reports, 147
Shoulder surﬁng, 26, 120
Shredding:
and convenience, 66
cross-cut confetti, 68
electronic, 69
purchase of shredders, 72
and targeting enemy, 172
Index 241

Signature required, 53
Simmel, George, 130
Simon, William, 118, 127, 131
Skimming, 27
ATM skimming, 25
Slippery slope bias, 117
SMiShing, 27
Social engineering, 27
and authority, 118
authority bias, 117
bribe bias, 116
charm, 118
corporate, 125–127
and distraction, 110–112
distress bias, 117
emotional biases, 115–118
failure, building culture of privacy from,
161–162
fear bias, 117
ﬂattery bias, 117, 118
‘‘Hogwash’’ reﬂex, 114–119, 136
name-dropping, 119
nonconfrontation bias, 117–118
protecting identity, prioritizing, 227–228
requests for identity, 113–114
rush bias, 116, 118
security bias, 115–116
slippery slope bias, 117
social networking, 178
trust bias, 115
Social networking. See also Facebook
data breach, 180
development stage, 175
false communities, 180
hazards of, 176–181
hijacked proﬁles, 179
impersonation, 178–179
malicious widgets, 179–180
malvertisements, 180
malware, 79, 179
password hacking, 178
phishing, 180
proﬁle building, 177
public nature of, 183
quizzes, misleading, 179
and skepticism, 184–185
social engineering, 178
Social Security number capture, 177–178
and trust, 176
Social Security Administration, contacting,
219
Social Security cards, 51
traveling, during, 205–206
Social Security numbers:
capture, social networking, 177–178
and identity, 16
identity theft, 29
vulnerability, 6
Social Security statements, monitoring,
151, 228
Source of information, eliminating, 37, 45–
63
action item checklist, 61
business relevance, 61–63
car, 60
cell phones, 59
credit report, 48–50
drop and switch, 45–47
information commerce, 54–58
junk mail, 54–58
mail, 58–59
mind-set of spies, 47–48
passwords, 59
spam, 60
and targeting enemy, 172–173
telemarketing, 54–58
wallets and purses, 50–54
website data leakage, 59–60
242
Index

Spam as source of information, 60
Spinney, Mike, 137–138
Spouse, protecting, 88
Spy:
mind-sets of, 37–40
thinking like, 35–36, 43
Squares test, 111–112
Stealing, 26
Steinmetz, Charles P., 127
Stilgoe, John, 112
Storage, documents, 98
Student ID cards, 53
Sun Tzu, 36
Surveys, 58
Facebook, 183
T
Targeting enemy, 40–41
accumulating data security, 162–164,
167–170
action items, 167–170
adapting, 165–167, 167–170
business relevance, 171–173
classiﬁcation scheme, 172
and education, 172
encryption, 172
failure, building culture of privacy from,
157–162
generally, 155
insider theft, 172
laptop, protecting, 41, 88, 194–202
mobile data device responsibilities and
best practices, 41, 172, 196–200
and motivation, 172
online identity, defending, 41, 174–193
principles, 162–170
prioritizing, 164–165, 167–170
protecting identity, prioritizing, 41, 222–
228
recovering identity, 41, 212–221
shredding, 172
source of information, eliminating, 172–
173
strategies_, 40–41, 157–173
traveling (business trips and vacations),
41, 203–211
Technology and identity theft, 23
Telemarketing, 54–58
Theft, documents to protect against, 99,
100
Theft Resource Center, 220
3-in-1 credit monitoring, 147
TJX, 4, 7
Toolbar (Google), 185
TransUnion, 49, 143, 144
address, 50
Traveling (business trips and vacations),
41, 203–211
action item checklist, 210
banking, 209–210
belongings, carrying, 208–209
bill payment, 206
business relevance, 211
cell phones, 208
checks and checkbooks, 205
client ﬁles, 204–205, 208
company data, 205
credit cards, 205
debit cards, 205
home, production during, 206–207
identiﬁcation, 205–206, 208
Internet, public access, 206
laptops, 204, 207–208
before leaving home, 204–207
ofﬁce, production during, 207
passports, 208
protecting identity, prioritizing, 227
Social Security cards, 205–206
Index 243

Traveling (business trips and vacations)
(Continued )
during travel, 207–208
traveling light, 204–206
Trojan horse, 27
Trust:
bias, 115
social networking, 176
2009 Identity Fraud Report:
destroying data, 68
fraud, detection, 141, 212
identity, deﬁned, 16–17
mail, protecting, 104
medical identity theft, 30
monitoring signs, 152
on paper trails, 59
recovering identity, 212,
214
safe houses, 97
sources of identity, 19
U
United Flight 175, 110
U.S. Department of Defense, 11
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs,
4
U.S. Postal Inspection Service, 103
V
Verify:
mobile data device responsibilities and
best practices, 197
Vishing, 27
W
Wallets and purses:
protecting identity, prioritizing, 223–224
as source of information, 50–54
Wardriving, 27
Warning signs of identity theft, 212–213
Warranty cards, 58
Website data leakage as source of
information, 59–60
WEP (Wired Equivalence Privacy), 82
What Got You Here Won’t Get You There
(Goldsmith), 6, 61–62
White pages, 57
Wi-Fi Protected Access, 82
Woods, James, 110–111
World Privacy Forum, 191–193
World Trade Center attacks, 110–111
WPA2, 82
Z
Zabasearch, 57
244
Index

About the Author
J
ohn Sileo’s identity was stolen from his small business and used to commit
a series of crimes, including $300,000 worth of digital embezzlement.
While the data thief operated behind the safety of John’s identity, John and
his business were held legally and ﬁnancially responsible for the felonies
committed. Ultimately, the data breach destroyed John’s business and con-
sumed two years of his life as he fought to stay out of jail. Then he chose to
ﬁght back and speak out.
Emerging from this crisis, John became America’s leading professional
speaker on information survival, including identity theft prevention,
data security, and safe social networking. His experiences as victim and
victor led him to write the critically acclaimed, award-winning book,
Stolen Lives: Identity Theft Prevention Made Simple (Da Vinci Publications,
2005), which was selected as the number-one Business Book at the EVVY
Awards. Since the day he was wrongly accused, John has been on a mis-
sion to educate businesses and individuals to take back control of their
data privacy before it’s too late.
John’s satisﬁed clients include the Department of Defense, the Federal
Trade
Commission,
the
FDIC,
Blue
Cross/Blue
Shield,
Pﬁzer,
the
Federal Reserve Bank, Lincoln Financial Group, AARP, Prudential, Liberty
Mutual, and scores of ﬁnancial institutions, universities, and associations
around the world. As a lifetime entrepreneur, John loves speaking to small
businesses about achieving entrepreneurial prosperity. He frequently appears
on NBC, ABC, and FOX, and writes for Dr. Laura.com and other
publications.
John is president of The Sileo Group, an idea-lab focused on inspiring
privacy and prosperity through keynote speaking, business coaching, and
advanced seminars. He graduated with honors from Harvard University,
and has served as a Rotary Ambassadorial Scholar to New Zealand. John lives

happily at the foot of the Rocky Mountains with his amazing wife, two highly
spirited daughters, and an acoustic guitar.
If you would like John to deliver a hilarious, interactive, and mission-
critical presentation at your organization’s next meeting or conference, please
contact his ofﬁce directly at 303–777–3222.
246
About the Author

P R A I S E  F O R
PRIVACY MEANS PROFIT
“You would be an idiot to hand out the keys to your house or your business and 
to give away your credit cards and passwords and then hope for the best. Not 
following John Sileo’s advice and protecting your privacy is just that: hoping for the 
best.  This book is the answer to giving yourself peace of mind.”
—Larry Winget
five-time New York Times and Wall Street Journal bestselling 
author and TV personality
“Whether you are leading a large organization or your family, Privacy Means Proﬁ t 
is a sobering, practical, and readable guide for preventing information theft and 
regaining peace of mind.”
 
—Patrick Lencioni, President,The Table Group;
author, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team and Getting Naked
John Sileo’s identity was stolen from his small business 
and used to embezzle hundreds of thousands of dollars 
from his clients. The data breach ultimately destroyed 
John’s business and consumed two years of his life as he 
fought to stay out of jail. Then he chose to ﬁ ght back and 
speak out. 
Emerging from this crisis, John became America’s leading 
professional speaker on information survival, including 
identity theft prevention, data security, and safe social 
networking. 
His satisﬁ ed clients include the Department of Defense, 
the Federal Trade Commission, the FDIC, BlueCross Blue 
Shield, Pfizer, the Federal Reserve Bank, Lincoln Financial 
Group, and hundreds of corporations, organizations, and 
associations around the world. 
For more information, visit www.thinklikeaspy.com.

