
 
PERSPECTIVES ON COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROBLEM-SOLVING 
 
STRATEGIES, CHALLENGES AND 
OUTCOMES 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

 
PERSPECTIVES ON COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional e-books in this series can be found on Nova’s website  
under the e-book tab. 
 

 
PERSPECTIVES ON COGNITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROBLEM-SOLVING 
 
STRATEGIES, CHALLENGES AND 
OUTCOMES 
 
 
 
 
 
KARLA NEWTON 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New York 
 

 
Copyright © 2016 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by 
any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, mechanical photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written 
permission of the Publisher. 
 
We have partnered with Copyright Clearance Center to make it easy for you to obtain permissions to reuse content from 
this publication. Simply navigate to this publication’s page on Nova’s website and locate the “Get Permission” button 
below the title description. This button is linked directly to the title’s permission page on copyright.com. Alternatively, you 
can visit copyright.com and search by title, ISBN, or ISSN.  
  
For further questions about using the service on copyright.com, please contact:  
Copyright Clearance Center 
Phone: +1-(978) 750-8400 
Fax: +1-(978) 750-4470  
E-mail: info@copyright.com. 
 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or implied warranty of any 
kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is assumed for incidental or consequential 
damages in connection with or arising out of information contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any 
special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers’ use of, or reliance upon, this 
material. Any parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts to 
the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this book. In addition, no 
responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising from any methods, 
products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject matter covered 
herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering legal or any other professional 
services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A 
DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR 
ASSOCIATION AND A COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
 
Names: Newton, Karla, editor. 
Title: Problem-solving : strategies, challenges and outcomes / editor, Karla  
  Newton. 
Description: Hauppauge, New York : Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2016. |  
  Series: Perspectives on cognitive psychology | Includes index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2016023910 (print) | LCCN 2016027878 (ebook) | ISBN  
  9781634855136 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781634855525 (eBook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Problem solving. 
Classification: LCC BF449 .P767 2016 (print) | LCC BF449 (ebook) | DDC  
  153.4/3--dc23 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016023910 
 
 
 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
Preface 
 
vii 
Chapter 1 
Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
1 
Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
Chapter 2 
Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving: 
Redesigning Resources, Materials, and Extending  
Learning Environments 
31 
Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
Chapter 3 
Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem 
Solving and Posing 
51 
Sergei Abramovich 
Chapter 4 
Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving Skills 
and Content Knowledge in Physics 
65 
Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
Chapter 5 
Teaching and Assessing Story Problems: Schema Based Problem 
Solving Environment 
85 
Manoj Praveen G. 
Chapter 6 
The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process:  
Assessment and Intervention 
103 
Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
Chapter 7 
A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies for Solving 
Personal Problems: Validation and Outcomes 
133 
Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
Chapter 8 
Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability in Relationship  
to Reflectivity-Impulsivity, Need for Cognition, and  
Communication Skills 
155 
Katsunori Sumi 
Chapter 9 
Relationship between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and 
Empathy among Adolescents in Hungarian Context 
177 
László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti and Anikó Zsolnai 

Contents 
vi
Chapter 10 
Self-Regulatory Strategies during Problem-Solving by Using an 
Inquiry-Based Approach: “Make Sense of Problems and Persevere 
in Solving Them” 
197 
Areti Panaoura 
Chapter 11 
Improving Undergraduate Student Generic Problem Solving Skills 
by Using Problem-Based Learning in a Large Classroom Setting 
211 
A. Klegeris and H. Hurren 
Chapter 12 
An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
221 
P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco and A. Torres 
Chapter 13 
Problem Solving in our Knowledge Society and Future Perspectives 
243 
Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
Index 
 
257 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
Life is a series of coping with a variety of problems. Major or minor problems arise for us 
all the time, and our life is filled with them. Thus, the authors need to engage in constant 
problem-solving in our daily lives. This book reviews strategies, challenges and outcomes of 
problem-solving. Chapter One discusses computational thinking and fuzzy logic in problem 
solving. Chapter Two reviews digital technologies and mathematical problem solving. 
Chapter Three deals with the concept of Einstellung effect – a psychological phenomenon 
evinced by problem solvers through a tendency (mind set) to use previously learned workable 
strategy in situations that either can be resolved more efficiently or to which the strategy is 
not applicable at all. Chapter Four gives an overview of the research on the use of narrative 
Context Rich Problems (CRP) in physics education at the upper secondary and higher 
education levels. Chapter Five examines teaching and assessing story problems. Chapter Six 
assesses the interpersonal problem-solving process. Chapter Seven discusses validations and 
outcomes of a multi-dimensional scale to measure strategies for solving personal problems. In 
Chapter Eight, the ability for solving problems in our day-to-day lives, called social problem-
solving is addressed. Chapter Nine examines the relationship between social problem solving 
and some mediator and moderator variables among 12- and 16-year-old Hungarian students. 
Chapter Ten investigates the effect of improving young students’ self-regulatory strategies on 
their persistence to face and overcome cognitive obstacles and their problem-solving ability. 
Chapter Eleven discusses improving undergraduate student generic problem solving skills by 
using problem-based learning in large classroom settings. Chapter Twelve presents problem-
solving therapy (PST) as an effective intervention to prevent or reduce psychopathology and 
to enhance positive well-being by helping individuals cope more effectively with stressful life 
problems. Chapter Thirteen investigates the status of Problem Solving in our modern society, 
and explores perspectives in the forthcoming Third Industrial Revolution. 
Chapter 1 - Computational thinking, named for its extensive use of computer science 
techniques, synthesizes critical thinking and existing knowledge and applies them to solve 
complex technological problems. Fuzzy logic on the other hand, due to its nature of 
characterizing vague situations with multiple values, offers rich resources for dealing with 
assessment cases involving a degree of uncertainty and/or ambiguity. In earlier works the 
authors have applied two frequently used fuzzy techniques for studying the effects of 
computational thinking on problem solving; the measurement of a fuzzy system’s total 
possibilistic uncertainty and the centre of gravity defuzzification technique. Properly 
formulated for the authors’ purposes. In the present paper a combination of the 

Karla Newton 
viii
triangular/trapezoidal fuzzy numbers and of the centre of gravity technique is utilized as an 
assessment tool of student problem solving/computational thinking skills. Fuzzy numbers 
play in general an important role in fuzzy logic mathematics, analogous to the role played by 
the ordinary numbers in classical mathematics. Applications are also presented illustrating the 
authors’ results, in which two traditional assessment methods of the bi-valued logic, the 
calculation of the mean values and of the Grade Point Average index, are used for validating 
the authors’ fuzzy assessment techniques.  
Chapter 2 - Mathematical problem solving is a research and practicing field that aims at 
analyzing the process involved in formulating and pursuing problems and the extent to which 
problem solving activities can be used to frame and structure students’ learning environments. 
How does the systematic use of several digital technologies shape and extend learners’ 
problem solving approaches? The authors argue that the use of mathematical action 
(GeoGebra) and multiple purpose technologies (Internet and communication tools) provides 
affordances for students to represent and explore dynamically mathematical situations and to 
extend and foster mathematical discussions beyond formal settings. The authors illustrate, via 
examples, and characterize the learners’ use of a Dynamic Geometry System (DGS) to 
construct and explore problems dynamically and ways to rely on online resources and 
communication technologies to engage students in mathematical discussions. Novel problem 
solving strategies such as dragging mathematical objects within the problem representation, 
finding and examining loci of particular objects, using sliders to explore some problem 
parameters behavior, quantifying attributes to observe patterns or invariance become essential 
in finding and supporting mathematical relationships or conjectures. 
Chapter 3 - This chapter reflects on the author’s work with prospective teachers of K-12 
mathematics. It reveals the cases of Einstellung effect – a phenomenon when experience with 
similar problems leads to automatic problem-solving behavior which is either erroneous or 
lacks insight. Three examples drawn from the counting, geometry, and algebra strands have 
been considered. It is suggested that by bridging procedural and conceptual knowledge, 
Einstellung effect in mathematical problem solving can be reduced. Such a bridge can be built 
through the seamless integration of problem solving and problem posing. 
Chapter 4 - This chapter gives an overview of the research on the use of narrative Context 
Rich Problems (CRP) in physics education at the upper secondary and higher education 
levels. After a presentation of the CRP concept, the benefits and risks of using CRP are 
investigated. The focus here is on learning physics concepts and problem solving, which 
includes bridging everyday experiences and physics modelling. How CRP stimulate 
discussions about physics and aid the development of problem solving skills is also discussed. 
The research findings include the selection and formulation of problems that help students to 
take ownership, i.e., take actions of choice and control. Other aspects of CRP are investigated 
too, such as whether there is a difference between giving too much or too little information in 
the problem solving context. How the teaching should be organised regarding the use of CRP 
and the functionality of the student group are also discussed. As engagement and good 
discussions in randomly organised groups are not always possible, the authors look at how the 
groups could be formed in order to be constructive. Being aware of students’ inabilities to 
work together and having the knowledge to deal with this can make the use of CRP more 
relevant and valuable. 
Chapter 5 - Story problems are typical text book problems that present a set of variables 
embedded within a shallow story context. They are means of appreciating subject matter at 

Preface 
ix
application level. Solving of story-problems not only calls for calculation accuracy, but also 
for comprehension of content knowledge. It is generally assumed that students with high 
content knowledge have high ability to solve problems. Unfortunately most of the students 
solve problems in Physics by memorizing equations and problem solving procedures without 
the support of content knowledge behind the problems (Panitz, 1998). Sherrill (1983) 
commented that despite the requirements for solving problems, learners usually employ a 
more tactical, problem-avoidance strategy to solve story problems. Jonassen (2011) argued 
that problem solving as a process has two critical attributes: first, the mental representation of 
the problem and second, the manipulation and testing of the mental representation in order to 
generate a solution. As knowledge can be classified into analogical knowledge, symbolic 
knowledge, and procedural knowledge, the authors have analogical, symbolic and procedural 
mental representations. But problems are complex patterns of knowledge that could be 
represented by complex mental representations like problem-schema, cognitive maps and 
mental models. Conceptual understanding of the problem is the crucial component of problem 
solving. For acquiring conceptual understanding, the problem solver is required to construct a 
conceptual model or a problem schema with respect to the problem. This problem schema has 
three sub-models – 1. Situational Model 2. Structural Model and 3. Algorithmic Model 
(formula). A problem solving environment designed to practice story problem solving should 
incorporate these models. A five step Problem Solving Learning Environment (PSLE) for 
story-problem solving is constructed along the lines of the model suggested by Jonassen 
(2011). This PSLE would have a structural map, a graphical representation of the problem 
elements of a domain which represents a kind of problems, as its first component. The second 
component would be the conceptual model interlaced with the situational model super 
imposed with the data given in the problem. The third component would be worked examples 
which help the novice to put into practice the new way of learning to solve problems. The 
fourth component would be practice problems which are in line with the worked examples but 
with the scaffolds presented at the earlier stages taken away. Formative feedback would be 
given during the problem solving process which helps the student systematically move 
through the logical sequence of problem solving. Assessment of problem solving skills 
requires testing of transfer skills acquired as well as conceptual understanding of the problem. 
The assessment of conceptual understanding of the problem would consist of items that test 
classification of problem types, identifying the structural elements and structural 
relationships, identifying analogous problems, etc. The ability of transfer of problem solving 
skills will be tested with items consisting of problems of similar structural relationship posed 
in different contexts and with problems consisting of transformed problem elements. 
Chapter 6 - One kind of problem someone may have to solve is interpersonal problems. 
Gardner (1983) defined intelligence as multiple and he included interpersonal as one of these 
intelligences. He proposed that interpersonal intelligence processes the information pertaining 
to the relationships between people and the problems between them that may occur. Thus, 
solving interpersonal problems requires one specific sort of task that uses mainly one 
particular type of intelligence, although all the intelligences cooperate with each other.  
For Gardner (1999), interpersonal intelligence is the aptitude to find an answer to 
interpersonal challenges. This process starts by noticing some changes in the behaviors, 
emotions, motivations, concerns or intentions of others. Well-developed intelligence must be 
able to detect and understand verbal and non-verbal cues accurately, even when they are 
concealed. 

Karla Newton 
x
Once these signals are perceived, other skills become significant: the ability to 
understand emotions, empathy, causal attribution to the behavior of others and the generation 
of solutions, for example. In order to describe the interpersonal problem-solving process, 
there are at least 3 theoretical propositions: Goldstein (1981), D’Zurilla and Goldfried (1971), 
Pelechano (1984) and some recent reformulation such as the published work by Calero et al.  
Goldstein (1981) enumerates 50 skills that join together to solve interpersonal conflicts 
such as asking for help, starting a conversation, negotiating, tolerating frustration, etc. His 
more than 30 studies analyse intervention effects for developing each of these skills (1984), 
but the process itself is not described in any great depth. 
In contrast, D`Zurilla and Goldfried (1971) show a particular interest in the process itself. 
They consider that social problems are solved through a cognitive-emotional-behavioral 
process, made up of some particular stages: positive orientation to the problem, definition and 
formulation of the problem, decision making, and verification of the solution. 
Pelechano, meanwhile, (1984) tries to merge the models described above defending 
interpersonal skills as a way that allows people to connect with others on a deeper level, 
sharing feelings and ideas, offering help, etc. He proposed a model of 7 stages: general 
presentation of the problem, identification and dimensions of the problem, perspective taking, 
solutions search, solutions essays, solution selection, decision making and putting into action.  
After having reviewed the background theory of the interpersonal problem-solving 
process, the authors offer an updated review of different evaluation tools and analyse the 
impact of applied interventions. Training in interpersonal problem-solving skills has been 
applied to different populations based on a preventive or therapeutic focus. Under the first 
approach, scientific literature points to preschool and primary school students, training for 
parents of seriously ill children, premarital couples and also for enrichment of social self-
efficacy. In the clinical field, interpersonal problem-solving programs are tested in ADHD, 
autism spectrum disorders, gifted children, aggressive adolescents, and all types of 
psychiatrically disabled patients, people with schizophrenia, self-injured patients or also as 
part of a substance abuse treatment. After reviewing some of these published papers on the 
subject, the work from the authors’ research group will be also revealed. 
Chapter 7 - Worry is defined as uncontrollable negative thinking and being attempt at 
problem solving. When it comes to solving everyday personal problems, worrying can 
represent thwarted problem-solving efforts. To examine if aspects of problem solving are 
diminished in worry, a multi-dimensional measure of everyday problem-solving strategies is 
necessary. The authors developed a six-factor measure capturing focus of thoughts (the 
future, the nature of the problem, and solving the problem) and mode of thought 
(consultative, analytical, and behavioral). Overall, problem-solving strategy use tended to be 
associated with an expectation of favorable outcomes as well as with actual favorable 
outcomes. Cluster analysis of six factors revealed three interpretable clusters: silent-thinking 
cluster (those with high focus on the future/the nature of the problem/solving the problem and 
high analytical mode coupled with less consultative mode), low strategy use cluster (those 
with overall low endorsement of strategies), and active-strategies cluster (those with high 
focus on the future/the nature of the problem/solving the problem and high analytical mode 
coupled with more consultative mode). The silent-thinking cluster was associated with 
unfavorable outcomes when compared to low strategy use cluster. In addition, favorable 
expectations and better actual outcomes were higher for the active-strategies cluster than for 
the silent-thinking cluster and low strategy use cluster. The comparisons of clusters indicates 

Preface 
xi
that consulting with others yields favorable problem-solving outcomes while refraining from 
consultation leads to unfavorable problem-solving outcomes. Finally, trait variables and 
cognitive appraisals moderated the relation between strategy use and outcomes. Interestingly, 
among participants with an active problem-solving style, those endorsing strong confidence in 
problem-solving abilities, and those with low threat appraisal, a higher use of problem-
solving strategies lead to unfavorable outcomes.  
Chapter 8 - “Social problem-solving” refers to a process of solving real-life problems. 
Social problem-solving consists of two major components: problem orientation and problem-
solving skills (or style). Numerous studies have focused on the role of social problem-solving. 
This chapter focuses on social problem-solving ability, and explores the characteristics of this 
ability. In this chapter, three studies on social problem-solving ability are reported. These 
studies were conducted to examine the relationship of social problem-solving ability to three 
related constructs: (1) reflectivity-impulsivity as a cognitive style, (2) need for cognition as a 
motivational construct, and (3) communication skills as coping skills only for interpersonal 
problems. Social problem-solving ability was assessed by two components: (1) problem-
solving self-efficacy as an important component of problem orientation, and (2) problem-
solving skills. Data for each study were obtained from Japanese college students. As a result, 
the characteristics of social problem-solving ability were further revealed on the basis of 
relationships to the related constructs. In addition, different characteristics between the two 
components of social problem-solving ability were indicated through relationships to 
reflectivity-impulsivity and three components of communication skills: expressivity, 
decipherer ability, and assertiveness. The implications of the results are discussed and 
suggestions for future research are provided. 
Chapter 9 - Research on social problem solving have been focusing on age, gender and 
cultural differences and development for a very long time. It is a widely known fact that the 
development of social problem solving depends on many mediator (e.g., super traits, anxiety, 
emotions) and moderator variables (e.g., family and school background). International studies 
agree that social problem solving has a profound influence on success in personal life, on 
mental health (e.g., Elliott et al., 2006), on academic achievement (e.g., Rodriguez-Fornells 
and Maydeu-Olivares, 2000), and, in turn, on the functioning of different social groups and 
society as a whole (e.g., Lindsay et al., 2011). Several studies have pointed out that mental 
health and school success also have an impact on social problem solving (e.g., McMurran and 
McGuire, 2005). The aim of the authors’ study was to examine the relationship between 
social problem solving and some mediator and moderator variables among 12- and 16-year-
old Hungarian students (N = 445). The authors examined the relationship between social 
problem solving, state and trait anxiety and empathy, and the authors also intended to find 
relationship between social problem solving and some family background variables (e.g., 
family structure, parents’ educational level). The authors used the short version of SPSI–R 
(2002, Social Problem Solving Inventory–Revised, D’Zurilla, Nezu,  Maydeu-Olivares – 
factors: positive problem orientation, negative problem orientation, rationality, impulsivity, 
avoidance); Davis’s IRI (1980, Interpersonal Reactivity Index – factors: perspective taking, 
fantasy, empathic concern, and personal distress) and Spielberger’s State-Trait Anxiety 
Inventory (1983). All of these measurements showed good reliability indices. According to 
the results, positive problem orientation was more typical of 12-year-olds and negative 
problem orientation, rationality, state anxiety, perspective taking and empathic concern were 
more common among 16-year-olds. The fitting of impulsivity and trait anxiety, and avoidance 

Karla Newton 
xii 
and trait anxiety are more solid in 16-year-olds. Regardless of age, the degree of negative 
problem orientation and avoidance is higher among those with increased anxiety as compared 
to those with lower levels of anxiety. Perspective taking has a strong connection to positive 
problem orientation and rationality in almost every age, while personal distress has greater 
influence only on negative problem orientation at the age of 16. The family structure and 
parents’ educational levels are the most profoundly influential in terms of social problem 
solving. 
Chapter 10 - The present study investigates the effect of improving young students’ self-
regulatory strategies on their persistence to face and overcome cognitive obstacles and their 
problem-solving ability. The intervention program which was developed, emphasized the 
necessity to develop young students’ ability (8-9 years old) to react flexibly by self-reflecting 
on the strategies and processes which had been used and apply different processes in order to 
persevere working on the same problem. The inquiry–based approach was the theoretical 
framework in order to enable teachers use real-life problem-solving situations which activate 
their students’ different cognitive and self-regulatory processes. The intervention program, 
after the teachers’ training, was applied for 5 weeks to 167 students who constituted the 
experimental group. The pre and post-test measurements were followed by a third 
measurement, two months after the intervention program in order to examine the stability of 
the expected improvement. Dynamic modelling indicated that growth in each of the ability 
was affected by the state of the others. The initial problem-solving ability was found to 
depend on the corresponding self-regulatory performance and the initial problem-solving 
perseverance and its advancement to rely on the development of the initial self-regulatory 
performance. Self-regulation seemed to have a predominant role on solving successfully real-
life mathematical problems. Significant interrelations between the three abilities at the initial 
and the following up measurements are indicative for the possible changes which can be 
achieved at them by intervening on a related ability. 
Chapter 11 - The ability to solve generic problems is a skill, which is highly valued in 
most modern workplaces. There are no well-defined instructional techniques, which are 
proven to facilitate development of this competency in undergraduate students as well as 
there are no widely available evaluation tools which would allow monitoring progress of 
students as problem solvers. By using a recently developed problem-solving test, the authors 
showed that problem-solving skills of undergraduate students were significantly improved 
after taking a course, which involved problem-based learning (PBL) as one of its components. 
Since these students were exposed to various other instructional approaches as well as to 
other courses, which they took at the same time, it was not clear whether the problem-based 
learning environment was responsible for the observed beneficial effect. To address this 
question, the authors used three similar problem-solving tests to measure the dynamics of 
problem-solving skills of students in the same class after the course schedule was modified in 
a way that all PBL activities were conducted in the second half of the semester. The authors’ 
data show no change in problem-solving skills of students after the first half of the term and 
strong trend towards improvement after the second half of the term. This indicates that PBL 
activities could be responsible for the observed improvement in the generic problem-solving 
skills of students. The authors’ data also indicate that exposing students to PBL over one half 
of a term is not as effective as spreading this activity over the full length of the term. These 
observations could assist other instructors with the design and implementation of strategies 
that are effective for developing generic problem-solving skills of undergraduate students. 

Preface 
xiii
Chapter 12 - In this chapter, problem-solving therapy (PST) is presented as an effective 
intervention to prevent or reduce psychopathology and to enhance positive well-being by 
helping individuals cope more effectively with stressful life problems. First, the theoretical 
foundations of the social problem-solving model are presented to explain the major concept 
definitions (such as the social problem solving, the problem or the solution), the major 
problem-solving dimensions (two problem orientation dimensions and three different 
problem-solving styles), and the relational problem-solving model of stress and well-being. 
The authors also review the empirical support for the theoretical foundations of problem-
solving therapy. Next, the authors describe the different phases of problem-solving therapy 
and discuss the most relevant guidelines and clinical considerations of the training and 
practical application. Later, the authors provide an overview of the scientific literature on the 
efficacy of problem-solving therapy. Finally, the authors analyze the main future challenges 
for both research on and clinical practice of problem-solving therapy. 
Chapter 13 - The importance of Problem Solving for human cognition and the evolution 
of our society has been recognized for centuries. The First Industrial Revolution, started at the 
end of the 19th Century, was characterized by the replacement of human hands by machines 
as power sources and the parallel development of transportation/communication means. The 
first was followed by the Second Industrial Revolution, started during the 1940s’ and 
characterised by the replacement of humans by machines (mainly by the computers) as means 
of control. As a result, the human society has been trasformed to our nowadays era of 
Knowledge and Globalization. In the present work the authors investigate the status of 
Problem Solving in our modern society. The authors also explore its perpectives in the 
forthcoming Third Industrial Revolution, which, according to the best shelling author J. 
Rifkin, will be characterized by the “Internet of Things and Energy.” Through this, energy, 
goods and services will be provided, almost free of cost, in the same way as information does 
through our nowadays Internet.  
  
 


In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
COMPUTATIONAL THINKING AND FUZZY LOGIC  
IN PROBLEM SOLVING 
 
 
Michael Gr. Voskoglou* 
Graduate Technological Educational Institute of Western Greece,  
Greece 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Computational thinking, named for its extensive use of computer science techniques, 
synthesizes critical thinking and existing knowledge and applies them to solve complex 
technological problems. Fuzzy logic on the other hand, due to its nature of characterizing 
vague situations with multiple values, offers rich resources for dealing with assessment 
cases involving a degree of uncertainty and/or ambiguity. In earlier works we have 
applied two frequently used fuzzy techniques for studying the effects of computational 
thinking on problem solving; the measurement of a fuzzy system’s total possibilistic 
uncertainty and the centre of gravity defuzzification technique. Properly formulated for 
our purposes. In the present paper a combination of the triangular/trapezoidal fuzzy 
numbers and of the centre of gravity technique is utilized as an assessment tool of student 
problem solving/computational thinking skills. Fuzzy numbers play in general an 
important role in fuzzy logic mathematics, analogous to the role played by the ordinary 
numbers in classical mathematics. Applications are also presented illustrating our results, 
in which two traditional assessment methods of the bi-valued logic, the calculation of the 
mean values and of the Grade Point Average index, are used for validating our fuzzy 
assessment techniques.  
 
Keywords: Problem Solving (PS), Critical Thinking (CrT), Computational Thinking 
(CT), Fuzzy Logic (FL), Center of Gravity (COG) Defuzzification Technique, Fuzzy 
Numbers (FNs), Triangular (TFNs) and Trapezoidal (TpFNs) FNs, Student 
Assessment, Grade Point Average (GPA) Index 
 
 
                                                           
* Corresponding Author address: Ag. Saranda 6-8, 26222 Patras, Greece. Email: mvosk@hol.gr. 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
2
INTRODUCTION 
 
The importance of Problem Solving (PS) has been realised for such a long time that in a 
direct or indirect way affects our daily lives. Volumes of research have been written about PS 
and attempts have been made by many educationists and psychologists to make it accessible 
to all in various degrees (e.g., see [33]). It is by all agreed that the PS process, not necessarily 
of mathematical problems only, is a complex situation. Even graduates have nowadays 
difficulty in solving real life problems. Somehow, they cannot apply theory into practice, or 
theorise/reflect on practice [24]. In fact, it is the human mind at the end that has to be applied 
in a problematic situation and solve the problem. But human thinking can vary from a very 
simple and mundane thought to a very sophisticated and complex one. The nature of the 
problem dictates the level of thinking. The higher-order thinking, termed as Critical Thinking 
(CrT), involves abstraction, uncertainty, application of multiple criteria, reflection, and self-
regulation. 
With the explosion of information technology and on moving away from an industrial 
society to a knowledge society, the attitude to think critically became a prerequisite 
(necessary condition) for solving non-routine problems. However, it is not always a sufficient 
condition too, especially when tackling complicated technological problems of our everyday 
life, where computers are frequently used as a supporting tool. In this case the need for 
Computational Thinking (CT) is another prerequisite for PS.  
The role that the rational use of the new technologies could play for the development of 
students’ PS abilities is very important indeed. In fact, the animation of figures and 
mathematical representations, provided by suitable computer software packages, videos, etc, 
increases the students’ imagination and helps them in finding solutions easier of the 
corresponding problems. The role of mathematical theory after this is not to convince, but to 
explain. There are several experimental results reported in the literature, according to which 
the use of computers as a tool in teaching mathematics enhances the students’ PS skills ([12, 
34, 36, 37, 40, 45], etc.). All these results have been obtained on comparing the performance 
of student groups for which computers have been widely used in the teaching process 
(experimental groups), with respect to the performance of similar groups, where the 
traditional teaching methods (theory and examples on the board) have applied (control 
groups).  
The assessment methods used in most of the above experiments are based on principles 
of the classical logic (YES-NO). However, Fuzzy Logic (FL), due to its possibility to 
characterize a situation with multiple values, provides a series of more realistic assessment 
methods. In earlier papers [36, 37] we have applied two frequently used fuzzy techniques for 
studying the effects of CT on PS: The measurement of a fuzzy system’s total possibilistic 
uncertainty, which is connected to the system’s mean performance with respect to an activity 
taking place within the system and the centre of gravity (COG) defuzzification technique [30] 
properly formulated for our purposes, which provides a weighted measure connected to the 
system’s quality performance. In the present paper a combination of the triangular/trapezoidal 
fuzzy numbers (TFNs/TpFNs) [38] and of the COG technique is introduced as an assessment 
tool of student PS/CT skills. Fuzzy numbers (FNs) play in general an important role in fuzzy 
mathematics, analogous to the role played by the ordinary numbers in classical mathematics.  

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
3
The rest of the paper is formulated as follows: In Section two we present a brief account 
of the evolution of research on PS in mathematics education from its emergency as a self 
sufficient science during the 1960’s until today (for more details see [33]). In Section three 
we give a description of the role that a proper combination of CrT and of CT plays for solving 
complicated technological problems [34]. The background about FNs being necessary for our 
purposes is provided in Section four. Applications are presented in Section five illustrating 
our results, in which two traditional assessment methods of the bi-valued logic, the 
calculation of the mean values and of the Grade Point Average (GPA) index, are used for 
validating our fuzzy assessment techniques. Finally, Section six is devoted to our final 
conclusions and to a brief discussion on the perspectives of further research on the subject. 
 
 
PROBLEM SOLVING 
 
As said above, the PS process is a complex phenomenon. Therefore, there is no wonder 
why there is no unique definition for it. The following encompass most of the existing in the 
literature definitions: For Polya [20], the pioneer in PS, “solving a problem means finding a 
way out of a difficulty, a way around an obstacle, attaining an aim that was not immediately 
understandable.” According to Schoenfeld [23] “a problem is only a problem, if you don’t 
know how to go about solving it. A problem that has no ‘surprises’ in store, and can be solved 
comfortably by routine or familiar procedures (no matter how difficult!) it is an exercise.” 
Green and Gilhooly [5] state that “PS in all its manifestations is an activity that structures 
everyday life in a meaningful way.” The authors add further that this activity draws together 
different components of cognition. Therefore, the kind of problem will dictate the type of 
cognitive skill necessary to solve the problem: Linguistic skills are used to read about a 
certain problem and debate about it, memory skills to recall prior knowledge and so on. 
Engaging in PS implies in general conscious and subconscious thinking and the type of 
problem will dictate the type of thinking: The more complex the problem, the higher the level 
of thinking required. Depending on the knowledge and thinking skills possessed by a problem 
solver, what could be a problem for one might not be a problem for some body else. Perhaps 
Martinez’s [12] definition carries the modern message about PS: “PS can be defined simply 
as the pursuit of a goal when the path to that goal is uncertain. In other words, it’s what you 
do when you don’t know what you’re doing.”  
Mathematics by its nature is a subject whereby PS forms its essence. In an earlier paper 
[33] we have examined the role of the problem in learning mathematics and we have 
attempted a review of the evolution of research on PS in mathematics education from its 
emergency as a self sufficient science at the 1960’s until today. Here is a rough chronology of 
that progress: 
 
 
1950’s – 1960’s: Polya’s ideas on the use of heuristic strategies in PS ([19, 20], etc).  
 
1970’s: Emergency of mathematics education as a self – sufficient science (research 
methods were almost exclusively statistical). Research on PS was still based on 
Polya’s ideas. 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
4
 
1980’s: A framework describing the PS process, and reasons for success or failure in 
PS, e.g., Schoenfeld’s “Expert performance model” [22], Lester and Garofallo [11], 
etc. 
 
1990’s: Models of teaching using PS, e.g., constructivist view of learning [31], 
mathematical modelling and applications (e.g., see [32] and its references), etc. 
 
2000’s: While early work on PS focused mainly on analyzing the PS process and on 
describing the proper heuristic strategies to be used in each of its stages, more recent 
investigations have focused mainly on solvers’ behaviour and required attributes 
during the PS process; e.g., ‘Multidimensional PS Framework’ (MPSF) of Carlson 
and Bloom [2]. More comprehensive models for the PS process in general (not only 
for mathematics) were developed by Sternberg and Ben-Zeev [26], by Schoenfeld: 
“PS as a goal-oriented behaviour” [25], etc. 
 
What has been agreed by many authors ([5, 6, 16], etc) is that a problem basically 
consists of three states: the starting state, the goal state and the obstacles or a set of available 
actions or strategies to move from the starting state to the goal state. Matlin [16] argues that 
the starting state describes the situation at the beginning of the problem; the goal state is 
reached when we solved the problem; and the obstacles describe the restrictions that make it 
difficult to proceed from the initial state to the goal state. The greatest difference among 
problem solvers of the same problem tends to lie in the third state, which might have infinite 
possibilities, while the goal and the starting points are usually the same for every one.  
 
 
CRITICAL AND COMPUATIONAL THINKING 
IN PROBLEM SOLVING  
 
The complexity of CrT is evident from the fact that there is no definition that is 
universally accepted. Some of the most characteristic definitions for CrT existing in the 
literature are the following: “…disciplined thinking that is clear, rational, open-minded, and 
informed by evidence” [6]; “…disciplined, self-directed thinking which exemplifies the 
perfection of thinking appropriate to a particular mode of domain of thinking.” [12], etc.  
CrT has its roots in the ancient Greek philosopher, Socrates, who perfected the art of 
questioning by asking pertinent questions to show that “people could not rationally justify 
their confident claims of knowledge.” With the explosion of information technology and 
moving away from an industrial society to a knowledge society, the attitude or disposition to 
think critically is as important as other skills such as professional acquisition of knowledge 
and lifelong learning [6, 29]. Understanding what CrT is and how it can be acquired might 
help institutions of learning to instil such skills in the learner and become more effective and 
efficient. 
Halpern’s [6] idea of thinking as information processing is complemented by 
McGuinness’s [17] idea of thinking as making judgements and sense-making. The former, 
deals with CrT, while the latter is embedded in constructivism. A combination of the 
definitions by Halpern [6] and Williams [43] gave rise into the following working definition 
for this study: CrT is an ability or skill by which the individual transcends his/her subjective 

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
5
self in a wilful manner in order to arrive rationally at conclusions that can be substantiated 
using valid information. 
CrT is considered to be a higher, non algorithmic, complex mode of thinking that often 
generates multiple solutions. Through it thinking skills of higher level such as analysis, 
synthesis and evaluation are combined giving rise to other skills like inferring, estimating, 
predicting, generalising, and creative thinking and PS. Therefore, PS is preceded by CrT. But 
CrT also affects acquisition of knowledge as knowledge is the product of thinking about 
concepts and combining them with principles. Concepts are acquired through abstractions and 
principles connect the concepts thus forming a network. Any new concept encountered has to 
fit in the existing cognitive structure. Such accommodation will not be possible without CrT. 
When a problem is encountered, before being solved it has to be analysed in a critical way: 
What is the problem, what is the given information and so on. Therefore, CrT is also involved 
in application of knowledge to solve the problem. 
It can be concluded that CrT is a prerequisite to knowledge acquisition and application to 
solve problems, but not a sufficient condition when we are faced with complex real 
technological problems. Technological problems require also a pragmatic way of thinking 
such as CT. The term CT has been initiated in 1996 by Papert [18], who is widely known as 
the creator of LOGO software, but it was brought to the forefront of the computer society 
only in 2006 by Wing [44], to describe “a set of thinking skills that are integral for solving 
complex problems, for systems’ analysis and for the understanding of the human behavior, by 
drawing on the concepts fundamental to computer science.” The main characteristics of CT 
include [41]: 
 
 
Analyzing and logically organizing data. 
 
Data modelling, data abstractions and simulations. 
 
Formulating problems such that computers may assist. 
 
Identifying, testing, and implementing possible solutions. 
 
Automating solutions via algorithmic thinking. 
 
Generalizing and applying this process to other problems. 
 
In general, CT synthesizes CrT with the existing knowledge and applies them for PS. 
Thus, CT is encouraging the application of CrT with the help of principles and techniques of 
the computer science rather, than it is suggesting the solution of problems in the way that 
computers do. However, the relationship between CT and CrT, the two modes of thinking in 
solving problems, has not been clearly established yet. In an earlier paper [34] we have 
attempted to shed some light into this relationship. Our conclusions can be summarized with 
the help of Figure 1, where a 3 - dimensional model for the PS process is presented. 
According to this model the existing knowledge serves as the connecting tool between CrT 
and CT, while the problem’s solution appears to be the product of a simultaneous application 
of the above three components (knowledge, CrT and CT) to the PS process. This approach is 
based on the hypothesis that, when the already existing knowledge is adequate, the necessary 
for the problem’s solution new knowledge is obtained through CrT, while CT is applied to 
design and to obtain the solution. 
 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
6
 
Figure 1. The 3- dimensional model for the PS process. 
The above model can be used in formulating the PS process of the complex problems of 
our everyday life and especially of the composite technological problems. However, the type 
of each problem dictates the order of the application of the above three components, which 
(order) can have in certain, relatively simple, cases the linear form of Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. The linear PS model. 
Computation is an increasingly essential tool for doing scientific research. It is expected 
that future generations of engineers will need to engage and understand computing in order to 
work effectively with computational systems, technologies and methodologies. CT is a type 
of analytical thinking that employs mathematical and engineering thinking to understand and 
solve complex problems within the constraints of the real world. When we have to solve real 
complex technological problems computational thinking with its components as described by 
Liu and Wang [13] are necessary thinking modes. These components involve: 
 
 
Abstract thinking, which is essential in computer science and technology in order to 
understand the main body of computer problem. In solving an interesting problem, 
abstraction of thinking is one very general purpose heuristic that can help to attack 
this problem. Informally, abstraction thinking can be thought of the mapping from a 
ground representation to a new but simpler representation.  
 
Logical thinking, which is the process where one uses reasoning consistency to come 
to a conclusion. Some computer problems or computer states (situations) involving 
logical thinking always call for mathematics structure, for relationships between 
some hypotheses and given statements, and for a sequence of reasoning that makes 
the conclusion more reasonable.  
 
Modelling thinking which, in the technical use of the term, refers to the translation of 
objects or phenomena from the real world into mathematical equations (mathematical 
models) or computer relations (simulation models). It is choosing an appropriate 
representation or modelling the relevant aspects of a problem to make it tractable. 
Computer modelling is the representation of reality objects on a computer. A 
problem which will be solved by computer must be modelled by a corresponding 
software model.  

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
7
 
Constructive thinking involving any well-defined computational procedure that takes 
some value, or set of values as input and produces some value, or set of values as 
output.  
 
The above components of CT synthesise CrT and existing knowledge and apply them to 
solve the problem. Thus CT is a prerequisite to PS when we face real complex technological 
problems. Learning to think computationally or to problem-solve through abstraction is the 
ability to eliminate details from a given situation in order to find a solution that might not be 
forthcoming under other circumstances [21]. 
CT can involve solving mathematical problems, building engineering systems, 
interpreting data, etc. It is becoming recognised as an important way to educate new 
generations of students who will become skilled not only at using tools, but also at creating 
them. All of today’s students will go on to live a life heavily influenced by computing, and 
many will work in fields that involve or are influenced by computing [34]. There is therefore 
a need to start teaching CT early and often [14]. 
CT today is spearheaded by the Center of Computational Thinking at Carnegie Mellon 
University in Pittsburg, Pensylvania, USA. The Center’s major activity is conducting 
PROBEs (PROBlem-oriented Explorations). These PROBEs are experiments that apply novel 
computing concepts to problems to show the value of CT. A PROBE experiment is generally 
a collaboration between a computer scientist and an expert in the field to be studied. The 
experiment typically runs for a year. In general, a PROBE will seek to find a solution for a 
broadly applicable problem and avoid narrowly focused issues. Some examples of PROBE 
experiments are optimal kidney transplant logistics and how to create drugs that do not breed 
drug resistant viruses (for more details look at www.cs.cmu.edu/~CompThink/probes.html). 
According to Denning [3] CT is just a new term for a core concept, algorithmic thinking. 
It is the new term for the more user-friendly Computer Science discipline. Computer Science 
is not just about programming, it’s about an entire way of thinking, which is now an intrinsic 
part of our lives. One could argue that a world without computers would be unthinkable. Yet 
there is a consensus that computer science has serious conundrums, such as attracting 
students, low retention rates and low motivation for learning programming despite the 
continuing growth of the information technology industry [9]. It is widely accepted that 
motivation and involvement are imperative in retaining students in computer science and in 
order to do this we need to engage students more in the process of learning programming  
by building more effective mechanisms and tools for the development of programming  
skills. However, this is not an easy task and one of the core aims of learning programming 
should be to constantly highlight that programming is not only coding, but also thinking 
computationally and acquiring skills to develop solid solutions through understanding of 
concrete problems. Recent studies in this field address the necessity to become trained in 
thinking computationally BEFORE learning programming, and conclude that the education of 
programming along with the theory of computing needs to be represented in a way that would 
make sense to students within the computer science discipline [9]. 
In thinking as a computer scientist, researchers become aware of behaviours and 
reactions that can be captured in algorithms or can be analysed within an algorithmic 
framework. CT now gives them a different framework for visualizing and analysing, a whole 
new perspective. To rephrase a common idiom, “until you have a screwdriver, everything 
looks like a nail.” CT develops a variety of skills (logic, creativity, algorithmic thinking, 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
8
modelling/simulations), involves the use of scientific methodologies and helps developing 
both inventiveness and innovative thinking. It has roots in mathematics, engineering, 
technology and science and in the synthesis of ideas from all these fields, has created a way of 
thinking that is only just beginning to generate enormous changes and benefits [4].  
CT is a learned approach and there’s no better way to learn it explicitly than through 
programming. Programming employs all the components of CT and the knowledge gained 
through the experience of tackling programming challenges – both explicit and tacit – can 
provide a framework not only for computer science, but for any field from natural and health 
sciences to the social sciences and humanities. 
So, here we have an important, essential and very truly 21st century skill, CT that is best 
learned through experience, interactions, and actively doing. It allows students who learn to 
express themselves through programming (and who have the time to gain this knowledge) to 
not only answer questions, but also generate new ones as they begin to view these challenges 
through the lens of the tacit knowledge intrinsic to computational thinking. The art of 
programming requires creativity and inventiveness, logic, algorithmic thinking and an 
appreciation of the recursive nature of this process, as the student learns from her failures, 
refines his/her work and gets a deeper understanding of the problem. As with any creation, 
even once a solution is found – a pattern, an algorithm – the solution can be refined, 
simplified and beautified, made more elegant. In a way, programming provides the same 
satisfaction as a video game – the opportunity to find a path – one of many – through a 
problem. The difference here is that students can answer their own questions and create their 
own challenges [4]. 
In concluding, our exploration into the dependence of PS of real engineering and 
scientific problems on CT and CrT revealed that there is a strong link between the constructs. 
As a result teaching practices should take cognisance of this finding [1]. 
We shall close this section with the following remark: Computers are viewed by some as 
tools that can perform miracles, solve any problem, while by others as auxiliary tools which 
perform cumbersome operations and use the saved time for functions that a computer cannot 
perform, i.e., creative thinking, developing new ideas and so on [4]. While the former group 
might have an exaggerated view as to what computers do, the latter, depending on the degree 
of computer science knowledge, might underestimate the power of the computer. However, 
they both know that computers (the hardware) were created by humans, and come into ‘life’ 
through programming, which was also performed by humans. And through programming it is 
possible to input information and get an output almost at the speed of light. However, the old 
credo “garbage in, garbage out” is still valid! 
 
 
FUZZY NUMBERS 
 
FL is based on the notion of fuzzy set introduced by Zadeh [46] in 1965 as follows: 
1. Definition: A fuzzy set A on the universal set U (or a fuzzy subset of U) is a set of 
ordered pairs of the form Α = {(x, mΑ(x)): x
U}, defined in terms of a membership function 
mΑ : U 
 [0,1] that assigns to each element of U a real value from the interval [0,1].  
The value mΑ(x) us called the membership degree of x in A. The greater is mΑ(x), the 
better x satisfies the characteristic property of A. The definition of the membership function is 



Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
9
not unique depending on the user’s subjective data, which is usually based on statistical or 
empirical observations. However, a necessary condition for a fuzzy set to give a reliable 
description of the corresponding real situation is that its membership function’s definition is 
compatible to the laws of the common logic. Note that many authors, for reasons of 
simplicity, identify a fuzzy set with its membership function, while others represent it as a 
sumbolic sum (finite or infinite according to the cardinality of U, or as a symbolicintegral, 
when U has the power of the continuous). 
For example, the probabilistic approach yields the natural language statement “there is an 
85% chance that Mary is tall”, while the fuzzy terminology corresponds to the expression 
“Mary’s degree of membership within the set of tall people is 0.85”. The semantic difference 
is significant: The first view supposes that Mary is or is not tall (still caught in the law of the 
Excluded Middle); it is just that we only have a 85% chance of knowing in which set she is 
in. In contrast, fuzzy terminology supposes that Mary is “more or less” tall, or some other 
term corresponding to the value of 0.85.  
A crisp subset A of U can be considered as a fuzzy set in U with mΑ(x) = 1, if x 
A and 
mΑ(x) = 0, if x 
A. In this way most properties and operations of crisp sets can be extended to 
corresponding properties and operations of fuzzy sets. 
The process of reasoning with fuzzy rules involves: 
 
 
Fuzzification of the problem’s data by utilizing the suitable membership functions to 
define the required FSs. 
 
Application of FL operators on the defined FSs and combination of them to obtain 
the final result in the form of a unique FS. 
 
Defuzzification of the final FS to return to a crisp output value, in order to apply it on 
the real world situation for resolving the corresponding problem. 
 
For general facts on fuzzy sets we refer to the book of Klir and Folger [10].  
 
FNs play an important role in fuzzy mathematics, analogous to the role played by the 
ordinary numbers in classical mathematics. The definition of a FN is the following: 
 
2. Definition: A FN is a fuzzy set A on the set R of real numbers with membership 
function mA: R 
[0, 1], such that: 
 
 
A is normal, i.e., there exists x in R such that mA(x) = 1, 
 
A is convex, i.e., all its a-cuts Aa = {x
U: mA (x)
 a}, a in [0, 1], are closed real 
intervals, and 
 
Its membership function y = mA (x) is a piecewise continuous function. 
 
As a counter example, Figure 3 represents the graph of a fuzzy set on R which is not 
convex. In fact, we observe that A0.4 = [5, 8.5] 
 [11, 13], i.e., A0.4 is not a closed interval.  
 







Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
10
 
Figure 3. Example of a non convex fuzzy set on R. 
Since the x-cuts Ax of a FN, say A, are closed real intervals, we can write Ax = [
] for each x in [0, 1], where 
 are real numbers depending on x. The following 
statement defines a partial order on the set of all FNs: 
 
3. Definition: Given the FNs A and B we write A
B (or
) if, and only if, 
and 
 (or
) for all x in [0, 1]. Two such FNs are called comparable, otherwise they are 
called non comparable. 
4. Remark: One can define the four basic arithmetic operations on FNS in two, equivalent 
to each other, ways [8]. In practice the above two general methods of the fuzzy arithmetic, 
requiring laborious calculations, are rarely used in applications, where the utilization of 
simpler forms of FNs is preferred.  
For general facts on FNs we refer to Chapter 3 of the book of Theodorou [28], which is 
written in Greek language, and also to the classical on the subject book of Kaufmann and 
Gupta [8]. 
 
 
Triangular Fuzzy Numbers 
 
TFNs are the simplest form of FNs. A TFN (a, b, c), with a, b, c in R actually expresses 
the fuzzyh notion that “the value of b lies in the interval [a, c]”. The membership function of 
(a, b, c) is zero outside the interval [a, c], while its graph in [a, c] consists of two straight line 
segments forming a triangle with the OX axis (Figure 4).  
,
x
x
l
r
A
A
,
x
x
l
r
A
A


x
x
l
l
A
B

x
x
r
r
A
B



Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
11
 
 
Figure 4. Graph and COG of the TFN (a, b, c). 
Therefore the analytical definition of a TFN is given as follows: 
5. Definition: Let a, b and c be real numbers with a < b < c. Then the TFN (a, b, c) is a 
FN with membership function: 
 
 
 
 
The following two Propositions refer to basic properties of TFNs that we are going to use 
later in the paper:  
6. Proposition: The x-cuts Ax of a TFN A = (a, b, c), x
[0, 1], are calculated by the 
formula Ax = [
] = [a + x(b - a), c - x(c - b)] 
Proof: Since Ax = {y
R: m(y
 x}, Definition 6 gives for the case of 
that  
= x
y = a + x(b – a). Similarly for the case of 
we have that  
= x 
y = c - x(c - b). 
 
Y
B(b,1)
O
G
X
Μ
A(α,0)
1
C(c,0)
N
,
[ , ]
( )
[ , ]
0,       
x
a
x
a b
b
a
c
x
y
m x
x
b c
c
b
x
a or x
c
















,
x
x
l
r
A
A


x
lA
y
a
b
a



x
r
A
c
y
c
b




Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
12
7. Proposition: (Defuzzification of a TFN) The coordinates (X, Y) of the COG of the 
graph of the TFN (a, b, c) are calculated by the formulas  
 
X = 
, Y = 
. 
 
Proof: The graph of the TFN (a, b, c) is the triangle ABC of Figure 5, with A (a, 0), B(b, 
1) and C (c, 0). Then, the COG, say G, of ABC is the intersection point of its medians AN 
and BM. The proof of the Proposition is easily obtained by calculating the equations of AN 
and BM and by solving the linear system of these two equations. 
8. Arithmetic Operations on TFNs: It can be shown [8] that the two general methods of 
defining arithmetic operations on FNs lead to the following simple rules for the addition and 
subtraction of TFNs: 
Let A = (a, b, c) and B = (a1, b1, c1) be two TFNs. Then 
 
 
The sum A + B = (a+a1, b+b1, c+c1). 
 
The difference A - B = A + (-B) = (a-c1, b-b1, c-a1), where –B = (-c1, -b1, -a1) is 
defined to be the opposite of B 1. 
 
In other words, the opposite of a TFN, as well as the sum and the difference of two TFNs 
are always TFNs. On the contrary, the product and the quotient of two TFNs, although they 
are FNs, they are not always TFNs, unless if a, b, c, a1, b1, c1 are in R+ ([39], Section 3.2). 
One can also define the following two scalar operations: 
 
 
k + A= (k+a, k+b, k+c), k
R 
 
kA = (ka, kb, kc), if k>0 and kA = (kc, kb, ka), if k<0. 
 
 
Trapezoidal Fuzzy Numbers 
 
Another simple form of FNs that are frequently used in applications are the TpFNs. 
Roughly speaking, a TpFN (a, b, c, d) with a, b, c, d in R states that “a certain real value lies 
in the interval [b, c]”. Its membership function y=m(x) is constantly 0 outside the interval [a, 
d], while its graph in this interval is the union of three straight line segments forming a 
trapezoid with the X-axis (Figure 5). 
 
 
                                                           
1 Obviously A + (-A) = (a-c, 0, c-a) O = (0, 0, 0), where the TFN O is defined by O(x) = 1, if x = 0 and O(x)=0, if 
x 0. 
3
a
b
c


1
3


Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
13
 
Figure 5. Graph of the TpFN (a, b, c, d). 
Therefore, the analytic definition of a TpFN is given as follows: 
9. Definition: Let a < b < c< d be given real numbers. Then the TpFN  
(a, b, c, d) is the FN with membership function: 
 
 
 
10. Remarks: (i) A TFN (a, b, d) can be considered as a special case of the TpFN (a, b, c, 
d) with b=c, i.e., the TpFNs are generalizations of TFNs. 
(ii) It can be shown [8] that the the arithmetic operations of addition and subtraction of 
TpFNs, as well as the corresponding two scalar operations defined for them in paragraph 8, 
can be performed in the same way with TFNs. However, the product and the quotient of two 
TpFNs, although they are FNs, they are not TpFNs, in general apart from some special cases 
[8].  
The following definition is introduced to be used later in the paper for assessing the 
student PS skills with the help of TpFNs/TFNs: 
11. Definition: Let Ai, i = 1, 2,…, n be TpFNs/TFNs, where n is a non negative integer, n
2. Then we define the mean value of the Ai’s to be the TpFN/TFN:  
 
A= 
(A1 + A2 + …. + An). 
 
We close this section with the following Proposition, which utilizes the COG technique 
for defuzzifying TpFNs: 
Y
B(b,1)
O
X
A(α,0)
C(c,1)
F(b,0)
E(c,0)
D(d,0)
,
[ , ]
1,
,
[ , ]
( )
[ , ]
0,       
x
a
x
a b
b
a
x
x
b c
y
m x
d
x
x
c d
d
c
x
a and x
d


















1
n

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
14
12. Proposition: The coordinates (X, Y) of the COG of the graph of the TpFN (a, b, c, d) 
are calculated by the formulas  
 
X = 
, Y = 
. 
 
Proof: We divide the trapezoid forming the graph of the TpFN (a, b, c, d) in three parts, 
two triangles and one rectangle (Figure 5). The coordinates of the three vertices of the triangle 
ABE are (a, 0), (b, 1) and (b, 0) respectively, therefore by Proposition 7 the COG of this 
triangle is the point C1 (
). Similarly one finds that the COG of the triangle FCD is 
the point C2 (
). Also, it is easy to check that the COG of the rectangle BCFE, being 
the intersection of its diagonals, is the point C3 (
). Further, the areas of the two 
triangles are equal to S1 = 
 and S2 = 
respectively, while the area of the rectangle is 
equal to S3 = c - b (in all cases the corresponding height is 1, since the TpFN (a, b, c, d) is a 
normal fuzzy set on R).  
It is well known then [42] that the coordinates of the COG of the trapezoid, being the 
resultant of the COGs Ci (xi, yi), i=1, 2, 3, are calculated by the formulas  
 
X = 
, Y = 
 (1),  
 
where S = S1 + S2 + S3 = 
 is the area of the trapezoid. 
The proof of the Proposition is completed by replacing the above found values of S, Si, xi 
and yi, i = 1, 2, 3, in formulas (1) and by performing the corresponding calculations. 
 
 
CLASSROOM APPLICATIONS 
 
As we have seen in our Introduction, exploratory investigations have demonstrated how 
exposure to CT enhances the way students approach problems. Also, in Section three we have 
seen that modelling thinking is one of the main components of CT. In order to investigate 
further all the above, but also to illustrate the use of our assessment model based on 
TFNs/TpFNs, we performed recently the following classroom experiment at the Graduate 
Technological Educational Institute (T. E. I.) of Western Greece, in Patras, Greece. 
Experiment: In the first place our subjects were 170 students of the School of 
Technological Applications, i.e., future engineers, being at their second term of studies. 
Notice that part (about the 1/3) of the lectures and the exercises of mathematical courses for 
the students of this School is performed in a computer laboratory, where the instructor 
presents the corresponding mathematical topics in a more “live” and attractive to students’ 
2
2
2
2
3(
)
c
d
a
b
dc
ba
c
d
a
b








2
2
3(
)
c
d
a
b
c
d
a
b






2
1
,
3
3
a
b

2
1
,
3
3
d
c

1
,
2
2
b
c

2
b
a

2
d
c

3
1
1
i
i
í
S x
S

3
1
1
i
i
í
S y
S

2
c
d
b
a




Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
15
way, while the students themselves, divided in small groups, use already existing 
mathematical software to solve the problems with the help of computers. 
Our basic tool in this application was a list of three problems involving mathematical 
modelling (MM) given to them for solution. The mathematical topics related to these 
problems included use of the derivatives to find the maximum of a given function, linear 
algebra (multiplication of matrices), and probability theory (see Appendix). A few days later 
we repeated the above application with a group of 255 students from the School of 
Management and Economics being also at their second term of studies. The topics covered in 
the mathematics course of the first term were almost the same with the students of the first 
group from the School of Technological Applications. Further, according to the marks 
obtained in this course, the two groups were found to be equivalent. The only difference was 
that the lectures in the mathematical courses for the students of the School of Management 
and Economics are performed in the classical way on the board including a number of 
exercises and examples connecting mathematics with real world applications and problems. 
The students participate in solving these problems. The student answers were marked in a 
climax from 0 to 100 and the scores obtained are the following:  
 
Group 1 (G1): 100(5 times), 99(3), 98(10), 95(15), 94(12), 93(1), 92 (8), 90(6), 89(3), 
88(7), 85(13), 82(4), 80(6), 79(1), 78(1), 76(2), 75(3), 74(3), 73(1), 72(5), 70(4), 68(2), 63(2), 
60(3), 59(5), 58(1), 57(2), 56(3), 55(4), 54(2), 53(1), 52(2), 51(2), 50(8), 48(7), 45(8), 42(1), 
40(3), 35(1). 
Group 2 (G2): 100(7), 99(2), 98(3), 97(9), 95(18), 92(11), 91(4), 90(6), 88(12), 85(36), 
82(8), 80(19), 78(9), 75(6), 70(17), 64(12), 60(16), 58(19), 56(3), 55(6), 50(17), 45(9), 40(6).  
 
The following linguistic characterizations (grades) were assigned to the above scores: A 
(100-85) = excellent, B (84-75) = very good, C (60-74) = good, D(50-59) = fair and F (<50) = 
not satisfactory. The student results with respect to the above grades are depicted in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Characterization of the student performance 
 
Grade 
G1 
G2 
A 
60 
60 
B 
40 
90 
C 
20 
45 
D 
30 
45 
E 
20 
15 
Total  
170 
255 
 
In order to validate our new fuzzy assessment method the overall performance of the two 
student groups was evaluated by two traditional assessment methods (mean values – GPA 
index) first and finally by using the TFNs as assessment tool: 
i) Mean values: A straightforward calculation gives that the mean values of the above 
student scores are approximately equal to 76.01 and 75.09 for G1 and G2 respectively. This 
shows that the mean performance of both student groups can be characterized (on the 
boundary) as very good, with the performance of the experimental group G1 being better. 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
16
ii) GPA index: We recall that the Grade Point Average (GPA) index is a weighted mean, 
in which more importance is given to the higher scores, by assigning greater coefficients 
(weights) to them. In other words, the GPA index measures the quality performance of a 
student group. For calculating the GPA index let us denote by nA, nB, nC, nD and nF the 
numbers of students whose performance was characterized by A, B, C, D and F respectively 
and by n the total number of students of each group. It is well known then that the GPA index 
is calculated by the formula GPA=
 (1); e.g., see [27]. 
Formula (1) gives that, GPA=0, if nF = n (worst case) and GPA=4, if nA = n (ideal case). 
Therefore 0 
 GPA 
 4, which implies that values of GPA greater than the half of its 
maximal value, i.e., greater than 2, could be considered as being connected to a satisfactory 
group’s performance. 
In our case, applying formula (1) on the data of Table 1, one finds that the GPA index for 
both groups is equal to 
2.529. Thus, the two student groups demonstrated the same, 
satisfactory, quality performance. 
(iii) Use of the TFNs: We assign to each linguistic label (grade) a TFN (denoted by the 
same letter) as follows: A= (85, 92.5, 100), B = (75, 79.5, 84), C = (60, 67, 74), D= (50, 54.5, 
59) and F = (0, 24.5, 49)2. The middle entry of each of the above TFNs is equal to the mean 
value of the student scores that we have previously attached to the corresponding grade. In 
this way a TFN corresponds to each student assessing his (her) individual performance 
We observe now that in Table 1 we actually have 170 TFNs representing the progress of 
the students of G1 and 255 TFNs representing the progress of the students of G2. Therefore, it 
is logical to accept that the overall performance of each student group is given by the 
corresponding mean value of the above TFNs (Definition 11). For simplifying our notation, 
let us denote the above mean values by the letter of the corresponding student group. Then, 
making straightforward calculations, we find that  
 
G1 = 
. (60A+40B+20C+30D+20F) 
 (63.53, 71.74, 83.47)  
 
and 
 
G2 = 
. (60A+90B+45C+45D+15F) 
 (65.88, 72.63, 79.53).  
 
Observing the left entries (63.53 and 65.88 respectively) and the right entries (83.47 and 
79.53 respectively) of the TFNs G1 and G2 one concludes that the overall performance of the 
two student groups could be characterized from good (C) to very good (B).  
It is also of worth to clarify that the middle entries of G1 and G2 (71.74 and 72.63 
respectively) give a rough approximation only of each group’s overall performance. In fact, 
                                                           
2 The representation of the linguistic labels A, B, C, D and F by TFNs has the advantage of determining numerically 
the scores corresponding to each grade. In fact, the scores assigned to the above grades in our example are not 
standard, since they may differ from case to case. For example, in a more rigorous assessment one could take 
A(90-100), B (80-89), C(70-79), D (60-69), F(<60), etc. 
0
2
3
4
F
D
C
B
A
n
n
n
n
n
n






43
17 
1
170

1
255


Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
17
since the middle entries of the TFNs A, B, C, D and F were chosen to be equal to the means 
of the scores assigned to the corresponding linguistic grades, the middle entries of the TFNS 
G1 and G2 are simply equal to the mean values of these means and therefore they do not 
measure the mean performances of the two student groups.  
Next, applying Proposition 6 one finds that the x-cuts of the two TFNs are G1x = 
[63.53+8.21x, 83.47-11.73x] and G2x = [65.88+6.75x, 79.53-6.9x] respectively. But 
63.53+8.21x 
 65.88+6.75x 
1.46x 
2.35 
x 
1.61, which is true, since x is in [0, 1]. 
On the contrary, 83.47-11.73x 
79.53-6.9x 
3.94
4.83x
0.82
x, which is not true for 
all the values of x. Therefore, according to Definition 3, the TFNs G1 and G2 are not 
comparable, which means that at this stage one can not decide which of the two groups 
demonstrates the better performance. 
A good way to overcome this difficulty is to defuzzify the TFNs G1 and G2. By 
Proposition 2.2.3, the COGs of the triangles forming the graphs of the TFNs G1 and G2 have 
x-coordinates equal to  
 
X = 
72.91 and  
X’ =
72.68 respectively.  
 
Observe now that the GOGs of the graphs of G1 and G2 lie in a rectangle with sides of 
length 100 units on the X-axis (student scores from 0 to 100) and one unit on the Y-axis 
(normal fuzzy sets). Therefore, the nearer the x-coordinate of the COG to 100, the better the 
corresponding group’s performance. Thus, since X > X’, G1 demonstrates a (slightly) better 
overall performance than G2.  
In concluding, the calculation of the mean values (76.01 and 75.09 respectively) 
demonstrated a very good (on the boundary) mean performance for both groups with the 
performance of the experimental group being better, the GPA index (2.529 for both groups) 
demonstrated equal, more than satisfactory, quality performances for both groups, while the 
defuzzified values of the corresponding TFNs (72.91, 72.68 respectively) demonstrated a 
good overall performance for both groups, with the performance of the experimental group 
being slightly better. The differences between the mean and quality performance of the 
groups are natural, while the differences between their mean performace (very good on the 
boundary) and their overall performance calculated with the help of TFNs (good) are 
relatively small and they can be easily justified from the different philosophy of the two 
methods (bi-valued and fuzzy logic respectively).  
Normally, the performance of the control group was expected to be better, since its 
students were exposed to more applications and solved problems on the board than the 
students of the experimental group did in the computer laboratory. Thus, the fact that the 
experimental group demonstrated a better mean performance and the same quality 
performance with the control group inicates that the use of computers had, at least for the 
mediocre students, a positive effect. However, the conclusions of the above experiment are 
not statistically safe, because the differences found in the performances of the two groups 
were small enough. 
The next example illustrates further the use of TpFNs for assessing student PS skills: 










63.53
71.74
83.47
3



65.88
72.63
79.53
3




Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
18
Example: Six different mathematics teachers train a group of five students of the Upper 
Secondary Education, who won at the final stage of the National Mathematical Competition, 
in order to participate in the International Mathematical Olympiad. In a preparatory test 
(solving of MM problems) during their training the students received the following scores 
(from 0-100) by their teachers: S1 (Student 1): 43, 48, 49, 49, 50, 52, S2: 81, 83. 85, 88, 91, 
95, S3: 76, 82, 89, 95, 95, 98, S4: 86, 86, 87, 87, 87, 88 and S5: 35, 40, 44, 52, 59, 62. The 
students’ performance is characterized by the linguistic grades A, B, C, D and F introduced in 
the previous experiment.  
i) Mean values: Calculating the mean values of the above scores separately for each 
student, one finds approximately the following mean performances for each of them (in 
parentheses we give the corresponding qualitative characterizations): S1: 48.5 (F), S2: 87.17 
(A), S3: 89.17 (A), S4: 86.83 (A) and S5: 48.67(F). Also, calculating the mean value of the 
above individual means on finds that the student overall mean performance is approximately 
equal to 72.05, i.e., it can be characterized as good (C). 
ii) GPA index: Inspecting the n = 5*6 = 30 in total student scores one finds that 14 of 
them are characterized as excellent (A), 4 as very good (B), 1 as good (C), 4 as fair (D) and 7 
are characterized as unsatisfactory. Replacing these values in formula (1) of our previous 
experiment one finds that GPA = 
2.47, i.e., the GPA index is greater than the half of its 
maximal value (4:2=2). Therefore the student overall quality performance is characterized as 
more than satisfactory. 
iii) Use of the TFNs: We consider the TFNs A, B, C, D and F defined in our previous 
experiment. Observing the 5*6 = 30 in total student scores one finds that in the present 
Example we have 14 TFNs equal to A, 4 equal to B, 1 equal to C, 4 equal to D and 7 TFNs 
equal to F characterizing the student performance. The mean value of the above TFNs 
(Definition 11) is equal to M = 
(14A + 4B + C + 4D + 7F) 
(60.33, 68.98, 79.63). 
Therefore, the student overall performance lies in the interval [60.33, 79.63]. Further, by 
Proposition 7, the x-coordinate of the COG of the graph of the TFN M is equal to 
 69.65, which shows that the student overall performance can be 
characterized as good (C).  
iv) Use of the TpFNs: We assign to each student Si a TpFN (denoted, for simplicity, with 
the same letter) as follows: S1 = (0, 43, 52, 59), S2 = (75, 81, 95, 100), S3 = (75, 76, 98, 100), 
S4 = (85, 86, 88, 100) and S5 = (0, 35, 62, 74). Each of the above TpFNs characterizes the 
individual performance of the corresponding student in the form (a, b, c, d), where a is the 
lower bound of his/her performance with respect to the linguistic grades defined above, b and 
c are the lower and higher scores respectively assigned to the student by the teachers and d is 
the upper bound of his/her performance with respect to the linguistic grades. 
Next, for assessing the overall students’ performance in terms of the TpFNs, we calculate 
the mean value of the TpFNs Si, i =1, 2, 3, 4, 5 (Definition 11), which is equal to the  
 
TpFN S = 
= (47, 64.2, 79, 86.6). Therefore the overall student performance lies 
in the interval [a2, a3] = [64.2, 79]. 
74
30 
1
30




3
63
.
79
98
.
68
33
.
60
5
1
1
5
i
i
S


Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
19
Further, by Proposition 12, one finds that the x-coordinate of the COC of the graph of the 
TpFN S is equal to  
 
X = 
,  
 
which shows that the student overall performance can be characterized as good (C). 
 
Remarks: 1. In contrast to the use of the TFNs as an assessment tool, which is always 
possible, there are cases where the use of the TpFNs is difficult in practice. In our classroom 
experiment, for example, in order to represent each student by a TpFN, we should need 170 + 
255 = 425 in total TpFNs and laborious calculations. However, whenever it can be applied, 
the method of TpFNs leads to more accurate outcomes. In our Example for instance, the 
TFNs determined the overall student performance to be in the interval [60.93, 79.63], while 
the TpFNs determined it to be in the interval [64.2, 79]. 
2. In [35] an ordered triple of fuzzy linguistic labels was assigned to each student 
assessing his/her individual PS skills. It was also shown [35] that this approach is equivalent 
to the A. Jones technique [7] of assessing a student’s knowledge in terms of his/her fuzzy 
deviation with respect to the teacher. However, this technique defines a partial order only 
among the students’ performances [35], which practically means that it is not always possible 
to compare the individual performance of two students. On the contrary, the combination of 
the TpFNs and the COG technique (paragraph iv of our Example) enables the comparison of 
two students’ individual performance in all cases. For this, it is enough to defuzzify the 
TpFNs Si, i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 of our Example corresponding to each student and to apply the 
same comparison criterion as we did for the TFNs G1 and G2 in our Experiment. Obviously, 
the above assessment cannot be obtained by using TFNs instead of TpFNs.  
 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
Based on what was reported in this paper, one can lead to the following conclusions: 
 
 
In our knowledge society the attitude to think critically became a prerequisite 
(necessary condition) for solving non-routine problems. However, it is not always a 
sufficient condition too, especially when tackling complicated technological 
problems of our everyday life, where computers are frequently used as a supporting 
tool. In this case the need for CT is another prerequisite for PS. CT, synthesizes CrT 
and existing knowledge and applies them to solve the complex problems.  
 
There are several experimental results reported in the literature, according to which 
the use of computers as a tool in teaching mathematics enhances the students’ PS 
skills. In the present paper we utilized a combination of the TFNs/TpFNs and of the 
COG defuzzification technique for assessing student PS/CT skills. Our results are 
illustrated by a classroom experiment recently performed in the Graduate T. E. I. of 
Westrn Greece and by another characteristic example, in which the creditability of 
our new fuzzy assessment method is validated by comparing its outcomes with the 
2
2
2
2
79
(86.6)
(64.2)
47
79*86.6
47*(64.2)
68.84
3(79
86.6
47
64.2)










Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
20
corresponding outcomes of two traditional assessment methods of the bi-valued 
logic, the calculation of the mean values and the GPA index. 
 
The conclusions of our classroom experiment, concerning the effects of the use of 
computers in teaching mathematics on student performance, are not statistically safe, because 
the differences appeared between the experimental and the control group are relatively small. 
Therefore, further experimental research is needed on the subject. Further, the combined use 
of the TFNs/TpFNs and the COG technique seems to have the potential of a general 
assessment method that could be used in a great variety of other human activities (games, 
sports, IQ tests, etc) and machine actions (decision-making, case-based reasoning, etc). This 
is also one of the main targets of our future research on the subject. 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
THE PROBLEMS GIVEN FOR SOLUTION TO THE STUDENTS IN OUR 
CLASSROOM EXPERIMENT 
 
Problem 1: We want to construct a channel to run water by folding the two edges of an 
orthogonal metallic leaf having sides of length 20cm and 32 cm, in such a way that they will 
be perpendicular to the other parts of the leaf. Assuming that the flow of the water is constant, 
how we can run the maximum possible quantity of the water? 
Remark: The correct solution is obtained by folding the edges of the longer side of the 
leaf. Some students solved the problem by folding the edges of the other side and failed to 
realize (validation of the model) that their solution was wrong. 
Problem 2: Let us correspond to each letter the number showing its order into the 
alphabet (A = 1, B = 2, C = 3 etc). Let us correspond also to each word consisting of 4 letters 
a 2X2 matrix in the obvious way; e.g., the matrix 
 corresponds to the word SOME. 
Using the matrix E = 
 as an encoding matrix how you could send the message LATE 
in the form of a camouflaged matrix to a receiver knowing the above process and how he 
(she) could decode your message? 
Problem 3: A ballot box contains 8 balls numbered from 1 to 8. One makes 3 successive 
drawings of a lottery, putting back the corresponding ball to the box before the next lottery. 
Find the probability of getting all the balls that he draws out of the box different. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Barr, V.; Stephenson, C. (2011). Bringing Computational Thinking to K-12: What is 
Involved and what is the Role of the Computer Science Education Community? ACM 
Inroads 2(1), 48-54. 




5
13
15
19




7
11
5
8

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
21
[2] 
Carlson, M. P.; Bloom, I. (2005). The cyclic nature of problem solving: An emergent 
multidimensional problem-solving framework. Educational Studies in Mathematics 58, 
45-75. 
[3] 
Denning, P.J. (2009). Beyond computational thinking. Communications of the ACM 
52(6), 28-30. 
[4] 
Einhorn, S (2012). Micro-Worlds, Computational Thinking, and 21st Century Learning. 
Logo Computer Systems Inc, White Paper. 
[5] 
Green, A. J. K.; Gillhooly, K.. Problem solving. In Cognitive Psychology: Braisby, N.; 
Gelatly, A. (Eds.); Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2005. 
[6] 
Halpern, D.. Thought and knowledge: An introduction to critical thinking; 4th Edition; 
Earlbaum: Mahwah, NJ, 2003. 
[7] 
Jones, A.; Kaufmman, A.; Zimmerman, H. J. (Eds.). Fuzzy Sets: Theory and 
Applications; NATO ASI Series, Series C: Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Vol. 
177; Reidel Publishing Company: Dordrecht, Holland, 1986. 
[8] 
Kaufmann, A.; Gupta, M.. Introduction to Fuzzy Arithmetic; Van Nostrand Reinhold 
Company: New York, NY, 1991. 
[9] 
Kazimoglu, C.; Kiernan, M.; Bacon, L.;MacKinnon, L. (2011). Understanding 
Computational Thinking before Programming: Developing Guidelines for the Design of 
Games to Learn Introductory Programming through Game-Play. International Journal 
of Game-Based Learning 1(3), 30-52. 
[10] Klir, G. J.; Folger, T. A.. Fuzzy Sets, Uncertainty and Information; Prentice-Hall: 
London, UK, 1988. 
[11] Lester F. K.; Garofalo, J.; Kroll, D. L.. Self-confidence, interest, beliefs and 
metacognition: Key influences on problem-solving behavior. In: Affect and 
Mathematical Problem Solving: A New Perspective: Mcleod, D. B.; Adams, V. M. 
(Eds.); Springer-Verlag: New York, NY, 1989, pp 75-88. 
[12] Lewandowski, G.; Bouvier, D.; McCartney, R.; Sanders, K.; Simon, B. (2007). 
Common sense computing (episode 3): Concurrency and concert tickets. Proceedings 
of the Third International Workshop on Computing Education Research (ICER ’07). 
[13] Liu, J.; Wang, L. (2010). Computational Thinking in Discrete Mathematics. 
Proceedings IEEE 2nd International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer 
Science, 413-416. 
[14] Magana, A. J.; Marepalli, P.; Clark, J. V. (2011). Work in Progress – Integrating 
Computational and Engineering Thinking through Online Design and Simulation of 
Multidisciplinary Systems. 41st ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, 
October 12-15. 
[15] Martinez, M. (2007). What is metacognition? Teachers intuitively recognize the 
importance of metacognition, but may not be aware of its many dimensions. Phi Delta 
Kappan 87(9), 696-714. 
[16] Matlin, W. M.. Cognition; Wiley and Sons: New York, NY, 2005. 
[17] Mc Guinness, C. (1993). Teaching thinking: New signs for theories of cognition. 
Educational Psychology 13(3-4), 305-316. 
[18] Papert, S. (1996). An exploration in the space of Mathematics Education. International 
Journal of Computers for Mathematics 1(1), 95-123. 
[19] Polya, G.. How to solve it; Princeton University Press:Princeton, 1945. 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
22
[20] Polya, G.. How I solve it: A new aspect of mathematical method; Princeton University 
Press: New Jersey, NJ, 1973. 
[21] Sarjoughian, H. S.; Zeigler, B. P. (1996). Abstraction Mechanisms in discrete-
event\inductive modelling. Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference, 748-755. 
[22] Schoenfeld, A. (1980). Teaching Problem Solving Skills. American Mathematical 
Monthly 87, 794-805. 
[23] Schoenfeld, A. (1983). The wild, wild, wild, wild world of problem solving: A review 
of sorts. For the Learning of Mathematics 3, 40-47.  
[24] Schoenfeld, A. (Ed.); Cognitive science and mathematics education; Erlbaum: New 
Jersey, NJ, 1987. 
[25] Schoenfeld, A.. How we think: A theory of goal-oriented decision making and its 
educational applications; Routledge: New York, NY, 2010. 
[26] Sternberg, R. J.; Ben-Zeev, T.. Complex cognition: The psychology of human thought; 
Oxford University Press: Oxford, 2001. 
[27] Swinburne.edu. Grade Point Average Assessment. Retrieved on October 15, 2014 from: 
http://www.swinburne.edu.au/studentadministration/ 
assessment/gpa.html. 
[28] Theodorou, J.. Introduction to Fuzzy Logic (in Greek language); Tzolas Publications: 
Thessaloniki, Greece, 2010. 
[29] Tiwari, A.; Lai, P.; So, M., Yuen, K. (2006). A comparison of the effects of problem-
based learning and lecturing on the development of students’ critical thinking. Med. 
Educ. 41(2), 156-174. 
[30] van Broekhoven, E.; De Baets, B. (2006). Fast and accurate centre of gravity 
defuzzification of fuzzy system outputs defined on trapezoidal fuzzy partitions. Fuzzy 
Sets and Systems 157(7), 904-918. 
[31] Von Glaserseld, E.. Learning as a Constructive Activity. In: Problems of representation 
in the teaching and learning of mathematics; Janvier, C. (Ed.); Lawrence Erlbaum: 
Hillsdale, N. J., 1987.  
[32] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2006). The use of mathematical modelling as a learning tool of 
mathematics. Quaderni di Ricerca in Didactica (Scienze Mathematche) 16, 53-60. 
[33] Voskoglou, M. Gr.. Problem solving from Polya to nowadays: A review and future 
perspectives. In: Progress in Education; Nata, R. V. (Ed.); Nova Publishers: New York, 
N. Y., 2011; Vol. 22, Chapter 4, pp. 65-82. 
[34] Voskoglou, M. Gr.; Buckley, S. (2012). Problem Solving and Computers in a Learning 
Environment. Egyptian Computer Science Journal 36(4), 28-46. 
[35] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2013). Assessing Students Individual Problem Solving Skills. 
International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and Artificial Intelligence 3, 39-49. 
[36] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2014). Solving problems with the help of computers: A fuzzy logic 
approach. International Journal of Advances in Applied Mathematics and Mechanics 
2(2), 62-71. 
[37] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2015). An application of fuzzy sets for studying the influence of 
computational thinking in learning mathematics. Journal of Mathematical Sciences and 
Mathematics Education 10(1), 30-47. 
[38] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2015). Assessment of human skills using trapezoidal fuzzy 
numbers. American Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics 5(4), 111-116. 

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
23
[39] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2015). Use of the Triangular Fuzzy Numbers for Student 
Assessment. American Journal of Applied Mathematics and Statistics 3(4), 146-150. 
[40] Weller, K.; Clark, J.; Dubinsky, E.; Loch, S.; McDonald, M.; Merkowsky, R. Student 
performance and attitudes in courses based on APOS theory and the ACE teaching 
style. In: Research in collegiate mathematics education V; Selden, A.; Dubinsky, E.; 
Harel, G.; Hitt, F. (Eds.); American Mathematical Society: Providence, RI, 2003, 97-
131. 
[41] Wikipedia.org. Computational thinking. Retrieved on December 17, 2015 from: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computational_thinking. 
[42] Wikipedia.org. Center of mass: A system of particles. Retrieved on December 17, 2015 
from: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Center_of_mass#A_system_of_particles. 
[43] Williams, R. L. (2005). Targeting critical thinking within teacher education: The 
potential impact on Society. The Teacher Educator 40(3), 163-187. 
[44] Wing, J. M. (2006), Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM 49, 33-35  
[45] Yadav, A., Zhou, N., Mayfield, C., Hambrusch, S. and Korb, J. T. (2011). Introducing 
Computational Thinking in Education Courses. Proceedings of the 42nd ACM technical 
symposium on Computer Science Education 11, 465-470. 
[46] Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy Sets. Information and Control 8, 338-353. 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
 
 
 
Name: Michael Gr. Voskoglou,  
Professor Emeritus of Mathematical Sciences. 
 
Affiliation: Graduate Technological Educational Institute (T. E. I.) of Western Greece, 
School of Technological Applications, 26334 Patras, Greece. 
 
Education:  
 
 
B.Sc., Department of Mathematics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece, 
1972  
 
M.Sc., Department of Pure Mathematics, University of Leeds, UK, 1978 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
24
 
M. Phil., Department of Pure Mathematics, University of Leeds, UK, 1980  
 
Ph.D., Department of Mathematics, University of Patras, Greece, 1982 
 
Address: 6-8 Ag. Saranda Str., 26222 Patras, Greece.  
 
Research and Professional Experience:  
 
 
3 Dissertations (M.Sc., M. Phil., Ph.D.) 
 
10 Books (1984-2015) 
 
199 Papers in English published in refereed academic journals and in Proceedings of 
refereed International Conferences of 28 countries in the five continents around the 
Globe (1983-2016). 
 
28 Announcements in International Mathematical Conferences (publication of the 
Abstracts only, 1983-2015) 
 
34 Reviews of the American Mathematical Society (2008-2016) 
 
85 Articles in Greek published in local mathematical journals and in proceedings of 
Mathematical Conferences (1984-2016) 
 
11 Announcements in Greek Mathematical Conferences (publication of the Abstracts 
only, 1983-2016) 
 
5 Technical Reports for Programs of Applied Research (T. E. I. of Western Greece, 
Messolonghi (1990-1997) 
 
14 Lecture Notes (1982-2010) 
 
His published research work has more than 100 citations by other researchers around 
the Globe. 
 
Supervisor of more than 15 student dissertations (T. E. I. of Western Greece, 1990-
2009) 
 
External Examiner of Ph.D. dissertations at: King Khalid University, Saudi Arabia 
(Dept. of Electrical Engineering, February, 2014), Ain Shams University, Cairo, 
Egypt (Dept. of Physics, July, 2014), National Institute of Technology Durgapur 
India (Dept. of Mathematics, March, 2016), Bharathidasan University, Tamilnadu, 
India (Dept. of Mathematics, currently) 
 
Editor in Chief of the “International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and 
Artificial 
Intelligence” 
(IJAFSAI: 
ISSN 
2241-1240, 
http://eclass.teipat.gr 
/eclass/courses/523103) Impact Factor: SJIF 3.806, Universal 0.71  
 
Reviewer of the AMS, Member of the Editorial Board or Referee in about 30 
academic mathematical journals around the Globe.  
 
1990-1994: Vice- President of the Researches’ Committee and Institutional 
Coordinator of the European program “Erasmus” for student and faculty exchanges, 
T. E. I. of Messolonghi. 
 
1995-1997: Dean of the Faculty of Management and Economics, T. E. I. of 
Messolonghi. 
 
2001-2005: Head of the Department and Scientific Director of the European Program 
“Expansion of Tertiary Education”, Department of Renovation and Restoration of 
Buildings, T. E. I. of Patras. 

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
25
 
His research interests include Algebra, Finite Markov Chains, Fuzzy Sets and 
Mathematics Education. 
 
Professional Appointments: 
 
 
2010 - Today: Professor Emeritus of Mathematical Sciences of the School of 
Technological Applications of the Graduate T. E. I. of Western Greece, Patras, 
Greece. 
 
2000 – 2010: Full Professor of Mathematics for Engineers/Operations’ Research, 
Department of Renovation and Restoration of Buildings, Graduate T. E. I. of Patras 
(and now of Western Greece) 
 
November 2009: Visiting Professor, M.Sc. Course in International Business of the 
School of Management at the University of Warsaw, Poland. 
 
May 2010: Visiting Professor, M.Sc. Course in Finance and Risk Management of the 
Department of Operational Mathematics at the University of Applied Sciences 
(HTW) of Berlin, Germany. 
 
2006 – 2008: Instructor in the Program of Business Administration of the Hellenic 
Open University (Quantitative Methods: Mathematics for Economists, Statistics, 
Operations’ Research). 
 
1989 – 2000: Full Professor of Mathematics for Economists/Operations’ Research, 
Department of Management of Cooperative Organizations, Graduate T. E. I. of 
Messolonghi (and now of Western Greece). 
 
1997 – 2000 (under sabbatical): Visiting Researcher, Institute of Mathematics and 
Informatics, National Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. 
 
1987 – 1989: Lecturer of Mathematics, Department of Management of Cooperative 
Organizations, Graduate T. E. I. of Messolonghi (and now of Western Greece). 
 
1972 – 1987: Teacher of Mathematics in Public Secondary Education, Patras, 
Akhaia, Greece. 
 
1977 – 1980 (under sabbatical): Postgraduate studies and research, University of 
Leeds, UK. 
 
1980 – 1982: Part - time Tutor in Abstract Algebra, Department of Mathematics, 
University of Patras, Greece. 
 
1983 – 1989: Instructor at the Schools of Primary and Secondary In-Service Teachers 
Training (of Elementary Mathematics from a Modern Optical Corner and of Linear 
Algebra respectively). 
 
Honors:  
 
 
1969-1972: Scholarship from the Greek National Scholarships’ Institute during his 
undergraduate studies, 
 
1977-1980: NATO’s Fellowship for postgraduate studies in England. 
 
1996: WHO IS WHO IN THE WORLD (Marquis: New Providence, NJ, USA) 
 
1996: MEN OF ACHIEVEMENT (The International Biographical Centre: 
Cambridge, England).  
 
1997: WHO IS WHO IN AMERICA (Marquis: New Providence, NJ, USA) 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
26
 
1999: RESEARCH BOARD OF ADVISORS (American Biographical Institute) 
 
2009: 
THE 
INTERNATIONAL 
EINSTEIN 
AWARD 
(The 
International 
Biographical Centre: Cambridge, England). 
 
2015: SINCEREST APPRECIATION PLAQUE (Ain Shams University, Faculty of 
Computer and Information Sciences, Cairo, Egypt). 
 
Memberships: 
 
 
Greek Mathematical Society (Vice-President/General Secretary for a series of years 
at the Sector of Patras). 
 
American Mathematical Society 
 
International Study Group of Mathematical Modelling and Applications (ICTMA) 
 
Hellenic Bridge Federation 
 
Links: 
 
Home page : http://eclass.teipat.gr/eclass/courses/523102 
Related pages : http://arxiv.org/a/voskoglou_m_1  
https://mindreaderpublications.academia.edu/MichaelVoskoglou  
https://researchgate.net/profile/Michael_Voskoglou 
http://www.researcherid.com/rid/C-4504-2014; http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4727-0089  
https://www.amazon.com/author/michaelvoskoglou  
 
Recent Publications (2013 – 2016) 
 
1. CASE-BASED REASONING IN COMPUTERS AND HUMAN COGNITION: A 
MATHEMATICAL FRAMEWORK, International Journal of Machine Intelligence 
and Sensory Signal Processing, Inderscience Publishers, 1, 3-22, 2013  
2. PROBLEM-SOLVING AS A COMPONENT OF THE CONSTRUCTIVIST VIEW 
OF LEARNING, In Mantano, B. and Chacon, A. (Eds.), Education Research: 
Challenges, Training Techniques and Improvements, Chapter 8, 91-110, Nova 
Publishers, N.Y., 2013 
3. PROBLEM SOLVING, FUZZY LOGIC AND COMPUTATIONAL THINKING, 
Egyptian Computer Science Journal, 37(1), 131-145, 2013. 
4. ASSESSING STUDENTS INDIVIDUAL PROBLEM SOLVING SKILLS: A 
FUZZY FRAMEWORK, International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and 
Artificial Intelligence, 3, 39-49, 2013 
5. AN APPLICATION OF THE APOS/ACE APPROACH IN TEACHING THE 
IRRATIONAL NUMBERS, Journal of Mathematical Sciences and Mathematics 
Education, 8(1), 30-47, 2013 
6. A STOCHASTIC MODEL FOR ANALOGICAL PROBLEM SOLVING, in G. 
Mircea and S. Wibovo, Recent Advances in Finite Differences and Applications and 
Computational Mathematics, 29-34, WSEAS Editions, Athens 2013 
7. FUZZY MEASURES OF STUDENTS MATHEMATICAL MODELLING SKILLS, 
(with. A.- B. Salem), Egyptian Computer Science Journal, 37(3), 2013 

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
27
8. AN APPLICATION OF FUZZY SETS TO SCIENTIFIC THINKING, ICIT  
13, Jordan, 2013, available at http://sce.juj.edu.jo/icit13/images/camera%20Ready/ 
Artificial%20Intelligence/638-math.pdf. 
9. FUZZY MEASURES OF A SYSTEM’S EFFECTIVENESS – AN APPLICATION 
TO PROBLEM SOLVING, Transactions on Mathematics (WSEAS), 12(4), 459-471, 
2013. 
10. APPLICATIONS OF THE CBR METHODOLOGY TO MEDICINE (with. A.- B. 
Salem), Egyptian Computer Science Journal, 37(7), 68-77, 2013 
11. ANALOGICAL REASONING AND TRANSFER: A FUZZY FRAMEWORK, in 
G. Mircea and S. Wibovo, Recent Advances in Finite Differences and Applications 
and Computational Mathematics, 35-40, WSEAS Editions, Athens, 2013 
12. FUZZY METHODS FOR ASSESSING STUDENTS ANALOGICAL REASONING 
SKILLS, in G. Mircea and S. Wibovo, Recent Advances in Finite Differences and 
Applications and Computational Mathematics, 45-50, WSEAS Editions, Athens 
2013 
13. AN APPLICATION OF FUZZY LOGIC IN MEASURING A SYSTEM’S 
EFFECTIVENESS, International Journal of Industrial Mathematics, 592), 97-108, 
2013 
14. APPLICATION OF FUZZY LOGIC TO SYSTEMS MODELLING, International 
Journal of Fuzzy Systems Applications, 3(2), 1-15, 2013 
15. FUZZY LOGIC AS A TOOL FOR ASSESSING STUDENTS KNOWLEDGE AND 
SKILLS, Education Sciences, 3, 208-211, 2013 
16. ASSESSING STUDENTS LEARNING SKILLS: A FUZZY FRAMEWORK, Fuzzy 
Sets, Rough Sets and Multi-valued Operations and Applications, 5(2), 115-124, 2013 
17. APPLICATION OF THE CENTROID TECHNIQUE FOR MEASURING 
LEARNING SKILLS, Journal of Mathematical Sciences and Mathematics 
Education, 8(2), 34-43, 2013 
18. DEALING WITH THE FUZZINESS OF HUMAN REASONING (with I. Subbotin), 
International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and Artificial Intelligence, 3, 91-
106, 2013 
19. FUZZY LOGIC IN HUMAN REASONING, Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and 
Informatics (Indonesia), 2(2), 158-166, 2013 
20. APPLICATIONS OF FUZZY SETS ON GENERAL STATE SPACES, ICTMA 
Newsletter, 6(1), p. 11, 2013 
21. USE OF FUZZY LOGIC IN STUDENTS ASSESSMENT, HMS International 
Journal for Mathematics in Education, 5, 145-160, 2013 
22. FUZZY LOGIC: A NEW POWERFUL TOOL FOR MATHEMATICAL 
MODELLING AND APPLICATIONS, ICTMA Newsletter, 6(2), p. 7, 2013 
23. PROBABILITY AND FUZZY LOGIC IN ANALOGICAL REASONING, Journal 
of Physical Sciences (Vidyasagar University, India), 17, 11-31, 2013 
24. REMARKS ON AND EXAMPLES OF MATHEMATICAL MODELLING 
PROBLEMS, ICTMA Newsletter, 7(1), 11-13, 2014 
25. PROBABILITY AND FUZZINESS IN DECISION MAKING, Egyptian Computer 
Science Journal, 38(3), 86-99, 2014 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
28
26. ANALOGY BASED AND CASE BASED REASONING: TWO SIDES OF THE 
SAME COIN (with A.-B. Salem), International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy 
Sets and Artificial Intelligence, 4, 5-51, 2014 
27. MEASURING THE UNCERTAINTY OF HUMAN REASONING, American 
Journal of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 2(1), 1-6, 2014 
28. ASSESSING THE PLAYERS PERFORMANCE IN THE GAME OF BRIDGE, 
American Journal of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 2(3), 115-120, 2014 
29. LANGUAGE, MATHEMATICS AND CRITICAL THINKING: THE CROSS 
INFLUENCE AND CROSS ENRICHMENT (with I. Subbotin), Didactics of 
Mathematics: Problems and Investigations (Donetsk University, Ukraine), 41, 89-94, 
2014 
30. A TRIANGULAR FUZZY MODEL FOR ASSESSING CRITICAL THINKING 
SKILLS (with I. Subbotin), International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and 
Artificial Intelligence, 4, 173-186, 2014 
31. FUZZY LOGIC AS A TOOL IN ASSESSING THE BRIDGE PLAYERS 
PERFORMANCE, International Journal of Advances in Applied Mathematics and 
Mechanics, 2(1), 134-142, 2014 
32. A TRIANGULAR FUZZY MODEL FOR ASSESSING PROBLEM SOLVING 
SKILLS, Annals of Pure and Applied Mathematics, 7(1), 53-58, 2014 
33. A FUZZY MODEL FOR ASSESSMENT PROCESSES, International Journal of 
Mathematical Modelling and Computations, 4(3), 201-212, 2014 
34. A TRIANGULAR FUZZY MODEL FOR DECISION MAKING, American Journal 
of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 496), 195-201, 2014 
35. A 
TRAPEZOIDAL 
FUZZY 
METHOD 
FOR 
ASSESSING 
STUDENTS 
MATHEMATICAL MODELLING SKILLS, American Journal of Educational 
Research, 2(12), 1144-1150, 2014 
36. FUZZY ASSESSMENT METHODS (with I. Subbotin), Universal Journal of 
Applied Mathematics, 2(9), 305-314, 2014  
37. SOLVING PROBLEMS WITH THE HELP OF COMPUTERS: A FUZZY LOGIC 
APPROACH, International Journal of Advances in Applied Mathematics and 
Mechanics, 2(2), 62-71, 2014 
38. A NEW FUZZY METHOD FOR ASSESSING HUMAN SKILLS, Progress in 
Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos, 2(2), 71-80, 2014 
39. FUZZY MODELS FOR LEARNING ASSESSMENT (with I. Subbotin), Turkish 
Journal of Fuzzy Systems, 5(2), 100-113, 2014 
40. THE APOS/ACE INSTRUCTIONAL TREATMENT FOR MATHEMATICS: A 
FUZZY APPROACH, HMS International Journal for Mathematics in Education, 6, 
120-141, 2014 
41. RECENT RESEARCH ADVANCES IN PROBLEM SOLVING, International 
Journal of Mathematics, Game Theory and Algebra, 21(2-3), 2014  
42. FUZZY MODELS FOR ASSESSING FACULTY EVALUATIONS (with I. 
Subbotin), International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and Artificial 
Intelligence, 5, 5-22, 2015 
43. APPLICATION OF THE TRIANGULAR FUZZY ASSESSMENT MODEL TO 
ASSESSMENT OF ANALOGICAL REASONING SKILLS (with I. Subbotin), 
American Journal of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 3(1), 1-6, 2015 

Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem Solving 
29
44. AN APPLICATION OF FUZZY SETS FOR STUDYING THE INFLUENCE OF 
COMPUTATIONAL THINKING IN LEARNING MATHEMATICS, Journal of 
Mathematical Sciences and Mathematics Education, 10(1), 30-47, 2015 
45. MATHEMATICAL 
MODELLING 
AS 
A 
TEACHING 
METHOD 
OF 
MATHEMATICS, Journal for Research in Innovative Teaching (National 
University, La Jolla, CA, USA), 8(1), 35-50, 2015 
46. FUZZY LOGIC IN THE APOS/ACE INSTRUCTIONAL TREATMENT OF 
MATHEMATICS, American Journal of Educational Research, 3(3), 330-339, 2015 
47. FUZZY LOGIC AS A TOOL FOR ASSESSING HUMAN SKILLS, International 
Journal of Mathematics and Computational Science, 1(2), 15-20, 2015 
48. FUZZY METHODS FOR STUDENT ASSESSMENT (with I. Subbotin), 
International Journal of Education and Information Technology, 1(1), 20-28, 2015 
49. EVALUATING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF A CBR SYSTEM: A FUZZY LOGIC 
APPROACH (with I. Subbotin), American Journal of Computational and Applied 
Mathematics, 5(2), 27-32, 2015  
50. A FUZZY MODEL FOR MEASURING THE STUDENT LEARNING BASED ON 
BLOOM’S TAXONOMY (with I. Subbotin), Egyptian Computer Science Journal, 
39 (2), 43-55, 2015  
51. REASONING 
METHODOLOGIES 
FOR 
INTELLIGENT 
INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS (with A.-B. Salem), International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets 
and Artificial Intelligence, 5, 111-127, 2015 
52. USE 
OF 
THE 
TRIANGULAR 
FUZZY 
NUMBERS 
FOR 
STUDENT 
ASSESSMENT, American Journal of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 3(4), 146-
150, 2015 
53. TEACHING MATHEMATICS OR MATHEMATICAL MODELLING? (AN 
ANSWER TO A COMMENT). ICTMA Newsletter, 8(1), 12-13, 2015 
54. ASSESSMENT OF HUMAN SKILLS USING TRAPEZOIDAL 
FUZZY 
NUMBERS, American Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 5(4), 
111-116, 2015 
55. VARIATIONS OF THE COG DEFUZZIFICATION TECHNIQUE FOR 
ASSESSMENT PURPOSES, Journal of Mathematical Sciences and Mathematics 
Education, 10(2), 38-57, 2015 
56. USE 
OF 
THE 
TRIANGULAR 
FUZZY 
NUMBERS 
FOR 
STUDENT 
ASSESSMENT (REVISED), arXiv: 1507.03257, [cs.AI], v2, uploaded on Oct. 12, 
2015 
57. DEFUZZIFICATION OF FUZZY NUMBERS FOR STUDENT ASSESSMENT, 
American Journal of Applied Mathematics and Statistics, 3(5), 206-210, 2015 
58. ASSESSMENT OF HUMAN SKILLS USING TRAPEZOIDAL 
FUZZY 
NUMBERS (PART II), American Journal of Computational and Applied 
Mathematics, 5(5), 154-158, 2015.  
59. FUZZY ASSESSMENT PROCESSES, In: M. Roushdy and T. Nazmy (Eds.), 
Proceedings of the 7th IEEE Int. Conf. on Intelligence Computing and Information 
Systems, (ICICIS 15), Vol. 1, 10-18, Ain Shams Univ., Cairo, Egypt, 2015. 
60. USING THE TRIANGULAR FUZZY NUMBERS FOR THE VERIFICATION OF 
A CHOSEN DECISION, Academic Journal of Applied Mathematical Sciences, 1(1), 
1-8, 2015 

Michael Gr. Voskoglou 
30
61. AN APPLICATION OF TRIANGULAR FUZZY NUMBERS TO LEARNING 
ASSESSMENT, Journal of Physical Sciences, 20, 63-79, 2015 
62. FUZZY NUMBERS: A TOOL FOR THE ASSESSMENT PROCESSES (with I. 
Subbotin), International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and Artificial 
Intelligence, 6, 17-32, 2016. 
63. NEW TECHNOLOGIES, OPEN ACCESS AND AUTHOR ETHICS: SOME 
REMARKS ON A CASE OF PLAGIARISM, Special Editorial, (with I. Subbotin), 
International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and Artificial Intelligence, 6, 67-
71, 2016.  
64. UTILIZING FUZZY NUMBERS AND THE COG TECHNIQUE FOR STUDENT 
ASSESSMENT, Journal of Global Research in Education and Social Science, 7(1), 
43-54, 2016. 
65. TRIANGULAR AND TRAPEZOIDAL FUZZY ASSESSMENT MODELS, in S. J. 
John (Ed.), Handbook of Research on Generalized and Hybrid Set Structures and 
Applications for Soft Computing, Chapter 18, 375-393, IGI-Global, Hershey, PA, 
USA, 2016.  
66. APPLICATIONS OF FINITE MARKOV CHAIN MODELS TO MANAGEMENT, 
American Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 6(1), 7-13, 2016 
67. AN APPLICATION OF FUZZY NUMBERS TO THE ASSESSMENT OF 
MATHEMATICAL MODELLING SKILLS (with I. Subbotin), International Journal 
of Mathematical Modelling and Computations, 6(1), 83-103, 2016. 
68. FUZZY NUMBERS AS AN ASSESSMENT TOOL IN THE APOS/ACE 
INSTRUCTIONAL 
TREATMENT 
OF 
MATHEMATICS, 
Physical 
and 
Mathematical Education, Sumy State Pedagogical University, Ukraine, 1(7), 29-37, 
2016. 
69. ON STUDENT UNDERSTANDING OF THE CONCEPT OF INFINITY, 
Philosophy of Mathematics Education Journal, accepted for publication, 2016.  
70. INFINITY AND FUZZY NUMBERS, Egyptian Computer Science Journal, accepted 
for publication, 2016. 
71. AN APPLICATION OF THE GENERALIZED RECTANGULAR FUZZY MODEL 
TO CRITICAL THINKING ASSESSMENT, American Journal of Educational 
Research, accepted for publication, 2016. 
72. FUZZY NUMBERS AND ANALOGICAL REASONING, Academic Journal of 
Applied Sciences Research, accepted for publication, 2016.  
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES AND MATHEMATICAL 
PROBLEM SOLVING: REDESIGNING RESOURCES, 
MATERIALS, AND EXTENDING  
LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
 
 
Manuel Santos-Trigo 
Centre for Research and Advanced Studies, Cinvestav-IPN, Mexico 
Matías Camacho-Machín 
Universidad de la Laguna, Spain 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Mathematical problem solving is a research and practicing field that aims at 
analyzing the process involved in formulating and pursuing problems and the extent to 
which problem solving activities can be used to frame and structure students’ learning 
environments. How does the systematic use of several digital technologies shape and 
extend learners’ problem solving approaches? we argue that the use of mathematical 
action (GeoGebra) and multiple purpose technologies (Internet and communication tools) 
provides affordances for students to represent and explore dynamically mathematical 
situations and to extend and foster mathematical discussions beyond formal settings. We 
illustrate, via examples, and characterize the learners’ use of a Dynamic Geometry 
System (DGS) to construct and explore problems dynamically and ways to rely on online 
resources and communication technologies to engage students in mathematical 
discussions. Novel problem solving strategies such as dragging mathematical objects 
within the problem representation, finding and examining loci of particular objects, using 
sliders to explore some problem parameters behavior, quantifying attributes to observe 
patterns or invariance become essential in finding and supporting mathematical 
relationships or conjectures. 
 
 
 
                                                           
 msantos@cinvestav.mx. 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
32
INTRODUCTION 
 
Digital technologies are omnipresent and pervade many of human activities nowadays. 
Mobile devices such as tablets and smart phones are not only used to communicate or interact 
with people (social networking), but also to look for information and access a variety of apps 
with educational purposes. Churchill, Fox, and King (2016) pointed out that “…If 
appropriately designed for the context, educationally useful digital resources for learning can 
be effectively delivered via mobile technologies to students at any time, inside and outside 
classrooms” (p. 20). What does it mean to design proper resources that learners can use to 
learn disciplinary knowledge and problem solving competencies? How should people or 
students use those resources? What type of support is important for students to receive during 
their learning experiences? How should students’ learning be assessed? In this chapter, we 
present and discuss ways in which both both mathematical actions and multiple purpose 
technologies can be used in learning environments that go beyond formal settings. 
Mathematical action technologies are used to represent mathematical ideas or problems, 
activate and improve exploration, conjecture formulation, argumentation and in general 
learners’ ways of thinking (Moreno-Armella and Santos-Trigo, 2016). An aim is to 
characterize the extent to which the systematic use of digital technologies provides a set of 
affordances for learners to represent and explore mathematical ideas and to extend 
mathematical discussions and activities outside the classroom. In particular, we focus on 
discussing the role played by a Dynamic Geometry System (GeoGebra) in constructing 
mathematical relationships that emerge while representing and examining simple 
mathematical objects dynamically. That is, moving objects within a problem representation 
offers students an opportunity to look for objects invariances or for mathematical relations 
and ways to support them through both empirical and formal arguments. In addition, we also 
argue that the use of GeoGebra opens up novel routes for learners to formulate questions 
when they direct their attention to the reconstruction of figures that are given in problem 
statements. In this process, learners can consult or are encouraged to look for online 
information regarding concepts or possible solutions that are shared and discussed with peers 
through communication technologies (Skype, FaceTime, etc.). Likewise, learners can rely on 
social networks to form discussion groups to solve mathematical problems or to exchange 
ideas about concepts or problem solutions.  
 
 
MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM SOLVING  
AND DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES 
 
Mathematical problem solving is a field of research and practice that focuses on 
analyzing the extent to which problem solving activities play a crucial role in learners’ 
understanding and use of mathematical knowledge. That is, learning mathematics is 
conceptualized as a problem solving experience that students need to engage in order to grasp 
mathematical concepts and to deal with mathematical situations. Indeed, problem-solving 
activities are central in the development of all disciplines. In accordance with the National 
Research Council (2012, p. 75) “problem solving may be the quintessential expression of 
human thinking” and involves more than solving a particular problem or finding a specific 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
33
solution; in problem solving activities, learners engage in collaborative search for different 
ways to represent, explore, solve, extend the initial problem, and to communicate results. 
Thus, analyzing and characterizing ways in which mathematical problems are formulated 
(Singer, Ellerton and Cai, 2015) and the process involved in pursuing and solving those 
problems generate important information to frame and structure learning environments to 
guide and foster learners’ construction of mathematical concepts and problem solving 
competencies (Santos-Trigo, 2014). Furthermore, mathematicians or discipline practitioners 
have often been interested in unveiling and sharing their own experience while developing the 
discipline (Polya, 1945; Schoenfeld, 1985). As a result, they have provided valuable 
information to characterize mathematical practices and ways in which those practices can be 
used to orient and frame students’ learning of the discipline.  
It is recognized that the work of Polya (1945) offered not only bases to launch several 
research programs in problem solving (Schoenfeld, 1992; Mason, et al., 1982); but also it 
became an essential resource for teachers to support and structure their mathematical lessons 
(Krulik and Reys, 1980). Polya addressed the importance for problem solvers to rely on 
heuristic strategies to make sense of problem statements and to work throughout all problem 
solving phases (understanding the problem, designing a solution plan, carrying out the plan 
and looking back). Further, Schoenfeld (1992) designed and implemented a research program 
based on Polyas’ ideas and found that heuristic strategies were complex and difficult for 
students to learn and apply in problem solving situations.  
Indeed, Schoenfeld pointed out that each heuristic was not only one strategy to apply 
during the problem solving process; but a collection of more than dozen strategies. 
Schoenfeld reported that in order for students to grasp what each heuristic involves and ways 
to use it in solving problems, they need to think of what the use of such strategy means for a 
particular domain and context (geometry/triangle, algebra/ roots, calculus/sequence, etc.); and 
to get insight and systematic practice from a variety of cases and examples. “For example, to 
use the strategy “Make sense of the problem by looking at examples” one must (a) think to 
use the strategy, (b) know which version of the strategy to use, (c) generate the appropriate 
examples, (d) gain the insight needed from the examples, and (e) use that insight to solve the 
original problem” (Schoenfeld, 2010, p. 106). In addition, students need to relate their 
experiences and insight to the initial problem and to analyze and discuss the role of the 
heuristics in achieving the problem solution (Watson and Ohtani, 2015).  
We argue that, in the last 40 years, the accumulated knowledge in the mathematical 
problem solving field has shed lights on both a characterization of what mathematical 
thinking involves and how learners can construct a robust knowledge in problem solving 
environments (Schoenfeld, 1992; 2010). What type of innovations should learning 
environments incorporate in order for students to rely on online resources and digital 
technologies to develop mathematical thinking? Alagic and Alagic (2013) pointed out that 
digital technologies offer teachers and learners affordances to provide a learning environment 
that fosters collaboration and direct interaction with peers. In this process, it is important to 
identify what types of transformations traditional learning scenarios might consider when 
teachers and students incorporate the use of digital technologies in mathematical classrooms. 
What are the principles to take into account in designing mathematical tasks in which 
learners’ approaches and solutions involve the use of digital technologies? Kieran et al., 
(2015) suggest that principles in the task design should address issues regarding the learners’ 
development of mathematical knowledge, the process of reasoning to formulate and validate 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
34
conjectures, the instructional support and the milieu. Pea (1987) refers to cognitive 
technologies to those tools that help “transcend the limitation of the mind…in thinking, 
learning and problem solving activities” (p. 91). In this context, our interest lies on analyzing 
what changes the students’ systematic use of several digital technologies (both multiple 
purpose and mathematical action or ad hoc technologies) bring to the mathematical 
curriculum and to learning environments. In particular, we intend to characterize what ways 
of mathematical reasoning are involved as result of using different digital technologies in 
problems solving approaches.  
To illustrate possible changes that the use of technology brings to the curriculum, we 
focus on a simple dynamic configuration that involves a family of triangles and a 
perpendicular bisector of a side (Figure 1). Moving objects within the configuration becomes 
an important reference in studying all conic sections that appear in an analytic geometry 
course. In this representation, Q is the intersection point between the perpendicular bisector of 
side BC and the line that includes side AC. The locus of point Q when point P is moved along 
the circle with center at A generates a hyperbola. Likewise, when point B is moved towards 
point A, then an ellipse is obtained (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 1. A dynamic representation of a triangle and the conic sections. 
 
 
Figure 2. When point B is moved towards A, an ellipse is shown. 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
35
Thus, the use of a DGS such as GeoGebra provides affordances to construct dynamic 
representations where students can explore properties of the conic sections as a result of 
moving some objects within the same representation. It is clear that traditional curriculum 
structure needs to be adjusted to integrate dynamic explorations of concepts and habits of 
mind to identify and support mathematical relations (Cuoco, Goldenberg and Mark, 1996). 
Likewise, in a technological learning environment, there are important problem solving 
strategies such as dragging objects orderly, identifying loci of particular objects, using sliders 
to explore some parameters behaviors that learners need to develop and apply in their 
problem solving activities. In this context, the learners’ systematic use of several digital 
technologies offers them diverse and novel ways to examine concepts or to identify, 
formulate, represent and solve mathematical problems. Similarly, the use of tablets (iPad) or 
smart phones opens up the possibility for students to discuss mathematical ideas with peers or 
experts beyond class time. There are applications (Padlet or Google Docs) in which learners 
can upload and share mathematical ideas or propose problem solutions to a learning 
community. For instance, students can access to the dynamic model of Figure 1 and move 
objects within the model in order to identify properties and visual behaviors to construct both 
empirical and geometric arguments to validate that the loci generated in Figure 1 and Figure 2 
represent a hyperbola and an ellipse. The model of Figure 1 can be accessed in 
https://tube.geogebra.org/material/simple/id/3130151. 
A goal in using digital technologies is to empower learners with affordances to delve into 
mathematical tasks and to amplify and enhance their ways of reasoning to construct, explore, 
and use mathematical knowledge. 
 
 
PROBLEM SOLVING AND THE USE OF  
A DYNAMIC GEOMETRY SYSTEM 
 
Dynamic Geometry Systems (DGS) can be considered as a milestone in the development 
of digital technologies. Objects or mathematical situations can be represented dynamically 
through the use of a DGS and learners or problem solvers can identify and examine 
mathematical relations that emerge from moving objects within the dynamic model. Leung 
and Bolite-Frant (2014) stated that “dynamic geometry software can be used in task design to 
cover a large epistemic spectrum from drawing precise robust geometrical figures to 
exploration of new geometric theorems and development of argumentation discourse” (p. 
195). Indeed, the use of a DGS allows learners to represent mathematical objects accurately 
and to observe or visualize patterns behaviors of some parameters and formulate and test the 
plausibility of some conjectures. In this process, learners not only need to develop skills and 
strategies to construct dynamic configurations of problems; but also ways to rely on the tool’ 
affordances (quantifying parameters or objects attributes, generating loci, graphing objects 
behaviors or dragging particular elements within the configuration) in order to identify and 
support mathematical relations. What does it mean to represent and explore an object or 
mathematical situation dynamically? How can a DGS (GeoGebra) be used to reconstruct 
geometric figures that often appear in problem statements? To address these questions, we 
focus on two types of tasks that involve: 
 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
36
1. The reconstruction of a figure associated with a given task that includes an angle, 
two circles and an equilateral triangle. In this context, asking about the order in 
which the figures can be drawn becomes a problem posing activity that generates a 
set of mathematical relations that need to be supported through mathematical 
arguments. 
2. A simple task that involves a dynamic representation of a rhombus is used to discuss 
ways in which learners can identify basic properties of this figure and to rely on 
graphic representation of the variation of some parameters attributes to visualize and 
support properties and relations. In particular, introducing and exploring relations 
that associate the movement of an element with an attribute (length of a segment or 
an angle measurement) becomes important to find and validate properties of rhombi.  
 
In both tasks, learners can rely on a set of technology affordances to engage in 
mathematical thinking. To this end, they can pose and pursue questions to explain the 
behaviors of parameters or attributes of the family of objects that is generated as a result of 
moving a particular element within the configuration. Thus, with the use of GeoGebra, 
students construct dynamic models of problems, explore the behavior of some elements, 
formulate conjectures and look for different ways or arguments to support those conjectures 
(Santos-Trigo, Reyes-Martínez, and Aguilar-Magallón, 2015).  
 
Task 1: Figure 3 shows two circles that are tangent to two lines and an equilateral triangle 
that is also tangent to both circles. Is there any relation between the sum of the radii of the 
circles and the height of the triangle? (adjusted from Leikin, 2007). 
 
 
Figure 3. Is there any relation between the radii of the circles and the height of the triangle? 
In a paper and pencil approach students mainly focus on examining the given figure in 
order to identify properties and relations involved in the figure that could lead them to detect 
and eventually support possible relations between the sum of the radii of the tangent circles 
and the height of the equilateral triangle. In using a DGS such as GeoGebra an important 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
37
question that learners initially might pose is: How can we draw the given figure? Indeed, in a 
digital technology environment looking for ways to reconstruct figures that are given in 
problem statements becomes a departure point to think of the figure representation in terms of 
geometric properties.  
This task was given to a group of high school students who were taking a problem-
solving course in which they were encouraged to use GeoGebra. During the sessions, students 
used the tool to represent mathematical tasks and to engage in problem posing activities that 
often led them to find not only novel ways to explore the problems, but also to propose new 
questions or extensions of the initial problem. We identify main approaches that the students 
exhibited while working on this task. 
The students noticed that Figure 3 involved several objects (an angle, two circles and a 
triangle) and they recognized that it was important to identify a possible order to draw the 
involved objects: What order should we follow to draw Figure 3 configuration? To respond to 
this question, students showed different paths: 
 
1. Starting with the equilateral triangle. In this approach, students drew segment AB 
and then with the compass tool drew point C to form the equilateral triangle ABC. 
Next, they drew lines AB and CD that intersect at point O (Figure 4a). To draw the 
tangent circles, they drew the bisectors of angles BOD, CAO and EBC respectively 
to determine the centers of those circles (Figure 4b). It is observed that basic 
properties associated with the involved elements (drawing the angle bisectors to find 
the centers of tangent circles) were used to draw the given figure. 
 
 
Figure 4a. Drawing an equilateral triangle and lines AB and CD.. 
2. The departure point, in this approach, was to draw lines OE and OD. Then, the 
bisector of angle EOD and to select point O’ as a center of the tangent circle to both 
lines. A perpendicular to line OD that passes through O’ intersects line OD at point 
F, then the circle centered at O’ and radius O’ F is tangent to both lines (Figure 5). 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
38
Then, they chose point G on the tangent circle with center at O’ and draw the tangent 
line to the circle that passes through G, this line intersects line OE at point I. Triangle 
IQJ is equilateral (Figure 3). Then, the goal is to move point G along circle with 
center at O’ and to identify the locus of point Q and the intersection point of that 
locus with line OD (Figure 5). 
 
What is the locus of point Q when point G is moved along the circle centered at O’ and 
radius O’ F? The locus is a hyperbola and the intersection point of this conic section and line 
OD provides the position for vertex Q so that triangle IQJ is equilateral that holds the required 
condition. The center (O’’) and the radius of the other tangent circle is the intersection of the 
bisector of angles EOD and EJQ and the segment O’’ W (Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 4b. The intersection of the angle bisectors are the centres of the tangent circles. 
 
Figure 5. Drawing a tangent circle and an equilateral triangle. 
These two ways of reconstructing the task figure are only some examples that students 
showed and discussed during the sessions. There were others approaches in which students 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
39
started drawing the two intersecting lines and then drawing the equilateral triangle and so on. 
It was clear that focusing on the reconstruction of the figure provides the students an 
opportunity to think of the figure in terms of properties and to look for concept connections 
and relations to draw the figure. For example, the angle bisector became important to connect 
the tangent to the circle, the perpendicular line and the center of the circle.  
All the students’ approaches were shown on an online wall and all the students examined 
all contributions and contrasted them with his/her personal solutions. Figure 7 was shown  
in the online wall (Padlet) and students were asked to examine it and to write down  
all properties and relations around the figure (https://tube.geogebra.org/material/simple/id/ 
3132615). That is, based on figure 7, that students had reconstructed previously, they were 
asked to list results and properties associated with this figure. It is important to mention that 
the figure included corresponding labels for points, lines, angles, etc. and students referred to 
in their report of results. The list of geometric properties and relations that students posted on 
the wall include statements and in some cases the use of an argument to support them: 
 
 
Figure 6. Using a conic section to draw the figure. 
 
Figure 7. Looking for properties and mathematical relations. 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
40
1. Points Q, J, G and H are the tangents points of the circles and sides of angle DD1B 
2. Points M and N are the tangent points of the circles and sides of equilateral triangle 
ABC, it is also true that QC = CM and JC = CN. This is because triangles POE and 
QOE are congruent (Figure 8). 
3. On Figure 7, we also have that line AE is the bisector of angle GAM. Therefore, 
triangles GAE and MAE are congruent and they are right triangles with angles of 30 
and 60 degrees (GA = AM). Then, triangles GAE and MAE are congruent. 
4. Similarly, line FB is the bisector of angle HBN and triangles HBF and NBF are 
congruent with angles of 30 and 60 degrees (BH = BN). Then, triangles HBF and 
NBF are congruent. 
5. Triangles QED and GED are congruent and also triangles DHF and DJF  
are congruent. Therefore, segments QJ and GH are congruent and the sum  
of their lengths equals to the perimeter of triangle ABC. That is, 
GH=GA+AB+BH=AM+AB+BN y QJ=QC+CJ=CM+CN. Then, we have that 
GH+QJ= AM+AB+BN+CM+CN. Here, we also have that GH is the semi-perimeter 
(
3𝐿
2 ) of triangle ABC, where L is the side of the triangle. Similarly, 𝐴+ 𝑁𝐵=
𝐿
2, 
because 𝐺𝐻= 𝑀𝐴+ 𝑁𝐵+ 𝐴𝐵= 𝑀𝐴+ 𝑁𝐵+ 𝐿= 
3𝐿
2 . Therefore, 𝑀𝐴+ 𝑁𝐵=
3𝐿
2 −𝐿=
𝐿
2. 
 
 
Figure 8. Triangles POE and QOE are congruent and the circle is tangent to both lines OQ and OE. 
1. Lines EM and FN are perpendiculars to sides AC and BC respectively and they get 
intersected at point K. Triangles AME and AMK are congruent (Angle-Side-Angle) 
and MK = EM = r. Similarly, NK = NF = R.  
2. Quadrilateral O’ FGC is a parallelogram, therefore, the sum of radii O’ F and HO’’ is 
the same as the height JC of triangle ABC (Figure 8a). 
 
The list of results increased gradually as a result of the students’ discussions. Making all 
students’ contributions available through the wall was important to follow up the students’ 
ideas and discussions outside the classroom.  
  

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
41
 
Figure 8a. Quadrilateral OFGC is a parallelogram. 
Comment: Polya (1945) recognizes that understanding and making sense of a problem 
statement is a crucial step for learners to think of some possible ways to solve it. How can we 
reconstruct figures or representations embedded or associated with a problem statement? 
With the use of GeoGebra, students need to think of the embedded objects in terms of their 
mathematical properties in order to achieve the given representation. Where must the centers 
of both circles be located so that they are tangent to the sides of the angle? Or how can I draw 
a tangent circle to two intersecting lines? These types of questions are important for learners 
to review or activate concepts and strategies to construct the representation of task 1.  
 
Task 2: A dynamic rhombus. Figure 9 represents a quadrilateral with a fixed side AB and 
a point M on side AB. With the use of GeoGebra a perpendicular line to line AB that passes 
through point M is drawn, C is the center of a circle with radios CM and lines AE and BF are 
tangent to the circle. Where must point M be located so that quadrilateral ABFE become a 
rhombus? To answer to this question, students consulted several online platforms that include 
information regarding the rhombus. They share information related to basic properties that a 
rhombus holds (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhombus). Based on this information they 
constructed a dynamic model to examine the definition and some properties related to the 
rhombus construction. In accordance to the information provided in the Wiki, a rhombus is “a 
simple (non self-intersecting) quadrilateral if and only if it is any one of the following: 
 
a quadrilateral with four sides of equal length (by definition) 
 
a quadrilateral in which the diagonals are perpendicular and bisect each other 
 
a quadrilateral in which each diagonal bisects two opposite interior angles 
 
a parallelogram in which a diagonal bisects an interior angle 
 
a parallelogram in which at least two consecutive sides are equal in length 
 
a parallelogram in which the diagonals are perpendicular (an orthodiagonal 
parallelogram).” 
 
 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
42
 
Figure 9. Where should point T be located so that ABFE becomes a rhombus? 
Thus, based on Figure 9, the students’ goal was to transform the quadrilateral into the 
corresponding rhombus that holds the properties found in the Wikipedia. 
 
1. Equal sides. The idea was to find a position for point T so that both sides AE and EF 
are equal. To construct the rhombus, they define point L as a relation between the x-
coordinate of point T (a movable point) and the length of side AE and a point L’ as a 
relation between the x-coordinate of point T and the length of side EF. The loci of 
points L and L’ are shown in Figure 10. 
 
 
Figure 10. The loci of lengths of sides AE and EF when point T is move along side AB. 
Interpreting the graphs of the length of sides led students to associated the intersection 
points of the loci with the construction of the rhombus. Figure 10 shows a position for point T 
to get rhombus ABFE. 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
43
2. Each diagonal bisects two opposite interior angles. Figure 11 shows diagonals AF 
and BE of quadrilateral ABFE. Where should point T be located on side AB such as 
diagonal AF bisects both angles BAE and EFB? To explore how both angles
 
behave when point T is moved along the side AB, a relation that associates the x-
coordinate of point T and the value of angle 
 (point G) and 
 (point G) is 
constructed. The loci of point G and H when point T is moved along the side AB are 
shown in Figure 11. By moving point T along the side AB, there will a position for 
point T in which points G and H coincide and at that position the quadrilateral OBFE 
becomes a rhombus. That is, the angle bisectors of the interior angles are the 
diagonals of the rhombus (Figure 12). 
 
 
Figure 11. The loci of point H and G when point T is moved along side AB. 
The idea of defining a relation between the position of point T and the measure of angle 
(length of sides) becomes a powerful strategy to examine properties of the rhombus. 
 
 
Figure 12. When point G and H coincide the quadrilateral becomes a rhombus. 
a & b
a
b

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
44
3. Incentres properties. Figure 13 shows incentres J, K, L and H of triangles BGF, 
BGA, AGE and EGF respectively. Is there a position for point T on the side AB such 
as quadrilateral JKLH is a square? Figure 14 shows that when quadrilateral ABFE 
becomes a rhombus then quadrilateral JKLH is a square. Thus, again, defining a 
relation between the position of point T and the lengths of sides of the quadrilateral 
JKLH and finding the corresponding loci provided the information to draw the 
rhombus (Figure 14). 
 
 
Figure 13. Drawing the quadrilateral whose vertices J, K, L, and H are incentres.  
 
Figure 14. The quadrilateral becomes a rhombus when quadrilateral J, K, L and H is a square. 
Comment: In the rhombus task, students initially looked for online information regarding 
this figure that became important to transform a dynamic quadrilateral into a rhombus. To this 
end, they relied on a powerful strategy that associates, through the loci, the position of a  
point on one side of the quadrilateral with the variation of length sides or angles. Indeed,  
this strategy allowed the students to verify all rhombus properties that appear in Wikipedia.  
In addition, students recognized that some information that appears in online sites 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
45
(http://www.wolframalpha.com) was useful for them to review or extend their knowledge 
about particular concepts.  
 
 
REFLECTIONS AND FINAL REMARKS 
 
Throughout this chapter, it is argued that the use of DGS provides learners a set of 
affordances to make explicit the implicit dynamism involved in reasoning about mathematical 
objects. The task that involves a dynamic triangle and a perpendicular bisector illustrates that 
the controlled movement of some objects within the model provides new referents and paths 
to study the conic sections. In this process, dragging, finding loci and quantifying objects 
attributes became powerful strategies to reconcile empirical and visual approaches with 
formal arguments.  
An underlying principle in any problem solving approach to understand and develop 
mathematical knowledge is to conceptualize learning as an inquiring process to delve into 
concepts and problems in order to identify and explore mathematical relationships. With the 
use of digital technologies learners can rely on affordances to represent problems and to 
constantly refine their problem solving approaches within a community that values and foster 
the formulation of questions or problems. The first task is an example where the goal of 
reconstructing figures associated with problem statements becomes important to engage 
learners in problem posing activities. In this context, they think of the task in terms of 
mathematical properties or basic results that are used as referent to reconstruct the figure.  
Similarly, the dynamic model of simple figures such as a quadrilateral became a 
departure point to examine and validate via mathematical arguments properties and relations 
associated with rhombi. In general terms, the use of DGS offers learners an opportunity to 
experience a large spectrum of epistemic actions that includes representing robust and precise 
geometric configuration and to formulate and explore mathematical theorems and to develop 
an argumentation discourse. Multiple purposes technologies are essential for students to share 
and discuss mathematical ideas and problems within a community outside classrooms. The 
use of an online wall was important to keep the students’ discussions active and as a 
consequence, they constantly contrasted and enhanced individual approaches.  
It is important to emphasize that the use of a DGS was crucial for students to initially 
represent and explore the tasks dynamically. Thus, learning to move objects orderly within 
the representation or task configuration became part of the tool appropriation process that all 
students engaged and gradually achieved. Likewise, the learners’ task exploration led them to 
identify invariances or mathematical relations among objects and their attributes. For 
example, in the first task, they were able to identify a parallelogram in the dynamic model 
that led them to conclude that the sum of the length of the radii of the circumference was 
equal to the height of the triangle. In addition, the students relied on a set of the tool’ s 
affordances such as dragging, finding loci, using sliders, etc. to identify mathematical 
properties that later were validated and used to present geometric or formal arguments. Thus, 
the use of GeGebra was important for students to reconcile empirical and visual reasoning 
with formal proofs.  
Finally, multiple purpose technologies (communication tools, iPads, smartphones) were 
important to extend mathematical discussions outside school and students recognized the 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
46
importance of working within a learning community that values and foster both individual 
and collaborative work. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The work and preparation of this chapter was supported from research projects with 
references Conacyt-168543 and EDU2015-65270-R. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Alagicc, G. and Alagic, M. (2013). Collaborative mathematics learning in online 
environments. In D. Martinovic, V. Freiman and Z. Karadac (Eds.), Visual mathematics 
and cyberlearning, pp. 23-48. NY: Springer. 
Churchill, D., Fox, B. and King, M. (2016), Framework for designing mobile learning 
environments. In D. Churcill, J. Lu, T. Chiu and B. Fox (eds.), Mobile learning design, 
lecture notes in Educational Technology, pp. 19-43. DOI 10.1007/978-981-10-0027-0_1. 
NY: Springer. 
Cuoco, A., Goldenberg, E. P. and Mark, J. (1996). Habits of mind: An organizing principle 
for mathematics curricula. Journal of Mathematical Behavior, 15, 3750402. 
Kieran, C., Doorman, M. and Ohtani, M. (2015). Frameworks and principles of task design. 
In A. Watson and M. Ohtani (Eds), Task design in mathematics education, pp. 19-81. 
NY: Springer. 
Krulik, S. and Reys, R., E. (Eds.). (1980). Problem Solving in School Mathematics. 
(Yearbook of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics). Reston VA: NCTM. 
Leikin, R. (2007). Habits of mind associated with advanced mathematical thinking solution 
spaces of mathematical tasks. In Proceedings of the fifth Congress of the European 
Society for Research in Mathematics Education, pp. 2330-2339. Cyprus: Department of 
Education, University of Cyprus. 
Leung, A. and Bolite-Frant, J. (2015). Designing mathematical tasks: The role of tools. In A. 
Watson, and M. Ohtani (eds.), Task design in mathematics education, pp. 191-225. NY: 
Springer. 
Moreno-Armella, L. and Santos-Trigo, M. (2016). The use of digital technologies in 
mathematical practices: Reconciling traditional and emerging approaches. In L. English 
and D. Kirshner (Eds.), Handbook of international research in mathematics education, 
3rd edition, (pp. 595-616). New York: Taylor and Francis. 
Pea, R. D. (1987). Cognitive technologies for mathematics education. In A. H. Schoenfeld 
(Ed.), Cognitive science and mathematics education, pp. 89-122. Hilldale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Polya G. (1945) How to solve it. Princeton University, Princeton. 
Santos-Trigo, M., Moreno-Armella, L and Camacho-Machín, M. (2016). Problem solving and 
the use of digital technologies within the mathematical working space framework. ZDM 
Mathematics Education, DOI 10.1007/s11858-016-0757-0. 
Santos-Trigo, M. and Reyes-Rodríguez, A. (2016). The use of digital technology in  
finding multiple paths to solve and extend an equilateral triangle task. International 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
47
Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, DOI 10.1080/ 
0020739X.2015.1049228.  
Santos-Trigo, M., Reyes-Martínez, I. and Aguilar-Magallón, D. (2015). The use of digital 
technology in extending mathematical problem solving reasoning. In L. Uden, D. 
Liberona and T. Welzer (Eds.), Learning technology for education in cloud, pp. 298-309. 
NY: Springer. 
Santos-Trigo, M. (2014). Problem solving in mathematics education. In S. Lerman (Ed.), 
Encyclopedia of Mathematics Education, (pp. 496-501). New York: Springer. 
Schmidt, E. and Cohen, J. (2013). The new digital age. Reshaping the future of people nations 
and business. NY: Alfred A. Knopf. 
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1992). Learning to think mathematically: Problem solving, metacognition, 
and sense making in mathematics. In: Grouws, D. A. (Ed.), Handbook of Research on 
Mathematics Teaching and Learning. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster, S. 334-370. 
Schoenfeld, A. H. (2010). Reflections of an accidental theorist. Journal for Research in 
Mathematics Education, 41(2), pp. 104-116. 
Singer, F. M., Ellerton, N. F. and Cai, J. (Eds.) (2015). Mathematical problem posing. From 
research to practice. NY: Springer. 
The National Research Council (2012). Discipline-based education research: Understanding 
and improving learning in undergraduate science and engineering. Washington, D.C: 
The National Academic Press. 
Watson, A. and Ohtani, M. (2015). Themes and issues in mathematics education concerning 
task design: Editorial introduction. In A. Watson and M. Ohtani (eds.), Task design in 
mathematics education, an ICMI Study 22, pp. 3-15. NY: Springer. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
Name: Manuel Santos-Trigo 
Affiliation: Center for Research and Advanced Studies, Cinvestav-IPN, Mexico 
Education: Doctorate, Mathematics Education, University of British Columbia Canada 
Address: Av. IPN 2508; San Pedro Zacatenco, 07360, México City 
Research and Professional Experience: Mathematical Problem Solving 
Professional Appointments: Full Professor, Mathematics Education Department 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
Santos-Trigo, M. and Moreno Armella (2016). The Use of Digital Technology to Frame 
and Foster Learners’ Problem-Solving 2 Experiences. In P. Felmer et al., (eds.), Posing and 
Solving Mathematical Problems, Research in Mathematics Education, Springer-Verlag, DOI 
10.1007/978-3-319-28023-3_12. 
Moreno-Armella, L. and Santos-Trigo, M. (2016). The use of digital technologies in 
mathe- matical practices: Reconciling traditional and emerging approaches. In L. English and 
D. Kirshner (Eds.), Handbook of international research in mathematics education, 3rd edition, 
(pp. 595-616). New York: Taylor and Francis. 

Manuel Santos-Trigo and Matías Camacho-Machín 
48
Santos-Trigo, M., Moreno-Armella, L and Camacho-Machín, M. (2016). Problem solving 
and the use of digital technologies within the mathematical working space framework. ZDM 
Mathematics Education, DOI 10.1007/s11858-016-0757-0. 
Santos-Trigo, M., Reyes-Martínez, I. and Aguilar-Magallón, D. (2015). The use of digital 
technology in extending mathematical problem solving reasoning. In L. Uden, D. Liberona 
and T. Welzer (Eds.), Learning technology for education in cloud, pp. 298-309. NY: Springer. 
Santos-Trigo, M. and Reyes-Rodríguez, A. (2015). The use of digital technology in 
finding multiple paths to solve and extend an equilateral triangle task. International Journal 
of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 2015. Taylor and Francis. ISSN: 
0020-739X (Print), ISSN: 1464-5211. 
Santos-Trigo, M., Reyes-Martínez, I. and Ortega-Moreno, F. (2015). Fostering and 
supporting the coordinated use of digital technologies in mathematics learning. Int. J. 
Learning Technology, Vol. 10(3), pp.251.270. 
Santos-Trigo, M., Suaste, E. and Figuerola, P. (2015). Technology and tools 
appropriation in medical practices. In M. Khosrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Information 
Science and Technology, Third Edition, Hershey PA: IGI Global. DOI: 10.4018/978-1-4666-
5888-2, ISBN: 978-1-4666-5888-2 (hardcover), ISBN: 978-1-4666-5891-2 (print and 
perpetual access), EISBN: 978-1-4666-5889-9, pp. 5633-5640. 
Santos-Trigo, M. (2014). Problem solving in mathematics education. In S. Lerman (ed.), 
Encyclopedia of Mathematics Education, pp. 496-501. NY: Springer. 
Santos-Trigo, M. and Reyes-Martínez, I. (2014). The coordinated use of digital 
technology in learning environments. In L. Uden et al., (Eds.), Learning Technology for 
Education in Cloud, Communication in Computer and Information Science, 446pp. 61-71. 
NY: Springer. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
  
Name: Matías Camacho-Machín 
Affiliation: Departamento de Análisis Matemático, Universidad de La Laguna, Spain 
Education: Doctorate in Mathematics, Facultad de Matemáticas, Universidad de La 
Laguna 
Address: Avda. Francisco Sánchez s/n 38271. La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain 
Research and Professional Experience: Mathematical Problem Solving, Mathematics 
Teacher Education, tertiary Mathematics. 
Professional Appointments: Full Professor, Departamento de Análisis Matemático  
Publications Last 3 Years: 
  
1. Santos-Trigo, M.; and Camacho-Machín, M. (2013) A Problem Solving Framework 
that enhances the use of computational technology. The Mathematics Enthusiast Journal. Vol 
10 (1 and 2) pp. 279-302. ISSN 1551-3440 
  
2. Santos-Trigo, M. and Camacho-Machín, M. (2015) Prospective high school teacher’s 
coordinated use of digital technologies to extend mathematical problema solving reasoning. 
En Gómez-Chacón, Mª I., Escribano, J., Kuzniak A., Richard, P. (Eds.). Mathematical 

Digital Technologies and Mathematical Problem Solving 
49
Working Space, Proceedings Fourth ETM Symposium, pp. 367-382. Madrid: Publicaciones 
del Instituto de Matemática Interdisciplinar, Universidad Complutense de Madrid. 
ISBN: 978-84-606-9475-5 
 
3. Santos-Trigo, M.; Moreno, L.; Camacho-Machín, M. (2016) Problem solving and The 
use of digital technologies within the mathematical working space framework. ZDM. 
Publicado online 1 de febrero 2016. ISSN 1863-9690 
 
4. Guerrero-Ortiz, C.; Mejía H. Camacho-Machín, M. (2016) Representations of a 
mathematical model as a means of analysing growth phenomena, Journal of Mathematical 
Behavior, 42, 109-126. ISSN: 0732-3123 
 
 
 
 


In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
EINSTELLUNG EFFECT AND THE MODERN DAY 
MATHEMATICAL PROBLEM SOLVING AND POSING 
 
 
Sergei Abramovich 
State University of New York at Potsdam, NY, US 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter reflects on the author’s work with prospective teachers of K-12 
mathematics. It reveals the cases of Einstellung effect – a phenomenon when experience 
with similar problems leads to automatic problem-solving behavior which is either 
erroneous or lacks insight. Three examples drawn from the counting, geometry, and 
algebra strands have been considered. It is suggested that by bridging procedural and 
conceptual knowledge, Einstellung effect in mathematical problem solving can be 
reduced. Such a bridge can be built through the seamless integration of problem solving 
and problem posing. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
This chapter deals with the concept of Einstellung effect – a psychological phenomenon 
evinced by problem solvers through a tendency (mind set) to use previously learned workable 
strategy in situations that either can be resolved more efficiently or to which the strategy is 
not applicable at all. In the United States, the study of Einstellung effect was first carried out 
by Luchins (1942) in the context of water jar experiments. This study was motivated by his 
teacher Max Wertheimer – one of the founders of Gestalt theory (Ellis, 1938) with its focus 
on the study of insight problems (Dunker, 1945) the solution of which often requires the 
ability to bypass the mind set. The water jar Einstellung test was originally administered  
by Zener and Duncker in Germany in the 1920’s (Levitt, 1956). However, already at the  
end of the 19th century similar experiments took place at the University of Berlin as Max 
Wertheimer, in the context of water jar tests, referred to experiments (probably using weights) 
                                                           
 abramovs@potsdam.edu. 

Sergei Abramovich 
52
by Müller and Schumann (1898) that he encountered there as a student (Luchins  
and Luchins, 1970). 
Water jar experiments involved three non-graduated jars of given capacity and the task 
for a subject was to obtain a required volume of liquid by filling the jars with water and 
pouring it from one jar to another until the task is completed. In the context of paper-and-
pencil water jar arithmetic problems, it was found that after subjects have practiced several 
times an identical solution strategy which may not necessarily be the most effective in all 
cases (or even not applicable to some cases), they develop a mind set that prevents seeing a 
simpler solution when such solution exists. For example, having the jars of capacity 36, 11, 
and 3 units of water, one can obtain 16 units through the following subtraction 36 – 11 – 3 – 3 
– 3 = 16 which appears to be a workable strategy. But in the case of the jars of capacity 42, 
11, and 5 units of liquid, whereas the same strategy, 42 – 11 – 5 – 5 – 5 = 16, works, there is a 
way to obtain 16 units through a simple addition; indeed, we have 11 + 5 = 16. At the same 
time, having the jars of capacity 42, 10, and 5 units of liquid makes this (or any other) 
strategy not applicable to the target of 16 units. It is one’s inability to see a simpler solution 
because of the earlier training in and success with a specific problem-solving strategy or to 
recognize limitations of the strategy that lead to Einstellung effect. In the words of Luchins 
(1942), “Einstellung – habituation – creates a mechanized state of mind, a blind attitude 
toward problems; one does not look at the problem on its own merits but is led by a 
mechanical application of a used method” (p. 15, italics in the original). 
Over the years, different variations of water jar experiments were administered by 
psychologists (e.g., Miller, 1957; Vallée-Tourangeau, Euden and Hearn, 2011) towards the 
development of learning environments conducive to the reduction of the dependency of 
problem solvers on a specific successful experience. In particular, Vallée-Tourangeau, Euden 
and Hearn (2011) found that when a subject, instead of using arithmetic (as shown above), 
participates in real experiments using jars and water (with a facet as its source), the effect of 
Einstellung can be reduced. While it appears that such finding reflects on subjects with low 
arithmetical skills, it is not surprising because, as is well known, using “first order symbols … 
directly denoting objects of actions … [facilitates acquiring] second order symbolism” 
(Vygotsky, 1978, p. 115) which, in the case of mathematics, involves an abstract notation 
system and grade-appropriate operations within the system.  
 
 
2. MATHEMATICS EDUCATION AND EINSTELLUNG EFFECT 
 
In mathematics education, the effect of Einstellung on problem-solving performance of 
students at all grade levels has been acknowledged, most notably, by Pólya (1962), “Human 
nature prompts us to repeat a procedure that has succeeded before in a similar situation” (p. 
63). Such a negative affordance of procedural expertise, which, otherwise, is a positive 
quality, calls for a pedagogy that encourages conceptual understanding and cognitive 
flexibility. In its then groundbreaking document, the National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics (1989) described the need for change in approaches to mathematics instruction 
suggesting that teachers should help their students to “foster mathematical insight” (p. 15) 
through solving problems. The word insight implies the use of productive thinking 
(Wertheimer, 1959) as opposed to reproductive thinking responsible for Einstellung effect. 

Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem Solving and Posing 
53
Because mathematics instruction consider important for students to use prior knowledge in 
order to build new knowledge, the negative affordance of prior knowledge (alternatively, 
expertise) should be taken into consideration when preparing teacher candidates.  
The flexibility of thought is also an important condition for creativity and insight without 
which mathematical problem solving may remain a challenge for way too many students. 
Indeed, Luchins (1942) noted that in schools focusing on drill and practice students “were not 
accustomed to being taught one method and expected to seek for, or use other methods” (p. 
90). However, already in the mid twentieth century it was also observed that schools using 
progressive teaching methods assist learners in being more creative and less dependent on the 
rigidity of thinking (Miller, 1957). Nonetheless, the perspective on mathematical problem 
solving grounded in the “single question – single answer” tradition can still be observed in a 
mathematics classroom of the 21st century. That is why, in contemporary mathematics teacher 
education classes, future teachers “learn to ask good mathematical questions … and to look at 
problems from multiple points of view” (Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, 
2001, p. 8) towards enabling students to “check their answers to problems using a different 
method … and identify correspondences between different approaches” (Common Core State 
Standards, 2010, p. 6).  
Research on the nature of mathematical thinking and problem-solving abilities indicates 
that “having a good mathematical mind involves the ability to think in a flexible way” 
(Dreyfus and Eisenberg, 1996, p. 280). Through teaching that develops such ability at the pre-
college level “it is possible to change students’ views from a fixed mind-set [leading to 
Einstellung effect] to a growth mind-set in ways that encourage them to persevere in learning 
mathematics” (Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, 2012, p. 9). Likewise, the 
modern day signature pedagogy of undergraduate mathematics includes the notion that 
solving a problem through “different approaches … challenges students’ misconception that 
there is just one technique or one solution to a mathematical problem” (Ernie, LeDocq, Serros 
and Tong, 2009, p. 265). One teaching method with potential to eliminate and clarify 
misconceptions is associated with problem posing, “an activity [of asking good questions 
either oneself or others] that at the heart of doing mathematics” (National Council of Teachers 
of Mathematics, 1989, p. 138). The activity, in general, goes back to Montessori’s approach 
to teaching encouraging children pose their own problems and, in doing so, “advance upon 
this road of independence” (Montessori, 1965, p. 28).  
Proceeding from the viewpoint that problem solving and problem posing are two sides of 
the same coin (Singer, Ellerton and Cai, 2015), one can argue that mathematics pedagogy 
which integrates the two activities, by bridging procedural and conceptual knowledge 
(Abramovich, 2015) has the potential to reduce the Einstellung effect typically associated 
with procedural competence. Below are examples drawn from the author’s work with 
mathematics teacher candidates. 
 
 
3. EINSTELLUNG EFFECT IN A COUNTING PROBLEM 
 
In order to avoid an Einstellung effect in the learning of mathematics, one needs to be 
able to recognize and comprehend conceptual change “when the new information to be 
learned comes in conflict with the learners’ prior knowledge” (Vosniadou and Verschaffel, 

Sergei Abramovich 
54
2004, p. 445). As an example of such a conflict, consider the sequence of towers (consisting 
of squares constructed from matchsticks) shown in Figure 1. A typical question about this 
construction is: How many matchsticks are needed to build a tower consisting of 100 
squares? As reported elsewhere (Abramovich and Brouwer, 2011), one elementary teacher 
candidate’s reasoning was as follows: in the 2nd tower, the ratio of the number of matchsticks 
to the number of squares is seven to two; in the 100th tower this ratio is x (unknown number 
of matchsticks) to 100; therefore 7/2 = x/100 whence x = 350. How do we know whether the 
answer is correct? The number 350 was found assuming that proportional reasoning is 
applicable to the growth of matchsticks used in the construction of the towers. But is it? 
Apparently, proportional reasoning is the teacher candidate’s procedural skill successfully 
(from her perspective) used in the past. How can one show that, nevertheless, this time it led 
to an incorrect answer? In other words, how can one show that formally applying a procedure 
without conceptual understanding led to Einstellung effect? 
Posing a simpler problem may be of help: How many matchsticks are there in the third 
tower? Counting yields ten matchsticks. The ratio of matchsticks to squares is ten to three and 
it is different from the ratio seven to two. Replicating the teacher candidate’s problem-solving 
strategy using an unknown x leads to the proportion 7/2 = x/3 whence x = 21/2. The answer 
contradicts common sense: the number of matchsticks must be an integer. One can see how 
solving a simpler problem both experimentally and algebraically suggests, at least in terms of 
a counterexample, that if the ratio of two interconnected quantities varies as the quantities 
change, it may not be used as an invariant in setting a proportion.  
A typical counting strategy for the matchstick problem is based on empirical  
induction: because experimentally, by counting, one can establish the following relations:
 … it follows that the number of matchsticks sought 
can be found as 4 +99×3= 301. Inductive reasoning used to find the answer is based on 
reproductive thinking; indeed, there are many cases when empirical induction leads to 
incorrect generalization, which is another manifestation of Einstellung effect. Reproductive 
thinking for Gestalt psychology means solving a problem with previous experiences and with 
what is already known. One can say that Einstellung effect is a negative affordance of 
reproductive thinking. At the same time, productive thinking based on insight could be in 
recognizing that if the first square were built out of three matchsticks, then not only each new 
square requires three matchsticks but the bottom square comprise three matchsticks as well. 
Thus we arrived to a multiplication problem. One can see that the number of matchsticks in 
the 100-square towers in Figure 1 and Figure 2 differs by one and there are 300 matchsticks 
in the latter tower. This observation immediately yields 301 as the (right) answer to the 
original problem. Nonetheless, teaching the matchstick problem for many years, the author 
never saw anyone offering this simple solution based on insight. Another kind of Einstellung 
effect can be observed here – the fixation of mind on closed towers (with a matchstick at the 
bottom) does not allow one to see a simple solution based on multiplication with adjustment: 
multiply 3 by 100 and add one. Note that similar problems about counting matchsticks can be 
formulated for towers built from regular pentagons, hexagons, etc., or their appropriate 
combinations (e.g., square-hexagon-octagon).  
 
 
 
7 = 4 +1×3,10 = 4 + 2×3,13= 4 + 3×3,

Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem Solving and Posing 
55
 
Figure 1. Matchsticks and squares are not in the same ratio. 
 
Figure 2. Matchsticks and squares are in the same ratio. 
 
4. EINSTELLUNG EFFECT IN FINDING AREAS ON A GEOBOARD 
 
Reification, one of the key principles of Gestalt psychology which regards Einstellung 
effect as an obstacle to productive thinking, deals with the constructive aspect of perception 
by which one can recognize in an image more concrete information than the image, in the 
absence of one’s insight, convey. Geometry presents a perfect case for the application of this 
principle, in particular through geoboard activities. Geoboard is a learning environment 
introduced by Gattegno (1971) for exploring basic geometric ideas at the primary level. On a 
geoboard, a linear unit is a side of a unit square the vertices of which are the four pegs closest 
to each other. As an example, consider quadrilateral ABCD (Figure 3) the area of which is to 
be found. The reification principle suggests that one can see quadrilateral ABCD as 
embedded into a rectangle comprised of eight unit squares, thus having area measured by 
eight square units. This enables one to find area of the quadrilateral in an indirect way by 
subtracting from area of the rectangle the areas of three triangles that do not belong to the 
quadrilateral but do belong to the rectangle. In that case, the areas of the three triangles are 

Sergei Abramovich 
56
halves of the corresponding rectangles for which a side of the quadrilateral is a diagonal. Thus 
the area of quadrilateral ABCD can found as follows: 
.  
When this problem-solving strategy is shown to teacher candidates, the emphasis on 
taking half when computing areas of triangles that do not belong to the original shape often 
results in Einstellung effect even when teacher candidates use an alternative strategy without 
seeing quadrilateral ABCD as embedded into a rectangle. Rather, the same reification 
principle suggests that the quadrilateral consists of eight parts labeled a, a1, b, b1, c, c1, d, d1 
in Figure 3. However, perhaps due the lack of conceptual understanding of one-half and 
seeing it as just one of the two pieces into which the whole is partitioned, some teacher 
candidates label each of the eight parts as 1/2 and thus arrive to the correct answer, 4. When 
asked to explain their answer, their response is “no idea.” In fact, their solution is due to 
Einstellung effect. However, the accurate, Einstellung-free, application of the reification 
principle yields 
, 
, and 
, whence 
.  
 
 
Figure 3. Using reification principle in finding area of ABCD. 
 
Figure 4. Triangle ABC defines its four parts. 
8 - (1
2 ×1+ 1
2 ×3+ 1
2 ×2 + 1
2 ×2) = 4
a = 1
2 ×1 a1 + b1 = c1 + d1 = 1
2 ×2 =1
b + c + d = 1
2 ×3 = 3
2
1
2 + 2×1+ 3
2 = 4

Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem Solving and Posing 
57
Likewise, by incorrectly labeling each of the four parts (a, b, c, d) of triangle ABC in 
Figure 4 as 1/2, one gets the correct value for area of the triangle. In the context of discussion 
of Einstellung effect as related to a link between basic geometric principles and Gestalt 
psychology, the following formulation by Wertheimer Max (1938) of the essence of Gestalt 
theory is worth citing: “There are wholes, the behavior of which is not determined by that of 
their individual elements, but where the part-processes are themselves determined by the 
intrinsic nature of the whole” (p. 2). Indeed, in Figure 4 triangle ABC may be considered as a 
whole; however, it is not defined by its four parts (a, b, c, and d) – one triangle and three 
trapezoids – but rather the parts are defined by the whole triangle using the similarity of 
triangles. Because the ratio of the legs of the whole is 4 to 1, so is the ratio of the legs of 
triangle a (a part of the whole). This yields 1/4 as the length of the horizontal leg of triangle a 
thus demonstrating that the triangular part of the whole is 1/8 of the unit square. Likewise, the 
smaller leg of the triangle comprised of a and b is equal to 1/2 whence it is one-half of the 
unit square. Consequently, trapezoid b is equal to 1/2 – 1/8 = 3/8 of the unit square. Trapezoid 
c is equal to 1 – 3/8 = 5/8 of the unit square and trapezoid d is equal to 7/8 of the unit square.  
It is not surprising that Gestalt psychologists used problem-solving strategies of informal 
geometry in teaching mathematics to young children (e.g., Luchins and Luchins, 1970). Their 
pedagogy was grounded in the tenets, “A whole is meaningful when concrete mutual 
dependency obtains among its parts” (Wertheimer Max, 1938, p. 16) and “the characteristics 
of the whole determine the characteristics of each part and its function in the whole” 
(Wertheimer Michael, 1985, p. 23). In particular, considering in Figure 4 the rectangle 
comprised of four unit squares as a whole with eight parts, one can see how these parts 
depend on each other and their mutual dependency is due to the relation between the side 
lengths of the whole. 
An obvious connection between Gestalt theory and school geometry can be used as a 
motivation for posing new problems that go beyond informal geometry and require insight. 
To this end, the geometric construction of Figure 4 can be extended to any number of unit 
squares cut by a diagonal connecting the two vertices of the far right and the far left unit 
squares. In this general case, the following questions can be formulated:  
What is the total number of segments serving as borders of the triangle and trapezoids in 
this construction? 
Can be the larger lateral side of any trapezoids so constructed a rational number? Why of 
why not? 
Is there a trapezoid among this series of trapezoids into which a circle can be inscribed? 
Why of why not? 
The list of questions can be extended. As Halmos (1980) noted, “I do believe that 
problems are the heart of mathematics, and I hope that as teachers, in classroom, in seminars, 
and in the books and articles we write, we will emphasize them more and more, and that we 
will train our students to be better problem-posers and problem-solvers than we are” (p. 524). 
This emphasis on the variety of educational means used to engage students in doing 
mathematics implies using more and more problems that require productive thinking towards 
the end of reducing Einstellung effect in mathematical problem solving. 
 
 
 
 

Sergei Abramovich 
58
5. EINSTELLUNG EFFECT IN SOLVING EQUATIONS AND INEQUALITIES  
 
Consider an algebraic equation of the form  
 
. 
(1) 
 
Often, experience in simplifying an equation by cancelling out a common numeric factor 
in its both sides is automatically applied to equation (1). Considering 
 as such a factor, 
one reduces equation (1) to the form  
 
. 
 (2) 
 
However, when there exists x0 so that 
 and 
, equation (1) and 
equation (2) are not equivalent and cancelling out f(x) results in the loss of x0 as a root of (1). 
In that case one can observe Einstellung effect in a sense that the strategy of cancellation of a 
common numeric factor when mechanically transferred to the equations of type (1) may lead 
to the loss of solutions. A similar, yet conceptually more complicated outcome of Einstellung 
effect in solving inequalities can be observed. 
As an example, consider solving the equation  
 
sin2x = sinx 
(3) 
 
and the inequality  
 
sin2x < sinx  
(4) 
 
on the segment [0, 2p]. Because sin2x = 2sinx×cosx, one can (automatically) reduce 
equation (3) to that of 2cosx =1 by cancelling out 
 as the common factor. The last 
equation has two roots, 
 and 
, which satisfy equation (3) on the segment 
[0, 2p]. At the same time, on the segment [0, 2p] there exist three more values of x 
satisfying equation (3), namely, x = 0, x = p, x = 2p . That is, dividing both sides of equation 
(3) by sinx results in the loss of roots. 
However, when the common factor sinx is cancelled out from both sides of inequality 
(4), the resulting inequality, 2cosx <1, has a solution set that manifests both the contraction 
and the extension of the solution set of (4). This rather complex phenomenon can be 
demonstrated through the use of technology. As shown in Figure 5, the bottom segments 
represent the graph of the solution set of inequality (4) and the upper segment represents the 
graph of the solution set of the inequality 2cosx <1, both on the segment [0, 2p]. In the 
construction of these graphs computer application The Graphing Calculator (Avitzur, 2011), 
capable of graphing relations from any two variable equations/inequalities, was used. In 
particular, the solution graph of inequality (4) was constructed from the system of inequalities 
f (x)g(x) = f (x)h(x)
f (x)
g(x) = h(x)
f (x0) = 0
g(x0) ¹ h(x0)
sinx
x = p
3
x = 5p
3

Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem Solving and Posing 
59
sinx -sin2x > 0,| y| < 0.05, 0 £ x £ 2p  and the solution graph of the inequality 2cosx <1 
was constructed from the system of inequalities 1- 2cosx > 0, 0.5 < y < 0.6, 0 £ x £ 2p . By 
graphing the solution sets along with the graphs of the functions 
 and 
, one can see that cancelling out sinx from the both sides of inequality (4) has 
led to the extension and the contraction of its solution set when sinx < 0,1- 2cosx < 0, and 
sinx < 0,1- 2cosx > 0, respectively. In that way, the use of technology allows one to 
establish conceptual sources of errors occurring due to Einstellung effect in solving 
inequalities. Knowing where errors may be coming from reduces the dependency of problem 
solvers on the mechanical transfer of experience without “insight into the structure but not 
superficial similarity of the new problem and the old problem whose solution is already 
understood” (Wertheimer Michael, 1985, p. 24). The appropriate use of modern technology 
and mathematical knowledge by teachers enables high school students to benefit from their 
TPCK (technological pedagogical content knowledge) and, thereby, to be become better 
problem solvers. 
 
 
Figure 5. Simultaneous extension and reduction of a solution set. 
 
Figure 6. Graphing solution sets along with the graphs of the corresponding functions. 
y = sinx
y =1- 2cosx

Sergei Abramovich 
60
CONCLUSION 
 
Problem solving as the major pillar of the modern mathematics signature pedagogy 
integrates procedural skills, conceptual understanding, and mathematical insight. This 
chapter, using three examples drawn from the author’s work with prospective K-12 teachers 
of mathematics, highlighted several cases of Einstellung effect in problem solving – a term 
coined by Gestalt psychologists to refer to the state of mind when, in the absence of 
conceptual understanding, experience with similar problems either becomes an obstacle to 
solutions that require insight or, worse still, leads to an erroneous outcome. It is not surprising 
that in the United States an emphasis of current standards for teaching mathematics (National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 2000; Common Core State Standards, 2010) and 
recommendations for the preparation of teachers of the subject matter (Conference Board of 
the Mathematical Sciences, 2001, 2012) is on the use of different problem-solving strategies, 
cognitive flexibility, and diversity of thinking. At the same time, another emphasis of the 
modern pedagogy is on the use of prior knowledge as a means of developing new knowledge 
and understanding. Such a dual ramification of using prior knowledge underscores the 
importance of recognition of the cases of Einstellung effect and knowing ways of its 
reduction. Einstellung effect points at the negative affordance of expertise in problem solving 
and, as was suggested in the chapter, among different methods of reduction of its detrimental 
impact on productive thinking is developing connections between procedural skills and 
conceptual understanding. 
Turning procedural skills into conceptual understanding and using conceptual knowledge 
to improve algorithmic performance can be accomplished when problem solving and problem 
posing are considered as two closely related mathematical activities. One way that procedural 
skills, even erroneous ones, can bring about conceptual knowledge is to use a procedure as a 
means of asking questions about the case observed. For example, by counting the number of 
matchsticks in the 100th tower through proportional reasoning (proceeding from any number 
of squares greater than one), in how many cases the result, though incorrect, is still an 
integer? Such an inquiry into an erroneous procedure, the flawed outcome of which is hidden 
behind an integer answer, could lead to understanding that the number of such cases is equal 
to the number of proper divisors of 100 and that the larger the divisor the smaller the counting 
error. Once this understanding is reached, a new family of problems seeking the number of 
matchsticks in towers comprised of the prime number squares can be posed for which 
Einstellung effect associated with using proportional reasoning (proceeding from any number 
of squares greater than one) would yield a non-integer – an obviously incorrect answer. By 
the same token, in the case of solving equations (inequalities) one can be asked to construct 
an equation (inequality) when cancelling common factor from its both sides does not affect 
the solution set. One’s ability to construct such an equation (inequality) demonstrates 
conceptual understanding of the corresponding algorithm, something that, in turn, enhances 
problem-solving skills. Through constructing an equation (inequality) as a reformulation of a 
problem already solved, one reflects on the problem’s inner structure by trying to understand 
caveats that made it solvable. Digital technology has great potential to facilitate such 
understanding, reduce undesirable manifestations of Einstellung effect, amplify skills in 
posing new problems, and enhance positive affordances of one’s problem-solving experience. 
 

Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem Solving and Posing 
61
REFERENCES 
 
Abramovich, S. (2015). Mathematical problem posing as a link between algorithmic thinking 
and conceptual knowledge. The teaching of mathematics, 18, 45-60. 
Abramovich, S., and Brouwer, P. (2011). Where is the mistake? The matchstick problem 
revisited. PRIMUS — problems, resources, and issues in mathematics undergraduate 
studies, 21, 11-25.  
Avitzur, R. (2011). Graphing Calculator (Version 4.0). Berkeley, CA: Pacific Tech. 
Common Core State Standards. (2010). Common core standards initiative: Preparing 
America’s students for college and career. [On-line materials]. Available at http:// 
www.corestandards.org. 
Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences. (2001). The mathematical education of 
teachers. Washington, DC: The Mathematical Association of America. 
Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences. (2012). The mathematical education of 
teachers II. Washington, D.C.: The Mathematical Association of America. 
Dreyfus, T., and Eisenberg, T. (1996). On different facets of mathematical thinking. In R. J. 
Sternberg and T. Ben-Zeev (Eds.), The nature of mathematical thinking (pp. 253-284). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Dunker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological monographs, 58 (whole No. 270). 
Ellis, W. D. (Ed.). (1938). A source book of Gestalt psychology. New York: Harcourt Brace. 
Ernie, K., LeDocq, R., Serros, S., and Tong, S. (2009). Challenging students’ beliefs about 
mathematics. In R. A. R. Gurung, N. L. Chick and A. A. Ciccone (Eds.), Exploring 
signature pedagogies (pp. 260-279). Sterling, VA: Stylus.  
Gattegno, C. (1971). Geoboard geometry. New York: Educational Solutions Worldwide. 
Halmos, P. R. (1980). The heart of mathematics. The American Mathematical Monthly, 87, 
519-524. 
Levitt, E. E. (1956). The water-jar Einstellung test as a measure if rigidity. Psychological 
bulletin, 53, 347-370. 
Luchins, A. S. (1942). Mechanization in problem solving: The effect of Einstellung. 
Psychological monographs, 54(6), whole No. 248. Evanston, IL: The American 
Psychological Association. 
Luchins, A. S., and Luchins, E. H. (1970). Wertheimer’s seminars revisited: problem solving 
and thinking (Volume III). Albany, NY: Faculty-Student Association, SUNY at Albany. 
Montessori, M. (1965). The Montessori method. Cambridge, MA: Robert Bentley. 
Miller, K. M. (1957). Einstellung rigidity, intelligence and teaching methods. British journal 
of educational psychology, 27, 127-134. 
Müller, G. E., and Schuman, F. (1898). Über die psychologischen Grundlagen der 
Vergleichung gehobener Gewichter [About psychological bases for comparison of 
upscale weighter]. Pflüg. Arch. Ges. Physiol., 45, 37-112. 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1989). Curriculum and evaluation standards 
for school mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (2000). Principles and standards for school 
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 
Pólya, G. (1962). Mathematical discovery: On understanding, learning, and teaching 
problem solving (volume 1). New York: John Wiley and Sons. 

Sergei Abramovich 
62
Singer, M., Ellerton, N., and Cai, J. (2015). (Eds), Mathematical problem posing: From 
research to effective practice. New York: Springer. 
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Euden, G., and Hearn, V. (2011). Einstellung defused: interactivity 
and mental set. The quarterly journal of experimental psychology, 64, 1889-1895. 
Vosniadou, S., and Verschaffel, L. (2004). Extending the conceptual change to mathematics 
learning and teaching. Learning and instruction, 14, 445-451. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Wertheimer, M. [Max]. (1959). Productive thinking. New York: Harper and Row.  
Wertheimer, M. [Max]. (1938). Gestalt theory. The general theoretical situation. In W. D. 
Ellis (Ed.), A source book of Gestalt psychology (pp. 1—16). New York: Harcourt Brace. 
Wertheimer, M. [Michael]. (1985). A Gestalt perspective on computer simulations of 
cognitive processes. Computers in human behavior, 1, 19-33. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
Dr. Sergei Abramovich is Professor of Mathematics Education in the Department of 
Elementary Education at SUNY Potsdam. Since coming to Potsdam in 1998, he has been an 
instructor to more that 2,000 prospective K-12 teachers of mathematics. During his time at 
Potsdam, he has been working with pre-service and in-service teachers, public school faculty 
and their pupils, colleagues in mathematics education and mathematics, disseminating results 
of his research (both individual and collaborative) through publications and presentations at 
professional meetings in the United States and other countries including Bahamas, Canada, 
China, Denmark, Ecuador, England, Finland, Germany, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Nicaragua, 
Norway, Russia, Serbia, and Spain. His current scholarly interests include projects dealing 
with experimental mathematics for teachers, technology and problem posing (including 
mathematics curriculum design in the digital era), hidden mathematics curriculum of teacher 
education, the relationship between algorithmic thinking and conceptual knowledge, and  
early technology-enhanced mathematics experiences with an engineering/science focus. 
Throughout his career he has authored/co-authored some 200 publications, including 
numerous articles on the use of technology in the teaching of mathematics. In 2003, he was a 
recipient of the SUNY Potsdam President’s Award for Excellence in Research and Creative 
Endeavors. In 2008 he became a recipient of the SUNY Chancellor’s Award for Excellence in 
Scholarship and Creative Activities. In 2013 he was awarded a Fulbright Specialist Grant in 
mathematics education at the universities Novi Sad and Niš in Serbia. He is the founding 
Editor-in-Chief of the International Mathematical Virtual Institute (with headquarters in 
Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina) Open Mathematical Education Notes (co-published by 
the SUNY Potsdam School of Education and Professional Studies), co-edits the journal 
Spreadsheets in Education, and serves on editorial boards of the Journal of Computers in 
Mathematics and Science Teaching, Computers in the Schools (Guest Editor of a special issue 
in 2013: Computers in K-20 Mathematics Education), Computer Tools in Education, 
Differential Equations and Control Processes, Interdisciplinary Studies and Contemporary 
Pedagogies, and Gatchina Review.  
 
 

Einstellung Effect and the Modern Day Mathematical Problem Solving and Posing 
63
Within the last six years he has written/edited the following books: 
 
Abramovich, S. (2015). Exploring Mathematics with Integrated Spreadsheets in Teacher 
Education. Singapore: World Scientific.  
Abramovich, S. (2014). Computational Experiment Approach to Advanced Secondary 
Mathematics Curriculum. Mathematics Education in the Digital Era series. Dordrecht, 
The Netherlands: Springer.  
Abramovich, S. (Editor). (2012). Computers in Education: Volume 1. Hauppauge, NY: Nova 
Science Publishers.  
Abramovich, S. (Editor). (2012). Computers in Education: Volume 2. Hauppauge, NY: Nova 
Science Publishers.  
Abramovich, S. (2011). Computer-Enabled Mathematics: Integrating Experiment and Theory 
in Teacher Education. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science Publishers. 
Abramovich, S. (2010). Topics in Mathematics for Elementary Teachers: A Technology-
Enhanced Experiential Approach. Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. 
 
His list of selected publications since 2013 includes: 
 
Abramovich, S. (2016). Combinatorics of the triangle inequality: from straws to experimental 
mathematics for teachers. Spreadsheets in Education, 9(1), Article 1. 
Abramovich, S., and Connell, M. L. (2016). Sociocultural aspects of the impact of computing 
technology on the preparation of K-12 mathematics teachers. In I. S. Gibbs (Ed.), 
Teacher Education: Assessment, Impact and Social Perspectives. Hauppauge, NY: Nova 
Science Publishers. 
Abramovich, S. (2015). Mathematical problem posing as a link between algorithmic thinking 
and conceptual knowledge. The Teaching of Mathematics, 18(2), 45-60. 
Abramovich, S. (2015). Educating teachers to pose mathematical problems in the digital age: 
toward alternative ways of curriculum design. IMVI Open Mathematical Education 
Notes, 5(2), pp. 115-136. 
Abramovich, S., and Cho, E. (2015). Using digital technology for mathematical problem 
posing. In F.M. Singer, N. Ellerton, and J. Cai (Eds), Mathematical Problem Posing: 
From Research to Effective Practice (pp. 71-102). New York: Springer. 
Abramovich, S. (2015). Experimental pre-college mathematics: theory, pedagogy, tools. IMVI 
Open Mathematical Education Notes, 5(1), 65-86. 
Abramovich, S. (2014). Experimental mathematics for secondary schools: Connecting 
curriculum strands through technology integration. In D. Berlin and A. White (Eds), 
Initiatives in Mathematics and Science Education with Global Implications (pp. 21-32). 
Columbus, OH: International Consortium for Research in Science and Mathematics 
Education. 
Abramovich, S. (2014). Revisiting mathematical problem solving and posing in the digital 
era: Toward pedagogically sound uses of modern technology. International Journal of 
Mathematical Education in Science and Technology, 45(7), 1034-1052.  
Abramovich, S., and Leonov, G. A. (2013). From Pascal’s triangle to a mathematical frontier: 
Uncovering hidden patterns in the oscillations of generalized golden ratios. IMVI Open 
Mathematical Education Notes, 3: 17-29. 


In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
USING CONTEXT RICH PROBLEMS AS  
A PATH TO PROBLEM SOLVING SKILLS AND 
CONTENT KNOWLEDGE IN PHYSICS 
 
 
Peter Gustafsson1,*, Margareta Enghag2 and Gunnar Jonsson1 
1Mälardalen University, Västerås, Sweden 
2Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
This chapter gives an overview of the research on the use of narrative Context Rich 
Problems (CRP) in physics education at the upper secondary and higher education levels. 
After a presentation of the CRP concept, the benefits and risks of using CRP are 
investigated. The focus here is on learning physics concepts and problem solving, which 
includes bridging everyday experiences and physics modelling. How CRP stimulate 
discussions about physics and aid the development of problem solving skills is also 
discussed. The research findings include the selection and formulation of problems that 
help students to take ownership, i.e., take actions of choice and control. Other aspects of 
CRP are investigated too, such as whether there is a difference between giving too much 
or too little information in the problem solving context. How the teaching should be 
organised regarding the use of CRP and the functionality of the student group are also 
discussed. As engagement and good discussions in randomly organised groups are not 
always possible, we look at how the groups could be formed in order to be constructive. 
Being aware of students’ inabilities to work together and having the knowledge to deal 
with this can make the use of CRP more relevant and valuable. 
 
Keywords: problem solving, cooperative student groups, context rich problems, student 
ownership, talking physics 
 
 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: Peter Gustafsson. Mälardalen University, Box 883, 72123 Västerås, Sweden. Email: peter. 
gustafsson@mdh.se. 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
66
INTRODUCTION 
 
At some time or other in their teaching careers most physics teachers will have observed 
that students find it difficult to apply physical concepts and laws when solving problems. 
Students’ activities sometimes give the impression that problem solving means fitting 
numbers into formulas and equations in the hope that an answer will emerge. This raises 
several questions for teachers to reflect on, such as: Have the students been given sufficient 
opportunity to really learn and understand the concepts and laws of physics? How do we 
know that they understand what problem solving means? Which problem solving strategies 
and repertoires are they familiar with? The authors of this chapter have themselves grappled 
with such questions and searched for ways in which to develop a useful pedagogical tool box. 
Physics education research gained legitimacy in the physics community when, in a study 
comprising some 6,000 participants, Hake (1998) concluded that interactive engagement (IE) 
methods benefitted student learning much more than courses based on lectures delivered to 
passive student recipients. IE methods are designed to promote conceptual understanding by 
means of joint activities with peers and feedback from peers and/or instructors, This type of 
research was based on large quantitative questionnaires studies, such as the Force Concept 
Inventory (Hestenes, Wells and Swackhammer, 1992) and A mechanics baseline test 
(Hestenes and Wells, 1992). Long-term inquiries into physics instruction at universities, such 
as Crouch and Mazur’s (2001) Peer Instruction: Ten years of experience and results, opened 
the way for physics teachers to use the peer instruction method to teach conceptual 
understanding. 
Several inquiries into why IE methods were successful and the kinds of interactive and 
communicative mechanisms that led to this were initiated. As a result, more exploratory 
qualitative methods for more refined analyses were used. In this context, the use of context 
rich problems (CRP) as part of physics instruction was identified as an important interactive 
engagement method. 
For us, a study visit to a university already using CRP led to a deepened interest in the 
further development of CRP and a reseach project to explore CRP and its usefulness in the 
problem solving process. Our own interest in how CRP might change the conditions for 
students’ learning and the development of problem solving skills was anchored in students’ 
poor conceptual understanding, a desire to change the learning environment so that it was 
more inclusive and the possibility of using peer instruction as a valuable resource. Qualitative 
methods, including transcriptions of classroom discourses, yielded information about how 
CRP functioned in smaller student cohorts in engineering education. Several facets of the use 
of CRP have been investigated by us and by other reseach groups and the important findings 
and issues are presented here. 
This chapter gives an overview of research that has been conducted on the use of CRP at 
the upper secondary and higher education levels. Our own contributions to this field of 
reseach are included in the overview. The chapter begins with a description of CRP. This is 
followed by research results related to students’ learning and problem solving abilities. Here 
we discuss the importance of talking physics as a pathway to learning and how promoting 
students’ identification of physics in everyday life creates a learning arena. The next section 
deals with student groups and what needs to be considered when these are formed. From this 
we move to students’ ownership of learning and the importance of developing this. Finally, 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
67
we discuss how CRP stimulates discussions and helps students to moves in the actual 
problem solving process. 
 
 
WHAT ARE CONTEXT RICH PROBLEMS? 
 
Around 1990, a group of teachers and educational researchers at the University of 
Minnesota begun an educational development (Heller, Keith and Anderson, 1992; Heller and 
Hollabaugh, 1992) to address student-related issues connected to problem solving. This 
resulted in the concept of CRP. The group had noted that teaching in cooperative student 
groups was an effective technique that helped students to learn complex problem solving 
skills by encouraging them to share conceptual and procedural knowledge with each other. 
CRP is thus an instructional approach that promotes verbalisation among students about 
concepts and facilitates an understanding of basic laws and problem solving strategies. CRP 
was originally developed for use at the introductory level of physics in higher education (e.g., 
Heller, Keith and Anderson, 1992; Heller and Hollabaugh, 1992, Enghag, Gustafsson and 
Jonsson, 2007; Benckert and Pettersson, 2008), but has also been applied in biology (Kieser, 
Kardos, Higgins and Herbison, 2002), chemistry (Ogilvie, 2009; Overton and Potter, 2011) 
and at upper secondary school level (Enghag, Gustafsson and Jonsson, 2004, Benckert, 
Pettersson, Aasa, Johansson and Norman, 2005). 
CRP is based on cooperative group work (Heller, Keith and Anderson, 1992), a conscious 
choice of a rather resource effective method. In many respects the cooperative group work 
reflects future working life and the necessity of team work. All that is required is for the basic 
principles of problem solving to be taught and a set of instructions provided. One can also 
state that the CRP is an application for student training of problem-solving strategy. 
A traditional end-of-chapter textbook exercise often includes a clearly stated question 
about what to calculate and the information and data that is necessary to solve the problem or 
data are easy to look up in tables. In contrast, CRP has a completely different approach. One 
of the ideas behind CRP is to force and stimulate discussions among the students themselves 
using the relevant concepts in the conversation. From this some basic constructional guiding 
can be identified. 
In order to use CRP, students have to be embroiled in a problem in the form of a short 
story that includes the pronoun “you.” The story has to be as realistic and relevant as possible 
so that the students easily can identify the problem as reasonable but also finding a solution as 
motivated. This is often done by placing the story in an everyday context that is familiar to 
the students. Through this curiosity can be raised among the students about what the answer 
to the problem might be. 
Furthermore, the context of the story and the descriptions have to be as real as possible 
which can make it rich of details. Information that is not actually needed to solve the problem 
can be provided, as long as it is regarded as plausible by the students and thereby can generate 
discussion. Questions that need to be asked by the students include whether the given 
information is of value for the problem-solving or not, and whether the arguments for that are 
relevant. Some of the information necessary to solve the problem may be missing, in which 
case this has to be identified and once again be argued for in the discussion with the fellow 
students and to be agreed on and looked up. In the discussions during the problem solving 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
68
process, the students themselves are expected to identify and propose assumptions or 
idealizations necessary for the solutions. The problem can also be presented in a such a way, 
that the solution is not immediately obvious even if a clear question is posed in the text. For 
example, a CRP about a traffic situation, car movements, speed and being stopped by the 
police for speeding could end with the question: Would you pay the fine? However, what 
needs to be calculated here is the speed of the vehicle at the time, not whether a fine should be 
paid. One important factor seems to be whether or not the problem contains numbers for 
parameters and variables. A lack of numbers reduces the tendency to directly use an equation 
to calculate answers, and means that more effort will be put into analysing the problem 
(Enghag and Carling, 2012). Another key issue is whether multiple answers are possible. 
An example of a typical end-of-chapter textbook exercise is (Jonsson, Enghag and 
Gustafsson, 2013): 
 
A bowl holds 80 l of water, with a temperature of 8°C. You use an immersion-heater, 
with power 2 kW, to warm up the water. How long does it take to warm it up to 28°C? 
[Disregard the heat exchange with the environment] 
 
The same problem as an example of a CRP (Jonsson, Enghag and Gustafsson, 2013): 
 
You are with your dog on a vacation at your cottage. You have been out all day 
training with the dog in the woods. During this your dog jumps in to a swamp and needs 
washing. Back in the cottage you wants to wash the dog, but you only have cold water 
with a temperature around 8°C. You find an old bowl of sheet metal of a suitable size, 
which holds 80 l of water. You also find an immersion-heater with a power of 2 kW. 
How long does it take before you can wash your dirty dog? 
 
There are basically two different principles to design a CRP. It can either be an over-
determined or under-determined problem. Most of the problems constructed by Heller and 
Hollabaught (1992) are over-determined, which means that more data than is needed to solve 
the problem is provided. This forces the students to evaluate the parameters and the 
information and prioritise some facts before others. In an under-determined CRP, all the 
necessary data for the solution is not provided. Several studies (Enghag et al., 2007; Enghag, 
Gustafsson and Jonsson, 2009; Enghag and Jonsson, 2011) have found that students prefer 
under-determined problems. From a teacher perspective, in under-determined problems it is 
easier to detect the students’ difficulties related to everyday life concepts and translate them 
into physics concepts. 
To summarise, a CRP is the key element in an instructional method that allows students 
to practise and develop problem solving skills whilst working in groups, to practise 
identifying physics in an everyday context using physics concepts in discussions and talk and 
to come up with plausible solutions of a question identified by themselves out from a given 
story. 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
69
THE IMPACT OF CRP ON THE CONDITIONS FOR PROBLEM SOLVING 
 
Physics teaching has a tradition of containing solving tasks, exercises and problems. 
However, learning through problem solving has been criticised to influence students’ way of 
choosing learning strategy. Learning can be described in different ways. For example, surface 
learning, as opposed to deep learning (Marton and Booth, 1997), is one way of describing the 
difference between memorising facts and understanding the meanings behind concepts and 
models. Elby (1999) found rote learning to be a student way of getting good results in tests 
due to the frequent use of formula-based problem solving. From a cognitive science 
perspective, Sweller (1988) concludes that problem solving as a learning device is ineffective, 
due to “a relatively large amount of cognitive processing capacity” (p. 257). Sweller also 
states that students cannot simultaneously solve a problem from start to finish, work on a 
problem step-by-step until the answer emerges (using means-end analysis as a problem-
solvning technique) and create basic understanding of physics (creating new pieces of 
“schemata” for future use in problem solving). 
Physics is not an easy subject to grasp. Understanding all the different representations is 
often dificult, mainly because “a variety of methods of understanding and to translate from 
one to the other — words, tables of numbers, graphs, equations, diagrams, maps” are included 
in the discipline (Redish, 1994, p. 801). Airey and Linder (2009) have looked critically at 
what happens when students’ knowledge and understanding of physics is too fragmented. 
From a sociocultural perspective, they describe physics as a disciplinary discourse, where 
discursive fluency is a necessary but not altogether sufficient condition for experiencing a 
disciplinary way of knowing. Students’ understanding is often a discursive imitation, in that 
they do not totally understand the subject or the multimodality of all its representations, and 
are not confident in their expressions of physics knowledge. From this it is understood that 
problem solving can itself be problematic when it comes to deep learning and an 
understanding of physics. 
How problem solving is conducted has been an active research field for a long time. A 
review of how experts differ from novices in problem solving can be found for example in 
How People Learn (Bransford, Brown and Cocking, 2000, Ch. 2). Problem solving in physics 
as a reseach object can be traced back to pioneer work in mathematics (Polya, 1957; 
Schoenfeld, 1985; 1994) and have been reviewed specifically for physics by Maloney (1994). 
With regard to problem solving in physics (Larkin, McDermott, Simon and Simon, 1980; 
Chi, Feltovich and Glaser, 1981), one finding is that a novice often solves a problem 
backwards, i.e., from the unknown solution to the known and given quantities, whereas at 
least for easy problems, experts solve problems forwards. This means that an expert starts out 
from his or her firm knowledge of the laws of physics and solution principles and uses the 
available schemes to work directly towards the problem goal based on the given information 
from given parameters. However, Priest and Lindsay (1992) find that experts and novices 
both exhibit a foreword interference when solving problems related to physics, even though 
experts are more competent than novices when it comes to planning the solution before 
solving the problem. 
From this, we understand that the problem solving process has a number of steps. Gick 
(1986) has described these at a general problem solving level. First, the problem-solver 
should generate a problem representation based on a qualitative analysis of the problem, 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
70
including given information, and set goals for the problem-solving. Here, the problem is 
connected to a person’s existing knowledge so that a scheme of how to proceed can be 
activated. Typical for an expert is that the problem solving process follows a specific scheme 
(Sweller, 1988), whereas a novice uses a search strategy to look for more information and 
make comparisons with other similar problems solved earlier and comparing goal state with 
problem state. 
The second stage is the solution process. If the problem-solver runs into difficulties here, 
the problem either has to be redefined or more information gathered. The solution stage can 
be followed by a third stage, namely checking whether the suggested solution is plausible. As 
there is no rigid separation into different stages, the problem solving process may involve 
looping back to a previous stage. 
Although extensive research has been carried out on problem solving in physics, it has 
mainly been limited to a single person as the problem-solver. Problem solving in a group, as 
in CRP, may have similarities, but as the setting is not the same, one can expected that the 
problem solving process will be different. 
Problem solving is not just an activity in an individual’s mind, but is also a collaborative 
arena that is constructed by language, the context and the students’ collective activities. 
Roschellel and Teasley (1994) suggest that a shared problem solving structure, called the joint 
problem space, supports the problem solving process for a group. This structure is formed by 
the integration of activities related to problem solving steps: goals, descriptions of the current 
problem state, awareness of available problem solving actions, associations relating to goals, 
features of the current problem state and possible actions. 
An important aspect of problem solving concerns how structured or ill-structured and 
open-ended the problems are. As indicated in the introduction, the exercises provided in 
physics textbooks are often structured as “plug and chug” into formulas, whereas real 
problems are open-ended. In order to solve these types of problems, a qualitative analysis of 
the problem needs to be conducted before continuing with models and equations (Chin and 
Chia, 2006). 
CRP can change the conditions for students’ learning and problem solving exercises. 
CRP are structured and include open-ended real-life issues. As these problems need to be 
qualitatively analysed, it means that students have opportunities to learn from their peers, that 
a situation for deep learning is created before you start modelling and solving equations 
(Gustafsson, Jonsson and Enghag, 2015). 
Jonsson et al. (2013) investigates quantitative and qualitative problems. Here, a problem 
is defined as quantitative if it contains numerical values and a calculation is needed to arrive 
at a solution, and qualitative if no numerical values are given and conceptual reasoning is 
needed to solve the problem. The results from this study indicate that quantitative problems 
appear to enhance a formula driven solution, where students try to apply an equation without 
considering the properties and assumptions of physics and discuss which equation to use and 
the numerical values that are required to solve the problem. A qualitative problem seems to 
lead to more open discussions about the requirements and models, which also seems to 
involve all the students in the group. In this study, they identified at least two mechanisms in 
the problem solving process that stimulated discussions about physics among the students. 
The first is that when students do not immediately know which physics model to use and the 
second is when students’ everyday conceptions are challenged. A conclusion of the study is 
that it is possible to select problems that allow students to practise using concepts that 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
71
enhance their problem solving abilities (Jonsson et al., 2013). Moreover, it would seem that 
qualitative problems are more likely to promote discussions in order to clarify concepts, 
whereas quantitative problems are more likely to develop problem solving skills. Both types 
of problems can induce conceptual or procedural discussions, depending on the students’ own 
experiences. 
Qualitative analysis involves setting parameters and excluding variables that do not 
contribute to the problem solving process. However, if students encounter difficulties in the 
planning process, they can ask for help from their peers. This phenomenon is often called 
internal teaching (Enghag, et al., 2004) and is described as students in groups teach each other 
in explicit areas, such as mathematics, when solving equations. However, this kind of 
learning is not always appropriate, for instance if the problem is too difficult or if no-one in 
the group knows how to start. When a group takes a completely wrong direction they need the 
support of a teacher to put them on the right track. However, in most cases it should be 
possible to construct CRP with very simple solutions. In this way, all the members of a group 
will be able to contribute to a fruitful learning environment, grasp the problem, work towards 
a solution, help each other to understand the different aspects involved in the problem solving 
process and iron out any difficulties that members of the group might have. 
 
 
CRP AS A FACILITATOR OF DISCUSSIONS AND TALK 
 
Students can be said to be in the zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978) when it 
comes to talking with teachers and peers in the physics classroom. The physics learning 
environment becomes a disciplinary context for the learners to participate in, where physics 
are presented on a social arena (Mortimer and Scott, 2003). The disciplinary discourse 
includes the language, concepts, terms relevant for physics, artefacts and the different modes 
of representing physics (diagrams, equations, models, formulas, equipment, etc.) that are 
necessary in order to become a practioner in the discipline (Airey and Linder, 2009). Every 
student has to be enculturated into the physics discourse by taking part in the different 
activities and discussions in order to become familiar with the concepts, equipment, 
multimodal resources, mathematics and language used. Certain activities in physics education 
could provide students with a culture that is slightly different from the physics research 
culture. From a sociocultural perspective, learning physics can be seen as a meaning-making 
process that is accomplished by participation in dialogic activities with peers and more 
knowledgeable members of the physics discipline (Lemke, 1990). 
Heller and Heller (1992) describe CRP group work as cooperative learning. Oxford 
(1997) compares cooperative learning, collaborative learning and interaction and describes 
cooperative learning as being “considered more structured, more prescriptive to teachers 
about classroom techniques, more directive to students about how to work together in groups, 
and more targeted (at least it was in its beginnings) to the public school population than to 
postsecondary or adult education” (Oxford, 1997, p. 444). In contrast, collaborative learning 
is described as a “construction of knowledge within a social context and which therefore 
encourages acculturation of individuals into a learning community” (p. 443). Oxford links 
keywords to cooperative learning (e.g., positive interdependence, accountability teamwork, 
roles, cooperative learning structures) and to collaborative learning (e.g., zone of proximal 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
72
development, cognitive apprenticeship, acculturation, scaffolding, situated cognition, 
reflective inquiry, epistemology). She also states that “Collaborative learning has thus taken 
on the connotation of social constructivism, which holds that learning is acculturation into 
knowledge communities” (p. 444). When it comes to the way in which the authors of this 
chapter have developed the use and structure of CRP, collaborative learning is an appropriate 
term to use. 
In the student discussions generated by CRP (Enghag et al., 2007, 2009), an inter-
thinking way of communication (Mercer, 1995) is found when the students try to reach 
consensus and a common understanding. The students talk to a peer they trust in an attempt to 
reach a conceptual understanding, in the search for a solution or to express doubt. It has been 
found (Enghag et al., 2007) that the talk that takes place in a student group when solving a 
CRP can be described according to the model of discursive moves presented by Barnes and 
Todd (1995), namely: initiate (invite others to discuss), extend/request (repeat an important 
word) and qualify (answer a question or express an opinion). This talk has been interpreted 
(Enghag et al., 2007, 2009) as exploratory talk (Barnes and Todd, 1995). It is argued that 
students need to talk physics (Lemke, 1990) and that this can be experienced when students 
use dialogue as a reflective space for deep learning in collaborative CRP groups. 
 
 
LEARNING TO IDENTIFY PHYSICS IN AN EVERYDAY CONTEXT 
 
Physics in an everyday context refer to several different circumstances. Physics concepts 
and terms can have different meanings when used in everyday life and in traditional physics 
teaching. For example, the differences in terms like force, momentum and impulse have been 
explored in these different contexts to determine the impact they have on the learning of 
physics (Itza-Ortiz, Rebello and Zollman, 2003). Another well-known example is heat and the 
multiple meanings of this concept. Also, in our everyday lives we learn by experience how 
physics concepts can be used. One example of an everyday situation is a CRP of ice-cubes 
melting in a drink (Enghag et al., 2007), where the students have to estimate the temperature 
inside a refrigerator and an appropriate temperature for a drink. In a larger context, such as 
global warming or socio-scientific dilemmas, physics concepts can enhance relevance and 
interest, as for example in a problem concerning nano-particles in consumer products. 
It has been demonstrated that an everyday context for physics problems helps students to 
visulise the problem (Rennie and Parker, 1996). In a study carried out by Park and Lee 
(2004), it was found that teachers and students preferred to work with physics problems that 
were situated in an everyday context but also that this introduce complexity in grasping the 
context and understand what matters in the problem information. In another study, a research 
group (Benckert, Pettersson, Aasa, Johansson and Norman, 2005)) investigating the use of 
CRP asked the student groups to select between problems with different contexts. The results 
showed that personal interest determined what the students found interesting or not 
interesting. Here, a connection to the students’ own reality was of great importance. 
An example of how students use everyday words, experiences and/or physics concepts in 
their discussions is found in Enghag et al. (2007) when reporting on group work on the CRP 
“The Drink”: 
 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
73
You are with a friend at the Gondola restaurant in Stockholm. You have just ordered 
a drink before dinner. While you are having a drink, looking ar the river “Stockholm 
ström,” your friend is philosophizing:” As a physicist can you tell me, how many ice-
cubes are needed to cool this drink to an appropriate temperature?” 
 
In this study, the content of the students’ talk when solving the CRP was analysed. 
During the problem solving period of 35 minutes, it was observed that everyday life related 
discussions mostly occurred at the start of the problem solving. Here the students made a 
qualitative analysis of the problem. Over 40 per cent of the talk during the first five minutes 
was coded as everyday life experience, using utterances like: “five degrees, that is really 
cold” or “that is as cold as in a fridge.” Physics related talk then dominated (amounting to 
some 70 per cent of the talk) and included expressions like: “then we need to know the 
density of the ice or the mass of the ice and the mass of the water.” In the last five minutes of 
the exercise, during the validation stage, everyday talk was again used (20 per cent) (Enghag 
et al., 2007). 
 
 
FORMING THE GROUPS FOR CRP ACTIVITIES 
 
When working with CRP teachers need to plan the formation of the groups and the 
working procedures with care. This means being aware of each student’s ability and content 
knowledge in physics and forming groups that are potentially functional and successful. 
Important aspects that need to be considered when forming cooperative student groups 
include the leadership and functionality of the group and the division of labour within the 
group. In the early 1960s, Hoffman and Maier (1961) studied the quality of solutions to 
problems based on how the groups were composed. Homogeneous and heterogeneous groups 
of four were formed in the laboratory sessions of an undergraduate psychology course. 
Homogeneous here refers to students with equal subject knowledge. Hoffman and Maier 
found that the quality of the solutions in the heterogeneous group were either significantly 
superior to those of homogeneous groups or did not differ at all. In the study it was found that 
the homogeneous groups never performed better than the heterogeneous ones. 
When Heller and Hollabaugt (1992) started their CPR activities they experimented with 
different sizes of groups (student groups of two, three and four students). They found that 
groups with only two students in them did not function as well as groups with more students: 
“Groups of two did not seem to have the “critical mass” of conceptual and procedural 
knowledge for the successful completion of context-rich problems” (p. 640). Also, some of 
these groups did not function as cooperative groups, in that one student often took control of 
the problem solving process. On the other hand, the larger groups had other problems: “In 
groups with four members, one student was invariably left out of the problem-solving 
process” (Heller and Hollabaugt, 1992, p. 640). From their research, it was deemed that 
groups consisting of three members were preferable as “a three member group is large enough 
for the generation of diverse ideas and approaches, but small enough to be manageable so all 
students can contribute to the problem solution” (p. 641). According to Rosser (1998), most 
research shows that groups of between three and six members are preferable, “groups larger 
than four may encounter problems with meeting times and poor participation by one or more 
members” (p. 83). 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
74
Also according to Heller and Hollabaugh (1992), in order to function optimally, the 
cooperative groups should consist of one higher ability, one medium ability and one lower 
ability student. This result aligns with the findings of Hoffman and Maier that heterogeneous 
groups tend to create the best solutions to problems (Hoffman and Maier, 1961). How the 
students are placed in the room also seems to affect cooperation within the group (Heller and 
Hollabaugh, 1992). 
In addition to mixed ability levels, it is also important to be aware of how the groups are 
formed from an ethnic and gender perspective. Rosser (1998) discusses gender and ethnicity 
in the science classroom. According to her, taking care of minority students is more important 
than considering ability. She also says that “one minority student within each majority group 
may lead to the minority student dropping out of the group, the course, or the major” (Rosser, 
1998, p. 84). She finds that women tend to drop out if they are the only females in the group, 
and especially so in subjects like science, engineering or mathematics. When forming groups, 
if they include minorities they should at least contain more than one person of the minority 
gender or more than one person from a different ethnic background. Heller and Hollabaugh’s 
(1992) findings are that groups with homogeneous gender or mixed gender groups of two 
females and one male are better able to solve problems than groups with one female and two 
males. Their observsations are that males tend to dominate if there is only one female in the 
group, even if the female is the most skilled student. 
Although heterogeneous groups are found to produce a higher proportion of high quality 
solutions than homogeneous groups (Hoffman and Maier, 1961), these groups can experience 
difficulties. Jonsson, Gustafsson and Enghag (2007) discuss ways of forming student groups. 
Their study involved aeronautical engineering students in an introductory physics course 
working with CRP at university level. The groups consisted of three or four students and were 
formed on the basis of the students’ previous performances in the engineering programme. 
They used heterogeneous groups (one over-achieving, one average and one under-achieving 
student) and groups in which at least two female students were included (Jonsson et al., 
2007). They found that if the knowledge levels of the group members were too disparate, a 
skilled student tended to take over the problem solving, leaving the others to discuss “the 
weather.” In one group of three students, one skilled student practically solved the problem 
single-handed, while one of the other two students assumed a social role and initiated 
discussions, primarily with the skilled student. The third student had difficulty understanding 
the task and did not really contribute to finding a solution. Jonsson et al. call this type of 
group “the solitaire group” rather than a “discussion group” where the group discussions 
function well and all the students make equal contributions. 
 
 
HOW CRP INFLUENCE THE OWNERSHIP OF LEARNING 
 
Solving a CRP creates ownership. The word ownership relates to the process of meaning 
making and understanding (Enghag and Niedderer, 2008). Student ownership of learning has 
two dimensions: a group level and an individual level. Both dimensions include students’ 
opportunities to choose and control. The dimension group ownership of learning refers to the 
actions of choice and control a group exercises in the mangement of a task. Three categories 
relating to the degree of student ownership have been identified: how and by whom the task is 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
75
determined, how it is performed and how it is reported. The dimension individual student 
ownership of learning refers to an individual student’s actions of choices and control, i.e., the 
student’s own questions/ideas that emerge from his or her own experience, interests or degree 
of understanding. In this context, an idea/question that recurs in a process is known as 
mimesis and leads to new insights (see Enghag, 2006). 
When the framework of student ownership was applied to group work on CRP, it was 
found (Enghag, 2006) that the CRP in its original form led to restricted group ownership. In 
this setting, the teacher decided which CRP problem was to be solved and also chose the 
members of the groups. However, in the working process there were opportunities for the 
students to make choices and take control. 
As described earlier in this chapter, when students are able to choose which CRP to work 
with (Bencker et al., 2005) they are more inclined to participate and engage in the problem 
solving. In order to enhance group ownership, the students taught by one of the authors of this 
chapter (Jonsson) presented different types of CRP from which the student groups could 
choose. These CRP were both over-determined and under-determined in nature. The students, 
who were given increased ownership by being able to choose which CRP to work with, 
preferred the under-determined problems. The CRP known as ‘The Drink’ was a typical 
under-determined problem that required the students to have an intense discussion about an 
appropriate temperature for a drink before they could begin to solve the problem. An over-
determined CRP will presumably have a different effect on the problem solving process. 
Whether this affects other groups in the same way remains to be investigated. 
Individual student ownership was found to be quite high for under-determined problems. 
Several questions were raised in the dialogue between the students, and in these exploratory 
talks (Barnes and Todd, 1995) they gradually arrived at a solution. During this process the 
students initiated discussion by asking various own questions and an understanding of physics 
evolved from their everyday life experience. Not all the students asked questions, though, and 
only two students’ questions were discussed in a group. 
 
 
THE PROBLEM SOLVING PATH FROM A GROUP PERSPECTIVE 
 
We now turn to the question of problem-solving in groups. In order to investigate the 
existence of a problem-solving path, in-depth analyses of transcribed audio-recordings of 
students’ discussions were used to map how students in CRP groups used some kind of 
problem-solving strategy (Gustafsson et al., 2015). The transcripts were used to identify the 
problem solving moves along a timeline in accordance with the five stages or categories of 
Bransford and Stein’s (1993) IDEAL model: 1) identify the problem and opportunities [do 
something creative], 2) define the goals, 3) explore possible strategies, 4) anticipate outcomes 
and act and 5) look back and learn. The findings (Gustafsson et al., 2015) first showed that 
not only individuals, but also collaborative groups have a problem solving path with 
identifiable steps that can be connected to established stages or categories in the problem 
solving process. If irrelevant information was given or necessary information was lacking, a 
discussion between the members of the student group took place, thereby stimulating moves 
between the categories backwards or forwards in the problem solving process. 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
76
This did not just include the novice versus expert behaviour described by Schoenfeld 
(1985), but was characteristic for group versus individual problem solving. When one of the 
group members forged ahead of the others, this also caused forwards-backwards discussions 
that seemed to allow the others to catch up. These discussions seemed to begin when the 
students talked about their everyday experiences in relation to the problem and the 
information gap. This often led to a meaning making process and required a well-functioning 
group in which everyone felt safe. 
The first step, identifying the problem, is close to what Antonenko et al. (2011) call 
qualitative analysis. In their study, student groups were given a set of multifaceted CRP to 
solve in a web based environment over the period of one school term. They allowed the 
students to do their qualitative analyses online, which simplified the quantitative analysis. It 
was found that some progress took place in the sense that the qualitative analyses were 
conducted at the beginning of the task and that the collection of relevant and irrelevant 
resources came later, as the group became more experienced. A more expert-like problem 
solving practice thus developed. A further finding was that approximately half of the students 
completed the qualitative analysis at the end of the task, rather than at the beginning, which 
still gave room for instructional improvements. Although this did not result in a significant 
number of correct answers to the problem, it did show that exploring CPR problem solving 
online can be fruitful. 
 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
In the introduction to this chapter three questions are posed in the quest for better 
teaching. These are: Have the students been given sufficient opportunity to really learn and 
understand the concepts and laws of physics? How do we know that they understand what 
problem solving means? Which problem solving strategies and repertoires are they familiar 
with? In our view, CRP gives physics students better opportunities to master the subject and 
develop the necessary problem solving skills. However, this process is not automatic. If a 
CRP is contextualised and anchored in the lives of learners it is more likely to engage 
students and help them to identify physics in an everyday context. But this is not in itself a 
trigger for talking physics. As the chapter describes, some of the objectives of CRP are to 
stimulate talk amongst the students, encourage them to develop and use scientific language, 
steer them towards using the relevant concepts, help them to explore the validity of models 
and to validate the outcome of the calculations and estimates made. Lemke (1989), who has 
investigated the use of text in students’ learning states that: “students’ ability to restate a 
sentence or passage in their own words is the surest sign of comprehension” (Lemke, 1989, p. 
139). In a practice that is led by a teacher, the activities can be steered in certain directions in 
real time. In contrast, in a CRP, the mechanism to stimulate talk about physics has to be built 
into the problem, which is an important aspect of the CRP design. If the CRP is vaguely 
formulated, such as an “appropriate temperature” in a thermodynamic problem, the group 
may be triggered to discuss the meaning of that particular expression. In the study, talk about 
an everyday experience such as what an appropriate temperature for a beverage might includ 
physics content, terms and values that could be used in a thermodynamic model. Talk thus 
helps students to conceptualise the ideas that make up the subject of physics. A vaguely 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
77
described everyday situation may initiate a discussion that leads to meaning making and ends 
up in the domain of physics. 
For teacher and constructers of CRP, these findings are a guidance how to write CRP. If 
redundancies or lack of information or presumed ambiguity in the problem can be connected 
to what can be presumed to be everyday experience for the students’, a discussion related to 
the physical issue are more likely to take place. 
Benckert and Pettersson (2008) argue that for good discussions to take place, the group 
must have some kind of knowledge base that can transfer the everyday reflection into the 
domain of physics. Without this, a productive discussion will not emerge, and the group could 
instead search for equations in an attempt to solve the problem. This discovery also led to a 
focus on how best to form the groups for the CPR activity. Even though some research 
findings report that heterogeneous groups produce better learning, we found several examples 
of homogenous groups using exploratory talk to reach consensus after interesting and fruitful 
discussions. The teacher needs to review group functionality with care, especially as as this 
may depend on the context and makeup of the physics course. 
The use of CPR also influences students’ ownership of learning. In a study of CRP in 
relation to ownership, Enghag et al. (2009) report that if a group collectively owns its 
learning, for example when solving a CRP, it does not necessarily mean that the individuals 
in the group automatically have a individual ownership of their learning. There may be 
various reasons for this, which may or may not be connected to the problem itself. Personal 
experience and the constitution of the group can make a difference. 
In this overview, we have pointed to several important factors when solving problems in 
physics using the CRP methodology. There is much more to it than simply changing a 
traditional end-of-chapter textbook exercise into a narrative story. The story in the CRP needs 
to appeal to the targeted student group in order to promote engagement in the task. It must 
include an everyday situation or components that are recognised by the students to initiate 
talk that will bridge from the everyday domain to the physics domain and stimulate individual 
ownership. The teacher also needs to reflect on the composition of the group in terms of 
competence, gender and ethic affiliation. The setting of the task, including who selects the 
problems, decides on the problem solving procedure and the presentation of the results, also 
affects ownership for the group. Other aspects that have been found to be sgnificant in terms 
of the problem-solving process are whether the problem is under-determined or over-
determined and whether the problem being dealt with is qualitative or quantitative in nature. 
In short, CRP gives students opportunities to talk physics in cooperative groups, take control 
of their learning processes and learn physics while developing problem-solving skills. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Airey, J., and Linder, C. (2009). A Disciplinary Discourse Perspective on University Science 
Learning: Achieving Fluency in a Critical Constellation of Modes. Journal of Research 
in Science Teaching, 46(1), 27-49. 
Antonenko, P. D., Ogilvie, C. A., Niederhauser, D. S., Jackman, J., Kumsaikaew, P., 
Marathe, R. R., and Ryan, S. M. (2011). Understanding student pathways in context-rich 
problems. Education and Information Technologies, 1(4), 323-342. 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
78
Barnes, D., and Todd, F. (1995). Communication and Learning Revisited: Making Meaning 
Through Talk. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Publishing. 
Benckert, S., Pettersson, S., Aasa, S., Johansson, O., and Norman, R. (2005). 
Gruppdiskussioner runt kontextrika problem i fysik – Hur ska problemen utformas? 
[Group discussions about context-rich problems in physics - How should the problems be 
designed?] Nordic Studies in Science Education, 1(2), 36-50. 
Benckert, S., and Pettersson, S. (2008). Learning Physics in Small-Group Discussions – 
Three Examples. Eurasia Journal of Mathematics, Science and Technology Education, 
4(2), 121-134. 
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., and Cocking, R. R. (2000). How People Learn. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press. 
Bransford, J., and Stein, B. S. (1993). The ideal problem solver: A guide for improving 
thinking, learning, and creativity (2nd ed.). New York: W.H. Freeman 
Chin, C., and Chia, L. G. (2006). Problem-based learning: Using ill-structured problems in 
biology project works. Science Education, 90(1), 44-67. 
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., and Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and Representation of 
Physics Problems by Experts and Novices. Cognitive Science, 5(2), 121-152. 
Crouch, C. H., and Mazur, E. (2001). Peer Instruction: Ten years of experience and results. 
American Journal of Physics 69(9), 970-977. 
Elby, A. (1999). Another reason that physics students learn by rote. American Journal of 
Physics 67, S52; doi: 10.1119/1.19081. 
Enghag, M. (2006). Two dimensions of student ownership of learning during small-group 
work with miniprojects and context rich problems in physics. Mälardalen University 
Press Dissertations, no. 37, 113 pages. 
Enghag, M., and Carling, K. M. (2012). Studenters val av representationer och 
problemlösningsstrategier under gruppdiskussioner om vågfysik [Students’ choices of 
representations and problem solving strategies in group discussions about physics] The 
2nd Conference for Pedagogical Development in Higher Education, Karlstad, Sweden, 
May 11, 2012, https://www.kau.se/puk/hogskolepedagogiska-utvecklingskonferensen-
2012. 
Enghag, M., Gustafsson, P., and Jonsson, G. (2004). Context Rich Problems in Physics for 
Upper Secondary School. Science Education International, 16(4), 293-302. 
Enghag, M., Gustafsson, P., and Jonsson, G. (2007). From everyday life experiences to 
physics understanding occurring in small group work with context rich problems during 
introductory physics work at university. Research in Science Education, 37(4), 449-467. 
Enghag, M., Gustafsson, P., and Jonsson, G. (2009). Talking physics during small-group 
work with context-rich problem - analysed from an ownership perspective. International 
Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 7(3), 455-472. 
Enghag, M., and Niedderer, H. (2008). Two Dimensions of Student Ownership of Learning 
During Small-Group Work in Physics. International Journal of Science and Mathematics 
Education, 6(4), 629-653. 
Enghag, M., and Jonsson, G. (2011). Att lösa fysikproblem i gruppdiskussioner – Hur, vad 
och varför? [Solving physics problems in group discussions - how, what and why?] The 
1st Conference for Pedagogical Development in Higher Education. Karlstad, Sweden, 
May 11, 2011. 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
79
Gick, M. L. (1986). Problem-Solving Strategies. Educational Psychologist 21(1 and 2), 99-
120. 
Gustafsson, P., Jonsson, G., and Enghag, M. (2015). The problem-solving process in physics 
as observed when engineering students at university level work in groups. European 
Journal of Engineering Education, 40(4), 380-399. 
Hake, R. R. (1998). Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousand-
student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal 
of Physics 66, 64. 
Heller, P., Keith, R., and Anderson, S. (1992). Teaching problem solving through cooperative 
grouping. Part I. group versus individual problem solving. American Journal of Physics, 
60(7), 627-636. 
Heller, P., and Hollabaugh, M. (1992). Teaching problem solving through cooperative 
grouping. Part II. Designing problems and structuring groups. American Journal of 
Physics, 60(7), 637-644. 
Hestenes, D., and Wells, M. (1992). A mechanics baseline test. The Physics Teacher 30(3), 
159-166. 
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., and Swackhammer, G. (1992). Force Concept Inventory. The 
Physics Teacher 30(3), 141-151. 
Hoffman, L. R., and Maier, N. R. F. (1961). Quality and Acceptance of Problem Solutions by 
Members of Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Groups. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 62(2), 401-407. 
Itza-Ortiz, S. F., Rebello, N. S., and Zollman, D. A. (2003). The Vocabulary of Physics and 
Its Impact on Student Learning. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National 
Association for Research in Science Teaching (Philadelphia, PA, March, 2003). 
Jonsson, G., Gustafsson P., and Enghag, M. (2007). Context Rich Problems as an Educational 
Tool in Physics Teaching – A Case Study. Journal of Baltic Science Education, 6(2), 26-
34. 
Jonsson, G., Enghag M., and Gustafsson, P. (2013). What kind of task promote student 
subject talk during problem-solving in physics? Oral presentation at European Science 
Education Research Association, Nicosia, Cyprus, September 2-7, 2013. 
Kieser, J., Kardos, T., Higgins, A., and Herbison, P. (2002). Context rich problems in oral 
biology teaching. European Journal of Dental Education, 6(3), 114-120. 
Larkin, J., McDermott, J., Simon, D. P., and Simon, H. A. (1980). Expert and Novice 
Performance in Solving Physics Problem. Science, 208: 1335-1342. 
Lemke, J. L. (1989). Making text talk. Theory into practice, 28(2), 136-141. 
Lemke, J. L. (1990). Talking science: Language, learning and values. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Maloney, D. P. (1994). Research on Problem Solving: Physics. In: D. Gabel (Eds.), 
Handbook of Research on Science Teaching and Learning (pp. 327-354). New York: 
Macmillan Publishing Company. 
Marton, F., and Booth, S. (1997). Learning and awareness. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Mercer, N. (1995). The guided construction of knowledge: Talk amongst teachers and 
learners. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual matters. 
Mortimer, E., ad Scott, P. (2003). Meaning making in Scondary Science Classrooms. 
Maidenhead: McGraw – Hill Education (UK). 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
80
Ogilvie, C. (2009). Changes in students’ problem-solving strategies in a course that includes 
context-rich, multifaceted problems. Physical Review Special Topics-Physics Education 
Research, 5, 020102. 
Oxford, R. L. (1997). Cooperative Learning, Collaborative Learning, and Interaction: Three 
Communicative Strands in the Language Classroom The Modern Language Journal, 81, 
443-456. 
Overton, T. L., and Potter, N. M. (2011). Investigating students’ success in solving and 
attitudes towards context-rich open-ended problems in chemistry. Chemistry Education 
Research and Practice, 12(3), 294-302. 
Park, J., and Lee, L. (2004). Analysing cognitive or non-cognitive factors involved in the 
process of physics problem-solving in an everyday context. International Journal of 
Science Education, 26(13), 1577-1595. 
Polya, G. (1957). How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method. Princeton. NJ: 
Princeton University Press. 
Priest, A. G., and Lindsay, R. O. (1992). New Light on Novice-Expert Differences in Physics 
Problem Solving. British Journal of Psychology, 83(3), 389-405. 
Redish, E. F. (1994). Implications of cognitive studies for teaching physics. American 
Journal of Physics, 62(9), 796-803. 
Rennie, L., and Parker, L. (1996). Placing physics problems in real-life context: Students’ 
reactions and performance. The Australian Science Teachers Journal, 42(1), 55-59. 
Roschellel, J., and Teasley, S. D. (1994). The Construction of Shared Knowledge in 
Collaborative Problem Solving. NATO ASI Series F Computer and Systems Sciences, 
128, 69-97. 
Rosser, S. V. (1998). Group Work in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics: Consequences 
of Ignoring Gender and Race. College Teaching, 46(3), 82-88. 
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1985). Mathematical Problem Solving. Orlando, FL: Academic. 
Schoenfeld, A. H. (1994). Reflections on Doing and Teaching Mathematics. In: A. H. 
Schoenfeld (Eds.), Mathematical Thinking and Problem Solving (pp. 53–70). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive Load During Problem Solving: Effects on Learning. Cognitive 
Science 12, 257-285. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
Name: Peter Gustafsson 
Affiliation: School of Education, Culture and Communication, Mälardalen University 
Education: Master in Engineering, Engineering Physics at Uppsala University, Ph.D. in 
Solid State Physics at Uppsala University, Reader in Physics at Mälardalen University, 
Excellent Teaching Practitioner at Mälardalen University 
Address: Box 883, 721 23 Västerås, Sweden 
 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
81
Research and Professional Experience: Peter is doing research on the teaching of 
sustainable development in upper secondary school and also students’ communication in the 
physics class room at university level. Besides that he is involved in projects investigating 
teachers’ view on the subject of technology in the Swedish pre-school and compulsory 
school. 
 
Professional Appointments: Professor in Physics with specialization in Physics 
Education 
 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
Sundqvist, P., Nilsson, T., and Gustafsson, P. (2015). The purpose of technology education in 
preschool - Swedish preschool staffs’ descriptions. I M. Chatoney (Red.), Plurality and 
Complementarity of Ap-proaches in Design and Technology Education: PATT29 
conference proceedings (pp. 390-396). Marseille: École supérieure du professorat et de 
l’éducation, Aix-Marseille Université. 
Sundqvist, P., Nilsson, T. and Gustafsson, P. (2015). Svensk förskolepersonals beskrivningar 
av teknik. [Swedish pre-school staffs’ descriptions of technology] LUMAT, 3 (2), 237-
257. 
Gustafsson, P., Engström, S., and Svenson, A. (2015) Teachers’ view of sustainable 
development in the Swedish upper secondary school. Procedia - Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 167, The XVI International Organisation for Science and Technology 
Education Symposium, IOSTE Borneo 2014, 7-14. 
Gustafsson, P., Enghag, M. and Jonsson, G. (2015) The Problem-Solving Process in Physics 
as Observed when Engineering Students at University Level Work in Groups. European 
Journal of Engineering Education, 40 (4), 380-399. 
Gustafsson, P. (2013) How Physics Teaching is Presented on YouTube Videos. Educational 
Research for Social Change, 2 (1), 117-129. 
 
 
Name: Margareta Enghag 
Affiliation: Department of Mathematics and Science Education, Stockholm University 
Education: BSc in Engineering, Master in Scientific Subjects Physics and Mathematics 
(Teacher qualification for Upper Secondary education), PhD in Science and Technology 
Education 
Address: Svante Arrhenius väg 20 A, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 
 
Research and Professional Experience: Margareta’s areas of research are 
communication, interaction and use of representations and multimodality in physics at 
secondary and tertiary education, but also how socioscientific issues can be incorporated in 
physics teaching as a mean to enhance students’ opportunity to use physics knowledge in 
dialogic inquiries. Margareta’s special interest is student ownership of learning during 
collaborative learning. She explores group conversations during inquiry, laboratory work and 
problem solving. 

Peter Gustafsson, Margareta Enghag and Gunnar Jonsson 
82
Margareta teaches science teachers at the master’s level in blended learning courses on 
research methodology, and Physics with digital tools for physics teacher students in 
collaboration with the physics department. 
Margareta was part of the EU-project S-TEAM (Science Teacher Education Advanced 
Methods), a coordination project to implement inquiry-based science teaching and learning in 
European schools. She has been part of two physics education research project funded by the 
Swedish Research Council, and are now part of a three years project, www.RiskEdu.se 
funded by Marcus och Amalia Wallenbergs Minnesfond (MAW). 
 
Professional Appointments: Senior lecturer in Science Education at Stockholm 
University. 
 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
Heinz, J., Enghag, M., Stuchlikova, I., Cakmakci, G., Peleg R., and Baram-Tsabari, A. 
(forthcoming) Impact of initiatives to implement science inquiry – a comparative study of 
the Turkish, Israeli, Swedish and Czech science education systems. Accepted for 
publication in Cultural Studies of Science Education. 
Enghag, M., and Schenk, L. (forthcoming) Students’ arguments of risks and benefits in a 
debate about nanotechnology as a socioscientific issue included in a teaching sequence in 
secondary school. Forthcoming in: Science Education Research: Engaging learners for a 
sustainable future. Editors: J Lavonen, K Juuti, J Lampiselkä, A Uitto and K Hahl. ISBN 
978-951-51-1541-6. 
Gustafsson, P., Jonsson, G. and Enghag, M. (2015) The Problem-Solving Process in Physics 
as Observed when Engineering Students at University Level Work in Groups. European 
Journal of Engineering 40 (4), 380-399 [DOI: 10.1080/03043797.2014.988687]. 
Karlsson, C., Enghag, M., Schenk, L., and Wester, M. (2014) Extending our understanding of 
nanotechnology: University students’ perception and argumentation concerning nano 
materials in consumer products Journal of Nano Science Education 6:1:50-62. 
Norberg Brorsson B., Enghag, M. and Engström, S. (2014) Muntlig kommunikation under en 
lektion om energikällor i årskurs 5 [Oral Communication during a Lesson on Energy 
Sources in Grade 5] Nordina Vol. 1, No 1, p. 35-47. 
Enghag, M., Forsman, J., Linder, C., MacKinnon, A., and Moons, E. (2013) Using a 
disciplinary discourse lens to explore how representations afford meaning-making in a 
typical wave physics course. International Journal of Science and Mathematics 
Education 11 (3), 625-650. 
 
 
Name: Gunnar Jonsson 
Affiliation: School of Education, Culture and Communication, Mälardalen University 
Education: Master of Science in Engineering Physics at Uppsala University, Master of 
Education at Uppsala University, PhD in Ion Physics at Uppsala University. 
Address: Box 883, 721 23 Västerås, Sweden 
 
Research and Professional Experience: His research is focused on discussions and 
communication in groups in physics at upper secondary school and university level. He is 

Using Context Rich Problems as a Path to Problem Solving … 
83
also teaching physics for engineer students and teacher students and also working with ICT in 
teacher education. He has recently started a project with teacher in primary schools, where 
their view of technology in elementary school is investigated. 
 
Professional Appointments: Senior lecturer in Physics with Physics Education. 
 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
Gustafsson, P., Enghag, M. and Jonsson, G. (2015) The Problem-Solving Process in Physics 
as Observed when Engineering Students at University Level Work in Groups. European 
Journal of Engineering Education, 40 (4), 380-399. 


In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
TEACHING AND ASSESSING STORY PROBLEMS: 
SCHEMA BASED PROBLEM SOLVING ENVIRONMENT 
 
 
Manoj Praveen G. 
Associate Professor, Farook Training College, Farook College PO, Calicut, Kerala, India 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Story problems are typical text book problems that present a set of variables 
embedded within a shallow story context. They are means of appreciating subject matter 
at application level. Solving of story-problems not only calls for calculation accuracy, but 
also for comprehension of content knowledge. It is generally assumed that students with 
high content knowledge have high ability to solve problems. Unfortunately most of the 
students solve problems in Physics by memorizing equations and problem solving 
procedures without the support of content knowledge behind the problems (Panitz, 1998). 
Sherrill (1983) commented that despite the requirements for solving problems, learners 
usually employ a more tactical, problem-avoidance strategy to solve story problems. 
Jonassen (2011) argued that problem solving as a process has two critical attributes: first, 
the mental representation of the problem and second, the manipulation and testing of the 
mental representation in order to generate a solution. As knowledge can be classified into 
analogical knowledge, symbolic knowledge, and procedural knowledge, we have 
analogical, symbolic and procedural mental representations. But problems are complex 
patterns of knowledge that could be represented by complex mental representations like 
problem-schema, cognitive maps and mental models. Conceptual understanding of the 
problem is the crucial component of problem solving. For acquiring conceptual 
understanding, the problem solver is required to construct a conceptual model or a 
problem schema with respect to the problem. This problem schema has three sub-models 
– 1. Situational Model 2. Structural Model and 3. Algorithmic Model (formula). A 
problem solving environment designed to practice story problem solving should 
incorporate these models. A five step Problem Solving Learning Environment (PSLE) for 
story-problem solving is constructed along the lines of the model suggested by Jonassen 
(2011). This PSLE would have a structural map, a graphical representation of the 
problem elements of a domain which represents a kind of problems, as its first 
                                                           
 Manoj Praveen G.: Associate Professor, Farook Training College, Farook College PO, Calicut 673632, Kerala, 
India. Email:manojpraveeng@gmail.com. 

Manoj Praveen G. 
86
component. The second component would be the conceptual model interlaced with the 
situational model super imposed with the data given in the problem. The third component 
would be worked examples which help the novice to put into practice the new way of 
learning to solve problems. The fourth component would be practice problems which are 
in line with the worked examples but with the scaffolds presented at the earlier stages 
taken away. Formative feedback would be given during the problem solving process 
which helps the student systematically move through the logical sequence of problem 
solving. Assessment of problem solving skills requires testing of transfer skills acquired 
as well as conceptual understanding of the problem. The assessment of conceptual 
understanding of the problem would consist of items that test classification of problem 
types, identifying the structural elements and structural relationships, identifying 
analogous problems, etc. The ability of transfer of problem solving skills will be tested 
with items consisting of problems of similar structural relationship posed in different 
contexts and with problems consisting of transformed problem elements. 
 
Keywords: story problems, problem solving learning environment, problem schema 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Understanding the process of problem solving is very essential because we do problem 
solving throughout our lives. The curious thing about problems in life is that not a single 
problem repeats; in other words, every problem we encounter is unique and structurally 
different from the older problems we have had before. In spite of this, we have to gain 
expertise in problem solving for the simple reason that every problem equips us with the 
arsenal to solve more complex and structurally different problems that would invariably ensue 
in life. Once we disentangle a problem structurally, another problem with the same structural 
configuration will offer little challenge of solving. The more we analyze and solve problems; 
the more we devise a systematic way to approach problems. Teaching of problem solving 
centers around this assumption that problem solving becomes easy when you learn to 
approach it effectively. 
The aim of school education system is to provide knowledge and expertise usable not 
only in the school context but also in problem solving situations in the future. A predominant 
purpose of formal education in schools is to facilitate learning outside them. Nevertheless, 
often what is learned in school contributes a little to students’ ability to solve future problems 
in their lives. This necessitates improvement in our teaching procedures so that transfer of 
problem solving skills to other situations will be enhanced to a much greater degree than at 
present. As an educational method, problem solving has still clear limitations for novice 
learners. Traditional class room learning experiences may not improve the problem solving 
ability of learners to a significant extent (Praveen, 2007). Providing support to learners is of 
utmost importance for helping them to develop problem-solving skills (van Merriënboer, 
2013). Barell (2007) argued that the educational system must educate students to be able to 
identify important problems, ask probing questions, and conduct rigorous investigations 
aimed at finding answers and solutions. Usually the text book problems serve as a means of 
appreciating the subject matter at the application level. These problems are structured, well 
defined and more often depend on predesigned algorithms to solve them. Even though they 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
87
do not mirror the unstructured nature and complexity of real problems, they would certainly 
enhance the potential for future problem solving. 
Story problems or word problems are the most commonly found problems in college 
level text books that use a shallow story context to represent a problem. Such problems are 
well structured and are solved by applying a predetermined algorithm upon the data values 
given in the problem statement. Students usually approach such problems by sniffing into the 
problem text for data sets that would fit into a readymade formula ignoring the situational or 
structural properties of the problem. The purposefully knit story to indicate the causal 
relationships between the problem-elements is often overlooked in such problem solving 
process. In fact, story problem solving calls for comprehension of content knowledge and 
exploration of causal relationships in addition to calculation accuracy. It is generally assumed 
that students with high content knowledge have high ability to solve problems. Panitz (1998) 
described the experience of Physics professor Eric Mazur who was shocked at the dismal 
results on basic understanding of Physics of his students who excelled in difficult story 
problems. Unfortunately most of the students solve problems in Physics by memorizing 
equations and standardized problem solving procedures without caring for the conceptual 
structure of the problems. Despite the requirements for effective problem solving, learners 
usually employ a more tactical, problem-avoidance strategy to solve story problems. 
The usual ways of attempting story problems are, 
 
1. Search for keywords 
2. Select algorithm (formula) based on key words 
3. Apply the algorithm 
(Sherrill, 1983) 
 
Such tactical ways of cracking a problem defeat the spirit of story problems, which are in 
fact designed to provide transfer skills in problem solving. 
 
 
DESIGN OF A PROBLEM-SOLVING LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 
 
Problems are of different kinds. Even though they can be classified generally as 
structured and unstructured, problems can vary with respect to the situational characteristics 
and sophistication as well. Keeping in mind the characteristics of problems like 
structuredness, context, complexity, dynamicity and domain specificity, Jonassen (2004) 
identified eleven kinds of problems: 
 
1. logic problems; 
2. algorithms; 
3. story problems; 
4. rule-using/rule-induction problems; 
5. decision making; 
6. trouble shooting; 
7. diagnosis-solution problems; 
8. strategic performance; 

Manoj Praveen G. 
88
9. policy-analysis problems; 
10. design problems; 
11. dilemmas. 
 
Algorithms represent the most well structured problems and the structuredness decrease 
along a continuum as we move from algorithms to dilemmas. The story problems and 
algorithms are the problem structures usually present in formal education system, the other 
types of problems typically occur in daily life. Well-structured problems require cognition, 
including domain-specific knowledge and structural knowledge, and knowledge of cognition 
(e.g., general strategies). However, ill-structured problem solving requires regulation of 
cognition, epistemic cognition, and non-cognitive variables, besides cognition and knowledge 
of cognition. Hong, Jonassen and McGee (2003) found that ill structured problems called on 
different skills than well structured problems, including meta-cognition and argumentation. 
As the problem varies with respect to its nature, solving process and solving components, a 
single problem solving learning environment will not suffice all. 
To develop effective problem solving skills, the learner must practise problem solving 
process using a logical way that would help the learner overcome cognitive difficulty in 
problem solving. Thus, teaching for problem solving must be designed as to promote the 
ability to construct mental representation of a particular problem in the minds of learners. 
Jonassen (2011) argued that problem solving as a process has two critical attributes: first 
the mental representation of the problem and second the manipulation and testing of the 
mental representation in order to generate a solution. The most important properties of mental 
representation are: (1) they preserve information about and interpretations of objects and 
events in this world, and (2) they exist in a representational system that includes mental 
processes defined on the representations (McNamara, 1994). The knowledge around us can  
be represented by using symbols, icons and relationship indicators in various forms. As 
knowledge can be classified into analogical knowledge, symbolic knowledge, and procedural 
knowledge, we have analogical, symbolic and procedural mental representations. As 
problems are complex patterns of knowledge, they could be represented by complex mental 
representations like Problem-Schema, Cognitive maps and Mental models. 
Rumelhart and Ortony (1977) introduced the concept of problem schema as a sort of 
knowledge structure used to identify the type of problem being solved. According to Riely 
and Greeno (1988) problem schema is the mental representation of the pattern of information 
that is represented in the problem. Schema theory has been often proposed by cognitive 
psychologists as one way to understand problem solving procedures. According to Marshall 
(1995), “A schema is a vehicle of memory, allowing organization of an individual’s similar 
experiences in such a way that the individual; (a) can easily recognize additional experiences 
that are also similar, discriminating these and ones that are dissimilar; (b) can access a generic 
framework that contains the essential elements of all of these similar experiences, including 
verbal and nonverbal components; (c) can draw inferences, make estimates, create goals, and 
develop plans using the framework; and (d) can utilize skills, procedures, or rules as needed 
when faced with a problem for which his particular framework is relevant. Jonassen (2011) 
studied the role of problem schema on solving story problems and found that problem schema 
includes semantic information and situational information about the problem. Problem 
schemas also possess knowledge about the process of solving problem. 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
89
A problem-solving learning environment (PSLE) is a structured environment to practise 
problem-solving with scaffolds and procedure sequences. Problem-solving learning 
environments (PSLEs) assume that learners must engage with problems and attempt to 
construct schemas of problems, learn about their complexity, and mentally wrestle with 
alternative solutions (Jonassen, 2011). As research proves that schemas are effective in 
modeling story problems, they become the crucial components for designing story problem 
solving environment. Story problem solving requires not only calculation accuracy but also 
the comprehension of textual information, the capacity to visualize the data, the capacity to 
recognize the semantic structure of the problem, the capacity to sequence their solution 
activities correctly, and the capacity and willingness to evaluate the procedure that they used 
to solve the problem (Lucangelli, Tressoldi, and Cendron, 1998). This implies that other than 
providing for calculations, the design of problem-solving learning environment for story 
problems should include means to view the problem holistically, to extract meaning from 
text, to construct situational model of the problem, to causally relate the data sets with 
structural configuration of the problem, to map the structure with the readymade algorithms 
(formulae), and to reflect upon the result of applying the algorithm on the basic premise of the 
problem. 
 
 
FRAMEWORK OF A STORY PROBLEM-SOLVING  
LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 
 
The composition of a Story Problem Solving Learning Environment has four basic 
components; the structure map, problem schema, worked examples and practice problems. 
The structure map is a big picture of the concepts and their causal relationships included in 
unit or chapter of content portion. Before attempting problems the learner should get 
acquainted with the structure map of the unit. In fact it is better to construct the structure map 
by the learner himself under the supervision of the teacher. This helps to have an intellectual 
rapport with the structural elements of the domain and create problem schema for different 
problem types within the unit. 
Story problem requires close reading of the problem statement to analyze the situation 
presented in it. This helps to get a feel of the problem and helps to identify the type of the 
problem. Once we identify the problem type, the associated problem schema with the 
inclusive concepts and relations come into our mind. This problem schema can be in the form 
of a readymade template for a problem type. Whereas this template serves as a basic structure 
to solve all problems of the type, it has to be outfitted with the situational aspects as well as 
data sets to truly represent the problem at hand. The situational aspect of the problem has to 
be picturised into either a graphic or diagrammatic sketch and has to be synchronized with the 
data sets given in the problem by superscripting the data on to the graphic. With this 
situational diagram loaded with the data sets, the problem schema would clearly suggest the 
algorithm that connects the causal relationships between structural aspects of the problem. 
Once the equation is worked out, the learner has to use the correct solution of the problem to 
reflect on the problem situation so as to check the feasibility of the solution. 
The third component of the problem solving learning environment is worked examples. 
This involves handholding the learner for a walk through over the customized sequence of the 

Manoj Praveen G. 
90
schema based problem-solving procedure. And the last component of the PSLE is the practice 
problem. Practice problems help learners to apply the newly learned skill into practice. It 
gives them confidence to transfer the problem-solving skill to new and unfamiliar workouts in 
the content domain. 
Structure map - Every problem is a jigsaw element of a bigger picture of the content 
domain to which it belongs and solving it requires the knowledge of the connections and 
relations of it with the other problem elements of the larger domain. Thus before attempting 
to solve a problem in a domain, one needs to get acquainted with the elements of the domain 
that form a network of relations and connections. This demands construction of graphical 
representation of a map of the concepts and relations of the domain content. The structure 
map would include all the components that constitute the content of the domain including 
concepts, equations, relations and principles. This big picture helps the learner to situate  
the problem at hand amongst the other elements of the domain. For example, if we consider 
the domain of ‘One Dimensional Motion’ in Physics; all the concepts like Time, Distance, 
Speed, Velocity, Frame of Reference, Acceleration, Retardation, Equations of Motion, Free 
Fall, Relative Velocity and their mutual relations along with equations, symbol and  
formulae would constitute the structure map. A structure map designed by the learner after 
comprehending the theoretical content portion of a domain acts as a blue print for locating the 
causal relations between the problem elements of the given problem. 
 
 
Figure 1. Frame work of a Story Problem Solving Learning Environment. 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
91
Problem Schema - Every story problem is presented as a challenge to connect variables 
using a known algorithm. But the situational characteristics and structural configuration of the 
problem obscure the task of applying the algorithm straight away. Albeit the fact that the 
situation elements and structure elements complicates solving a story problem, these elements 
crucially decide the selection and operation of appropriate algorithm that could crack the 
problem. Conceptual understanding of the problem is the crucial component of problem 
solving. For acquiring conceptual understanding, the problem solver is required to construct a 
conceptual model or a problem schema with respect to the problem. Jonassen (2011) 
suggested that a problem schema has three sub-models – 1. Situational model 2. Structural 
model and 3. Algorithmic model (formulae). A problem schema represents a type of problems 
that can be tackled using it. Thus in a unit, say, ‘one dimensional motion’ we can think of 
different problem types like average speed, average velocity, accelerating body, relative 
velocity, overtake problems and closing to each other problems. Each problem type share a 
set of common associated problem elements and interlinking set of causal relationships in the 
form of formulae. These common features that are characteristic of a type of problems are 
represented by a single problem schema. Thus there will be as much number of problem 
schemas under a content domain as the number of types of problems in the domain. 
Schema acts as the perfect vehicle to blend the situational and structural aspects of a story 
problem with the required algorithm (formulae) to solve the problem. The schema enunciates 
the causal relations of the problem elements embedded within and also helps to associate the 
problem with the bigger picture - the structure map of the domain in which the problem is 
situated. For example, a schema for ‘accelerating body’ in Physics would be a graphical 
representation of the concepts and equations associated with the topic ‘accelerating body’ in 
the domain content of ‘one dimensional motion.’ 
 
 
Figure 2. Schema for Accelerating Body. 

Manoj Praveen G. 
92
Figure 2 shows the schema of an accelerating body. It is a schematic diagram which 
represents the type of problem with conceptual and causal aspects associated with the content 
portion – accelerating body. It helps the learner to remember the associated concepts along 
with their relationships to select and execute the appropriate algorithm to solve the problem at 
hand. The situational aspects which are characteristic of the current problem may be 
superscripted over this diagram to produce a rich meaningful schema for the problem. For 
instance, the values of initial velocity, acceleration or other constraints mentioned in the 
problem could be incorporated into the diagram to make the schema uniquely represent the 
problem at hand. 
Worked Examples - The shortcoming with usual worked examples is that they stress on 
the procedural process of solving problem, not on structural aspects or situational aspects. 
High achievers usually memorize formulae and even variations of formulae which suit 
different cases of a problem type. And they engage in a frantic ‘trial and error’ process of 
matching a preconceived case with the problem at hand. They succeed or not, would end up 
retrieving an equation from their memory which would apparently fit into the situation 
presented in the story problem. Literally they ‘plug and chug’ by tucking in the formula 
which they have found matching with the given data sets in the problem statement. The 
problem is seen as a pattern game where one has to select and place the correct bits to 
complete the pattern. Even some teachers believe that memorizing all possible variations of a 
formula is the best single shot technique to tackle all the story problems related to that 
content. Instead of playing the trial and error game with formulae, the worked examples 
should guide the learners through the process of conceptual exploration of the problem. The 
worked examples should provide reasonably good handholding to get the learner accustomed 
to the cognitive exploration of the problem starting from situating the problem context, 
considering the conceptual elements, recognizing the causal relationships, substituting of the 
data sets into an algorithm, solving the equation and finally reflecting on the results. The 
worked examples should consist of easy and moderately difficult problems. Sufficient number 
of problems should be provided as worked examples so as to get the learner accustomed with 
the variations in situational and structural aspects. And the learners should convince 
themselves that the schema remains robust in all such variations and provides adequate 
scaffolding for problem-solving. 
Practice Problems - The fourth component would consist of practice problems which are 
in line with the worked examples but with the scaffolds presented at the earlier stages taken 
away. Formative feedback would be given during the problem solving process which helps 
the student systematically move through the logical sequence of problem solving. The 
important thing in framing practice problems is that they should be of the same difficulty 
level as that of the worked examples. 
 
 
A MODULE FOR TEACHING PROBLEM-SOLVING 
 
A teaching module for story problem learning environment can be framed as a sequence 
of progressive chunks through which the learner is escorted with proper cognitive scaffolds. 
The module would present cognitive challenges in a supportive environment as the learner 
meddles with the holistic, situational, and conceptual aspects of the problem at hand. 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
93
  
Figure 3. (a) Structure map element 1. 
 
Figure 3. (b) Structure map element 2. 
In the beginning the learner is presented with the task of constructing a structure map (big 
picture) of the content domain. For instance, in one dimensional motion, the teacher may give 
structure map elements in the form of more than one graphical structures as in Figure 3 (a) 
and Figure 3(b) and the learners would be asked to combine the graphical elements to form 
the big picture. 
The learners are allowed to incorporate additional elements or use a totally different 
mapping structure to represent the content domain. 
Once the structure map is made, learners are suggested to get acquainted with the 
problem types within the domain. As each problem type has its own conceptual configuration, 
the secret in solving the problem effectively is to get accustomed with the problem types of 
the content domain. In a unit, there are different types of problems. Usually we attempt all the 
problems of a unit together and confuse with a lot of equations and concepts of the total unit. 

Manoj Praveen G. 
94
Instead of this traditional way, we will classify problems of a single unit in to different types. 
Each problem type is unique. For example, in our unit of one dimensional motion, we have 6 
problem types. 
 
1. Average speed 
2. Average velocity 
3. Accelerating body 
4. Relative velocity 
5. Overtake problems 
6. Closing to each other problems 
 
When you are given a problem, the first task is to find out the problem type. The module 
will ask the learner to identify the problem type soon after presenting them with a new 
problem. 
For instance the learner is presented with a Worked Example: 
John left home and drove at the rate of 45 mph for 2 hours. He stopped for lunch then 
drove for another 3 hours at the rate of 55 mph to reach his destination. How many miles did 
John drive? 
Instead of simply substituting values into the equation, we will go through 5 simple steps 
to solve this problem systematically. This will help us to better understand the problem and 
do more complex problems later. 
 
STEP I 
Identify the problem type 
STEP II 
Identify the problem schema 
STEP III 
Imagine and draw the situation. 
STEP IV 
With situation in mind, superimpose data on problem schema. 
STEP V 
Substitute, Calculate and Reflect. 
 
 
Figure 4. Graphic organizer showing problem types. 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
95
 
Figure 5. Problem schema for Average Speed. 
 
Figure 6. Situation aspect of the problem. 
 
Figure 7. Combining data with situational and conceptual aspects. 
The module makes the learner undergo the first step, viz. Identify the problem. The 
learner is presented with a graphic organizer as in Figure 4 from which the learner has to 
identify and select the type of the problem at hand. Here the learner identifies the relevant 
problem type as Average Speed. 
In the second step of problem solving, the learner has to associate the problem with the 
corresponding problem schema. Every problem type has its own unique problem schema. The 
problem schema represents the situational and conceptual structure of the problem on to 
which the data sets can be mapped. The learners will have to build appropriate problem 
schema with the help of the instructor before attempting problems so that once the problem 

Manoj Praveen G. 
96
type is identified, the problem schema is readily at hand. In this case, the appropriate problem 
schema associated with Average Speed is selected as given in Figure 5. 
Once the problem schema is chosen, the learner moves on to the third step viz. Imagine 
and draw the situation. The learner has to mentally construct the situation of the problem. The 
situation represented in the problem is displayed in the form a picture with data as in Figure 6. 
With a grasp of the conceptual structure in the form of a problem schema and situational 
structure in the form of a mental imagery, the learner now attempts the crucial fourth step. 
Here the learner combines the problem schema with the data set. For this the learner will 
superimpose the data of the problem situation on to the problem schema as in Figure 7. 
In the last step, we select appropriate equations and substitute to solve the problem. In 
this case we need the equation, speed (r) = S/t. We apply this equation in portion 1 and 
portion 2 and find distance in each case. Then, we simply add the distances to find the total 
distance (We do not need to find average speed in this problem). 
Here distance 1 = 45 * 2 = 90 miles and distance 2 = 55 * 3 = 165 miles 
Therefore total distance = 90 + 165 = 255 miles. That’s the answer! One more thing; in 
this style of problem solving we do a little more work after solving the problem - Reflecting 
upon the problem. That means we will once again take the situation picture and post the 
values including the solution value on to the situation picture to assess the problem in its 
totality as in Figure 8. 
Ok! Does this appear good to your logic? Yes, the first lap 90 miles was covered in 2 
hours at a speed of 45 mph and the next lap of 165 miles (larger lap) covered in 3 hours... 
with a higher speed of 55 mph. The total time for the entire journey is 5 hours. If we calculate 
the average speed, 255/5 = 51 mph which is higher than the speed in portion 1 but lesser than 
the speed in portion 2. It also suggests that the average speed is not the average value ([45 + 
55]/2 = 50) of the two speeds. Yes, this reveals a few things! 
These five steps of problem solving suffice the schema based problem solving procedure. 
A learner once guided through this procedure will be served with additional practice problems 
of the same difficulty level for further work out and for developing transfer ability of problem 
solving skills. 
 
 
ASSESSING OF PROBLEM-SOLVING 
 
As problems vary with respect to their structuredness, context, complexity, dynamicity 
and domain specificity the techniques and methods for solving them also vary. Different 
kinds of problem solving entail different kinds of cognition: different knowledge, different 
forms of knowledge representation, and different thinking skills (Jonassen, 2011). Well 
structured problems like algorithms and story problems have distinct and specified domain 
contents and could be represented in the form of mental models like problem schema and 
require cognitive skills like analogical, causal and questioning skills for solving them. 
The conventional way of testing story problem-solving skills of a learner is by creating 
test items that are similar to the worked examples given in the school or college level text 
books which vary in the situational aspects or structural aspects only. The students are 
required to solve such problems quantitatively by analyzing causal relationships among 
structural elements of the problem. 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
97
 
Figure 8. Reflecting on the problem. 
But solving a story problem quantitatively does not test the learner’s conceptual 
understanding of the problem. In fact students can be trained to solve such problems just by 
making them mug up formulae and their variations to suit different cases of one problem 
situation. Some students and naive teachers indeed think that the best way to solve story 
problems is to get equipped with a battery of equations and formulae that suits every problem 
situation. This defeats the very essence of testing. Such test items do not call for cognitive 
skills required in problem solving and in fact encourages recalling of prototype problem 
situations and suggestive algorithms that may solve them. 
The triangular relation between objectives, learning experience and evaluation require us 
to formulate test items that are in line with the objectives of instruction upon which the course 
is constructed and the learning environment which was given to the learner. Presuming that 
the students were provided ideal problem solving learning environments to practice the 
analysis of causal relationships among problem elements and to employ cognitive skills 
relevant to problem solving, assessment of problem solving has to be done in multiple 
formats, and on multiple dimensions. But most educators lack the skill of constructing and 
implementing tests that assess meaningful learning. Even if they have the skills, most do not 
commit to this task as it is highly complicated and time consuming (Jonassen, 2011). 
Assessment of problem solving skills requires testing of transfer skills acquired as well as 
conceptual understanding of the problem. The assessment of transfer of problem solving will 
be tested with items consisting of problems of similar structural relationship but in a different 
context or problems with transformed problem elements. 
 
 
TOWARDS A COMPREHENSIVE ASSESSMENT OF PROBLEM SOLVING 
 
In the usual college level examinations of the type of paper pencil tests, the assessment of 
story problems is done with respect to certain value points determined by indicators like 
proper step-wise calculation, using of correct equation, mathematical substitution, unit 
compatibility among physical quantities, etc. As long as the valuation scheme does not test 
effective problem representation or establishing of causal relationships among problem 
elements, the learners will not be motivated to construct the comprehensive mental 
representation of the problem neither will they appreciate the problem as a construed 
application of the theory they have learnt. Many good problem solvers even have a distorted 
or ill-constructed schema of problem where some key words are connected with ready-made 
equations that help solve the problem. For instance, for many pupils, a problem from one 
dimensional motion in Physics including the key word ‘stopping distance’ will trigger the 

Manoj Praveen G. 
98
associated equation d = v02/2 µg, without exploration of the details presented in the problem 
that may help to construct a robust schema. Without considering this as a general case of 
negative acceleration, and not employing the standard equations for acceleration, the pupil 
will directly make use of the ready-made variation of the equation that suits this situation of 
stopping distance. Most of the students and quite a few teachers also accept this way as a 
proper way of solving Physics problems. 
Towards a more comprehensive assessment of problem solving would require the test 
items to assess the cognitive and meta-cognitive skills of the learner in solving problems. 
Jonassen (2011) describes four different ways of assessing problem solving knowledge and 
skills including: 
 
1. Assess problem schemas (problem types). 
2. Assess their problem-solving performance. 
3. Assess the component, cognitive skills required to solve problems 
4. Assess their ability to construct arguments in support of their solutions to problems. 
 
Jonassen further argues that at least one form of all the four ways be used to ensure 
adequacy in assessing. 
 
 
ASSESSMENT OF STORY PROBLEMS IN SCHEMA BASED LEARNING 
 
A problem schema is a mental representation of the problem at hand. It is a form of 
conceptual understanding of the problem in the form of a structured mental imagery. The 
assessing of problem solving in schema based learning would test the robustness of the 
structure of the problem schema the learner has constructed. The clarity and structuredness of 
the problem schema along with the causal relationships incorporated into it determines the 
conceptual understanding of the problem. The assessment of the conceptual understanding of 
the problem would thus consist of items that test analysis of the situational elements, 
classification of problem types, identifying analogous problems with similar schema, 
recognizing structural relationships, recognizing relevant and irrelevant data, and finally 
applying the equation to solve it. 
Consider the story problem from one dimensional motion in Physics: 
A 16 years old boy participated in a 1000 meters race. He has an average speed of 2 m/s 
during the race. The race started at 9.00 am. How far does the runner travel in 7 minutes? 
The situational aspects of a problem vary with respect to the surface level features 
presented in the problem situation as well as the constraints to which these features are 
subjected to. In the example problem a boy who participates in a 1000 meter race is the 
surface feature. This event is constrained with additional controls like average speed and 
given interval of time. To test the conceptual understanding over situational characteristics of 
the story problem, a test item to redraw a figure that represents the situational characteristics 
of the problem at hand is given. The original figure which is purposefully drawn wrong serves 
as the cue to redraw the picture and to incorporate necessary data sets that would act as 
constraints in the problem. 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
99
 
Figure 9. Test item to assess the conceptual understanding of situational aspects of a problem. 
Figure 9 shows a test item to assess the conceptual understanding of the situational 
aspects of the problem given here as example. Here the wrong figure does not clearly 
represent the situational aspect presented in the problem. The constraint, average speed need 
to be incorporated in to the figure whereas 1000 meters is not a relevant constraint in the 
problem and needs to be sidelined. 
A sequence of test items about the key features that determine the problem, relevant data 
sets and conceptual relations among the problem elements could be included as shown in 
Table 1 to check the understanding of the structure of the problem schema related to one 
particular story problem. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The basic ideas of this chapter are indebted to the work of David H. Jonassen. The 
models presented for teaching as well as assessing problem-solving, presented in this chapter 
are derived from his designs. Story problems are widely used in science and engineering 
learning situations so that students apply the learned theory in new and unfamiliar situations. 
The story problems are supposed to develop cognitive skills that would help the learner 
approach more complex and structurally different problems later on. The basic assumption of 
teaching problem-solving with a schema based problem-solving learning environment is that, 
story-problem solving is a skill that can be enhanced with cognitive scaffolding. van 
Merriënboer (2013) suggested that when problem solving is conceptualized as a skill, it is 
seen as something that develops over time as a function of practice. The schema based 
problem solving helps the learner to build up fundamental knowledge structures in the content 
domain along with causal relationships among them. Problem schema serves as the perfect 
knowledge representation tool for story problems and acts as a vehicle for teaching as well as 
assessing story problems. The situational elements, structural elements, causal relationships, 
and algorithms which fabricate the problem schema become the fundamental elements in 
comprehending the problem conceptually and they also serve as critical cues to construct test 
items in assessing problem-solving in a comprehensive way. 
 
 
 

Manoj Praveen G. 
100
Table 1 
Test items for testing the structural model 
 
A 16 years old boy participated in a 1000 meters race. He has an average speed of 2 m/s during 
the race. The race started at 9.00 am. How far does the runner travel in 7 minutes? 
a) What are the key features that would help solving this problem? (select all that apply) 
 
 
The age of the boy 
 
Average speed 
 
Time of start of race 
 
Length of the race track. 
 
Acceleration due to gravity 
b) Identify the concept to which this problem is related to? 
 
 
Average Speed 
 
Average Velocity 
 
Uniform Acceleration 
 
Displacement 
c) What laws/ideas are needed to solve this problem? (select all that apply) 
 
 
One minute = 60 seconds 
 
Initial velocity is zero. 
 
The motion is not uniform. 
 
Average speed and time. 
d) Which of the following quantities are directly given in the problem? (select all that apply) 
 
 
Initial speed 
 
Average speed 
 
Time taken to complete 1000 m race. 
 
Distance travelled in 7 minutes. 
e) Following are the quantities given in this problem. Which of the values are required to solve 
the problem? (Select all that apply) 
 
 
16 years 
 
1000 meters 
 
2 m/s 
 
9.00 am. 
 
7 minutes 
f) Write the equation/equations required to solve this problem? 
g) Now apply the equation and calculate the final answer 
 
 
 
 
 

Teaching and Assessing Story Problems 
101
REFERENCES 
 
Barell, J. (2007) Problem Based Learning: An Inquiry Approach. California: Corwin Press. 
Hong, N. S., Jonassen, D. H., and McGee, S. (2003). Predictors of well-structured and ill-
structured problem solving in an astronomy simulation. Journal of Research in Science 
Teaching, 40(1), 6-33. 
Jonassen, D. H. (2004). Learning to solve problems: An Instructional Design Guide. San 
Fransisco: Pfeiffer. 
Jonassen, D. H. (2011). Learning to solve problems: A handbook for Designing Problem-
Solving Learning Environments. New York: Routledge. 
Lucangelli, D., Tressoldi, P. E., and Cendron, M. “Cognitive and Meta cognitive Abilities 
Involved in the Solution of Mathematical Word Problems: Validation of a 
Comprehensive Model.” Contemporary Educational Psychology, 1998, 23, 257-275. 
McNamara, T. P. (1994). Knowledge Representation. In: R.J. Sternberg (Ed.) Thinking and 
Problem Solving (pp. 83-113). London: Academic press. 
Panitz, B. “The Fifteen-Minute Lecture.” Prism, Nov. 1998, p. 17. 
Praveen, M. G. (2007). Effect of Mastery Learning Strategy on Problem Solving Ability in 
Physics of High School Students. Unpublished Ph D thesis, University of Calicut. 
Rumelhart, D. E., and Ortony, A. (1977). The representation of knowledge in memory. In: R. 
C. Anderson, R. J. Spiro, R. J., and W. E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisition 
of knowledge (pp. 99-135). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Sherrill, J.M. (1983). Solving text book mathematical word problems. Alberta Journal of 
Science Educational Research, 29 (2), 140-152. 
van Merriënboer J.J.G., (2013). Perspectives on problem solving and instruction, Computers 
and Education 64 (2013), 153-160. 
 
 


In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 6  
 
 
 
THE INTERPERSONAL PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS: 
ASSESSMENT AND INTERVENTION 
 
 
Saray Bonete* and Clara Molinero  
Universidad Francisco de Vitoria (Madrid, Spain) 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
One kind of problem someone may have to solve is interpersonal problems. Gardner 
(1983) defined intelligence as multiple and he included interpersonal as one of these 
intelligences. He proposed that interpersonal intelligence processes the information 
pertaining to the relationships between people and the problems between them that may 
occur. Thus, solving interpersonal problems requires one specific sort of task that uses 
mainly one particular type of intelligence, although all the intelligences cooperate with 
each other.  
For Gardner (1999), interpersonal intelligence is the aptitude to find an answer to 
interpersonal challenges. This process starts by noticing some changes in the behaviors, 
emotions, motivations, concerns or intentions of others. Well-developed intelligence must 
be able to detect and understand verbal and non-verbal cues accurately, even when they 
are concealed. 
Once these signals are perceived, other skills become significant: the ability to 
understand emotions, empathy, causal attribution to the behavior of others and the 
generation of solutions, for example. In order to describe the interpersonal problem-
solving process, there are at least 3 theoretical propositions: Goldstein (1981), D’Zurilla 
and Goldfried (1971), Pelechano (1984) and some recent reformulation such as the 
published work by Calero et al.  
Goldstein (1981) enumerates 50 skills that join together to solve interpersonal 
conflicts such as asking for help, starting a conversation, negotiating, tolerating 
frustration, etc. His more than 30 studies analyse intervention effects for developing each 
of these skills (1984), but the process itself is not described in any great depth. 
In contrast, D`Zurilla and Goldfried (1971) show a particular interest in the process 
itself. They consider that social problems are solved through a cognitive-emotional-
behavioral process, made up of some particular stages: positive orientation to the 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Ctra. Pozuelo-Majadahonda Km. 1800, 28223 Pozuelo 
de Alarcón (Madrid, Spain), Email: s.bonete.prof@ufv.es. 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
104
problem, definition and formulation of the problem, decision making, and verification of 
the solution. 
Pelechano, meanwhile, (1984) tries to merge the models described above defending 
interpersonal skills as a way that allows people to connect with others on a deeper level, 
sharing feelings and ideas, offering help, etc. He proposed a model of 7 stages: general 
presentation of the problem, identification and dimensions of the problem, perspective 
taking, solutions search, solutions essays, solution selection, decision making and putting 
into action.  
After having reviewed the background theory of the interpersonal problem-solving 
process, we offer an updated review of different evaluation tools and analyse the impact 
of applied interventions. Training in interpersonal problem-solving skills has been 
applied to different populations based on a preventive or therapeutic focus. Under the 
first approach, scientific literature points to preschool and primary school students, 
training for parents of seriously ill children, premarital couples and also for enrichment of 
social self-efficacy. In the clinical field, interpersonal problem-solving programs are 
tested in ADHD, autism spectrum disorders, gifted children, aggressive adolescents, and 
all types of psychiatrically disabled patients, people with schizophrenia, self-injured 
patients or also as part of a substance abuse treatment. After reviewing some of these 
published papers on the subject, the work from our research group will be also revealed. 
 
Keywords: social problem-solving process, social skills, interpersonal skills, assessment, 
intervention 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
An Approach to Interpersonal Problem-Solving Skills  
 
The Multiple intelligences concept proposes intelligence as a group of skills used to solve 
different kinds of problems. Therefore, there is one particular kind of intelligence for each 
kind of problem (Sternberg, 1981; Gardner, 1983). According to this concept, depending on 
the kind of problem each particular kind of intelligence would respond to solve one particular 
task. Hence, for Gardner (1983; 1993), multiple intelligences would consist of at least  
eight: linguistic and logical-mathematical, musical, spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, naturalist, 
interpersonal, and intrapersonal. This list is not exhaustive, considering always the possibility 
of finding any other new intelligence.  
In that sense, one kind of problem someone may have to solve is an interpersonal one. 
Interpersonal intelligence processes the information linked to relationships between people 
and the problems that may occur among them. Thus, solving interpersonal problems is in 
itself a specific task that uses mainly one specific sort of intelligence, although all the 
intelligences cooperate with each other. For Gardner (1999), interpersonal intelligence is the 
aptitude to find an answer to interpersonal challenges.  
This process starts by noticing some changes in the behaviors, emotions, motivations, 
concerns or intentions of others. Classical social problem-solving literature highlights the 
importance of the ability of noticing and understanding these cues; otherwise, the next steps 
of the process will not be put into play. Well-developed interpersonal intelligence must be 
able to detect and understand verbal and non-verbal cues accurately, even when they are 
concealed (Heppner and Krauskopf, 1987; Sternberg, 1981).  

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
105
Once these signals are perceived, other skills become significant: the ability to 
understand emotions, empathy, causal attribution to the behavior of others and the generation 
of solutions, for example (Morelato, Maddio and Ison, 2005; Greco and Ison, 2012). 
These skills should develop before adulthood and, although there might be some 
differences between men and women, every healthy adult should be sufficiently capable in 
this aspect. In this sense, when there is some immaturity in an individual, it may cause 
emotional pain, exhaustion or psychological and physical problems (Calero, Luna, Vera-
Villarroel and González, 2001; Polo, León, Gómez, Palacios and Fajardo, 2013; Nolen-
Hoeksema and Aldao, 2011). 
In order to describe the interpersonal problem-solving process, there are at least three 
theoretical proposals: Social skills to solve conflicts (Goldstein, 1981), the social problem-
solving process (D`Zurilla and Goldfried, 1971; Heppner and Krauskopf, 1987), and 
interpersonal skills as phases of the problem-solving process (Bonete, Calero and Fernández-
Parra, 2014; Pelechano, 1984). 
 
I. Social Skills in the Conflict-Solving Process  
Searching about social skills construct will lead us to find a large number of different 
skills listing; as many as there are authors on the subject. Usually, they highlight adjusted 
social behaviors such as: greeting, asking for opinion, assertive answering, etc. These 
represent different attempts to define repertories of behaviors, but do not explain the social 
problem-solving process itself (Rus-Calafell, Gutierrez-Maldonado, Ribas-Sabate and Lemos-
Giraldez, 2014). Some classic authors are, for example, Libet and Lewinsohn (1973) or Kelly 
(1982), among many others. 
Goldstein (1981) sets out on a slightly different path. Despite the fact that he also 
highlights the behavioral approach, he enumerates 50 social skills organized into six groups to 
explain how people solve interpersonal conflicts. The first group includes primary skills such 
as paying attention, starting a conversation, etc. The second group consists of advanced skills 
such as asking for help, giving instructions, etc. The third group is for managing emotions 
skills such as knowing, understanding or expressing emotions. The fourth group is for 
alternative to aggression skills such as negotiation or self-control. The fifth group is for 
dealing with stress skills such as acceptance or tolerating frustration. Finally, the sixth group 
includes planning skills for conflict solving such as collecting information, causes attribution 
or goals definition. With this theoretical proposal, Goldstein and Pentz (1984) developed 
more than 30 studies in which they reviewed the effects of training programs for these skills.  
Nowadays, Goldstein (2013) has followed this approach training aggressive people in 
social skills: highlighting the importance of desiring the training, trying to explain the process 
and the way these skills may be trained. He trained these skills in different samples of 
children, adolescents and adults. 
 
II. The Social Problem-Solving Process  
A second approach tries to describe the process itself. For example, Heppner and 
Krauskopf (1987) presented an information-processing approach to understanding social 
skills. They described a personal problem-solving process made up of five stages: encoding, 
goal setting, plans, pattern matching, and problem-solving actions. 
The first step includes encoding verbal and non-verbal cues about the existence and the 
definition of the problem; as well as the acknowledgement of the meaning or gravity of the 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
106
problem to us. For the definition of the problem, it is important to be able to identify the 
central elements and the interaction between behaviors and the environment (Sternberg, 
1981). Encoding should include speed, accuracy and completeness. In this first step, we will 
take into account the causes of the problem as well as the meaning of the problem (if it is 
relevant, if it may have any costs, if it will have an effect in the long/short term, if there is any 
possibility of success, etc.). 
The second stage is goal setting. Goals will direct the problem-solving process; they will 
organize and stimulate every behavior as well as the different solution alternatives. Goals 
vary in complexity, concreteness and function (to respond to a stressful situation, to control 
our feelings, to cope with a particular event, etc.). A successful problem-solving process 
should include concrete, specific and realistic goals that would lead to adaptive short or long-
term consequences. 
Subsequently, plans must be designed. Usually, people search first in their memories to 
see if they have solved the same kind of problems before. If so, they may try to replicate the 
solution. Sometimes this is adaptive, sometimes it is not; depending on the circumstances. 
This reflection depends on the quality of the information about the problem, if it is enough 
and accurate. After trying to solve the problem, according to the consequences found, another 
evaluation process will judge if this plan was satisfactory or not. Following this, the pattern 
matching step consists of all the processes of thinking about how to apply the plan: resources 
needed, obstacles that might appear, solution alternatives, etc.  
When the process is clear, the problem-solving actions themselves may start. These 
actions are not only behaviors but also cognitions and emotions. As explained above, they are 
not random guided; they depend on previous experience, memory, goals and plans designed. 
Any variation in one of these will lead to a deviation in the actions.  
Nowadays, not exactly under the name of the process-information approach but 
highlighting social cognition, we can find a number of studies that consider the social 
problem-solving process from a cognitive point of view. For example, Green et al. (2008) or 
Rus-Calafell, Gutierrez-Maldonado, Ribas-Sabate, and Lemos-Giraldez (2014) develop a 
training program including social cognition (mental operations such as perception and 
interpretation). Also, some social problem-solving processes have been defined as part of the 
Theory of Mind proposal (Brüne, 2005), or as a section in causal attribution theory (Graham 
and Folkes, 2014; Reinsenzein, 2015). 
A second group of authors offers a cognitive-emotional-behavioral process approach. For 
example, D`Zurilla and Goldfried (1971) and Maydeu-Olivares and D`Zurilla (1996), 
proposed a description of the process that included these stages or abilities: definition and 
formulation of the problem, alternatives generation, decision making, and verification of the 
solution. 
The first stage is the definition and formulation of the problem. It is necessary to 
delimitate the problem, understand the factors involved, its repercussions in social life, etc. 
The better we delimitate, the less confusing it is for us. Overgeneralized problems are not 
easy to solve, they demand a lot of resources and it is difficult to find one global solution. 
This definition activates the rational process of searching for information about it, 
systematically, taking into account previous experiences and similar solutions.  
Secondly, we start generating several solution alternatives. In this sense, it is 
recommended to think of as many solutions as possible in order to have more options 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
107
available and therefore increase the probability of success. These alternatives must be realistic 
and must consider all possible obstacles one may find. 
The third step is the decision-making process itself. Here, people choose one of the 
alternatives produced in the previous stage. In order to be able to select the best one, people 
think of their possible consequences and their capability to guide them to success.  
Finally, the alternative selected is applied and the verification of the solution starts. This 
step means that we evaluate the quality of the solution chosen through the consequences that, 
in fact, appeared. A good one should make the problem disappear or, at least, make it smaller. 
If the alternative chosen is not working, sometimes we can retry with another one (Maydeu-
Olivares and D’Zurilla, 1996). 
Before the social problem-solving process starts, a positive orientation to the problem is 
needed. When people realize that they have a problem, they develop an attitude toward it. If 
this attitude is positive, it means that the person will put the problem-solving process into 
operation immediately. Otherwise, when the attitude is negative, they try to avoid this 
process, expecting it to disappear or to be solved by itself. These attitudes depend on one’s 
sensitivity to realizing that the problem exists, as well as one’s beliefs about it, suppositions, 
judgments, general expectations about social problems and sense of self-efficacy (D’Zurilla 
and Nezu, 2010). 
Following this model, some authors such as Areán (2000) and Dobson (2009) describe 
three problem-solving styles: impulsive (or reckless), avoidant and rational. Impulsive and 
avoidant styles are not efficient enough. Impulsive persons put into practice a lot of solutions 
but in an unsystematic way, producing a lot of errors that may increase the problem. In 
avoidant styles no alternatives are chosen at all. People with this pattern prefer to wait and see 
if the problem gets solved by itself or look for the manner to place responsibility on 
somebody or something else. The Rational style in problem solving includes the five-stages 
process described above. This style increases the probability of success in social problems 
because it is systematic and logical (Adams and Laursen, 2001; Calero, Luna, Vera-Villarroel 
and González, 2001; Areán, et al. 2010). 
Under this approach, some studies have reviewed if these abilities can be learned, and 
their relationship with psychological wellbeing or feeling distress (for example D’Zurilla and 
Maydeu-Olivares, 1995; D`Zurilla, Maydeu-Olivares and Kant, 1998; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 
2010; Bell and D’Zurilla, 2009; Chang, D’Zurilla and Sanna, 2009; Londahl, Tverskoy and 
D’Zurilla, 2005; Kramp, 2012).  
 
III. Interpersonal Skills as Phases of the Problem-Solving Process 
Another theoretical proposal presents the process of social problem solving through the 
construct of interpersonal skills, merging some aspects of the models described above. Under 
this approach, interpersonal skills are a component of intelligence, a specific kind of skills 
intended to solve interpersonal problems. Therefore, these skills work together when an 
interpersonal problem appears and a particular kind of problem-solving process starts. 
Considering intelligence as multiple, following Gardner (1983; 1993), interpersonal 
intelligence would deal with interpersonal information. In this sense, interpersonal skills are 
cognitive abilities to detect and understand problems between people and conflicts between 
them in social life (Pelechano, 1984; 1995; 1996; 2003). 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
108
Competent people in these skills consider others not as instruments for their own benefit, 
but as people; solving interpersonal problems allows them to connect with others on a deeper 
level, share feelings and ideas; and motivates them to help others (Pelechano, 1995).  
Pelechano (1984) proposed a model of interpersonal problem-solving process consisting 
of seven stages: general presentation of the problem, identification and dimensions of the 
problem, perspective taking, solutions search, solutions essays and selection, decision 
making, and putting in action.  
Firstly, a general presentation of the problem clarifies the goals of the conflict. Thus, in 
this stage, the person must adjust himself to the new aspects of the situation; it is not good 
enough to repeat old solutions. Also, it is necessary to put the problem-solving process into 
operation (do not avoid the conflict) and face it in a rational and systematic way (not 
answering impulsively or recklessly) in order to make the problem smaller.  
Subsequently, the identification of the problem and its dimensions means that one should 
realize that there is a problem, paying attention to some social cues available: emotion 
recognition, behavior changes in others, possibility of misleading and dissembling. One 
should also be aware of one’s own bias in perception of the conflict. These biases could lead 
to the denial or misreading of some signals. 
Thirdly, there is a stage for perspective taking and communication. People involved in a 
conflict need to be able to change their perspective, to move into the others’ point of view, to 
be empathic. Otherwise, they won’t be able to make a more unbiased consideration of the 
problem, to understand it entirely. Communication becomes essential here too. It should be 
efficient, not confusing or mixing everything up; listening to the others’ opinion, and 
managing shape and content of the speech.  
The Solutions search stage has two parts: generating alternatives and causes attribution. 
Each one influences the other. The recommendation is to produce as many alternatives as 
possible, thereby generating a greater number of options to choose from, or select a second 
one if the one chosen fails. When generating solution alternatives; procedures, methods, and 
resources needed must be taken into account. Sometimes some flaws of the plan may appear 
when considering each potential process of solving. 
Causes attribution, the other part of this stage, is an inference we make about the 
conflict´s origin. As it is a logical inference it might seem obviously correct for the one who 
makes the said inference; but it doesn’t mean that it will always be right. It depends on the 
quality of the reasoning process, previous beliefs about people and social facts, habits, etc. 
The fifth stage includes every solution essay made. Considering each option, we assess 
the quality of the alternatives depending on their potential consequences on the conflict. 
These may be short-term or long-term consequences and may affect different people 
involved. Also, sometimes there is not only one good solution, but more than one; therefore, 
we look for some aspects that can make one better than others.  
Solution selection and articulation is the next stage. It includes the process of dividing 
each solution alternative into simple segments. In this way, the alternatives procedures, 
possible obstacles and the resources needed become clear, allowing us to choose one solution. 
Finally, the decision is made and the alternative is implemented; expecting it to produce 
the best consequences and the fewest obstacles possible.  
Nowadays, the validity of this approach has been examined on children and adults, with 
clinical and no-clinical samples, searching for individual differences. The process itself is 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
109
being evaluated through psychometric tests and training programs (Bonete, Calero and 
Fernández-Parra, 2014; Calero et al., 2005, Molinero, 2015). 
 
 
Assessment 
 
Assessment tools for the interpersonal problem-solving process itself are not as common 
as social skills tests (Matson and Wilkins, 2007; Merrel, 2001). The first ones ask about the 
process, while the second ones ask for a sample of competent behaviors, named social skills. 
It is hard to find enduring standardized instruments with psychometrical data. Most of 
them have been used for no longer than a couple of decades, and then fell into disuse. Here 
we present just some examples of each kind of assessment tool for the process of solving 
interpersonal problems.  
There is also another difficulty in interpersonal problem-solving process assessment due 
to the fact that there is a lack of congruence found depending on the instruments, the method 
and the informant in question. Therefore, it is important to have these potential discrepancies 
in mind while designing an assessment. Sometimes, in order to increase validity, different 
sources or methods may be used simultaneously (Caballo, 1993; Garaigordobil and Peña, 
2014; Junttila Voeten, Kaukiainen and Vauras, 2006; Moran and Olaz, 2014).  
Following Merrel classification of assessment of social skills (2001) we distinguished 
between: 1) Questionnaires and self-report instruments regarding the social problem-solving 
process, 2) Behavioral rating scales, 3) Lab-based behavioral observation and 4) Performance 
tasks and expressive techniques. The selected tools are described based on the aim for which 
they were conceived and the type of information they provide to professionals. 
 
Questionnaires and Self-Report Instruments  
Questionnaires are the most common technique in psychological assessment to measure 
improvements after intervention, personal traits or states, as they are easy to apply. However, 
these sort of measures may carry some concerns regarding reliability because these kinds of 
tasks do not measure the competence in the action directly. On the other hand, paying 
attention to psychometric quality, questionnaires and self-report instruments simplify the 
access to the social problem-solving skills and offer valuable information regarding how the 
information about the problem is processed, which will affect performance later.  
One attempt to assess the underlying process while solving social problems is asking 
about the cognitive elements: thoughts, decision making, self-verbalizations. One example is 
the The Social Interaction Self-Statement Test (SISST; Glass, Merluzzi, Biever and Larsen, 
1982). It contains 30 items: 15 positive thoughts, that are supposed to enhance interaction; 
and 15 negative thoughts, which inhibit it. The items ask about the frequency of occurrence of 
these thoughts during the solving process. Reliability in the original study was satisfactory 
(.73 in positive thoughts,.86 in negative ones). Validity was studied with correlations between 
SISST and other tests on social skills and social anxiety. They also reviewed concordance 
between judges observing tapes of fictional interactions (Glass, Merluzzi, Biever and Larsen, 
1982). This test has been used and reviewed later in several international samples such as 
French (Yao et al., 1998) and Spanish (Caballo, Olivares, López-Gollonet, Irurtia, Rosa, 
2003; Baldor-Tubet, Ortiz and Jerez-Álvarez, 2014) for example.  

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
110
Sometimes it may be very important to access different informants. There are several 
studies that have found incongruence when comparing different sources of information 
(Caballo, 2009; Junttila, Voeten, Kaukiainen and Vauras, 2006; Lerner, Calhoun, Mikami and 
De los Reyes, 2012). That is the reason why, for example, there is Home and Community 
Social Behavior Scales (Merrell, Streeter, Boelter, Caldarella and Centry, 2001) which, 
although it asks about children and adolescents between five and eighteen years old, parents 
are requested to answer, so that researchers can compare other reports about somebody’s 
interpersonal competence. This questionnaire includes 64 items structured into two Likert 
scales: social competence and antisocial behavior. Parents must answer between 1 (never) and 
5 (frequently) about each behavior described, if it occurred in the last three months. Original 
manual obtained satisfactory reliability through three different methods: test-retest (r > .82), 
Cronbach’s α and two halves (r > .91), and correlation between both parents’ report (r > .85). 
They also ran a factor analysis to confirm both scales: social competence and antisocial 
behavior; and reviewed convergent and discriminant validity by means of correlations with 
other tests about social skills and symptomatology. Since then, it has been used in 
international samples and has undergone several psychometric reviews: factor analysis, 
discriminant and convergent validity (Kjobli and Ogden, 2014; Salazar and Caballo, 2006). 
Some other questionnaires ask the examinee to answer while thinking of a past event 
when he solved an interpersonal problem. For example, the Coping Strategies Inventory (CSI; 
Tobin, Holroyd, Reynolds and Kigal, 1989) designed for adolescents and adults between 17 
and 55 years old. It is a Likert scale with 40 items, structured in 8 primary coping strategies 
(such as problem-solving, emotion expression and problems avoidance, etc.), four secondary 
strategies that summarize the primary strategies (adequate problem-centered managing; 
adequate emotion-centered managing, inadequate problem-centered managing and inadequate 
emotion-centered managing) and two tertiary strategies that cluster secondary strategies 
(adequate and inadequate management). It has been used in several clinical samples, with its 
validity reviewed by means of hierarchical factor analysis (e.g., Leiner, Kearns, Jackson, 
Astin, and Rothbaum, 2012). It also has Spanish (Cano, Rodriguez and Garcia, 2007; Rubio, 
Dumitrache, Cordón-Pozo and Rubio-Herrera, 2016), Mexican (Rodríguez-Díaz, Estrada-
Pineda, Rodríguez-Franco, and Bringas-Molleda, 2014) and other international adaptations 
that offers factor analysis, convergent validity and reliability data. 
Some others focus on asking separately some moments or potential obstacles during the 
problem-solving process. An example of that is the Interpersonal Problem Solving Inventory 
(IPSI; Çam and Tümkaya, 2007), a 5-scales inventory made up of 50 items, for adolescents 
and adults. Each scale describes one aspect of the problem-solving process: approaching 
problems in a negative way, constructing problem solving, lack of self-confidence, 
unwillingness to take responsibility and insistent-persevering approach. Construct validity (by 
means of factor analysis and convergence with other tests) and reliability were reviewed 
several times and in different age samples (Tümkaya, Çam, and Yerlikaya, 2011). Recently, 
Arslan (2010) used the IPSI and also reviewed relationships with communication skills in 
Turkish preschool teacher trainees, and Bedel (2015) evaluated the interpersonal problem-
solving relationship with negative effect and anxiety in the Turkish sample.  
As a result of the D’Zurilla theoretical approach, the Social Problem-Solving Inventory 
was developed (SPSI-R; D’Zurilla, Nezu and Maydeu-Olivares, 2002; D’Zurilla and Maydeu-
Olivares, 1995; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1990; Maydeu-Olivares and D`Zurilla, 1996), aimed at 
examining the process of social problem resolution itself. According to their proposal, this 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
111
inventory consists of 52 items arranged into 5 factors: two adjusted dimensions (positive 
orientation to the problem and rational problem-solving process) and three not-adaptive 
dimensions (negative orientation to the problem, avoidant style and impulsive style). Chang 
and D’Zurilla (1996) also reviewed correlations with other tests for positive attitude toward 
problems, pessimism, and some emotional traits. It has been used in other countries, for 
example, in a Spanish sample (Calero et al., 2001; Calvete and Cardeñoso, 2001), Chilean 
(Kramp, 2014), a Peruvian sample (Merino, 2012) and Iranian (Bayani, Ganji and Bayani, 
2013) and also with clinical samples (Pugliese and White, 2014).  
Under this perspective there are some classical tests which ask the examinee about how 
he would solve every stage of the social problem-solving process in a fictional situation. 
Some of them were used in more than one study, such as the Means-End problem solving 
Task (Platt, Spivack, and Bloom, 1975) that assesses the sequence of steps one may need to 
solve a problem. In this task, four of the ten fictional situations proposed include interpersonal 
problems: interpersonal conflict, making new friends, friends avoiding you, and problems 
with the boss. Authors found good internal consistency and several validity evidence 
elements addressed in the manual of the test (Platt, Spivack, and Bloom, 1975). 
Unfortunately, there are quite a few of them which are not easily found in recent reviews 
(Folkman and Lazarus, 1980; Heppner and Peterson, 1982; Spirito, Francis, Overholser and 
Frank, 1988). 
The Means-End problem solving Task in particular, has been used later in different 
studies, for example with Borderline Personality Disorder (Benitez, 2014), Asperger 
Syndrome (Goddard, Howling, Dritschel and Patel, 2007), also in Noreen, Whyte and 
Dritschel (2015) to study the role of future thinking in the social problem-solving process, 
just to mention a few recent examples.  
 
Behavioral Rating Scales 
Sometimes researchers assess the process through observation. Therefore, they design 
coding systems for the observed behaviors. Some of them are made ad hoc, while others are 
standardized. These procedures try to assess the base line of these skills, intervention effects, 
changes in behavior in different situations, or other factors involved (Demiri, 2004; Barton-
Arwood, Morrow, Lane and Jolivette, 2005).  
Sometimes, one might codify also situational factors and their relationship with the 
presence or absence of one particular behavior; for example: attention provided by others, 
self-verbalization, cognitive biases, or behavior repertory (Labbe-Poisson, 2009; De Miguel, 
2014).  
One of the advantages of using behavioral observation is that it is one of the most valid 
methods of performance assessment; psychometrically more reliable than questionnaires. 
Mainly for children, an observation’s validity lies in the access to behavior without asking for 
it. In this way, interaction develops typically, which increases assessment validity. When 
carried out in natural settings, these measures are highly ecologically valid. On the other 
hand, one of the main risks of this assessment method is the possibility of affecting the 
behavior while observing and coding. There are some recommendations than can be followed 
and may be found in any handbook of psychological assessment or interview techniques. To 
mention some examples of the issues observers must take into account: one should evaluate 
whether the observation might be better in a natural setting or in a laboratory, whether the 
observer should be a participant or not, if behavior categories should be structured or 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
112
unrestricted, whether coding should be performed while the behavior is taking place or later, 
through video registration, etc. (Baldor-Tubet, Ortiz and Jerez-Álvarez, 2014; Stivers, 2015; 
Saldaña, 2015).  
 
Lab-Based Behavioral Observation 
Sometimes, when natural observation comes into difficulties, observation may be 
implemented in the laboratory through simulated interaction situations where one should 
show ones skills and the process by which the interpersonal problem is solved. Designing this 
lab-based behavioral observation includes deciding the length (whether it is brief or longer); 
if it should be created ad hoc or if standardized procedures should be used as before, if this 
interaction should be structured, semi-structured or not structured at all (Merrel, 2001). 
Once again, these tasks or questionnaires do not last long. Researchers usually adjust 
them or create a new task in order to find a better fit with the purposes of the study. 
For example, the Situation Questionnaire (SQ, Rehm and Marston, 1968) consists of two 
groups of 10 situations for each one. After a short explanation of each situation, the person 
interacts solving the problem with an actor. In this test, the aim was to assess social skills and 
anxiety levels during interaction with an actor of the other sex. The researchers assessed the 
quality of the interactions while introducing self-reinforcement, and compared with some 
interactions without self-reinforcement.  
Another purpose of this kind of measures is evaluating generalization beyond treatments 
of social skills. One example is the Behavioral Role Playing Test (BRPT, McFall and 
Marston, 1970), which proposes 16 interaction situations where a storyteller describes the 
hypothetical situation and, with an actor, a semi-structured interaction starts. Here, 
researchers wanted to assess generalization and maintenance of changes in assertiveness as a 
trained skill in a program. By doing this, the interaction could be valued while occurring.  
Similarly, the Social Simulated Interaction Test (SSIT, Curran, 1982; García-Bóveda, 
Morejón and Jiménez, 2007), and its modified version SSIT-M (Caballo, 2009) also serve this 
purpose, whereby 10 situations are described to the person and the interaction is observed. 
Some of them are for example: being criticized by your boss, being rejected by a relative, to 
receive a compliment, etc. (Rus-Calafell, Gutiérrez-Maldonado and Ribas-Sabaté, 2014).  
A recent contribution has been made by Ratto, Turner-Brown, Rupp, Mesibov and Penn 
(2011) with the development of the Contextual Assessment of Social Skills (CASS), a role-
play measure of social functioning and conversational skills for individuals with high-
functioning autism. It is comprised of two role-play conversations of 3 minutes each. The 
manual specifys the need to use opposite-gender confederates due to their importance to 
develop an ability to communicate among adolescents and adults. Different dimensions are 
described in the CASS in order to assess an individual’s ability to adapt one’s behavior in 
response to changes in the social context. Confederates are trained to act as socially interested 
(Interested condition) or socially bored with minimal verbal response (Bored condition). 
Role-plays are videotaped. Four critical domains are described: Asking Questions, Topic 
Changes, Overall Involvement and Overall Quality of Rapport. And five more exploratory 
domains are Social Anxiety, Kinesic Arousal, Vocal Expressiveness, Gestures and Positive 
Affect; and a Social Adaptation Index was included to evaluate a person’s ability to adapt his 
or her behavior depending on the confederate’s interest or disinterest. Ratto et al. (2011) 
found significant differences between scores obtained by adults with and without autism 
spectrum disorders (ASD). White, Scarpa, Conner, Maddox and Bonete (2015) examined its 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
113
sensitivity to change after intervention was applied to five adults with ASD and reported 
significant improvements in four participants. These results are evidence of the usefulness of 
these measures in clinical trials for measuring change after treatment.  
The tools described above are just an example for behavioral measures developed with 
different aims which have the advantage of measuring the behavior while it is occurring and 
also of allowing researchers to include the instruments as part of control studies, in which 
measuring change due to intervention is highly valuable. Some handbooks offer a wider 
compilation of some of these tests and some pieces of advice to take into account (Caballo, 
Olivares, López-Gollonet, Irurtia, and Rosa, 2003; Kazdin, 2013; Saldaña, 2015). 
 
Performance Tasks/Expressive Techniques 
There are some assessment tools that ask the person to show proficiency in how they 
carry out the problem-solving process by resolving a conflict during the assessment. In this 
way, they evaluate proficiency as it occurs (Orviz, Novoa and Palacios, 2010).  
By means of a graphical or narrative support, where the hypothetical situation is 
described, the examinee is asked for solution alternatives. This way, the social problem 
becomes clearer than with a questionnaire or an interview, and places the person into the 
situation but without role-playing (Celdrán and Ferrandiz, 2012).  
Between counting on an actor and the graphical or narrative support, the latter may have 
at least three advantages: first, it offers a better standardization and more accurate replication 
of the use, as well as some statistical data for psychometric quality; second, it also allows the 
person to put himself in the situation but with some distance and therefore less anxiety, 
because the situations are about other people; third, it is cheaper to repeat several assessments 
with the narrative or graphical support than with actors (Molinero, 2015; Merrel, 2001).  
Some of these tasks show video tapes or stories of conflicts such as, for example, 
Channon, Charman, Heap, Crawford and Rios (2001), who compared Asperger syndrome 
adolescents’ performance with a typical development sample as the control group. They 
showed 8 situations to assess if participants could recognize the conflict, understand the 
causes and offer solutions. They also asked for change of perspective: from the character’s 
and from their own point of view. These conflicts were about social relationships, within the 
family, at work or with strangers. Although there are not psychometric data about these tasks, 
which were a shortened version from an earlier study (Channon and Crawford, 1999), some 
validity evidence may be inferred from the lower scores found in the Asperger Syndrome 
sample compared with the regular, developed group.  
As another example, the Social Interaction Cognitive Strategies [Estrategias Cognitivas 
de Interacción Social] (EIS; Garaigordobil, 2001) arranges six situations and describes them 
in a short story (moral conflict, aggression, making friends, rejection, recovering an object, 
saying no). Adolescents between 12-14 years old are asked to respond from the characters’ 
point of view and to offer as many solution alternatives as possible. This way, answers are 
classified as passive, assertive or aggressive strategies. The original study found adequate 
internal consistency for the questionnaire (Cronbach’s α = .74). In a later study they offered 
standard criteria to evaluate the quality of the alternatives (Garaigordobil and Peña, 2014).  
The Attitudes towards Social Interaction Assessment [Evaluación de Actitudes ante la 
Interacción Social] (TAISO; Garcia and Magaz, 2005), designed for children between 8-12 
years old, shows 25 interaction situations and asks the child how he or she would behave. 
Situations are presented through a picture in which a boy or a girl is interacting. This test 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
114
offers no psychometric scores but a description of the strategies the children show by a 
percentage of aggressive, passive and assertive answers.  
The Cognitive Skills for Interpersonal Problem-Solving Assessment [Evaluación de 
habilidades cognitivas para la solución de problemas interpersonales] (EVHACOSPI; García 
and Magaz, 1998) is another example of an instrument designed for children, with pictures 
that represent interpersonal problems, but it emphasizes the process itself. This time, the test 
is made up of 6 situations. In this case, the child is not only asked for solutions, he or she 
must identify who has got the problem, describe it, generate as many solutions as possible, 
anticipate consequences, and chose the best alternative. The EVHACOSPI has been used later 
in different samples from Colombia (Ison, 2004) and Argentina (Morelato, Maddio and Ison, 
2005). 
The Interpersonal Skills Battery [Batería de Habilidades Interpersonales] (Pelechano, 
1996; Toldos and Baguena, 2005) is another attempt to assess the process of interpersonal 
problem-solving itself. It was at first designed for elderly people and later adjusted for 
adolescents and children. Situations here are described in short stories, whereby the person 
must answer different questions in order to show his proficiency at each phase of the solving 
process: how does the character feel? What would he think? Why does he feel that way? 
What can he do? Just to mention some, for example. This battery assesses 5 dimensions 
through some situations described: 11 situations for perspective taking, 15 for alternatives 
generation, 10 for causal attribution, 14 for consequences, 11 for means-end planning. The 
person must answer about feelings, thoughts, the feelings’ causes and possible solutions to the 
situations. The study with elderly adults offered 90% of interrater agreement and reliability 
index over .70. Later, Toldos and Baguena (2005) used this battery on the elderly too. This 
study reviewed reliability (Cronbach’s α between .76 and .86) and validity through a factor 
analysis. We have not found psychometric studies in younger or clinical samples.  
The Evaluation of the Solutions to Interpersonal Conflicts ([Evaluación de Solución de 
Conflictos Interpersonales] (ESCI; Calero, García-Martín, Molinero and Bonete, 2009). 
Created and validated by our research group, it was designed to answer the same social 
problem solving structure so that improvements in the acquisition of social cognition 
knowledge would be observed in the resolution of the task. The task consists of different 
scenarios of interpersonal conflicts, 17 pictures that represent interpersonal conflicts in which 
participants should answer three questions: How does the character feel? Why does he feel 
that way? and What could he do to solve the conflict? The task provides four scores: 
Emotions Recognition, Causes Attribution and Solutions Generation, and Total score. 
Following the Pelechano model (1996), it was initially designed to assess the outcomes of an 
intervention in interpersonal skills aimed at gifted children (Calero and García-Martín, 2005), 
which we later applied with Asperger Syndrome children, adolescents and adults (Bonete, 
Calero and Fernández-Parra, 2015; Bonete, Vives, Fernandez-Parra, Calero and Garcia-
Martin, 2010) and larger samples of gifted children (Gómez-Pérez et al., 2014). Molinero 
(2015) ran a psychometric study to offer normative data, validity and reliability of the test 
with a large sample of Spanish adolescents between 11 and 18 years old. The validity of the 
instrument was analyzed and proper values were obtained for each dimension: Emotion 
recognition, α = .69, Causes attribution α = .91, Solutions generation α = .81 and Total Score 
α = .90 (Molinero, 2015) 
 
 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
115
Intervention in Interpersonal Problem-Solving Skills 
 
Interpersonal skills and the problem-solving process can be learned through training. 
Studies such as Dobson (2009) have shown that benefits of interpersonal training may endure, 
being incorporated to individual psychological resources of the person trained.  
Different attempts at designing training programs have been made. Training in 
interpersonal problem-solving skills has been applied in different populations based on a 
preventive or therapeutic focus. For children, adolescents, adults; as well as those programs 
built for disabled groups, terminally ill patients, criminals, and some psychological disorders 
such as anxiety, depression, social phobia or substance abuse (Pelechano,1996; Toldos and 
Báguena, 2005; Calero and García-Martín, 2005; Soldevila, Ribes, Filella and Agulló, 2005; 
Moral and Ovejero, 2005; Greco and Ison, 2012; Salazar, 2014; Olivares, Olivares-Olivares 
and Maciá, 2014; Garaigordobil and Peña, 2014). In this chapter we selected some current 
studies as examples of interventions which resulted in positive outcomes for the participants. 
Although the issue of a social problem-solving process was not the most common in 
psychology research, there is a quite wide extension of published research in the field. The 
reason for including some studies and not others in this chapter was none other but that they 
were good examples of the classification we proposed with the aim that the reader could get 
an idea of which the fields of application are, including different training programs for 
different samples. Thus, according to the classification explained, we sorted the interventions 
as follows: 1) interventions working on social skills grouped by different aspects or skills 
needed to solve conflicts, 2) trainings which emphasises the course of the social problem 
solving as the process itself with particular characteristics (positive vs. negative orientation, 
rational, impulsive or avoidance style to face problems, etc…) and 3) programs in which the 
focus is made on the phases that necessarily involve the social problem-solving process.  
The social problem-solving construct is considered to be a fundamental domain of 
cognition which carries important implications for one’s life, compromising ones learning 
process, general coping strategies and self-control method (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2010). 
Therefore, its role has been the source of different studies concerning the functional or 
dysfunctional path to face personal events. 
 
I. Social Skills in Conflict-Solving Process 
In this sense, training social problem-solving skills has been tested to be helpful in 
clinical samples. In fact, intervention in some disorders such as anxiety, depression and 
schizophrenia usually include some kind of social skills training. Training in discrete skills 
has been very common as part of different intervention approaches (cognitive-behavioural 
therapies, systemic therapy, etc.) due to its importance in solving interpersonal problems.  
An example of this focus is the treatment of incarcerated people that has been an issue in 
the field of social problem-solving training. Based on cognitive-behavioral orientation, 
Bourke and Van Hasselt (2001) published a treatment manual with the aim to train social 
problem-solving skills in incarcerated offenders. Authors concerned about increasing violence 
in society and prision overcrowding brought them to develop this social problem-solving 
skills training with the aim of increasing not only social skills but also management of anger, 
hostility and aggression. They used a stress inoculation approach to the management of 
stressors with the aims of improving incarcerated offenders’ social and assertion skills, their 
understanding of the desirable and undesirable functions of anger, anger control methods, 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
116
developing coping skills, teaching tension reduction techniques, improving behavioral 
responses, empathic awareness, social perspective-taking and verbal and non-verbal skills.  
In Spain, Olivares, Olivares-Olivares and Macià (2014) study the effects of an 
intervention for adolescents with social phobia comparing the complete package treatment 
(which includes training in social skills needed to solve problems) with the intervention 
without the social skills module to analyze the effect of this training in recovery. For the full 
treatment group scores in symptomatology decreased significantly more than in the social 
skills group, what was interpreted as an evidence of the relevant role that the social skills 
training plays in recovery.  
 
II. The Social Problem-Solving Process 
It could be said that one of the most important contributions from the social problem-
solving process approach is the work of D’Zurilla and Nezu (1999), who published the 
Problem Solving Therapy. Using an individual as well as in a group treatment program, they 
trained in the different domains such as problem identification, recognition of emotions, 
generation of alternative solutions and implementation. Currently considered an evidence-
based treatment program, it has been tested in multiple samples with impressive results in 
general psychopathology for the treatment of different mental illnesses. 
In the field of schizophrenia, different rehabilitation programs were developed. Due to 
the severe neurocognitive deficits that are common to people with schizophrenia, 
psychosocial interventions are highly valuable. Therefore, different social skills training and 
social problem-solving skills training are presented in the literature. 
Based on this social problem-solving process perspective, we highlight as an example of 
application in the field of schizophrenia the work published by Kern et al., (2005) using 
errorless learning methodology. They analyzed social problem-solving skills improvements in 
patients with schizophrenia. The targets for training were: 1) identifying the presence/absence 
of a problem (identification of key elements, goals and obstacles, and definition of the 
problem) 2) generating an appropriate solution (which generally speaking could be classified 
into three main categories: clarifying communication, perspective taking or seeking help from 
a higher authority) and 3) effectively enacting the solution (dividing the training in the verbal 
component –what should be said- and nonverbal subcomponents –appropriate eye contact, 
body posture, hand gestures, voice volume, prosody and rate of speech). Sessions were 
distributed to train each of these three main skill areas. Training included videotape scenarios 
representing common problems to this type of patients. Control group participants received a 
Symptom Management program equated for total training time, group structure and format. 
Training was organized into groups of six to eight subjects with one instructor and two 
assistants during six hours split over 2 days. Results showed that the errorless learning group 
improved in their overall performance in the three skill areas with maintenance three months 
later. 
Rus-Calafell, Gutierrez-Maldonado, Ribas-Sabate and Lemos-Giraldez (2014) also tried a 
social cognition and social skills training for a schizophrenic sample. They specified the 
social functioning components, training: Social cognition (mental operations such as 
perception, interpretation and response generation to the intentions, dispositions and 
behaviors of others), some aspects of ToM (Brüne, 2005) which is the ability to understand 
others` mental state; some social perceptions about roles and context rules added to 
verbal/nonverbal cues; process of causal attribution including attributional bias; and 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
117
emotional perception and processing (Rus-Calafell, Gutierrez-Maldonado, Ortega-Bravo, 
Ribas-Sabaté and Caqueo-Urizar, 2013; Rus-Calafell, Gutiérrez-Maldonado, and Ribas-
Sabaté, 2014). In their studies, authors found improvements in psycopathology (negative 
symptoms), social discomfort, social cognition, social withdrawal and interpersonal 
communication; some of which were maintained 6 months later; outcomes were better than in 
a treatment as usual condition. When virtual reality was added to the training program, the 
objective scores indicated learning in emotion perception, assertive behaviors and time spent 
in a conversation.  
From D’Zurilla and Nezu’s model, Liberman, Eckman and Marder (2001) also compared 
the effects of Problem Solving Therapy (PST) with supportive group therapy. Although in 
both cases identification of problems improved, under PST, participants obtained better marks 
on generating alternatives, decision making, role-play skills and performance.  
Meanwhile, there has been a growing interest in the study of suicidal behavior. Last 
research points at deficiencies in problem solving as a mediator variable. Speckens and 
Hawton (2005) carried out a systematic review of social problem solving in adolescents with 
suicidal behavior and found that depression and hopelessness might be playing a fundamental 
role, as when these variables are controlled, problem-solving skills differences decreased 
between control groups and patients. Thus, the question is if deficits in problem-solving skills 
lead to depression when adversity presents itself and predisposes to suicidal behavior or 
whether depression generates decreases of problem-solving skills. In fact, social problem 
solving and coping skills present in people diagnosed with depression or anxious symptoms 
seems to be deteriorated and less adaptive (Kramp, 2012). 
There are quite a few meta-analysis comparing effects from different psychotherapies to 
treat depression. In all these studies, PST is more effective than control conditions and it is 
comparable to others such as cognitive behavioral therapy, mindfulness-based cognitive 
therapy, supportive counseling, social skills training and behavioral activation (Barth et al., 
2013; Cape, Whittington, Buszewicz, Wallace and Underwood, 2010; Kirkham, Choi and 
Seitz, 2016; Nieuwsma et al., 2012 and Bell and D’Zurilla, 2009). Niewsma et al. (2012) 
found that problem-solving therapy and cognitive behavioural therapy are the most 
efficacious. 
PST has been adapted to different needs. For example, in the field of depression, there is 
a shortened package for primary care implementation. It lasts from four to eight sessions, 
adapted so that non-mental health providers can be trained to administer it. This treatment has 
been tested to be effective for younger primary care patients and also, older adults (Arean, 
Hegel Vannoy, Fan and Unuzter, 2008). In fact, when this intervention was compared with 
usual psychotherapy treatment for depression in primary care, symptoms decreased and better 
functioning was maintained one year later.  
 Camacho et al. (2015) also compared the standard protocol in primary care with the 
evidence-based problem-solving therapy (PST) to a sample of Hispanic people diagnosed 
with depression who were attending a community health clinic. After treatment, patients who 
received the problem-solving therapy decreased in depressive symptoms. The most important 
contribution of this study was its implementation in a community mental health setting. 
In the same direction, Biggam and Power (2002) examined the effectiveness of a group 
based problem-solving intervention in a sample of 23 young offenders, comparing their 
results with a control group of incarcerated people who did not participated in any therapy of 
this kind. Results revealed that levels of anxiety, depression and hopelessness decreased in 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
118
the intervention group and social problem-solving abilities improved according to self-report 
measures with maintenance three months later.  
Social problem solving has also been a recurring issue in the field of Autism Spectrum 
Disorders (ASD). A recent contribution is the work done by Pugliese and White (2014), who 
adapted PST for adults with ASD. In order to apply it to this specific population, a first 
psychoeducational session was provided. Then, three sessions were focused on positive 
problem orientation in relation to problem solving and four sessions worked on practicing 
specific dimensions of the problem-solving process through different techniques. A final 
session was centered on evaluating attempts to implement and re-define solution plans when 
necessary. Their pilot study consisted of five college students. Improvements were assessed 
through a questionnaire measuring the cognitive process of social problem solving, and an 
outcome questionnaire. Reliable changes indices were also calculated for clinical significance 
of change in both measures. Two of the five participants demonstrated reliable improvements 
at post-treatment, the other three did not show any significant change nor worsen in problem 
solving.  
One area of applicability of social problem-solving training is with family caregivers of 
stroke survivors, the elderly, cancer patients and chronic illness in order to improve the 
physical and psychological well-being of these caregivers (Toseland, Labrecque, Goebel and 
Whitney, 1992; Toseland, Banchand, and McCallion, 1995). Based on the theory of Problem 
Solving Therapy (D’Zurilla, 1986). Different studies have examined the impact of offering 
this intervention to caregivers compared with sham and control conditions. Results showed 
better problem-solving skills, greater caregiver preparedness, less depression and anxiety 
symptoms in caregivers which received the PST training (Grant et al., 1999; Grant et al., 
2002; Kurylo, Elliott and Shewchuk, 2001; Nezu, Nezu, Felgoise, McClure and Houts, 2003; 
Wade et al., 2005).  
 
III. Interpersonal Skills as Phases of the Problem-Solving Process 
Under this epigraph we included social problem-solving interventions which focus on the 
phases and their order when trying to solve a problem, and especially an interpersonal 
problem. In this way, prior to thinking about the consequences, one needs to assume the way 
the specific situation affects my feelings and thoughts and also the other person’s feelings and 
thoughts; which are the different perspectives of the problems and what is the root of the 
problem (attribution of cause), as any of these aspects could also affect what the consequence 
of any particular alternative solution would be.  
This approach has received less attention in the scientific literature. Some researchers 
have applied this approach to children and adolescents at risk. Santinello, Vieno and Altoè 
(2006) presented the effectiveness of the Interpersonal Cognitive Problem Solving training 
published by Shure and Spivack (1978) for children at risk (n = 68, between 6-7 years old). 
They found a significant decrease of behavior and learning problem scores in the children at 
risk, and improvements in frustration tolerance. Recently, Bergeron, Nolan, Dai and White 
(2013) worked on the training program published by Godlstein (1998), PREPaRE program. 
They assessed 84 high school students from two schools with at-risk population. Results 
showed improvements in a social skills rating scale, especially for males.  
We highlight the contribution made by Pelechano (1984, 1995, 1996, 2003) who 
developed and deeply defined the concept of interpersonal skills. His work is considered an 
integrative model of the three explained alternatives. He designed a program of interpersonal 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
119
problem solving skills which covers from children to adolescents and elderly groups. It is 
structured in 7 stages or phases, one per session, in which the aim is to work on the different 
dimensions of the social problem-solving process. The order of implementation needs to be 
respected. The objective of the training programs developed from Pelechano is the well-being 
of people in different stages through lifetime. Therefore, he did not address specifically  
the deficits of clinical samples but applied his program to various populations such as 
schoolchildren with social withdrawal, aggressive behaviors, family caregivers and the 
elderly, with successful results in all cases based on their research group measure, the 
Interpersonal Skills Battery (already outlined above).  
Following Pelechano’s contribution, our research group adapted its proposal by adding a 
few dimensions: coping with failure and causal attribution (Calero, García-Martín and 
Bonete, 2012). The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Skills Program for Children (SCI-
Children; Programa de Solución de Conflictos Interpersonales, Calero, García-Martín and 
Bonete; 2012) consists of 10 weekly sessions of approximately one hour. Each session works 
on one step from the social problem-solving process: problem definition, recognition of 
personal feelings and thoughts, learning perspective taking, attribution of causes, solution 
alternatives, consequences, choosing the best option and planning of action, evaluation of 
implementation and coping with failure (Bonete, Calero and Fernández-Parra (2015) for 
further description).  
As didactic methodology, mediation is the approach. The meditational approach was 
developed with Feuerstein’s work on mediated learning experience and afterwards it has been 
applied to clinical population. Lessons and rules are not explicitly taught but the child 
discovers the process rationality through concrete examples, personal experiences and sharing 
in the group. The therapist, making use of feedback and giving explicit help only after 
personal demands, is the person in charge of leading the child to disclose the resolution 
process. The clue is bringing into the session the conceptual map the participants already have 
about the particular phase of problem resolution and once it is shared by everybody, then the 
whole group is ready for the next step. We believe this is an efficacious method of working 
on interpersonal skills in order to promote peer-mediated learning and interactions with others 
during the teaching-learning process. 
Each session consists of an introduction to the concrete dimension by giving an example 
of a common situation in daily life. Examples range from personal problems which do not 
require any other person (like a broken laptop), to interpersonal problem situations between 
two people, and finally, conflicts concerning a whole group of people. The key elements of 
each corresponding phase (for example, trying to think of closed possible causes that 
generated the problem, and also distant possible causes of the problem) are put into practice 
through different examples and also personal experiences that participants share. 
Primarily, Calero y García-Martín (2005) applied the program to a sample of 9 gifted 
children between 6 and 10 years of age who had some difficulties in interpersonal skills and 
social adaptation. Based on the task of social problem-solving performance, they found 
significant improvements after the treatment was implemented and also a high degree of 
satisfaction in participants.  
A subsequent study with a larger sample obtained similar results. The participants, 20 
children diagnosed as gifted between 7 and 13 years of age, were compared with a wait-list 
control group (Gómez-Pérez et al., 2014). In this case, they were selected through the 
community services and societies of parents of gifted children. There was no social 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
120
difficulties requirement, but only an interest in participating, while a second group comprised 
the wait-list group. Results showed that the treatment group showed higher scores in 
Attribution of causes, Generation of solutions and Total scores after the end of the 
intervention with a clear improvement based on the task of social problem-solving skills. 
Moreover, when both groups were compared, besides being homogeneous groups in all 
variables, the treatment group’s post-treatment scores were even higher in generation of 
solutions than they were in the wait-list group (high effect sizes).  
Another target population in the field of social problem-solving skills concerns the 
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). There is well documented and wide evidence of social 
skills deficits in this population which directly affect social problem-solving skills (Buon et 
al., 2012; Channon et al., 2010; Channon et al., 2001; Goddard et al., 2007). During the past 
years, there has been a growing interest in providing support to adults with ASD with the 
hope of incorporating them into the world of employment (Friedman, Erickson Warfield and 
Parish, 2013).  
Our research group worked on adapting the Interpersonal Problem-Solving Skills 
Program according to the needs of adolescents and adults with Asperger Syndrome (SCI-
Labour; Bonete, Calero and Fernández-Parra; 2014) to test its effectiveness. The program was 
offered to adults with average IQ and good problem-solving skills for different kinds of 
problems (academic achievement and independent daily activities) but restricted and poor 
interpersonal conflict-solving skills.  
The program was adapted by including some specific issues of Asperger Syndrome 
(description of characteristics, examples of typical difficult situations for this population…). 
Changes were also made in the stories and social situations to work with, in sessions 
according to their age and the stage of development. The SCI-Labour program (Interpersonal 
Problem-Solving Skills for Workplace adaptation) is centered on social problem-solving 
skills played in conflict situations in work environments. Typical social situations which are 
potentially problematic in the workplace were the ones selected to work on during training. 
Time was also given for sharing personal experiences and analyzing any failed experience in 
the past together. The social problem-solving process was revealed session by session; each 
session was focused on a particular phase of the problem-solving process and participants 
undertook to complete a homework task based on this cognitive process.  
Data were collected from 50 participants with ASD between 16 and 29 years. They were 
assessed with the ESCI and a socialization scale (Socialization subscale of the Vineland-II). 
As a whole sample, significant changes were observed after treatment in both measures and 
subdomains except emotions recognition from the ESCI. Individual scores were also 
analyzed, showing that half of the sample showed statistically significant change for at least 
one domain of social problem-solving task (based on Reliable Change Index, RCI, Jacobson 
and Truax, 1991). Moreover, results from the ASD treatment group were compared with a 
control group of adolescents and adults with typical development (matched in gender, age and 
Non Verbal-IQ scores). The analyses found that differences with the control group had 
decreased significantly for the ASD group at post-treatment. Due to these promising results 
using three different types of analyses, we concluded that participating in the SCI-Labour 
improved the social problem-solving skills for the recruited sample with ASD. 
Bonete, Molinero, Mata, Calero and Gómez-Pérez (in press) applied the Interpersonal 
Problem-Solving Skills Program (SCI-Children) to children with Asperger Syndrome. A first 
study explored treatment outcomes in a sample of 22 children from 7 to 13 years of age. In 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
121
this case, the standard program was implemented (Calero, García-Martín and Bonete, 2012) 
in ten sessions of one hour per week. Assessments were conducted prior to treatment and at 
post-treatment point. Significant differences were found in the socialization scale fulfilled by 
parent impressions and also in the Total scores and Solutions domain of the socialization 
problem-solving task (ESCI).  
In order to test that changes were not due to the curve of development, a second study 
was run. In this case, there was a sample of fifteen children with Asperger Syndrome (7-13 
years of age) who were assessed twice prior to intervention (Pre-0 and Pre-1, without 
intervention in between) and again when the training was finished ten weeks later (Post). 
Results showed that there were no significant differences between Pre 0 and Pre 1 for any of 
the outcome measures but this pattern changed after the program was finished. At post-
treatment, participants scored significantly higher in the socialization subscale reported by 
parents with large effect size maladaptive behaviors decreased as reported by parents. 
 
Social Problem-Solving Skills and Well-Being 
On a separate issue, although no less important, from the Health Psychology field and a 
from a preventive point of view, social skills for solving problems are the basis of well-being 
as they protect us from different problems which can arise when there are particular social 
skills deficits. In this sense, it has been seen that training in different social skills leads to 
social adjustment and promotes mental health. For these reasons, social problem-solving 
training has been offered to the general population under different focuses. Under this 
epigraph, we note some of the populations with whom training programs have been applied 
from a preventive point of view. There is quite extensive literature on this subject, but this is 
just a brief overview. 
One example is the training programs offered to hospital staff, nurses and medical teams 
to support healthcare workers and avoid burnout and anxiety disorders (Salazar, Roldán, 
Garrido and Ramos-Navas, 2014) with positive treatment effects (Hirokawa, Taniguchi, 
Tsuchiya and Kawakami, 20012; Linn et al., 2004) 
It is also known that deficits in social skills are a risk factor in adolescents when dealing 
with substance consumption. Therefore, social problem-solving training is being presented as 
necessary from a preventive point of view. For example, Moral and Ovejero (2005) studied 
the effects of a training program aimed at improving and strengthening different social skills 
to face social pressure. They confirmed improvements in cognitions, behaviors and social 
relations after a group of 141 adolescents in risk of consuming substances participated in a 
training program. 
More recently, Espada, Griffin, Pereira, Orgilés and García-Fernández (2012) analyzed 
the effects of the drugs prevention program SALUDA (Espada and Méndez, 2003), 
comparing the outcomes with only two intervention components such as social skills training 
and problem-solving training, and a wait-list control group. Results showed that the three 
intervention conditions produce reductions in alcohol use and intentions to use other 
substances compared with the wait-list control group. When examining problem-solving 
skills at post-treatment, the full program condition reported better problem-solving skills than 
those in the other three conditions (including the problem-solving condition), which indicates 
that the most powerful effect is provoked by the combination of problem-solving and social 
skills training.  

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
122
Regarding the education field, the classic study by Weissberg et al. (1981) showed how 
social problem-solving training programs could be useful from a prevention competence-
building approach. During the last years, some other programs have addressed the issue of 
promoting social competence and interpersonal skills in children and adolescents in 
educational contexts. Approaches are multiple and diverse and include emotional intelligence, 
coping skills, discrete social skills, interpersonal problem-solving skills… Nowadays, these 
programs are even more important due to the high correlation found between childhood 
depression and social problem solving skills deficits (Dubow, Schmidt, McBride, Edwards 
and Merk, 1993; Garaigordobil and Peña, 2014, Sharma, Petosa and Heaney, 1999) and the 
impact that early deficits in social competence have on adolescents and young adults later on. 
For instance, Sharma et al. (1999) examined the impact of a brief intervention based on 
social cognitive theory (SCT) to develop problem-solving skills among sixth-grade children. 
They compared the students of five classrooms (n = 133) receiving the SCT-based 
intervention to another five classroom (n = 127) whose children received a knowledge-based 
intervention. Measures of situational perception of stressors, expectations of problem-solving 
skills, and application of problem-solving skills to real-life problems were taken and the 
experimental group of SCT improved in applying problem-solving skills to real life problems.  
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The study of the interpersonal problem-solving process has been addressed through 
different approaches. In this chapter, we classify the contributions based on three main 
theoretical proposals: Social skills to solve conflicts, social problem-solving process and 
interpersonal skills as phases of the problem-solving process. Thereafter, we review some 
evaluation tools such as questionnaires and self-report instruments, behavioral rating scales, 
lab-based behavioral observations and performance tasks or expressive techniques. Finally, 
interventions to address specifically interpersonal problem-solving skills are also considered 
and organized by these three main approaches. There are a wide variety of clinical 
populations in which training in interpersonal problem-solving skills has proved to be 
relevant, such as incarcerated people and young offenders, people suffering from an anxiety 
disorder, acute depression, suicidal behavior, schizophrenia, autism spectrum disorders, gifted 
children, family caregivers. From a preventive point of view, some initiatives have also 
demonstrated the need for training programs in healthy people: for preventing substance 
consumption in adolescence, healthcare workers’ resilience, children and adolescents 
adaptation in educational contexts.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Adams, R. and Laursen, B. (2001). The organization and dynamics of adolescent conflict with 
parents and friends. Journal of Marriage and Family, 63(1), 97-110. 
Areán, P. A. (2000). Terapia de solución de problemas para la depresión: Teoría, 
investigación y aplicaciones. [Problem Solving Therapy for Depression: Theory, research 
and applications] Psicología Conductual/Behavioral Psychology, 8(3), 547-559. 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
123
Arean, P., Hegel, M., Vannoy, S., Fan, M. Y. and Unuzter, J. (2008). Effectiveness of 
problem-solving therapy for older, primary care patients with depression: Results from 
the IMPACT project. The Gerontologist, 48(3), 311–323. 
Areán, P. A., Raue, P., Mackin, R. S., Kanellopoulos, D., McCulloch, C. and Alexopoulos, G. 
S. (2010). Problem-solving therapy and supportive therapy in older adults with major 
depression and executive dysfunction. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167(11), 1391-
1398. doi:10.1176/appi. ajp.2010.09091327. 
Arslan, E. (2010). Analysis of communication skill and interpersonal problem solving in 
preschool trainees. Social Behavior and Personality: an international journal, 38(4), 
523-530. DOI 10.2224/sbp.2010.38.4.523. 
Baldor-Tubet, I., Ortiz, A. and Jerez-Álvarez, M. C. (2014). Avances en los programas de 
entrenamiento en habilidades sociales para personas con enfermedad mental grave 
[Improvements in social skills training programs for people with severe mental health]. 
Rehabilitación Psicosocial, 11(1), 43-54. 
Barth, J., Munder, T., Gerger, H., Nüesch, E., Trelle, S. Znoj, H. Jüni, P. and Cuijpers, P. 
(2013). Comparative efficacy of seven psychotherapeutic interventions for patients  
with depression: A network meta-analysis. PLoS Med, 10(5), e1001454. doi:10.1371/ 
journal.pmed.1001454. 
Barton-Arwood, S., Morrow, L., Lane, K. and Jolivette, K. (2005). Project IMPROVE: 
Improving Teachers’ Ability to Address Students’ Social Needs. Education and 
Treatment of Children, 28(4), 430-443. 
Bayani, A. A., GhorbanaliGanji, A. and Bayani, A. (2013). Psychometric Properties of the 
Farsi Version of the Social Problem Solving Inventory–Revised (F-SPSI-R): Preliminary 
Evidence. Journal of Basic and Applied Scientific Research, 3(4), 241-245. 
Bedel, A. (2015). The Relationship between Interpersonal Problem Solving, Positive-
Negative Affect and Anxiety. Studia Psychologica, 57(2), 121. 
Bell, A. C. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (2009). Problem-solvinng therapy for depression: A meta-
analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 348-353. 
Benitez, C. (2014). An Experimental Manipulation of Validating and Invalidating Responses: 
Impact on Social Problem-Solving (Doctoral dissertation, The Ohio State University). 
Bergeron, J. L., Nolan, R. F., Dai, Y. and White, B. (2013). Interpersonal skills training with 
at-risk high school students. National Forum of Applied Educational Research Journal, 
26(3), 1-10. 
Biggam, F. H. and Power, K. G. (2002). A controlled, problem-solving, group-based 
intervention with vulnerable incarcerated young offenders. International Journal of 
Offender Therapy and Comparative Criminology, 46(6), 2002 678-698 
Bonete, S., Calero, M. D. and Fernández-Parra, A. (2015). Group training in interpersonal 
problem-solving skills for workplace adaptation of adolescents and adults with Asperger 
syndrome: A preliminary study. Autism, 19(4), 409-420.  
Bourke, M. L. and Van Hasselt, V. B. (2001). Social-problem-solving skills training for 
incarcerated offenders. Behavior Modification, 25(2), 163-188. 
Buon, M., Dupoux, E., Jacob, P., Chaste, P., Leboyer, M. and Zalla, T. (2012). The role of 
causal and intentional judgments in moral reasoning in individuals with high functioning 
autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, DOI: 10.1007/s10803-012-
1588-7.  

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
124
Brüne, M. (2005). “Theory of mind” in schizophrenia: a review of the literature. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 31(1), 21-42. 
Caballo, V. (1993). Relaciones entre diversas medidas conductuales y de autoinforme de las 
habilidades sociales. [Relationship between several behavior and self-report measures for 
social skills] Psicología Conductual/Behavioral Psychology (1), 1, 73-99. 
Caballo, V. (2009). Manual de evaluación y entrenamiento de las habilidades sociales. 
[Handbook of Assessment and Training in Social Skills] Madrid: Siglo XXI de España 
Eds. 
Caballo, V. E., Olivares, J., López-Gollonet, C., Irurtia, M. J. and Rosa, A. I. (2003). Una 
revisión de los instrumentos para la evaluación de la fobia social: algunos datos 
empíricos. [A Review of Social Phobia Assessment Instruments: some empirical data] 
Psicología Conductual/Behavioral Psychology, 11(3), 539-562. 
Calero, M. D., Luna, M. J., Vera-Villarroel, P. and González, M. C. (2001). Un estudio de 
validez del inventario de solución de problemas sociales [Validity Study of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory-R, SPSI-R]. Psicología Conductual/Behavioral Psychology, 
9 (2), 373-387. 
Calero, M. D. and García-Martín, M. B. (2005). Habilidades interpersonales y afrontamiento 
al fracaso: un método de entrenamiento para niños superdotados [Interpersonal skills and 
coping with failure: a training method for gifted chlidren]. Mente y Conducta en 
Situación Educativa, 2, 1-10. 
Calero, M. D., García-Martín, M. B. and Bonete, S. (2012). Programa de entrenamiento en 
habilidades de resolución de problemas interpersonales para niños [Training program in 
interpersonal problema-solving skills for children]. Unpublished manuscript. Granada, 
Sider. D.L: Gr2371-2012. 
Calero, C., García-Martín, B., Molinero, C. and Bonete, S. (2009). Evaluación de Solución de 
Conflictos Interpersonales, ESCI [Evaluation for the Solutions to Interpersonal 
Conflicts], (unpublished manuscript). University of Granada, Granada. 
Calvete, E. and Cardeñoso, O. (2001). Creencias, resolución de problemas sociales y 
correlatos psicológicos. [Beliefs, social problem-solving and psychological correlates] 
Psicothema, 13(1), 95-100. 
Camacho, A., González, P., Castañeda, S. F., Simmone, A., Buelna, C., Lemus, H. and 
Talavera, G. A. (2015). Improvement in depressive symptoms among Hispanic/Latinos 
receiving a culturally tailored IMPACT and problem-solving intervention in a community 
health center. Community Mental Health Journal, 51, 385-392. 
Cano, F. J., Rodríguez, L. and García, J. (2007). Adaptación española del Inventario de 
Estrategias de Afrontamiento [Spanish version of the Coping Strategies Inventory]. Actas 
Españolas de Psiquiatria, 35(1), 29-39. 
Cape, J., Whittington, C., Buszewicz, M., Wallace, P. and Underwood, L. (2010). Brief 
psychological therapies for anxiety and depression in primary care: meta-analysis and 
meta-regression. BMC Medicine, 8. 
Celdrán, J. and Ferrándiz, C. (2012). Reconocimiento de emociones en niños de Educación 
Primaria: Eficacia de un programa educativo para reconocer emociones. [Emotion 
Recognition in Elementary Education: Efficacy of an Emotion Recognition Educational 
Programme] Electronic Journal of Research in Educational Psychology, 10(28), 1321-
1342. 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
125
Chang, E. and D’Zurilla, T. (1996). Relations between problem orientation and optimism, 
pessimism, and trait affectivity: A construct validation study. Behaviour research and 
therapy, 34(2), 185-194. 
Chang, E. C., D’Zurilla, T. J. and Sanna, L. J. (2009). Social problem solving as a mediator of 
the link between stress and psychological well-being in middle-adulthood. Cognitive 
therapy and research, 33(1), 33-49. 
Channon, S., Charman, T. Heap, J., Crawfor, S. and Rios, P. (2001). Real-Life-Type 
Problem-Solving in Asperger’s Syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 31(5), 461-469. 
Channon, S. and Crawford, S. (1999). Problem-solving in real-life-type situations: The effects 
of anterior and posterior lesions on performance. Neuropsychologia, 37(7), 757-770. 
Channon, S., Crawford, S., Orlowska, D., Parikh, N. and Thoma, P. (2010). Mentalising and 
social problem solving in adults with Asperger’s syndrome. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 
19(2), 149-163. 
Demiri, V. (2004) Teaching social skills to children with autism using social stories. An 
empirical study. Doctoral disertation. Hofstra University, New York, USA. 
De Miguel, P. (2014). Enseñanza de habilidades de interacción social en niños con riesgo de 
exclusión. [Teaching Social Interaction Skills in children at exclusion risk] Revista de 
Psicología Clínica con Niños y Adolescentes, 1(1), 17-26. 
Dobson, K. S. (Ed.). (2009). Handbook of cognitive-behavioral therapies. (3rd ed.). New 
York, NY, USA.: Guilford Press. 
Dubow, E. F., Schmidt, D., McBride, J., Edwards, S. and Merk, F. L. (1993). Teaching 
children to cope with stressful experiences: Initial implementation and evaluation of a 
primary prevention program. J Clin Child Psychol, 22, 428-440. 
 D’Zurilla (1986). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinical 
intervention. New York: Springer.  
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Goldfried, M. R. (1971) Problem solving and behavior modification. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 78, 107-126. 
D’zurilla, T. J. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (1995). Conceptual and methodological issues in 
social problem solving assessment. Behaviour Therapy, 26, 409-432. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Maydeu-Olivares, A. and Kant, G. L. (1998). Age and gender differences in 
social problem-solving ability. Personality and individual differences, 25(2), 241-252. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (2010). Problem-solving therapy. Handbook of cognitive-
behavioral therapies, 3, 197-225. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2002). Manual for the Social 
Problem-solving Inventory--revised (SPSI-R). North Tonawanda, NY, USA: Multi-
Health Systems. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. (1999). Problem Solving Therapy: A social competence 
approach to clinical intervention (2nd Edition). New York: Springer. 
D’Zurilla, T. and Nezu, A. (1990). Development and preliminary evaluation of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 2, 156-163. 
Friedman, N. D. B., Erickson Warfield, M. and Parish, S. L. (2013). Transition to adulthood 
for individuals with autism spectrum disorder: current issues and future perspectives. 
Neuropsychiatry, 3(2), 181-192. 
Garaigordobil, M. (2001). Intervención con adolescentes: impacto de un programa en la 
asertividad y en las estrategias cognitivas de afrontamiento de situaciones sociales. 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
126
[Intervention with adolescents: Programme effect on asertivity and cognitive coping 
skills in social contexts] Psicología conductual/Behavior Psychology, 9(2), 221-246. 
Garaigordobil, M. and Peña, A. (2014). Intervención en las habilidades sociales: efectos en la 
inteligencia emocional y la conducta social [Intervention in social skills: effects on 
emotional inteligence and social behaviour]. Behavioral Psychology, 22(3), 551-567 
García, E. M. and Magaz, A. (2005). TAISO Test de evaluación ante la Interacción Social. 
[TAISO Social Interaction Assessment Test] Madrid: Grupo Albor-Cohs. 
García, E. M. and Magaz, A. (1998). Test de evaluación de habilidades cognitivas para la 
solución de problemas interpersonales (EVHACOSPI) [Cognitive Skills for Interpersonal 
Problem-Solving Assessment Test]. Manual de referencia. Madrid: Grupo Albor-Cohs. 
García-Bóveda, R. J., Morejón, A. J. V. and Jiménez, R. V. M. (2007). Habilidades sociales y 
apoyo social en esquizofrenia. [Social Skills and Social Support in Schizofrenia] Revista 
Internacional De Psicología y Terapia Psicológica, 7(1), 61-71. 
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The new Theory of Multiple Intelligences. New York: 
Basic Books. 
Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice. New York: Basic Books. 
Gardner, H. (1999) 
Intelligence reframed: 
multiple intelligences for the 21st 
century. New York: Basic Books. 
Glass, C. R., Merluzzi, T. V., Biever, J. L. and Larsen, K. H. (1982). Cognitive assessment of 
social anxiety: Development and validation of a self-statement questionnaire. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 6(1), 37-55. 
Goddard, L., Howlin, P., Dritschel, B. and Patel, T. (2007). Autobiographical memory and 
social problem-solving in Asperger Syndrome. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders, 37, 291-300. 
Goldstein, A. P. (1981). Psychological skill training: The structured learning technique 
Nueva York, EE.UU.: Pergamon. 
Goldstein, A. P. (2013). Problem-solving training. In Response to Aggression: Methods of 
Control and Prosocial Alternatives, 98, 219. 
Goldstein, A. P. and Pentz, M. A. (1984). Psychological skill training and the aggressive 
adolescent. School Psychology Review, 13(3), 311-323. 
Graham, S. and Folkes, V. S. (Eds.). (2014). Attribution theory: Applications to achievement, 
mental health, and interpersonal conflict. Nueva York, EE.UU.: Psychology Press. 
Grant, J. S. (1999). Social problem-solving partnerships with Family Caregivers. 
Reabilitation Nursing, 24(6), 254-260. 
Grant, J. S., Elliott, T., Weaver, M., Bartolucci, A. and Ginger, J. N. (2002). Telephone 
intervention with family caregivers of stroke survivors after rehabilitation. Stroke, 33, 
2060-2065. 
Greco, C. and Ison, M. S. (2012). Emociones positivas y solución de problemas 
interpersonales: su importancia en el desarrollo de competencias sociales en la mediana 
infancia. [Positive emotions and interpersonal problem-solving: Its importance in social 
competence development during childhood] Perspectivas en Psicología, 8(2) 20-29. 
Green, M. F., Penn, D. L., Bentall, R., Carpenter, W. T., Gaebel, W., et al. (2008). Social 
cognition in schizophrenia: an NIMH workshop on definitions, assessment, and research 
opportunities. Schizophrenia bulletin, 34(6), 1211-1220. 

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
127
Hegel, M. T., Dietrich, A. J., Seville, J. L. and Jordan, C. B. (2004). Training residents in 
problem-solving treatment of depression: A pilot feasibility and impact study. Family 
Medicine, 36(3), 204–208. 
Heppner, P. P. and Krauskopf, C. J. (1987). An information-processing approach to personal 
problem solving. The Counseling Psychologist, 15(3), 371-447. 
Hirokawa, K., Taniguchi, T., Tsuchiya, M. y. and Kawakami, N. (2012). Effects of a stress 
management program for hospital staffs on their coping strategies and interpersonal 
behaviors. Industrial Health, 50, 487-498.  
Ison, M. (2004). Características Familiares y Habilidades Sociocognitivas en niños con 
conductas disruptivas. [Family Features and Social-Cognitive Skills in children with 
disruptive behavior] Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología, 36(2), 257-268. 
Junttila, N., Voeten, M., Kaukiainen, A. and Vauras, M. (2006). Multisource assessment of 
children’s social competence. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 66(5), 874-
895. 
Kazdin, A. E. (2013). Covert Modeling, Imagery Assessment, and Assertive. Covert 
Conditioning: Pergamon General Psychology Series, 81, 230. 
Kelly, J. A. (1982). Social-skills training: a practical guide for interventions. Nueva York, 
EE.UU.: Springer. 
Kern, R. Green, M., Mitchell, S. Kopelowicz, A., Mintz, J. and Liberman, R. (2005). 
Extensions of errorless learning for social problem-solving deficits in Schizophrenia. The 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 162(3), 513-519. 
Kirkham, J., Choi, N. and Seitz, D. P. (2016). Meta-analysis of problem solving therapy for 
the treatment of major depressive disorder in older adults. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry, 31, 526-535. 
Kjøbli and Ogden (2014). A randomized effectiveness trial of individual child social skills 
training: six-month follow-up. Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health 13(6), 
616-626 doi: 10.1186/s13034-014-0031-6. 
Kramp, U. (2012). Perfil de resolución de problemas sociales y afrontamiento en ansiosos y 
depresivos chilenos. [Social Problem-Solving and Coping Profile in depressive and 
anxious Chilean] Psicothema, 4, 529-536.  
Kramp, U. (2014). Equivalencia entre los modelos de análisis factorial de los ítems y teoría de 
respuesta a los ítems en la evaluación de las propiedades psicométricas de los 
instrumentos de medición psicológica. [Equivalency between Factor Analysis of the 
items and Answer to the Item Theory in psychometric properties assessment of the 
psychological assessment tools] Revista Peruana de Psicometría, 1(1), 1-18. 
Labbe-Poisson, K. (2009) Peer-Mediated Social Skills Instruction and Selfmanagement 
Strategies for Students with Autism. Doctoral disertation, Southern Maine University, 
USA. 
Leiner, A. S., Kearns, M. C., Jackson, J. L., Astin, M. C. and Rothbaum, B. O. (2012). 
Avoidant coping and treatment outcome in rape-related posttraumatic stress disorder. 
Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 80(2), 317-321. 
Lerner, M. D., Calhoun, C. D., Mikami, A. Y. and De los Reyes, A. (2012). Understanding 
parent–child social informant discrepancy in youth with high functioning autism 
spectrum disorders. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 42(12), 2680-2692. 
Liberman, R. P., Eckman, T. and Marder, S. R. (2001). Training in social problem solving 
among persons with schizophrenia. Psychiatric Services, 52, 31-33. 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
128
Libet, J. M. and Lewinsohn, P. M. (1973). Concept of social skill with special reference to the 
behavior of depressed persons. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 40(2), 
304-312. 
Lin, Y., Shiah, I., Chang, Y., Lai, T., Wang, K. and Chou, K. (2004). Evaluation of an 
assertiveness training program on nursing and medical students’ assertiveness, self-
esteem, and interpersonal communication satisfaction. Nurse Education Today, 24, 656-
665.  
Londahl, E. A., Tverskoy, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (2005). The relations of internalizing 
symptoms to conflict and interpersonal problem solving in close relationships. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 29, 445-462. 
Matson, J. L. and Wilkins, J. (2007). A critical review of assessment targets and methods for 
social skills excesses and deficits for children with autism spectrum disorders. Research 
in Autism Spectrum Disorders 1, 28-37. 
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1996). A factor-analytic study of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory: An integration of theory and data. Cognitive therapy and 
research, 20(2), 115-133. 
McFall, R. M. and Marston, A. R. (1970). An experimental investigation of behavior 
rehearsal in assertive training. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 76(2), 295. 
Merino, C. (2012). Forma breve del SPSI-R: Análisis preliminar de su validez interna y 
confiabilidad. Terapia psicológica, 30(2), 85-90. 
Merrel, K. W. (2001). Assessment of Children’s Social Skills: Recent Developments, Best 
Practices, and New Directions. Exceptionality: A Special Education Journal, 9, 3-18. 
Molinero, C. (2015). Análisis Psicométrico de la Prueba de Evaluación de Solución de 
Conflictos Interpersonales (ESCI). [Psychometric analysis of the Assessment of 
Interpersonal Conflict Solutions Test (ESCI)]. Unpublished Ph. D thesis, University of 
Granada. 
Moral, M. and Ovejero, A. (2005). Un programa de intervención psicosocial para la mejora 
de las habilidades sociales de adolescentes consumidores de alcohol y otras sustancias 
psicoactivas [Psychosocial intervention programme for social skills enhancement for 
alcohol ans psychoactive substances consumers]. Apuntes de Psicología, 23(1), 3-26. 
Morán, V. E. and Olaz, F. O. (2014). Instrumentos de evaluación de habilidades sociales en 
América Latina: un análisis bibliométrico. [Social Skills Assessment Tools in Latin 
America] Revista de Psicología, 23(1), 93-105. 
Morelato, G. S., Maddio, S. and Ison, M. S. (2005). Aportes a los criterios de evaluación de 
las habilidades cognitivas para la solución de problemas interpersonales en niños 
argentinos. [Contributions to Assessment Criteria Interpersonal Porblem-Solving 
Cognitive Skills in Argentinian Children] Revista Iberoamericana de Diagnóstico y 
Evaluación Psicológica, 2, 149-164. 
Nieuwsma, J., Trivedi, R., McDuffie, J., Dronish, I., Benjamin, D. and Williams, J. W. 
(2012). Brief psychotherapy for depression: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Int’l. 
J. Psychiatry in Medicine, 43(2), 129-151.  
Nolen-Hoeksema, S. and Aldao, A. (2011). Gender and age differences in emotion regulation 
strategies and their relationship to depressive symptoms. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 51(6), 704-708.  

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
129
Noreen, S., Whyte, K. E. and Dritschel, B. (2015). Investigating the role of future thinking in 
social problem solving. Journal of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry, 46, 78-
84. 
Olivares, J., Olivares-Olivares, P. J. and Macía, D. (2014). Social skills training and treatment 
of adolescents with generalized social phobia. Behavioral Psychology-Psicología 
Conductual, 22(3), 441-459. 
Orviz, S., Novoa, T. and Palacios, M. (2010). Evaluación de las Habilidades Sociales en 
Rehabilitación Psicosocial. [Social Skills Assessment in Psychosocial Rehab] In: Jaime 
A. Fernández, Rafael Touriño, Natalia Benítez, Cristina Abelleira. (eds.). Evaluación en 
Rehabilitación Psicosocial. Valladolid: FEARP. 
Pelechano, V. (1984). Inteligencia social y habilidades interpersonales. [Social Intelligence 
and Interpersonal Skills] Análisis y Modificación de Conducta, 10(26), 393-420. 
Pelechano, V. (1995). Habilidades interpersonales: conceptualización y entrenamiento. 
[Interpersonal Skills: Concept and training] In M. D. Calero (1995). Modificación de la 
inteligencia: Sistemas de evaluación e intervención (pp. 131-179). Madrid: Pirámide. 
Pelechano, V. (1996) Las habilidades interpersonales en un modelo de inteligencia humana. 
[Interpersonal Skills in a Human Intelligence model] In V. Pelechano (Ed.), Habilidades 
interpersonales. Teoría mínima y programas de entrenamiento. (Vol. I). Valencia: 
Promolibro. 
Pelechano, V. (2003). El estudio de la discapacidad desde el punto de vista psicosocial. 
[Impairment Study from a Psychosocial Perspective] Análisis y Modificación de 
conducta, 29(125), 327-393. 
Polo, M., León, B., Gómez, T., Palacios, V. and Fajardo, F. (2013). Estilos de socialización 
en víctimas de acoso escolar. [Socialization Styles in Scholar Bullying Victims] 
European Journal of investigation in health, psychology and education, 3(1) 41-49. 
Platt, J., Spivack, G. and Bloom, W. (1975). Manual for the means-end problem-solving 
procedure: A measure of interpersonal cognitive problem-solving skill. Philadelphia: 
Hahnemann Medical College and Hospital). 
Ratto, A. B., Turner-Brown, L., Rupp, B. M., Mesibov, G. B. and Penn, D. L. (2011). 
Development of the contextual assessment of social skills (CASS): A role play measure 
of social skill for individuals with high-functioning autism. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 41, 1277–1286.  
Rehm, L. P. and Marston, A. R. (1968). Reduction of social anxiety through modification of 
self-reinforcement: An instigation therapy technique. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 32(5), 565-574. 
Reisenzein, R. (2015). On the universality of the attribution-affect model of helping. 
International Journal of Psychology. doi: 10.1002/ijop.12153. 
Rodríguez-Díaz, F. J., Estrada-Pineda, C., Rodríguez-Franco, L. and Bringas-Molleda, C. 
(2014). Adaptation of the Coping Strategies Inventory (CSI) for the Mexican prison 
population. Psicologia: Reflexão e Crítica, 27(3), 415-423. 
Rubio, L., Dumitrache, C. G., Cordón-Pozo, E. and Rubio-Herrera, R. (2016). Psychometric 
properties of the Spanish version of the Coping Strategies Inventory (CSI) in elderly 
people. Anales de Psicología/Annals of Psychology, 32(2), 355-365. 
Rus-Calafell, M., Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J., Ortega-Bravo, M., Ribas-Sabaté, J. and Caqueo-
Urízar, A. (2013). A brief cognitive–behavioural social skills training for stabilised 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
130
outpatients with schizophrenia: A preliminary study. Schizophrenia research, 143(2), 
327-336. 
Rus-Calafell, M., Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J. and Ribas-Sabaté, J. (2014). A virtual reality-
integrated program for improving social skills in patients with schizophrenia: a pilot 
study. Journal of behavior therapy and experimental psychiatry, 45(1), 81-89. 
Rus-Calafell, M., Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J., Ribas-Sabaté, J. and Lemos-Giráldez, S. (2014). 
Social skills training for people with schizophrenia: What do We train? Psicología 
Conductual, 22(3), 461-477. 
Salazar, I., Roldán, G. M., Garrido, L. and Ramos-Navas Parejo, J. M. (2014). La asertividad 
y su relación con los problemas emocionales y el desgaste en profesionales sanitarios. 
[Assertiveness and its relation with emotional problems and burnout in health 
professionals]. Behavioral Psychology, 22(3), 523-549. 
Salazar, I. and Caballo, V. (2006). Casa y Comunidad. Escalas de comportamiento social. 
[House and Community. Social Behavior Scales] En V. Caballo (dir.) Manual para la 
evaluación clínica de los trastornos psicológicos: trastornos de la edad adulta e informes 
psicológicos (pp. 373-399). Madrid: Piramide. 
Saldaña, J. (2015). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. 3rd Ed. Great Britain. 
Sage. 
Santinello, M., Vieno, A. and Altoè, G. (2006). Evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
Interpersonal Cognitive Problem Solving training for the improvement of social skills of 
children at risk. Psicoterapia Cognitiva e Comportamentale, 12(1), 41-50. 
Selton, E. A., Crosland, K. A. and Clark, H. B. (2016). Acquisition of a social problem-
solving Method by caregivers in the foster care system: evaluation and implications. 
Child and Family Behavior Therapy, 38(1), 32-46. 
Soldevila, A., Ribes, R., Filella, G. and Agulló, M. J. (2005). Objetivos y contenidos de un 
programa de educación emocional para personas mayores. Emociona’t. [Aims and 
content of an emotional education program for elderly. Emociona’t]. Revista 
Iberoamericana de Educación, 37(5).1-12 
Speckens, A. E. M. and Hawton, K. (2005). Social problem solving in adolescents with 
suicidal behavior: A systematic Review. Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior, 35(4), 
365-387. 
Sternberg, R. J. (1981). The evolution of theories of intelligence. Intelligence, 5(3), 209-230.  
Stivers, T. (2015). Coding social interaction: A heretical approach in conversation analysis? 
Research on Language and Social Interaction, 48(1), 1-19. 
Tobin, D. L., Holroyd, K. A., Reynolds, R. V. and Kigal, J. K. (1989). The hierarchical factor 
structure of the Coping Strategies Inventory. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 13, 343-
361. 
Toldos, M. P. and Bagena, M. J. (2005). Criterios de respuesta cualitativos en la batería de 
habilidades interpersonales en personas mayores. [Qualitative Answer Criteria at 
Interpersonal Skills Battery for elder persons] Revista Multidisciplinar de gerontología, 
15(2), 106-118. 
Toseland, R. W., Blanchanrd, C. G. and McCallion, P. (1995). A problem solving 
intervention for caregivers of cancer patients. Social Science and Medicine, 40, 517-528.  
Toseland, R. W., Labrecque, M. S., Goebel, S. T. and Whitney, M. H. (1992). An evaluation 
of a group program for spouses of frail elderly veterans. Gerontologist, 32, 382-390.  

The Interpersonal Problem-Solving Process: Assessment and Intervention 
131
Wade, S. L., Wolfe, C., Brown, T. M. and Pestian, J. P. (2005). Putting the pieces together: 
Preliminary efficacy of a Web-based family intervention for children with traumatic brain 
injury. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 30, 437-442.  
Weissberg, R. P., Gesten, E. L., Carnrike, C. L, Toro, P. A., Rapkin, B. D., Davidson, E. and 
Cowen, L. (1981). Social Problem-Solving Skills Training: A competence-building 
intervention with second- to fourth-grade children. American Journal of Community 
Psychology, 9(4), 411-423. 
White, S. W., Scarpa, A., Conner, C., Maddox, B. B. and Bonete, S. (2015). Evaluating 
change in social skills in high-functioning adults with autism spectrum disorder using a 
laboratory-based observational measure. Focus of Autism and Other Developmental 
Disabilities, 30(1), 3-12.  
Yao, S. N., Cottraux, J., Mollard, E., Robbe-Grillet, P., Albuisson, E., Dechassey, M., Note, 
I., Ektmedjian, N., Jalencques, I., Bouvard, M., Fangent, F. and Coudert, J. (1998). The 
French version of the Social Interaction Self-Statement Test (SISST): A validation and 
sensitivity study in social phobics. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 26(03), 
247-259. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
Name: Saray Bonete  
Affiliation: Universidad Francisco de Vitoria 
Education: International Ph.D in Clinical and Health Psychology by the University of 
Granada (Spain, 2013). Three months of a research internship at Psychology Departament and 
the Child Study Center of Virginia Tech University (2012). Master in Research and Advances 
in Health Psychology, Psychological Assessment and Treatment by the University of Granada 
(2009). Psychology degree by the University of Salamanca (Spain, 2008). 
Address: Universidad Francisco de Vitoria, Ctra. Pozuelo-Majadahonda Km. 1800, 
28223 Pozuelo de Alarcón, Madrid, Spain 
 
Research and Professional Experience: Focused on autism spectrum disorders, 
Assessment, diagnostic and treatment; interpersonal skills training and effectiveness of 
intervention programs in autism spectrum disorders, attention deficit and hyperactive disorder 
and gifted children. As research, co-responsible of different national proyects. As professor 
she teaches psychopatology, children psychopatology and clinical assessment.  
 
Professional Appointments: Ph. D Contracted Lecturer accredited by the National 
Agency of Quality Assessment (ANECA), Research Coordinator of the Psychology Degree at 
Francisco de Vitoria University 
 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
Calero, M. D., Mata, S., Bonete, S., Molinero, C. and Gómez-Perez (2015). Relations 
between Learning Potential, Cognitive and Interpersonal Skills in Asperger Children. 
Learning and Individual Differences, 44, 53-60. 

Saray Bonete and Clara Molinero 
132
Molinero, C., Bonete, S., Gómez-Pérez, M. M. and Calero, M. D. (2015). Estudio normativo 
del test de 60 caras del Ekman para adolescentes españoles. Behavioural 
Psychology/Psicología conductual, 23(2), 361-371 
Gómez-Perez, M. M., Mata-Sierra, S., García-Martín, M. B., Calero-García, M. D., Molinero-
Caparrós, C., Bonete-Román, S. (2014). Valoración de un programa de habilidades 
interpersonales en niños superdotados. Revista latinoamericana de psicología 46 (1), 59-
69. 
Bonete, S., Calero, M. D., Fernández-Parra (2015). Group training in interpersonal problema-
solving skills for workplace adaptation of adolescents and adults with Asperger síndrome. 
Autism 19 (4), 409-420. 
White, S. W., Scarpa, A., Conners, C.M., Maddox, B. B y Bonete, S. (2014). Evaluating 
change in social skills in adults with autism spectrum disorder using a laboratory-based 
observational measure. Focus on Autism and Developmental Disorder. Advance online 
publication. doi: 10.1177/1088357614539836. 
 
Name: Clara Molinero Caparrós 
Affiliation: Universidad Francisco de Vitoria 
Education: PhD Psychologist (University of Granada). Master in Methodology of 
Behavioral and Health Science in Psychology (UNED, Spain). Graduate in Psychologist 
(PUCP, Peru). Graduate in Phylosophy (Urbaniana University of Rome) 
Address: Calle Santa Escolástica 4- 1º. ZipCode: 18009 –Granada –Spain 
 
Research and Professional Experience:  
Research experience includes psychometric and clinical research on normative, Asperger 
and at-risk children and adolescents. At the same time, full-time psychotherapy practice with 
different topics (substance abuse, ASD, OCD, ADHD, learning disabilities, sexual abuse, etc. 
with families, children, adolescents, elder, couples) and also forensic psychology (expert 
reports and judicial expert trials assistance). 
 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
M. M. Gómez-Pérez, S. Mata-Sierra, M. B. García-Martín, M. D. Calero-García, C. 
Molinero-Caparrós y S. Bonete-Román (2014) Evaluation of an interpersonal Skills 
Program in Gifted Children. Revista Latinoamericana de Psicología 46 (1) pp. 59-69 
C. Molinero, S. Bonete, M. M. Gómez-Pérez, M. D. Calero (2015) A normative study of the 
Ekman 60-faces test in Spanish adolescents. Behavioral Psychology/Psicologia 
Conductual 23(2):361-371  
M. D. Calero, S. Mata, S. Bonete, C. Molinero, M. M. Gómez-Pérez. (2015) Relations 
between learning potential, cognitive and interpersonal skills in Asperger children. 
Learning and Individual Differences 44, 53-60 
C. Molinero, S. Mata, M. D. Calero, M. B. García-Martín, A. Araque-Cuenca (2015) 
Usefulness of WISC-IV in determining Intellectual Giftedness. The Spanish journal of 
psychology, 18, 1-10. 
 
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 7  
 
 
 
A MULTI-DIMENSIONAL SCALE TO MEASURE 
STRATEGIES FOR SOLVING PERSONAL PROBLEMS:  
VALIDATION AND OUTCOMES* 
 
 
Yoshinori Sugiura1 and Tomoko Sugiura2 
1Hiroshima University, Japan 
2The Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Japan 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Worry is defined as uncontrollable negative thinking and being attempt at problem 
solving. When it comes to solving everyday personal problems, worrying can represent 
thwarted problem-solving efforts. To examine if aspects of problem solving are 
diminished in worry, a multi-dimensional measure of everyday problem-solving 
strategies is necessary. We developed a six-factor measure capturing focus of thoughts 
(the future, the nature of the problem, and solving the problem) and mode of thought 
(consultative, analytical, and behavioral). Overall, problem-solving strategy use tended to 
be associated with an expectation of favorable outcomes as well as with actual favorable 
outcomes. Cluster analysis of six factors revealed three interpretable clusters: silent-
thinking cluster (those with high focus on the future/the nature of the problem/solving the 
problem and high analytical mode coupled with less consultative mode), low strategy use 
cluster (those with overall low endorsement of strategies), and active-strategies cluster 
(those with high focus on the future/the nature of the problem/solving the problem and 
high analytical mode coupled with more consultative mode). The silent-thinking cluster 
was associated with unfavorable outcomes when compared to low strategy use cluster. In 
addition, favorable expectations and better actual outcomes were higher for the active-
strategies cluster than for the silent-thinking cluster and low strategy use cluster. The 
comparisons of clusters indicates that consulting with others yields favorable problem-
solving outcomes while refraining from consultation leads to unfavorable problem-
solving outcomes. Finally, trait variables and cognitive appraisals moderated the relation 
between strategy use and outcomes. Interestingly, among participants with an active 
                                                           
* Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Yoshinori Sugiura, Graduate School of Integrated 
Arts and Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-7-1, Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima City, Hiroshima Prefecture 
739-8521, Japan; Tel: +81-82-424-6573; Fax: +81-82-424-0759. E-mail: ysugiura@hiroshima-u.ac.jp. 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
134
problem-solving style, those endorsing strong confidence in problem-solving abilities, 
and those with low threat appraisal, a higher use of problem-solving strategies lead to 
unfavorable outcomes.  
 
Keywords: problem-solving, worry, moderators, factor analysis 
 
 
As defined by Borkovec，Robinson，Pruzinsky, and DePree (1983), “Worry is a chain 
of thoughts and images, negatively affect-laden and relatively uncontrollable. The worry 
process represents an attempt to engage in mental problem solving on an issue whose 
outcome is uncertain but contains the possibility of one or more negative outcomes” (p. 10). 
In daily usage, the term worry is sometimes treated as having the same meaning as anxiety 
but as noted in the above definition, a “chain of thoughts and images” would make the term 
worry a cognitive component of anxiety. 
Worry is often unpleasant and difficult to control. However, as the definition suggests, it 
“represents an attempt to engage in mental problem-solving.” Therefore, worry represents 
problem solving in daily life. Davey (1994) understood worry to result when good problem-
solving processes fail. Following this line of thinking, the question becomes one of 
determining how a good problem-solving process can change into worry. In this study, we 
developed a scale to measure everyday problem-solving strategies that could change into 
worry and investigated their psychometric properties. Several summaries of problem-solving 
strategies presumably linked to worry will first follow. 
 
 
INFORMATION SEEKING STRATEGIES 
 
Seeking information when under stress is related to worrying behavior. Davey, Hampton, 
Farrell, and Davidson (1992) discovered positive correlations between measures of worry and 
measures of information seeking as a stress coping strategy. There is a long history of 
literature on studies contrasting information seeking and information avoidance as strategies 
for coping with stress. For example, Bryne (1961) proposed the concept of repression and 
sensitization and Miller (1987) discussed the concept of monitors and blunters. Miller (1987) 
developed the Miller Behavioral Style Scale (MBSS) based on the idea that whether someone 
sought information or avoided it in threat situations was, to a certain degree, a consistent 
individual difference that could be measured. In the MBSS, information seeking and 
information avoidance behaviors are treated as separate dimensions in and of themselves. 
Further, Miller found that individuals who seek information report higher levels of stress. 
In addition to these studies based on measurements obtained through questionnaires, 
Sugiura (1999a) collected qualitative data concerning situations that were considered stressful 
for university student participants and made numerous discoveries by asking the participants, 
who rated high on a factor of worry, to verbalize their worry processes using the think-aloud 
method. He found that high worriers were characterized by the use of information-seeking 
strategies. 
 
 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
135
GENERATING SOLUTIONS TO PROBLEMS 
 
According to D’Zurilla (1986), in order to successfully solve problems encountered in 
daily life, one needs to go through the stages of problem definition and formulation, seeking 
more information, generation of alternative solutions, solution selection and decision-making, 
and finally, solution implementation and verification. While high worriers in the Sugiura 
(1999a) study provided information seeking relating to their problems, there was almost no 
mention of problem solutions. We can infer that people who are self-identified as worriers 
may stall at the information seeking stage and not make it to the solution generation stage. 
However, in a later study, contrary to expectations, Sugiura (2001) found a positive 
relationship between solution generation and the uncontrollability of worry. This relationship 
was particularly marked in individuals rated high in active problem-solving style. 
 
 
PURPOSES OF THE STUDY 
 
As worry is a thinking about difficult problems, there is a need to investigate how it 
relates to strategies involving actively thinking about problem solutions. Taking the above 
findings into account, the purpose of this study was to develop a scale to detail the strategies 
of information seeking and solution generation and investigate their properties. The items for 
the scale were collected from an open-ended questionnaire survey. 
The study, based on the Stress Transaction Model (Lazarus and Folkman, 1984), 
investigated (1) how personality traits and cognitive appraisal of stressful situations 
determines the problem-solving strategies used, (2) what the outcomes of those strategies are, 
and (3) how personality traits and cognitive appraisals determine the outcomes of those 
strategies. For the investigation related to question (3), we took into account the stress theory 
of Bolger and Zuckerman (1995) and the findings of Sugiura (2001) to investigate whether 
the correlations between problem-solving strategies used and unfavorable results differed 
according to personality traits and cognitive appraisal of the problem situations. 
 
 
METHOD 
 
Participants 
 
Participants included 141 university undergraduate and graduate students (86 men and 55 
women). The mean age of the participants was 20.56±1.62 years. 
 
 
Assessments and Measures 
 
Problem-Solving Strategies Scales 
Using items collected from an open-ended questionnaire survey, we created a 
questionnaire about thinking styles related to problem-solving of everyday personal problems. 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
136
Unless specifically noted below, participants were asked to rate each question on a 5-point 
Likert scale from 1 (does not apply at all) to 5 (applies very well). 
 
Problem Choice 
The participants were asked to choose from one of the everyday personal problems in 
order to rate the questionnaire items related to cognitive appraisal and problem-solving 
strategies: 1) career path (exams, major, life after graduation); 2) school work; 3) health, 
including illnesses and injuries; 4) relationships with others, including romantic partners, 
friends, and school club members; 5) self, including appearance, abilities, and personality; 6) 
failures; 7) money; or 8) other. They had to choose the most distressing of their recent 
problems and put it down concisely and concretely. 
 
Cognitive Appraisal 
The Cognitive Appraisal Rating Scale (CARS) developed by Suzuki and Sakano (1998) 
was used to measure four dimensions of cognitive appraisal: importance, threat, commitment, 
and controllability. 
 
Focus of Thinking 
We chose 11 items asking what the individual thought about as they were trying to better 
tackle the problem. 
 
Mode of Thinking 
Thirteen items asked how the person approached thinking about the problem. 
 
Expected Outcomes by Strategy 
Nineteen items asked about the changes the person had expected as a result of the 
strategy they took. 
 
Actual Outcomes by Strategy 
Nineteen items asked what kind of changes resulted from the problem-solving strategy 
taken. These were the same as the items of “expected outcomes by strategy” except that they 
incorporated the necessary grammatical changes (for example, “I thought things would get 
harder for me” became “Things got harder for me.”) 
 
Personality Traits 
Scales measuring worry and problem-solving style were used and participants were asked 
to rate to what extent the statement described them on a 5-point Likert scale, with 1 being 
“Not at all typical of me” and 5 being “Very typical of me.” 
 
Worry 
To measure worry, items were administered from the Japanese version of the Penn State 
Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ; Meyer, Miller, Metzger, and Borkovec, 1990); reliability and 
validity of this scale have been thoroughly investigated. The reliability and validity of the 
Japanese version of the PSWQ was confirmed by Sugiura and Tanno (2000). As many of the 
16 items are similar in content, five of them were used. 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
137
Active Problem-Solving Style 
Of the three subscales on the Problem-Solving Inventory (Heppner and Peterson, 1982) 
for measuring social problem-solving styles, the approach-avoidance style subscale was used. 
Because the subscale name is a bit difficult to understand, in this study, we called it the active 
problem-solving style scale. The Japanese items were taken from an appendix in Maruyama’s 
(1995) translation of D’Zurilla (1986). Three items (e.g., When I am confused by a problem, 
one of the first things I do is survey the situation and consider all the relevant pieces of 
information.) were selected for use. When items were difficult to understand, we revised the 
Japanese wording. Higher scores indicated a more active problem-solving style. 
 
Problem-Solving Confidence 
Problem-solving confidence is another subscale of the Problem-Solving Inventory. Three 
items (e.g., When I make plans to solve a problem, I am almost certain that I can make them 
work.) were selected for use. Higher scores indicated higher problem-solving confidence.  
 
 
RESULTS  
 
Subscale Construction 
 
Cognitive Appraisal/Personality Traits 
The original subscales and scoring were maintained, with the sum of the scores for each 
item considered the score for the scale. 
 
Focus of Thinking 
Factor analysis was performed on the 11 focus of thinking items. A rotated solution was 
obtained by applying varimax rotation to the initial principal components solution. (The same 
method was used in all of the factor analyses that follow). Based on changes in the 
eigenvalues (in order from the first eigenvalue 3.47, 2.20, 1.11, 0.99, 0.77), 2- to 4-factor 
solutions were examined and a 3-factor solution was selected for ease of interpretation (Table 
1). The 3-factor solution explained 62% of the data variance. We named focus factor 1 “The 
future” from the items “My future self” and “The outlook for the future.” We named focus 
factor 2 “The nature of the problem” from the items “The cause of the problem” and “How 
the problem came about.” Finally, focus factor 3 was named “Solving the problem” from the 
items “What I should do” and “How to solve the problem.” 
 
Mode of Thinking 
Factor analysis was performed on the 13 modes of thinking items. Based on changes in 
the eigenvalues (in order from the first eigenvalue 3.13, 2.03, 1.49, 1.22, 0.96) 2- to 4-factor 
solutions were examined and a 3-factor was chosen for ease of interpretation (Table 2). The 
3-factor solution explained 51% of the data variance. We named mode factor 1 
“Consultative” because “I asked others’ advice” had a positive loading and “I pondered the 
problem alone” had a negative loading. We named mode factor 2 “Analytical” from the item 
“I systematically organized my thinking.” We then named mode factor 3 “Behavioral” 
because of the loadings shown for the items “I tried to figure out what should be done” and “I 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
138
used expert organizations.” While the analytical mode items also reflect proactive thinking, 
we viewed behavioral items as being more linked to concrete solutions and actions. 
 
Table 1. Factor Analysis of Focus of Thinking Items 
 
My future self 
.94 
.11 
-.07 
The outlook for the future 
.89 
.20 
-.04 
What I wanted to do 
.67 
-.24 
.30 
How the problem came about 
.07 
.82 
-.02 
The cause of the problem 
-.05 
.77 
.07 
The problematic situation 
.23 
.73 
-.02 
What I should do 
.11 
-.03 
.83 
How I felt 
.44 
-.10 
.58 
How to solve the problem 
-.02 
.36 
.58 
What I did wrong 
-.31 
.44 
.49 
 
Table 2. Factor Analysis of Mode of Thinking Items 
 
I talked to others about my thoughts and feelings. 
.87 
.16 
-.01 
I asked others' advice. 
.83 
.11 
.10 
I pondered the problem alone. 
-.61 
.49 
-.02 
I tried to think about the problem as best I could. 
.03 
.78 
.07 
I systematically organized my thinking. 
.26 
.71 
-.01 
I tried to visualize and imagine things. 
-.39 
.59 
.09 
I thought about how the problem occurred and the situation before 
and after. 
.04 
.53 
.06 
I tried not to think about the problem too deeply. 
.00 
-.37 
.16 
I thought about doing things step by step. 
.01 
.12 
.73 
I tried to figure out what should be done. 
.16 
.05 
.69 
I relied on past experience. 
-.38 
-.13 
.64 
I used expert organizations. 
.22 
-.22 
.62 
I read books and newspapers. 
-.03 
.13 
.51 
 
Expected and Actual Outcomes by Strategy 
Factor analyses were performed separately on the 19 items related to expected outcomes 
and the 19 items related to actual outcomes, and the factor solutions that resulted were very 
similar. For the expected outcomes, 3- to 4-factor solutions were examined based on the 
changes in eigenvalues (in order from the first eigenvalue 3.95, 3.53, 1.73, 1.33, 1.24) and a 
3-factor solution selected for its ease of interpretation (Table 3). The 3-factor solution 
accounted for 48% of the data variance. Starting with factor 1, we named the factors 
unfavorable expectation (e.g., I thought I’d get anxious), favorable expectation (e.g., I thought 
the problem would become clearer), and no expected change (e.g., I thought the situation 
would’t change). 
 
 
 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
139
Table 3. Factor Analysis of Expected Outcomes for the Strategy Used 
 
I thought I'd end up thinking about it more than was necessary. 
.84 
.07 
.07 
I thought I'd get anxious. 
.79 
-.04 
-.08 
I thought I'd start thinking about the worst possible situation. 
.73 
-.02 
.10 
I thought I wouldn't be able to stop thinking about it. 
.69 
-.07 
.13 
I thought things would get harder for me. 
.67 
-.01 
.15 
I thought the situation would get worse. 
.65 
-.01 
.11 
I thought the problem would become clearer. 
-.11 .78 
.08 
I thought I'd be able to think about things systematically. 
.09 
.74 
.18 
I thought I'd be able to understand the cause of the problem. 
.13 
.68 
.04 
I thought I'd be able to calm down. 
-.19 .66 
-.14 
I thought this would help me cope better the next time I get into this kind 
of situation. 
.15 
.64 
-.01 
I thought I'd be able to think about concrete ways to cope. 
.04 
.60 
-.23 
I thought I'd get more motivated. 
-.20 .48 
-.06 
I thought I'd be able to avoid having the same problem again in the 
future. 
.35 
.41 
.03 
I thought I'd stop thinking about it much. 
-.06 .20 
-.15 
I thought the situation wouldn't change. 
-.11 .01 
.81 
I thought that my thinking wouldn't change. 
.31 
-.12 
.68 
I thought the way I felt wouldn't change. 
.17 
.13 
.66 
I thought I'd be able to find a good solution. 
-.13 .44 
-.51 
 
Table 4. Factor Analysis of Actual Outcomes for the Strategy Used 
 
The problem became clearer. 
.83 
-.02 
.04 
I started thinking about things systematically. 
.76 
.06 
-.05 
I started thinking about concrete ways to cope. 
.74 
-.07 
.01 
I understood the cause of the problem. 
.73 
.21 
-.01 
This will help me cope better the next time I start to worry. 
.64 
.18 
-.02 
I got more motivated. 
.62 
-.20 
-.10 
I calmed down. 
.58 
-.19 
-.29 
I found a good solution. 
.55 
-.16 
-.27 
I'll be able to avoid having the same problem again in the future. 
.49 
.24 
-.14 
I ended up thinking about it more than was necessary. 
.10 
.77 
.24 
Things got harder for me. 
-.01 
.74 
.21 
I started being unable to stop thinking about it. 
.11 
.71 
.32 
I got anxious. 
.03 
.70 
.37 
I started thinking about the worst possible situation. 
-.04 
.69 
-.14 
The situation got worse. 
-.09 
.69 
-.24 
What I thought did not change. 
-.19 
.12 
.76 
The way I felt did not change. 
-.07 
.10 
.68 
The situation did not change. 
-.17 
.21 
.67 
I stopped thinking about it too much. 
.01 
.05 
-.51 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
140
For actual strategy outcomes, 3- to 4-factor solutions were examined based on the 
changes in eigenvalues (in order from the first eigenvalue 4.42, 3.78, 1.67, 1.50, 0.94) and we 
selected the 3-factor solution because it corresponded to the 3-factor solution for expected 
outcomes (Table 4). The 3-factor solution accounted for 52% of the data variance. We named 
the 3 factors favorable, unfavorable, and no change to explain the actual outcome. 
 
 
Natures of Problem-Solving Strategies 
 
Descriptive Statistics and Reliability 
Table 5 shows the problem participants chose to use for their ratings. The most frequently 
chosen problem types were career path (n=39) and relationships (n=55).  
 
Table 5. Problems Chosen for Ratings 
 
n 
% 
Career path (exams, major, life after graduation) 
39 
27.86 
School work 
13 
9.29 
Health (illnesses, injuries) 
11 
7.86 
Relationships (romantic partners, friends, school club members) 
55 
39.29 
Self (appearance, abilities, personality) 
7 
5 
Failures 
2 
1.43 
Money 
3 
2.14 
Other 
10 
7.14 
 
Table 6 shows the descriptive statistics and Cronbach’s α for each subscale. With the 
exception of the threat subscale, Cronbach’s α for the cognitive appraisal subscales was very 
low and particularly so for the controllability subscale, at only .20. These dimensions are 
theoretically meaningful and have been included in the subsequent analysis, but the results 
need to be interpreted cautiously as a result. On the other hand, reliability for the problem-
solving subscales was mostly satisfactory, with Cronbach’s α being at least .63; half were 
over the .70 standard for acceptable reliability. In much the same way, reliability for the 
actual and expected strategy outcome subscales was satisfactory. Reliability for the 
personality trait subscales was good with Cronbach’s α being .78 or higher. 
 
Strategy Use Differences by Problem Choice 
We performed t-tests to test for significant differences in the strategies used by 
participants who chose either of the two most frequently chosen problem types, career path 
and relationships. The results showed significant differences at p<.05 for the future as a focus 
of thinking and for the behavioral mode of thinking. There was also a trend toward 
significance (p<.10) for solving the problem as a focus of thinking. Compared to participants 
who chose the relationship problem, those choosing a career path problem were more often 
focused on the future and on solving the problem. In addition, they were more action-oriented 
in their modes of thinking. A possible explanation is that compared to relationship problems, 
which involve other people, solutions to career path problems depend on one’s own effort.  

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
141
We used the same t-test to analyze whether there also might be differences in cognitive 
appraisal scores between these two groups of participants. The results revealed that the 
participants with relationship problem tended to score higher on appraisal of threat, and there 
was a trend of lower scores for appraisal of importance, which suggested a relationship with 
active coping strategies (Suzuki and Sakano, 1998). 
 
Table 6. Descriptive Statistics for Personality Traits, Cognitive Appraisal,  
and Problem Solving 
 
  
N 
Mean 
SD 
α 
Personality traits 
  
  
  
  
Worry 
137 
14.85 
5.16 
.90 
Active problem-solving style 
137 
9.91 
2.72 
.78 
Problem-solving confidence 
137 
10.04 
2.76 
.83 
Cognitive appraisals 
  
  
  
  
Importance 
141 
8.74 
1.45 
.49 
Threat 
141 
5.73 
2.42 
.72 
Commitment 
141 
7.79 
1.90 
.54 
Controllability 
141 
5.79 
1.82 
.20 
Focus of thinking 
  
  
  
  
The Future 
140 
3.85 
1.14 
.84 
The Nature of the Problem 
140 
3.49 
0.98 
.74 
Solving the Problem 
141 
4.11 
0.84 
.65 
Mode of thinking 
  
  
  
  
Consultative 
141 
2.78 
1.05 
.74 
Analytical 
141 
3.65 
0.80 
.63 
Behavioral 
140 
2.77 
0.83 
.63 
Expected outcome 
  
  
  
  
Unfavorable 
140 
2.61 
0.90 
.84 
Favorable 
140 
2.90 
0.75 
.79 
No Change 
141 
2.81 
0.91 
.64 
Actual outcome 
  
  
  
  
Unfavorable 
141 
2.47 
0.91 
.83 
Favorable 
140 
2.86 
0.80 
.85 
No Change 
141 
2.98 
0.99 
.75 
 
Correlations Among Problem-Solving Strategy Subscales 
Table 7 shows the correlation coefficients among the problem-solving strategy subscales. 
Among the focus of thinking subscales significant positive correlations were shown for 
solving the problem with the nature of the problem and the future. These correlations are easy 
to interpret as deriving a solution requires that the problem be understood and that the 
solution match future goals. Significant positive cross-correlations were also shown for the 
behavioral mode of thinking with the consultative and analytic modes. A possible explanation 
for this could be that solving a problem by thinking of concrete actions to take requires both 
analytical thinking and help from others. 
 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
142
Table 7. Correlations among Problem-Solving Strategies 
 
  
The future The nature of 
the problem 
Solving the 
problem 
Consultative Analytical Behavioral 
Focus of thinking 
  
  
  
  
  
  
The future 
1.000 
.098 
.455** 
.165 
.148 
.285** 
The nature of the 
problem 
  
1.000 
.378** 
.032 
.366** 
.122 
Solving the problem 
  
  
1.000 
.178* 
.505** 
.290** 
Mode of thinking 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Consultative 
  
  
  
1.000 
.088 
.192* 
Analytical 
  
  
  
  
1.000 
.290** 
Behavioral 
  
  
  
  
  
1.000 
* p < .05; ** p < .01. 
 
 
Personality Traits/Cognitive Appraisal and Strategies Used 
 
To look at the determinants of strategy use, we investigated the relationships between the 
subscales relating to the strategies used (focus of thinking and mode of thinking) and those 
for personality traits and cognitive appraisal (Table 8). 
 
Table 8. Correlations Between Personality Traits/Cognitive Appraisal, and  
Problem-Solving Strategies  
 
  
Focus of thinking 
Mode of thinking 
  
The 
future 
The nature 
of the 
problem 
Solving the 
problem 
Consultative Analytical Behavioral 
Personality traits 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Worry 
.048 
.216* 
.104 
-.033 
.167+ 
.172* 
Active problem-solving 
style 
.202* 
.012 
.113 
.008 
.160+ 
.161+ 
Problem-solving 
confidence 
.031 
-.061 
-.118 
.137 
-.146+ 
.075 
Cognitive appraisal 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Importance 
.337** 
.153+ 
.398** 
.113 
.250** 
.113 
Threat 
-.144+ 
.052 
-.127 
-.125 
-.059 
-.094 
Commitment 
.157+ 
.317** 
.381** 
.139 
.092 
.218** 
Controllability 
.065 
.018 
.032 
.028 
-.079 
.101 
+ p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01.  
 
Personality Traits and Strategies Used 
As to focus of thinking, significant positive relationships were shown between the future 
and active problem-solving style and between the nature of the problem and worry. The latter 
result is consistent with Sugiura’s (1999a) finding that worry is associated with information 
seeking strategies. 
For the mode of thinking factors, analytical and behavioral thinking either trended toward 
or showed significant positive relationships with worry and active problem-solving style. The 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
143
only negative relationship (a trend) was between analytical thinking and problem-solving 
confidence, which suggested that the use of analytical thinking to solve a problem was related 
to the difficulty of the problem-solving. Overall, the effect of personality traits on problem-
solving strategy use was small. 
 
Cognitive Appraisal and Strategies Used 
For cognitive appraisal, the factors that showed significant positive relationships with the 
strategies used were appraisal of importance and appraisal of commitment. Appraisal of 
importance showed significant positive correlations with focus on the future and on solving 
the problem and with analytical thinking. Appraisal of commitment showed significant 
positive correlations with focus on the nature of the problem, solving the problem, and with 
behavioral thinking. Taking into consideration that appraisal of commitment also was shown 
to relate to behavioral thinking, stronger commitment may encourage thinking in ways that 
directly apply to achieving a solution. In any case, even though the reliability of the cognitive 
appraisal subscales was low, the effect of cognitive appraisal factors on strategy choice was 
stronger than that of personality traits. 
 
 
Strategies Used and Outcomes 
 
To look at the effect of strategy use on outcomes (study purpose 2), we investigated the 
relationships between the problem-solving strategy subscales and both expected and actual 
outcomes. First, we looked at the overall ratings for the expected and actual outcomes for all 
of the strategies. Then, we looked at how the specific strategies used related to their expected 
and actual outcomes. For this, we used both a correlation analysis on the study’s individual 
strategy subscales and a cluster analysis to identify strategy use patterns. 
 
Expected and Actual Strategy Outcomes 
Table 9 shows the means for the subscale scores related to expected and actual outcomes 
as well as the corresponding expected-actual correlation coefficients. Paired t-tests performed 
on the expected and actual scores for each subscale suggested that participants’ expectations 
of unfavorable outcomes were exaggerated compared to the actual outcomes and that 
outcomes remained largely unchanged more frequently than participants had expected. 
 
Table 9. Basis Statistics of Expected and Actual Outcomes of Strategy Use 
 
  
Expected 
outcomes 
Actual outcomes 
Expected/Actual 
difference 
Expected/actual 
correlation 
  
Mean 
SD 
Mean 
SD 
Favorable 
2.61 
.68 
2.58 
.72 
  
.76** 
Unfavorable 
2.61 
.90 
2.47 
.91 
** 
.80** 
No change 
2.81 
.91 
2.98 
.99 
* 
.65** 
* p < .05; ** p < .01 
  
  
  
  
  
 
Further, the expected-actual correlation coefficient for each subscale was, in general, high 
(.65–.80). It is possible that participants did not differentiate between the actual and expected 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
144
outcomes because they were asked to provide ratings successively on subscales whose items 
were similar in content. However, the data suggest that in many cases the problem-solving 
strategy used gave rise to the outcome that was expected. 
 
Relationships between Expected/Actual Outcomes and Each Strategy Use 
Table 10 shows the correlation between each strategy use and expected/actual outcomes. 
All of the strategy subscales showed significant positive correlations with favorable estimated 
and actual outcomes. In other words, these results suggest that every strategy was undertaken 
with the expectation of a favorable outcome and that a favorable outcome actually resulted. 
On the other hand, there were no significant correlations between the strategy subscales and 
unfavorable expectations of outcome. A significant negative correlation was shown between 
consultative thinking and no expected change, but no significant positive correlations were 
shown for any strategy subscale with no expected change. These results all support the 
conclusion that, as above, every strategy was undertaken with a favorable expectation of 
outcome. Thinking focused on the nature of the problem and on solving the problem showed 
significant positive correlations with unfavorable actual outcomes while only thinking 
focused on solving the problem showed a positive correlation with no actual change. In other 
words, this suggests that thinking about the nature of the problem resulted in both a positive 
and a negative outcome and thinking about generating solutions resulted in either a negative 
outcome, no effect, or a positive outcome. 
 
Relationships between Patterns of Strategy Use and Expected and Actual Outcomes 
Participants provided responses to expected and actual outcomes for the overall use of 
strategy to solve their problem, without reference to the individual strategy subscales for 
focus and mode of thinking. Therefore, to investigate the relationship between strategy used 
and expected/actual outcomes, it is necessary to look at how overall patterns of focus and 
mode of thinking related to both types of outcomes. To identify those patterns, we performed 
cluster analyses on the focus of thinking and mode of thinking subscales and then compared 
clusters as to their expected and actual outcomes. 
 
Table 10. Correlations Between Strategy Used and Expected and Actual Outcomes  
 
  
Expected 
Actual 
  
Unfavorable 
Favorable 
No change Unfavorable 
Favorable No change 
Focus of 
thinking 
  
  
  
  
  
  
The future 
.033 
.311** 
.063 
.094 
.212* 
.012 
The nature of 
the problem 
.140 
.385** 
-,059 
.269** 
.360** 
.046 
Solving the 
problem 
.118 
.309** 
.140 
.167* 
.286** 
.195* 
Mode of 
thinking 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Consultative 
-.043 
.298** 
-.170* 
-.040 
.339** 
-.143 
Analytical 
.091 
.423** 
.052 
.111 
.395** 
.077 
Behavioral 
.116 
.346** 
.017 
.124 
.313** 
-.072 
* p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .001.  

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
145
Because the analysis in this study was an exploratory analysis, we had no particular 
assumptions about the clusters that would result, such as cluster hierarchy, so we used SAS’s 
FASTCLUS procedure, which computes non-hierarchical clusters. We selected 3 clusters for 
ease of interpretation (Figure 1). We called Cluster 2, which had low scores for every 
subscale, the low strategy use cluster. Clusters 1 and 3 each included high scores related to 
focus of thinking on the future, on the nature of the problem, and on solving the problem, as 
well as high scores for the analytical mode of thinking. However, because Cluster 3 included 
high scores for thinking on consultative modes of thinking, we called Cluster 1 the silent-
thinking cluster and Cluster 3 the active-strategies cluster. 
Table 11 shows the mean values for the expected and actual outcomes for the individuals 
in each cluster. The table also shows the results of the one-way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) performed using the clusters as factors. No statistically significant inter-cluster 
difference was seen for unfavorable expectations, no expected change, and no actual change. 
As for the statistically significant dependent variables, for unfavorable actual outcome, the 
mean for the silent-thinking cluster was higher than the mean for the low strategy use cluster. 
For both favorable expectations and favorable outcomes, the means for the active strategies 
cluster were higher than those for the silent-thinking and low-use strategy clusters. In other 
words, these results suggest that pondering a problem alone and not asking for advice can 
affect outcomes negatively and that in fact, the cluster of individuals who asked advice and 
took action tended to have better results. 
 
 
Figure 1. Clusters of problem-solving strategy use. 
 
 
 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
146
Table 11. Expected and Actual Outcomes by Strategy Cluster 
 
  
Silent thinking 
Low strategy 
use 
Active strategies 
ANOVA 
  
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
F 
p 
Expected outcome 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Unfavorable 
2.82 
0.87 
2.39 
1.00 
2.58 
0.86 
2.27 
0.11 
Favorable 
2.72 
0.67 
2.33 
0.70 
3.30 
0.61 
25.01 
0.00 
No change 
3.01 
0.86 
2.75 
0.90 
2.70 
0.94 
1.73 
0.18 
Actual outcome 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Unfavorable 
2.66 
0.91 
2.14 
0.88 
2.50 
0.90 
3.19 
0.04 
Favorable 
2.62 
0.75 
2.42 
0.73 
3.25 
0.69 
17.81 
0.00 
No change 
3.23 
0.80 
2.76 
0.97 
2.90 
1.08 
2.53 
0.08 
 
 
Effects of Personality Traits and Cognitive Appraisal on Effects of Strategies 
on Actual Negative Outcomes 
 
We performed a hierarchical regression analysis in order to look at the how personality 
traits and cognitive appraisal influenced the relationship between strategy use and outcomes 
(study purpose 3). Based on the understanding that worry results when efforts to solve a 
problem are unsuccessful, we endeavored to find out under which condition did problem-
solving strategies have a negative effect on outcomes. We reported only on the analysis 
results that predict the unfavorable actual outcomes, hypothesized to capture the “negatively 
affect-laden and relatively uncontrollable” nature of worrying.  
When analyzing personality traits and cognitive appraisal’s influence on the relationship 
between problem-solving strategy and outcomes, two models for the effect can be considered. 
First, a mediation model in which personality traits and cognitive appraisal are determinants 
of the coping strategies used, that then determines the final outcome. This is the equivalent of 
finding an assumed indirect effect from path analysis. Second, a moderation model in which 
personality traits and cognitive appraisal determines the effect a problem-solving strategy has 
on the outcome. This is equivalent to finding the interaction effect from an analysis of 
variance. Bolger and Zuckerman (1995) have said that when studying the relationship 
between stress coping and personality traits, one needs to distinguish the effect of each. That 
idea likely applies to the relationship between the cognitive appraisal and problem-solving 
strategy effects on a negative outcome. 
A moderation (interaction effect) model was used here. Hierarchical regression was used 
to analyze whether the interactions in a model predicting unfavorable outcomes from specific 
personality traits/cognitive appraisal and strategy use were statistically significant. When a 
significant interaction was found, the participants were divided into two groups according to 
high or low scores for the personality trait or cognitive appraisal, respectively. For each 
group, the correlation between problem-solving strategy and unfavorable outcome was 
calculated and the between-group correlation coefficients compared (Table 12). Below we 
report on the moderator variables seen with interactions that were significant or showed a 
trend. 
 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
147
Table 12. Correlations Between Each Strategy and Unfavorable Outcomes by 
Personality Trait and Cognitive Appraisal Rating Scores  
 
  
  
Focus of thinking 
Mode of thinking 
  
  
The 
future 
The nature of 
the problem 
Solving the 
problem 
Consultative Analytical Behavioral 
Active problem 
solving style 
High 
.10  
.40** 
.36** 
.24+ 
.20  
.37** 
Low 
.08  
.17  
.02  
-.22* 
.04  
-.03  
Problem solving 
confidence 
High 
.05  
.27  
.27* 
-.07  
.19  
.20  
Low 
.16  
.26  
.06  
.02  
-.01  
.06  
Threat 
High 
.05  
.30  
.05  
.07  
-.06  
.06  
Low 
.15  
.25* 
.25* 
-.08  
.18+ 
.18+ 
Italics: Interaction significant at p < .10. 
Underlining: Interaction significant at p < .05. 
Correlation coefficients: + p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01.  
 
Active Problem-Solving Style 
The results suggested that outcomes tended to be more unfavorable for subjects scoring 
higher in an active problem-solving style as they focused on generating solutions, asked 
others for advice, and thought about concrete steps to take to solve the problem. On the other 
hand, for subjects scoring lower in an active problem-solving style, outcomes tended to be 
less unfavorable as they asked others for advice. 
 
Problem-Solving Confidence 
The results suggested that outcomes tended to be more unfavorable for participants 
scoring high in problem-solving confidence, as they focused on generating solutions. 
 
Appraisal of Threat 
For participants with lower scores for appraisal of threat, an analytical approach to the 
problem tended to lead to more unfavorable outcomes. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
Facets of Everyday Personal Problem Solving Strategies 
 
In this study, we developed a multidimensional scale to measure problem-solving 
strategies for everyday problems. Factor analysis on items describing what the participants 
thought about when they were under stress resulted in three categories: the future, the nature 
of the problem, and solving the problem. Problem-solving can be defined as the process of 
reducing the gap between current and target states. Thinking about the future is a coping 
response to understanding the target state, nature of the problem corresponds to the gap 
between the initial and target state, and generating solutions corresponds to shrinking the gap. 
The participants’ modes of thinking under stress were categorized into three types: 
consultative, analytical, and behavioral. Our findings showed differences in how much 
individuals thought about problem using external resources when under stress and how much 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
148
they thought about taking concrete steps. For future research, it may be of value to look at 
introversion and extroversion, dimensions of basic personality traits, as a determining factor 
for individual differences in the mode of problem-solving strategies. 
 
 
Determinants of the Problem-Solving Strategies Used 
 
The study found that cognitive appraisal factors were more important determinants for 
problem-solving strategies used than personality traits, the principle contributing factors 
being appraisal of importance and appraisal of commitment. Suzuki and Sakano (1998) found 
that appraisal of importance and appraisal of commitment are related to active coping (which 
is close to problem solving) and the results of this study support those findings. 
 
 
Problem-Solving Strategy Outcomes 
 
The study showed that when thinking under stress, regardless of the focus or mode of 
thinking used, participants expected positive outcomes, and actually got positive outcomes. In 
addition, when participants expected outcomes to be positive, positive outcomes actually 
came about. In stress research, coping strategies are broadly categorized as problem-focused 
and emotion-focused. Problem-focused coping aims at directly solving the problem and 
emotion-focused coping mitigates the emotional response arising in response to stress. In 
general, problem-focused coping is thought to relate to adaptation. Because the problem-
solving strategies measured in this study could be considered problem-focused rather than 
emotion-focused coping strategies, it may be easy to accept that they generally had positive 
outcomes and expected to have positive outcomes. 
On the other hand, while the relationship was not strong, some strategies were shown to 
relate to negative results. Specifically, negative results tended to occur the more participants 
thought about the nature of the problem and about solving the problem. These results are 
consistent with the finding of Sugiura (2001) that information seeking, solution generation, 
and the uncontrollability of worry are related. 
It is thought that there may be methodological differences between studies showing that 
problem-focused coping increased stress and studies showing it reduced stress (Carver and 
Scheier, 1997). In general, it seems that in studies of coping where a specific stress situation 
is measured, namely where state measures were used, there is a tendency to find that 
confronting stressful problems increases the stress. This study, although retrospective, also 
evaluated specific stress situations and Sugiura (2001), similarly, evaluated specific stress 
situations when he found the relationships between the uncontrollability of worry, 
information seeking, and solution generation. 
However, the detailed multidimensional measure of daily problem-solving strategies in 
this study did not show negative results for all of the strategies. This may be based on the fact 
that when caught in a stressful situation, people almost never rely on a single strategy. Focus 
and mode of thinking measured in this study are theoretically independent constructs. 
Therefore, problem-solving strategy patterns (subscale combinations) were identified by 
cluster analysis and the relationships between those patterns and outcomes were investigated. 
The results suggested that pondering on a problem without asking for advice tended to have a 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
149
negative effect on outcomes, but the cluster of subjects who asked for advice tended to have 
good results. 
 
 
Conditions Causing Problem-Solving Strategies to Have Negative Outcomes 
 
Finally, we looked at how personality traits and cognitive appraisal factors act as 
determinants of the effects produced by strategy use. Because the strategy effects of interest 
were stress response and unfavorable situational change, our analyses would be suggestive of 
one question: What factors caused a good problem-solving process to change into worry? 
Previous research has shown that stress can increase when good problem-focused coping 
strategies are adapted to situations where control is impossible and a threat is severe. Further, 
as a result of investigations into the relationship between worry and problem-solving strategy, 
Davey (1994) and Davey, Hampton, Farrel, and Davidson (1992) believe that when there are 
inhibiting factors such as low problem-solving confidence, a good strategy can be 
unsuccessful and turn into worry. 
This study’s results demonstrated the opposite of points raised in some previous studies. 
We found that strategies like solving the problem increased stress for participants who had an 
active problem-solving style, confidence in their problem-solving abilities and a low appraisal 
of threat. All of moderators are generally considered favorable conditions for problem-
solving. These results contradict the interpretation that worry is the result of problem-solving 
being thwarted by some condition that causes thinking related to the stress situation to 
become uncontrollable which gives rise to unpleasant emotions.  
Sugiura (1999b) found that worrying increased the difficulty in finding a solution to a 
problem when the intention to solve the problem was very high. He postulated explanations 
for this finding: (1) Information seeking strategies uncover more threats (Davey et al., 1992); 
(2) worry exhausts the resources for processing information inconsistent with one’s anxiety 
(Wells and Matthews, 1996); (3) as motivation to solve a problem increases, the standards for 
considering the problem solved become higher; and (4) when someone thinks that worry is 
useful, they do not try to stop worrying (Wells, 1995). Explanations one and two may apply 
to strategies that collect negative information about the problem situation. Meanwhile, 
explanations three and four may apply to problem-focused coping strategies that are generally 
considered effective. Further, recently, Killingsworth and Gilbert (2010) found that regardless 
of the daily activity one is engaged in, happiness diminishes when the mind begins to wander. 
As mind-wandering involves thinking about oneself, their finding suggests that thinking too 
much is maladaptive.  
Regarding of the reason why increased motivation to solve a problem leads to higher 
standards for considering a problem solved, further research is needed to better understand the 
later stages of the problem-solving process. According to D’Zurilla’s (1986) social problem-
solving model, solution evaluation occurs much later than generation of alternative solutions, 
solution selection, and implementation. In this model, a good way for generating alternative 
solutions is brainstorming as many solutions as possible to increase the possibility of finding 
one that will work. However, thinking of too many alternative solutions may make choosing 
one more difficult. In addition, increased motivation to solve a problem makes one evaluative 
while generating solutions.  

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
150
The explanation that when someone thinks that worry is useful, they do not try to stop 
worrying implies that a high level of strategy use in and by itself, ironically, can increase the 
negative effects on outcomes. However, this study found that outcomes were affected by 
interactions between personality traits and strategy use; therefore, outcomes are not the result 
of amount of strategy implementation alone. In fact, we divided the subjects into high and 
low strategy use groups (using median values) and looked at the relationship of strategy use 
with unfavorable outcomes but found no significant difference in the magnitudes of 
correlations.  
 
 
Study Limitations 
 
In this study, participants were asked to choose one typical, everyday personal problem 
for which we multi-dimensionally measured cognitive appraisal, problem-solving strategies 
used to solve the problem, expected outcomes for the strategies used, and actual strategy 
outcomes. As a result, we were able to better understand how participants used problem-
solving strategies to solve various personal problems. Meanwhile, to understand what 
outcomes occur when a single strategy is used continuously, it would be important to use trait 
measures of its use or take repeated measurements over time. 
Further, in this study worry was understood to arise when efforts to solve a problem fail. 
However, because we did not directly measure worry as a result of problem-solving strategy 
use, it is not possible to discuss how problem-solving strategies may lead to worry. In the 
future, it will be important to expand these measures based on the results of this methodology. 
Finally, because the study participants were university graduate and undergraduates, 
generalizability is limited for people affected by a broader variety of stressors or for clinical 
populations. Further research on a broader sample of participants is needed. 
 
 
Author Note 
 
This study was supported by a JSPS Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (C) to the first 
author (No: 26380929) and a JSPS Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows to the second author (No: 
13J40120).  
There are no conflicts of interests to declare. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bolger, N. and Zuckerman, A. (1995). A framework for studying personality in stress 
process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 890–902. 
Borkovec, T. D., Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T. and DePree, J. A. (1983). Preliminary 
exploration of worry：Some characteristics and processes. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 21, 9–16. 
Bryne, D. (1961). The repression-sensitization scale: Rationale, reliability, and validity．
Journal of Personality, 29, 334–349. 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
151
Carver, C. S. and Scheier, M. F. (1994). Situational coping and coping disposition in a 
stressful transaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 184–195. 
Davey, G. C. L. (1994). Worrying, social problem-solving abilities, and social problem-
solving confidence. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32, 327–330. 
Davey, G. C. L., Hampton, J., Farrell, J. and Davidson, S. (1992). Some characteristics of 
worrying: Evidence for worrying and anxiety as separate constructs. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 13, 133–147. 
D'Zurilla, T. J. (1986). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinical 
intervention. New York: Springer Publishing Company, Inc. S. Maruyama (trans.). 
(1995). Mondai kaiketsu ryōhō – rinshōteki kainyū e no shakaiteki konpitensu apurōchi. 
Tokyo: Kongo Shuppan. 
Heppner, P. P. and Peterson, C. H. (1982). The development and implication of a personal 
problem-solving inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 29, 66–75. 
Killingsworth, M. A. and Gilbert, D. T. (2010). A wandering mind is an unhappy mind. 
Science, 330(6006), 932–932. 
Lazarus, R. S. and Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: Springer 
Publishing Company, Inc. 
Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L. and Borkovec, T. D. (1990). Development and 
validation of the Penn State worry questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 
487–495. 
Miller, S. M. (1987). Monitoring and blunting: Validation of a questionnaire to assess styles 
of information seeking under threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 
345–353. 
Sugiura, Y. (1999a.) Mondai-kaiketsu-katei to shite no shinpai – Hatsuwa-shikō ni yoru kentō 
[Worry as a problem-solving process: A study using the think-aloud method]. Papers 
presented at the 18th Conference of the Association of Japanese Clinical Psychology. 
Sugiura, Y. (1999b). Shinpai no mondai-kaiketsu-shikōsei to seigō-konnansei no kanren 
[Worry: Problem-solving orientation and uncontrollability]. Japanese Journal of 
Educational Psychology 47(2), 191–198. 
Sugiura, Y. (2001). Sutoresu-jōtai ni kansuru shikō no seigō-konnansei to kanrensuru 
taishohōryaku – Jōhō-kaihi/kaiketsu-saku sanshutsu to shinpai [Coping strategies related 
to the uncontrollability of thoughts: Information avoidance, information seeking, solution 
generation and worry]. Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology. 49(2), 186–197. 
Sugiura, Y. and Tanno, Y. (2000). Kyōhaku shōjō no jiko-kinyūshiki shitsumonhyō- 
nihongoban Padua Inventory no shinraisei to datōsei no kentō [Testing the reliability and 
validity of a Japanese version of the Padua Inventory – A self-administered questionnaire 
for obsessive compulsive disorder symptoms]. Archives of Psychiatric Diagnostics and 
Clinical Evaluation 11, 175–189. 
Suzuki, S. and Sakano, Y. 1998. Ninchiteki hyōkasokutei shakudo (CARS) sakusei no 
kokoromi [Development of a Cognitive Appraisal Rating Scale (CARS) and its 
validation] Human Science Research 7, 113–124. 
Wells, A. (1995). Metacognition and worry: A cognitive model of generalized anxiety 
disorder．Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 23, 301–320. 
Wells, A. and Matthews, G. (1996). Modeling cognition in emotional disorder: The S-REF 
model. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 34, 881–888. 

Yoshinori Sugiura and Tomoko Sugiura 
152
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES 
 
Name: Yoshinori Sugiura 
 
Affiliation: Hirosima University 
 
Education: Ph.D (Univetsity of Tokyo) 
 
Address: Hiroshima University, Graduate School of Integrated Arts and Sciences, 1-7-1, 
Kagamiyama, Higashi-Hiroshima, 739-8521, JAPAN 
 
Research and Professional Experience: Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion 
of Science 
 
Professional Appointments: Associate Professor 
 
Honors: Kido Reserach Prize (2000) 
 
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
Sugiura, T. and Sugiura, Y. (2015). Common factors of meditation, focusing, and cognitive 
behavioral therapy: longitudinal relation of self-report measures to worry, depressive, and 
obsessive-compulsive symptoms among nonclinical students. Mindfulness, 6, 610-623. 
Sugiura, Y. (2013). The dual effects of critical thinking disposition on worry. PloS One, 8, 
e79714. 
Sugiura, Y. and Sugiura, T. (2015). Emotional intensity reduces later generalized anxiety 
disorder symptoms when fear of anxiety and negative problem-solving appraisal are low. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 71, 27-33. 
 
Yoshinori Sugiura is Associate Professor at Hiroshima University. He was a recipient of 
Kido Research Prize from Japanese Association for Educationa1 Psychology in 2000. The 
focus of his work is on cognitive behavior therapy for anxiety disorder, mindfulness, and 
psychopathy and publishes many articles related to these themes. 
 
 
Name: Tomoko Sugiura 
 
Affiliation: Japan Sociaty for the Promotion of Science 
 
Education: Ph.D (Japan Woman's University) 
 
Professional Appointments: Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science 
 
Honors: Naruse Jonzo Memorial Prize (2003) 
 

A Multi-Dimensional Scale to Measure Strategies 
153
Publications Last 3 Years: 
 
Sugiura, T. and Sugiura, Y. (2015). Common factors of meditation, focusing, and cognitive 
behavioral therapy: longitudinal relation of self-report measures to worry, depressive, and 
obsessive-compulsive symptoms among nonclinical students. Mindfulness, 6, 610-623. 
Sugiura, T., Sugiura, Y. and Tanno, Y. (2013). Relationships among refraining from 
catastrophic thinking, worrying, and metacognitive beliefs. Psychological Reports, 113, 
1-14. 
Sugiura, Y. and Sugiura, T. (2015). Emotional intensity reduces later generalized anxiety 
disorder symptoms when fear of anxiety and negative problem-solving appraisal are low. 
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 71, 27-33. 
 
Tomoko Sugiura is Fellow of the Japan Society tor the Promotion of Science. She won 
Naruse Jollzo Memoria1 Prize in 2003 from Japan Woman's university. The current research 
interest includes metacognitive approach to emotional disorders and measurement of 
cognitive control skills. Her representative book is Cognitive Control of Emotional Distress 
(Tokyo: Kazama Shobo, 2014). 
 


In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 8  
 
 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SOCIAL PROBLEM-SOLVING 
ABILITY IN RELATIONSHIP TO REFLECTIVITY-
IMPULSIVITY, NEED FOR COGNITION,  
AND COMMUNICATION SKILLS 
 
 
Katsunori Sumi* 
Nagoya Institute of Technology, Nagoya, Japan 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
“Social problem-solving” refers to a process of solving real-life problems. Social 
problem-solving consists of two major components: problem orientation and problem-
solving skills (or style). Numerous studies have focused on the role of social problem-
solving. This chapter focuses on social problem-solving ability, and explores the 
characteristics of this ability. In this chapter, three studies on social problem-solving 
ability are reported. These studies were conducted to examine the relationship of social 
problem-solving ability to three related constructs: (1) reflectivity-impulsivity as a 
cognitive style, (2) need for cognition as a motivational construct, and (3) communication 
skills as coping skills only for interpersonal problems. Social problem-solving ability was 
assessed by two components: (1) problem-solving self-efficacy as an important 
component of problem orientation, and (2) problem-solving skills. Data for each study 
were obtained from Japanese college students. As a result, the characteristics of social 
problem-solving ability were further revealed on the basis of relationships to the related 
constructs. In addition, different characteristics between the two components of social 
problem-solving ability were indicated through relationships to reflectivity-impulsivity 
and three components of communication skills: expressivity, decipherer ability, and 
assertiveness. The implications of the results are discussed and suggestions for future 
research are provided. 
 
Keywords: social problem-solving ability, reflectivity-impulsivity, need for cognition, 
communication skills  
                                                           
* Corresponding Author address: Email: sumi@nitech.ac.jp. 

Katsunori Sumi 
156
INTRODUCTION 
 
Life is a series of coping with a variety of problems. Major or minor problems arise for us 
all the time, and our life is filled with them. These problems make incessant demands on us to 
treat and solve them. Thus, we need to engage in constant problem-solving in daily life. Real-
life problems vary in difficulty in solving, from extremely easy for anyone to eternally 
unsolvable. When coping with solvable problems, our ability to solve such problems is of 
great import. In this chapter, the ability for solving problems in our day-to-day lives, called 
social problem-solving, is addressed.  
 
 
Concept of Social Problem-Solving 
 
Social problem-solving addressed in this chapter was originally conceptualized in detail 
by D’Zurilla and colleagues (D’Zurilla, 1986; D’Zurilla and Goldfried, 1971; D’Zurilla, 
Nezu, and Maydeu-Olivares, 2002, 2004; Maydeu-Olivares and D’Zurilla, 1996; Nezu, 
2004). According to social problem-solving theory (D’Zurilla et al., 2002, 2004; Nezu, 2004; 
D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007), it is defined as the self-directed cognitive-affective-behavioral 
process through which a person attempts to identify or discover effective ways of coping with 
real-life problems in everyday life. Although the process is included in the broad construct of 
coping, and sometimes viewed as synonymous with coping (McGuire, 2005), all copings are 
not problem solving (D’Zurilla and Chang, 1995). Moreover, the process is a metaprocess of 
understanding, appraising, and adapting to stressful situations, rather than a simple coping 
strategy or activity (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2010; Nezu, Nezu, and D’Zurilla, 2007). In addition, 
because social problem-solving refers to the process of finding solutions to specific problems 
in the natural environment, solution implementation (i.e., the process of carrying out the 
solutions) is not a part of the problem-solving process. (D’Zurilla et al., 2004; D’Zurilla and 
Nezu, 2007; D’Zurilla and Maydeu-Olivares, 1995). 
According to social problem-solving theory, the social in the term social problem-solving 
indicates that problem solving happens within the natural social environment (D’Zurilla et al., 
2004; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007). Additionally, a problem is defined as a discrepancy 
between adaptive demands and coping response availability (D’Zurilla, 1990; D’Zurilla and 
Nezu, 2010; Nezu, Nezu, and Clark, 2008). Therefore, social problems consist of all kinds of 
problems in daily life, including personal, interpersonal, and broader community and societal 
problems (D’Zurilla et al., 2002; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007). 
 
 
Dimensions of Social Problem-Solving Ability 
 
Social problem-solving is a process that we all are concerned with in the everyday 
environment. Therefore, most people may have some ability to solve social problems. 
However, a number of previous studies have shown that individual differences in ability play 
an important role in functioning and well-being (see Chang, Downey, and Salata, 2004; 
D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2010; D’Zurilla et al., 2002; Elliott, Grant, and Miller, 2004; Nezu, 
2004; Nezu, Wilkins, and Nezu, 2004; Rich and Bonner, 2004).  

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
157
In social problem-solving theory, ability is assumed to be a multidimensional construct 
and consists of two major components: (1) problem orientation and (2) problem-solving style 
(D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007; D’Zurilla et al., 2004; Nezu, 2004). Problem orientation is a 
motivational aspect of the ability, involving the operation of a set of cognitive-emotional 
schemas that reflect a person’s general beliefs, appraisals, and feelings about daily problems 
and one’s own problem-solving ability. Problem-solving style refers to the cognitive and 
behavioral activities that people engage in when attempting to understand the problems and 
find effective solutions. At first, problem-solving style was called problem-solving skills 
(D’Zurilla and Goldfried, 1971; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1990), and then problem-solving proper 
(D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1999). 
Furthermore, research by D’Zurilla and colleagues on the two major dimensions has 
identified five dimensional components that comprise two components of problem orientation 
and three components of problem-solving style (Maydeu-Olivares and D’Zurilla, 1995, 
1996). The two components of problem orientation are (1) positive problem orientation, 
which is an optimistic and challenging attitude toward tackling problems, and (2) negative 
problem orientation, which is a pessimistic and diffident attitude toward solving problems. 
The three components of problem-solving style are described as follows: (1) rational  
problem solving, a systematic solution approach, from problem formulation to solution 
implementation and verification; (2) impulsivity/carelessness style, an ill-thought-out and 
quick response to tackling problems; and (3) avoidance style, a dysfunctional pattern to avoid 
problems such as procrastination and blaming others. In addition, positive problem 
orientation and rational problem solving are constructive components that are related to 
adaptation and well-being, whereas negative problem orientation, impulsivity/carelessness 
style, and avoidance style are dysfunctional components that are related to maladaptive 
functioning and distress (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007; D’Zurilla et al., 2004; Nezu, 2004). 
 
 
Measurement of Social Problem-Solving Ability 
 
Many measures have been developed to assess social or real-life problem-solving 
(D’Zurilla, et al., 2004; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007). One measurement based on the social 
problem-solving theory is the Social Problem-Solving Inventory-Revised (SPSI-R; D’Zurilla 
et al., 2002). The SPSI-R is a 52-item revised measure of the 70-item Social Problem-solving 
Inventory (SPSI: D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1990). The SPSI consists of two scales to measure the 
two major components of the ability, problem orientation and problem-solving skills. In 
addition, the SPSI has seven subscales corresponding to three aspects of problem orientation 
and four major problem-solving skills based on the social problem-solving model, which was 
proposed and later refined by D’Zurilla and colleagues (D’Zurilla and Goldfried, 1971; 
D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1990). Problem orientation comprises cognitive, emotional, and 
behavioral aspects. Problem-solving skills consists of four major skills: problem definition 
and formulation, generation of alternative solutions, decision making, and solution 
implementation and verification. 
The SPSI-R consists of subscales to measure the five components as previously described 
(i.e., positive problem orientation, negative problem orientation, rational problem solving, 
impulsivity/carelessness style, and avoidance style). Furthermore, the scale for rational  
 

Katsunori Sumi 
158
problem solving comprises subscales to measure the four problem-solving skills that are 
assessed by the SPSI. There is also a 25-item short form of the SPSI-R to assess the five 
components. The short form does not include subscales to measure the four problem-solving 
skills. Japanese versions of the SPSI-R were developed by Sato, Takahashi, Matsuo, Sakai, 
Shimada, Chen, Kaiya, and Sakano (2006) and Nakazawa, Enomoto, and Nakamichi (2007). 
Other popular measures of social or real-life problem solving (D’Zurilla et al., 2004; 
Nezu, 2004; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007) are the Means-Ends Problem Solving procedure 
(MEPS; Platt and Spivack, 1975) and the Problem Solving Inventory (PSI; Heppner, 1988; 
Heppner and Peterson, 1982). The MEPS was designed as an outcome measure of the ability 
to cope with hypothetical interpersonal problem situations and assesses the quality of 
solutions to specific problems, whereas other measures presented in this section are process 
measures that assess general cognitive and behavioral activities (D’Zurilla and Maydeu-
Olivares, 1995). 
The PSI is a 35-item measure to assess problem-solving appraisal, which is defined as the 
self-appraisal of one’s problem-solving ability, style, behavior, and attitudes (Heppner and 
Lee, 2009; Heppner and Peterson, 1982; Heppner and Wang, 2003). The PSI yields a total 
scores and three subscale scores: (1) problem-solving confidence, self-assurance while 
engaged in problem-solving; (2) approach-avoidance style, a general tendency to either 
approach or avoid problem-solving activities; and (3) personal control, a belief in one’s 
emotional and behavioral control while solving problems. There are Japanese versions of the 
PSI that were developed by Hayashi (1985) and Kato (2008). 
In addition to these measures, the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale and Problem-
Solving Skills Scale (Maydeu-Olivares and D’Zurilla, 1997) are also measures of social 
problem-solving ability (D’Zurilla, et al., 2004). These measures were developed through a 
content analysis of the PSI based on social problem-solving theory. The Problem-Solving 
Self-Efficacy Scale is a 7-item measure to assess the belief that one is capable of effectively 
solving problems, which is an important component of positive problem orientation. The 
Problem-Solving Skills Scale is a 9-item measure to assess perceived skills in solving social 
problems effectively, which approximately refers to problem-solving style (D’Zurilla and 
Goldfried, 1971; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1990). Therefore, problem-solving self-efficacy and 
problem-solving skills are a motivational component and a skill or style component of social 
problem-solving ability, respectively. A Japanese version (Sumi, 2009a, 2012a) of these 
measures is available. 
 
 
Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability 
 
Social problem-solving ability can exert a significant influence on the process and 
outcomes of problem-solving in daily living. This influence is naturally an essential 
characteristic of social problem-solving ability. Moreover, additional or more detailed 
characteristics can be understood based on relationships to other constructs. 
Social problem-solving ability is one of the individual difference variables that has been 
treated mainly within the field of positive psychology (D’Zurilla, et al., 2004), and is 
embedded in the psychological stress and coping paradigm (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007; 
Lazarus and Folkman, 1984; Rich and Bonner, 2004). Therefore, numerous studies have 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
159
examined relationships of social problem-solving ability to variables within this paradigm in 
particular.  
According to reviews of the literature, it has been generally supported that the ability is 
associated with various antecedents and consequences of adjustment (e.g., D’Zurilla and 
Nezu, 2007, 2010; D’Zurilla et al., 2002; Nezu, 2004). For example, deficient social problem-
solving ability has been shown to be related to neuroticism, maladaptive coping strategies, 
negative affectivity, psychological distress, depression, and offending behavior (D’Zurilla and 
Nezu, 2010; D’Zurilla et al., 2002; Rich and Bonner, 2004). In addition, research has 
indicated that the ability is not only directly related to the antecedents and consequences of 
adjustment, but plays a mediator or a moderator role in the relationship as well (D’Zurilla and 
Nezu, 2007, 2010; Nezu, 2004). For example, social problem-solving ability has been shown 
to moderate the relationships between stressful life events and depression (D’Zurilla and 
Nezu, 2007, 2010; Nezu, 2004). 
There are many studies on social or real-life problem-solving in the Japanese population. 
Several of these studies are those on social problem-solving ability based on social problem-
solving theory. For example, when developing the Japanese version of the SPRI-R, Sato et 
al., (2006) showed that a clinical sample (psychiatric outpatients) tended to have lower 
constructive components of the ability than a community sample. Nakazawa et al., (2007) 
examined the hypothesized relationship between the ability and adjustment using path 
analysis, and showed the relationship between problem orientation and trait anxiety, and 
between problem-solving style and adjustment outcomes. As with this study, most of the 
studies on the Japanese population have examined the relationships between the ability and 
adjustment. Sumi (2009a) showed that the ability may influence psychological stress and 
depression beyond what was accounted for by stress coping. Sumi (2009b) found that there 
were gender differences in indirect effects of problem-solving self-efficacy via problem-
solving skills on depression, anxiety, and somatization. There are also a few studies that 
examined hypothesized causal relationships. Sumi (2013) supported the hypothesized causal 
relationships whereby dispositional optimism influences social problem-solving ability, 
which in turn has a negative effect on depression and somatization. Sumi (2012c) found that 
extraversion or neuroticism influenced the ability, which in turn had an effect on subjective 
well-being. In addition, Sumi (2012b) found in the longitudinal data that the deficiency of the 
ability predicted perceived stress, depression, anxiety, and somatization. Using a prospective 
approach, Sumi (2009a) found that the relationships between the ability and aspects of 
interpersonal relationships were stronger for men than for women. Furthermore, Sumi (2011) 
showed a positive relationship between the ability and interpersonal competence. 
Based on the results of these previous studies, characteristics of social problem-solving 
ability may be described as essential for everyday life. Moreover, the ability may be 
characterized as relative to, or a predictor of, a wide range of antecedents and consequences 
of adjustment. However, as of yet, characteristics of the ability have not been sufficiently 
clarified. Because numerous variables are involved in daily life, it can be assumed that an 
ability necessary for daily life would be extensively characterized on the basis of the 
relationships the ability has with numerous variables in daily life. More research is necessary 
to further understand the characteristics of social problem-solving ability through examining 
relationships of the ability to a wide range of the variables, including cognitive style, 
motivation, and skills. 
 

Katsunori Sumi 
160
Purpose of This Chapter 
 
The goal of this chapter is to clarify some of the characteristics of social problem-solving 
ability. The characteristics were examined from the perspective of relationships with other 
constructs. In this chapter, three studies examining the relationships are reported. In Study 1, 
the ability was examined in relation to cognitive style. The study focused especially on 
reflectivity-impulsivity among cognitive styles. Study 2 addressed need for cognition as a 
cognitive related and motivational construct. Finally, Study 3 investigated communication 
skills as a basic ability in daily life. All the studies examined data from Japanese college 
students. 
 
 
STUDY 1 
 
Study 1 focused on reflectivity-impulsivity (or reflection-impulsivity) as a well-known 
cognitive style (Kagan, 1965, 1966; Kagan, Rosman, Day, Albert, and Phillips, 1964). 
Reflectivity-impulsivity refers to the tendency to consider and reflect on alternative solution 
possibilities when making decisions (Kagan, 1965, 1966). Reflectivity and impulsivity are at 
opposite ends of a single dimension. Reflectivity refers to the tendency to gather and evaluate 
information prior to decision-making, whereas impulsivity refers to the tendency to respond 
impulsively. 
There are some visual matching tests that were designed to assess this cognitive style, 
such as the Matching Familiar Figures Test (Kagan et al., 1964) and the Kansas Reflection-
Impulsivity Test for Preschoolers (Wright, 1971). Of these tests, the Matching Familiar 
Figures Test is most often used (Grigorenko and Sternberg, 1995; Messer, 1976). In addition, 
as a questionnaire for adult Japanese speakers, the 10-item Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity 
Scale (Takigiku and Sakamoto, 1991) has been developed. 
The reflectivity-impulsivity dimension has an important role in processing information 
and solving problems (Grigorenko and Sternberg, 1995; Messer, 1976). The dimension 
reflects on cognitive strategy concerning speed and accuracy when some choices are 
presented (Ayabe, 1979; Weijers, Wiesbeck, and Boning, 2001). When solving real-life 
problems (Block, Block, and Harrington, 1974), individuals high in reflectivity will gather 
and evaluate information and carefully consider the information prior to decision-making. 
The results may make them respond slowly with few errors. In contrast, individuals high in 
impulsivity will tend to make an impulsive decision before obtaining sufficient information, 
which in turn may make them respond rapidly with some errors. Therefore, individuals with 
higher reflectivity will tend to be successful problem solvers, whereas individuals with higher 
impulsivity will tend to experience failure in the problem-solving process in everyday life. 
These associations between reflectivity-impulsivity and social problem-solving can also be 
suggested with regard to the impulsivity/carelessness style as one of the dysfunctional 
problem-solving styles in social problem-solving theory (D’Zurilla, Nezu, and Maydeu-
Olivares, 2004; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007). Based on social problem-solving theory, it is 
expected that impulsive problem-solving behavior is likely to cause failure in solving 
problems in everyday life. 
This study aimed to examine the correlation between social problem-solving ability and 
reflectivity-impulsivity to clarify the characteristics of the ability. Although a positive 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
161
correlation was generally expected, because social problem-solving ability is independent of 
the reflectivity-impulsivity dimension, a strong correlation was not expected. In addition, 
because reflectivity-impulsivity is more closely related to problem-solving styles than 
problem orientation, problem-solving skills was expected to correlate more highly with 
reflectivity. 
 
 
METHOD 
 
Participants 
 
A total of 409 Japanese college students from four colleges located in a major city in 
Japan participated in this study. The participants comprised 98 women and 206 men with a 
mean age of 21.73 years (SD = 2.98; range = 20 to 31). 
 
 
Measures 
 
The questionnaire contained demographic items including age and sex, the Japanese 
versions of the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale and Problem-Solving Skills Scale, and 
the 10-item Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale. 
As mentioned earlier, the 7-item Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale and 9-item 
Problem-Solving Skills Scale are measures to assess an important component of positive 
problem orientation and perceived skills to effectively solve social problems, respectively. 
Items for both measures are rated on a 6-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 6 
(strongly agree). Possible scores on the former scale range from 7 to 42, with higher scores 
indicating greater problem-solving self-efficacy. Possible scores on the latter scale range from 
9 to 54, with higher scores reflecting better problem-solving skills. The Japanese versions of 
both scales were found to have good reliability and validity in Japanese college students 
(Sumi, 2009, 2012a). 
The Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale is a Japanese self-rating scale that was 
designed to assess the reflectivity-impulsivity dimension. The 10 items were selected from an 
item pool of 37 items, consisting of 21 items originally created and 16 items from an existing 
personality measure. Each of the 10 items, including two reverse scored items, are rated using 
a 4-point scale that ranges from 1 (disagree) to 4 (agree). Possible scale scores range from 10 
to 40, with higher scores indicating a higher level of reflection and lower scores indicating 
impulsivity. The Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale was shown to have good reliability 
and validity (Takigiku and Sakamoto, 1991). 
 
 
Procedures 
 
The participants agreed to complete questionnaires after being informed of the nature and 
purpose of the study. 
 

Katsunori Sumi 
162
RESULTS 
 
The means, standard deviations, Cronbach’s αs, and zero-order correlations of scale 
scores are presented in Table 1. All the scales had adequate internal consistency reliability. 
The zero-order correlation between scores on the scales of social problem-solving ability was 
significant (r = .30, p < .01). Scores on the Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale were 
modestly and significantly correlated with Problem-Solving Skills Scale scores (r = .46, p < 
.01), and non-significantly correlated with Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale scores (r = 
.10). 
 
Table 1 Means, Standard Deviations, Cronbach’s αs,  
and Zero-Order Correlations 
 
 
M 
SD 
α 
r 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
1. Problem-solving self-efficacy 
26.47 
5.63 
.75 
– 
 
2. Problem-solving skills 
37.66 
6.22 
.77 
.30** 
– 
3. Reflectivity-impulsivity 
28.77 
5.45 
.85 
.10 
.46** 
** p < .01. 
 
In order to examine these correlations in more detail, partial correlations were calculated. 
Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale scores were non-significantly correlated with scores 
on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale (pr = -.05), controlling for scores on the 
Problem-Solving Skills Scale. Controlling for scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy 
Scale, scores on the Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale modestly correlated with scores 
on the Problem-Solving Skills Scale (pr = .46, p < .01). These partial correlations were hardly 
distinguishable from the zero-order correlations. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
This study examined the relationship between social problem-solving ability and 
reflectivity-impulsivity. As expected, reflectivity-impulsivity modestly correlated with 
problem-solving skills and did not correlated with problem-solving self-efficacy. These 
correlations hardly changed after the other component of social problem-solving ability was 
controlled for. The findings indicate that individuals who tend to consider and reflect on 
alternative solution possibilities may have better skills to solve real-life problems. Successful 
problem-solving can be enhanced by the tendency to prudently consider various information, 
whereas ineffective problem solving can be caused by the tendency to respond impulsively 
without consideration of the information. Social problem-solving ability may be partly 
characterized by reflectivity. 
However, this characteristic may be different between the two components of social 
problem-solving ability. Based on the positive correlation between problem-solving skills and 
reflectivity-impulsivity, reflectivity is likely to contribute to effective problem-solving. This 
is supported by the social problem-solving theory, which assumes dysfunctional problem-
solving styles include the impulsivity/carelessness style (D’Zurilla, Nezu, and Maydeu-

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
163
Olivares, 2004; D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007). Dysfunctional problem-solving style may be 
characterized by impulsivity, whereas functional problem-solving style may be characterized 
by reflectivity. 
As expected, there may be little relationship between problem orientation and 
reflectivity-impulsivity. The motivational component may not share essential characteristics 
with the tendency for processing information and solving problems as a cognitive style. On 
the other hand, problem-solving skills, the other component of the ability, was closely related 
to reflectivity-impulsivity. This result could suggest the necessity for separately assessing the 
two components of social problem-solving ability. 
Several potential limitations of this study should be addressed. First, the sample was 
limited to college students, therefore, the findings may have limited generalizability. Second, 
the findings are based on self-report measures that may lead to social desirability and 
acquiescent response biases. Third, data were cross-sectional, restricting inferences about 
causality. Future research should replicate the findings using other populations as a sample, 
ratings by others such as peer ratings, and longitudinal data. Despite these limitations, this 
study provides information on the characteristics of social problem-solving ability based on 
its relationships to reflectivity-impulsivity. 
 
 
STUDY 2 
 
Study 2 examined how social problem-solving ability is related to need for cognition as a 
cognitive-related and motivational construct. Need for cognition is defined as an individual’s 
tendency to engage in and enjoy cognitive activities (Cacioppo and Petty, 1982; Cacioppo, 
Petty, and Kao, 1984; Petty, Briñol, Loersch, and McCaslin, 2009). Originally, Cohen, 
Stotland, Wolfe (1955) proposed the term need for cognition as a need to make sense of the 
experiential world. Cacioppo and colleagues (Cacioppo and Petty, 1982; Cacioppo et al., 
1984) redefined the same term. The definition by Cacioppo et al., implies that individuals 
with higher need for cognition are likely to enjoy thinking and be satisfied with thinking. In 
contrast, for individuals with lower need for cognition, thinking can be a chore done with 
reluctance (Petty et al., 2009). The utility of the construct has been supported by numerous 
studies (Petty and Cacioppo, 1986). There are two major measures designed to assess 
individual differences in need for cognition: the 34-item version (Cacioppo and Petty, 1982) 
and 18-item short version (Cacioppo et al., 1984) of the Need for Cognition Scale. Both 
measures have good psychometric properties (Cacioppo and Petty, 1982; Cacioppo et al., 
1984). 
Needless to say, problem-solving is a facet of cognitive activities (Anderson, 2014). 
Therefore, need for cognition is involved in motivation for social problem-solving that 
contains effortful cognitive activities. For example, a previous study found that need for 
cognition was positively related to effectiveness in solving complex problems, i.e., a 
complex, long-duration, computer-simulated, and multifaceted cognitive task (Naira and 
Ramnarayan, 2000). Another study showed that individuals with higher in need for cognition 
performed better on problem-solving than those with lower need for cognition (Coutinho, 
Wiemer-Hastings, Skowronski, and Britt, 2005). Individuals with higher need for cognition 
may be more willing to engage in solving real-life problems. From another perspective, social 

Katsunori Sumi 
164
problem-solving ability has characteristics reflecting need for cognition. Thus, it was 
expected that need for cognition would be positively related to social problem-solving ability; 
in particular, need for cognition would be more strongly related to the motivational aspect of 
problem orientation. 
 
 
METHOD 
 
Participants 
 
The participants in this study were 160 students from a college located in a major city in 
Japan. They consisted of 61 women and 99 men with a mean age of 21.06 years (SD = 1.56; 
range = 18 to 27). 
 
 
Measures 
 
The questionnaire contained questions about age and sex, the Japanese versions of the 
Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale and Problem-Solving Skills Scale, and the 15-item Need 
for Cognition Scale (Kouyama and Fujihara, 1991). 
The Japanese version of the Need for Cognition Scale is a single factor scale that was 
developed on the basis of an item pool of 45 items that was generated by Cacioppo and Petty 
(1982) to develop their 34-item version of the scale. The original 45 items were translated 
into Japanese and examined in four independent samples. Of the 45 items, 15 items were 
selected to form the final scale, in which participants respond to items, using a 7-point 
response format ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Eight items are 
reverse scored. The range of possible scale scores is 15 to 105, with higher scores indicating 
greater need for cognition. The Japanese version had good psychometric properties in the four 
Japanese samples (Kouyama and Fujihara, 1991). 
 
 
Procedures 
 
After informed consent was obtained by all the participants, questionnaires were 
administered to the participants outside of class by a teacher. 
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Table 2 shows the means, standard deviations, Cronbach’s αs, and zero-order correlations 
of scale scores. All the scales showed good internal consistency reliability. Need for 
Cognition Scale scores were modestly and significantly correlated with scores for the two 
subscales of social problem-solving ability (rs = .30 and .42, ps < .01). There was no 
significant difference between the two correlations, t (157) = 1.34. 
 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
165
Table 2. Means, Standard Deviations, Cronbach’s αs,  
and Zero-Order Correlations 
 
 
M 
SD 
α 
r 
 
 
 
 
1 
2 
1. Problem-solving self-efficacy 
26.66 
5.27 
.84 
– 
 
2. Problem-solving skills 
35.98 
5.90 
.80 
.18* 
– 
3. Need for cognition 
63.83 
11.81 
.84 
.30** 
.42** 
* p < .05. ** p < .01. 
 
To further examine these correlations, partial correlations were calculated. Controlling 
for scores on the Problem-Solving Skills Scale, scores on the Need for Cognition Scale were 
modestly correlated with scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale (pr = .25, p < 
.01). Controlling for scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale, scores on the Need 
for Cognition Scale were modestly correlated with scores on the Problem Solving Skills Scale 
(pr = .39, p < .01). These partial correlations were roughly comparable to the zero-order 
correlations. 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
In this study, the relationship between social problem-solving ability and need for 
cognition was examined. The results showed modest and positive correlations between the 
two variables. Both components of social problem-solving ability were modestly and 
positively correlated with need for cognition even when the other component of social 
problem-solving ability was controlled for. Individuals with greater problem orientation or 
problem-solving skills might have a greater tendency to engage in and enjoy cognitive 
activities. As assumed, ability in solving real-life problems may have characteristics that are 
linked to a willingness to be involved in cognitive activities. 
However, the assumption that need for cognition is more strongly related to problem 
orientation than problem-solving skills was not supported. Scores for the two components of 
social problem-solving ability had nearly the same correlations with scores for need for 
cognition. These components may similarly have characteristics that are positively associated 
with need for cognition. Additional research is needed to further examine the relationship 
between social problem-solving ability and need for cognition.  
This study also has limitations, including the use of only college students, self-report 
measures, and cross-sectional design. These limitations should be addressed in future studies. 
Additionally, further study is warranted to confirm the present findings. 
 
 
STUDY 3 
 
Study 3 examined the relationship between social problem-solving ability and 
communication skills. In the two studies described above, cognitive-related constructs were 
addressed. Communication skills, on the other hand, are an ability necessary for trouble-free 
and successful everyday life, similar to social problem-solving ability (D’Zurilla, Maydeu-
Olivares, and Kant, 1998; D’Zurilla, et al., 2004; Sumi, 2011; Wang, 2007), and has often 

Katsunori Sumi 
166
been used interchangeably with the terms communication competence, social competence, 
interpersonal competence, social skills, and interpersonal skills (Hargie, 2006; Spitzberg, 
2003; Spitzberg and Cupach, 1989). 
Communication skills have attracted numerous researchers in many fields, including 
psychology, sociology, education, management, medicine, and computer science (Hargie, 
2006; Wilson and Sabee, 2003). However, studies on communication skills have suffered 
from definitional indeterminacy as well as a lack of theoretical grounding (Jablin and Sias, 
2001; Wilson and Sabee, 2003). There are numerous measures of communication skills 
(Spitzberg, 2003). Generally, communication skills is a term that has been typically used to 
refer to an ability to communicate well and share or exchange information with others 
(Spitzberg, 2003; Spitzberg and Cupach, 2002). This ability must be capable of preventing the 
development of communicative problems in daily life, and handling problems that develop 
more effectively; that is, individuals with better communication skills may have fewer 
experiences of suffering from problems. 
Although communication skills and social problem-solving ability are not identical 
constructs, they share some essential features (Chang, D’Zurilla, and Sanna, 2009). As 
mentioned above, communicative or interpersonal problems are typical and important 
examples of social problems (D’Zurilla, Maydeu-Olivares, and Kant, 1998; D’Zurilla, et al., 
2004; Sumi, 2011; Wang, 2007). There are numerous studies on communicative or 
interpersonal problems in everyday life (Hargie and Dickson, 2004; Priestley, McGuire, 
Flegg, Hemsley, and Welham, 1978), of which a large number have examined 
communication skills (Canary, 2003; Spitzberg and Cupach, 1989). The ability of solving 
communicative or interpersonal problems is an ability required of us in everyday life. In 
addition, it has been shown that communication skills, similar to social problem-solving, is 
positively related to functioning and well-being (Spitzberg, 2003; Spitzberg and Cupach, 
1989, 2002). 
Based on the similarity between and independence of communication skills and social 
problem-solving ability, a modest and positive correlation between them would be expected. 
This relationship has already been pointed out by previous researchers (Sumi, 2011). Two 
previous studies of college (D’Zurilla et al., 2002) and high school students (Sadowski, 
Moore, and Kelley, 1994) showed that communication skills were related modestly and 
positively to constructive dimensions and negatively to dysfunctional dimensions of problem-
solving. The study reported by D’Zurilla et al., used peer ratings of interpersonal problem-
solving competence. Sadowski et al., used the Social Skills Rating Scale self-report form 
(Gresham and Elliot, 1990), which is a 30-item measure to assess social skills in elementary 
and secondary school students. Although the Social Skills Rating Scale comprises four 
subscales to measure dimensions of social skills, Sadowski et al., did not report scores for the 
subscales. 
Communication skills are typically recognized as a multidimensional construct (Segrin 
and Taylor, 2006; Sumi, 2011; Wilson and Sabee, 2003). Therefore, to more fully examine 
the relationship between social problem-solving ability and communication skills, it is 
necessary to assess not only overall communication skills, but also dimensions of 
communication skills. However, the previous studies (D’Zurilla et al., 2002; Sadowski et al., 
1994) did not assess the dimensions. In one exceptional study, Sumi (2011) examined the 
relationship by using the SPSI-R and the Social Skill Scale (Wada, 1992). The Social  
Skill Scale was developed on the basis of the Interpersonal Competence Questionnaire 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
167
(Buhrmester, Furman, Wittenberg, and Reis, 1988), which is a dispositional measure for 
assessing competence in five domains of interpersonal tasks: initiating relationships, self-
disclosure, asserting displeasure with others’ actions, providing emotional support, and 
managing interpersonal conflict. The subscales of the Social Skill Scale correspond to four 
dimensions of communication skills for Japanese people: initiating relationships, maintaining 
intimate relationships, managing interpersonal conflict, and rejecting undesirable requests. 
The results of the data from Japanese college students showed most of the components of 
social problem-solving ability were modestly related to all the dimensions of communication 
skills. The positive constructive dimensions and negative dysfunctional dimensions of social 
problem-solving ability related positively and negatively to each dimension of 
communication skills as expected. As an exception, however, rejecting undesirable requests 
was not related to social problem-solving ability. 
Although this exceptional study (Sumi, 2011) improved knowledge about the relationship 
between social problem-solving ability and communication skills, the study of this 
relationship has been totally insufficient. In addition, there is a definitional problem in that a 
variety of dimensions of communication skills have been suggested by various researchers 
(Wilson and Sabee, 2003). This issue is reflected in the various subscales in measures of 
communication skills. For example, the Interpersonal Communication Competence  
Scale (Rubin and Martin, 1994), as a comprehensive measure of interpersonal competence 
(Graham, 2009), represents 10 skills: self-disclosure, empathy, social relaxation, 
assertiveness, altercentrism, interaction management, expressiveness, supportiveness, 
immediacy, and environmental control. The Communicative Adaptability Scale (Duran, 1983, 
1992) contains subscales corresponding to six dimensions of communication skills: social 
composure, social experience, social confirmation, articulation, wit, and appropriate 
disclosure. Furthermore, it is possible to find some differences in dimensions even between 
the Social Skill Scale (Wada, 1992) and Interpersonal Competence Questionnaire 
(Buhrmester et al., 1988) as mentioned above. 
In view of the divergent view of communication skills, the present study used the 
ENDCOREs (Fujimoto and Daibo, 2007) as a communication skills measure distinct from the 
Social Skill Scale used by Sumi (2011). The ENDCOREs was designed to measure 
communication skills based on a hierarchical model of communication skills, which is called 
the ENDCORE model (Fujimoto, 2013; Fujimoto and Daibo, 2007). The ENDCORE model 
illustrates a hierarchical association among various dimensions of communication skills in a 
broad sense. In the model, the dimensions are classified into three classes of skills: (1) 
Communication Skill is the ability to effectively establish verbal and nonverbal 
communication with others; (2) Social Skill is the ability to promote sociability focused on 
interpersonal relationships; and (3) Strategy is the ability to participate fully in culture and 
society. The skill class assessed by the ENDCOREs is the Communication Skill, which 
consists of six dimensions: self-control, expressivity, decipherer ability, assertiveness, other 
acceptance, and regulation of relationship. The first three dimensions constitute the basic skill 
and the last three dimensions constitute interpersonal skills. Furthermore, these six 
dimensions form three systems: management system, encode system, and decode system. 
Self-control (the most basic dimension) and regulation of relationship (the highest order 
dimensions) are classified as the management system. The encode system is composed of 
expressivity and assertiveness. Decipherer ability and other acceptance constitute the decode 
system. 

Katsunori Sumi 
168
In the present study, additional knowledge about the characteristics of social problem-
solving ability was gathered with regard to its relationship to communication skills, which 
were evaluated by using of the ENDCOREs. Because of the weaker direct association 
between the motivational aspect of problem-solving ability and the communication skills in 
the ENDCORE model, it was assumed that problem orientation would be more weakly 
related to communication skills than problem-solving skills. 
 
 
METHOD 
 
Participants 
 
The participants were 160 students attending two colleges located in major cities in 
Japan. The sample consisted of 61 women and 99 men with a mean age of 21.06 years (SD = 
1.56; range = 18 to 27). 
 
 
Measures 
 
The questionnaire contained demographic items such as age and sex, the Japanese 
versions of the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale and Problem-Solving Skills Scale, and 
the ENDCOREs. 
The ENDCOREs is composed of six subscales that correspond to six dimensions of 
communication skills. Each subscale consists of four items that are rated on a 7-point scale 
ranging from 1 (very poor at doing so) to 7 (very good at doing so). Each subscale score is 
calculated by summing the item scores and dividing by four, i.e., the number of subscale 
items. The range of possible subscale scores is from 1 to 7, with higher scores indicating 
better skills. All the subscales of the ENDCOREs were found to have good reliability and 
validity in Japanese college students (Fujimoto and Daibo, 2007). 
 
 
Procedures 
 
After obtaining informed consent from the participants, questionnaires were administered 
to them outside of class by a teacher.  
 
 
RESULTS 
 
Table 3 shows the means, standard deviations, and Cronbach’s αs for the subscales. All 
the subscales had acceptable internal consistency reliability. Zero-order correlations between 
scores on the subscales measuring social problem-solving ability and communication skills 
are presented in Table 4. Most of these correlations were modest and positive (rs = .28 
to .48), with three exceptions. Scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale were highly 
correlated with scores on the Decipherer Ability subscale and the Assertiveness subscale. 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
169
Scores on the Problem-Solving Skills Scale were correlated non-significantly with 
Expressivity subscale scores. There was a low correlation between scores on the Problem-
Solving Self-Efficacy Scale and Problem-Solving Skills Scale (r = .20, p < .01). 
To examine these correlations in more detail, partial correlations were calculated. While 
the partial correlations with the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale were controlled for 
scores on the Problem-Solving Skills Scale, partial correlations with the Problem-Solving 
Skills Scale controlled for scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale. As shown in 
Table 5, there were few notable differences between the zero-order correlations and partial 
correlations. 
 
Table 3. Means, Standard Deviations, and Cronbach’s αs 
 
 
M 
SD 
α 
Problem-solving self-efficacy 
26.41 
5.07 
.75 
Problem-solving skills 
35.43 
5.79 
.71 
Self-control 
3.57 
.83 
.67 
Expressivity 
3.00 
.94 
.79 
Decipherer ability 
3.68 
.96 
.92 
Assertiveness 
3.24 
.93 
.77 
Other acceptance 
3.94 
.86 
.75 
Regulation of relationship 
3.67 
.77 
.70 
 
Table 4. Zero-Order Correlations Between Scores for Social Problem-Solving Ability 
and Communication Skills 
 
 
Problem-solving self-efficacy 
Problem-solving skills 
Self-control 
Expressivity 
Decipherer ability 
Assertiveness 
Other acceptance 
Regulation of relationship 
.31** 
.48** 
.56** 
.60** 
.34** 
.37** 
.31** 
.15 
.34** 
.28** 
.38** 
.34** 
** p < .01. 
 
Table 5. Partial Correlations Between Social Problem-Solving Ability and 
Communication Skills 
 
 
Problem-solving self-efficacy 
Problem-solving skills 
Self-control 
Expressivity 
Decipherer ability 
Assertiveness 
Other acceptance 
Regulation of relationship 
.26** 
.47** 
.53** 
.58** 
.29** 
.32** 
.27* 
.06 
.27** 
.20** 
.34** 
.29** 
Note. Partial correlations of scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale are controlled for scores 
on the Problem-Solving Skills Scale. Partial correlations of scores on the Problem-Solving Skills Scale 
are controlled for scores on the Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale. 
* p < .05. ** p < .01. 

Katsunori Sumi 
170
DISCUSSION 
 
This study examined how social problem-solving ability is correlated with dimensions of 
communication skills based on the ENDCORE model (Fujimoto, 2013; Fujimoto and Daibo, 
2007). In general, as expected, the correlations were positive and modest. Similar correlations 
were confirmed after controlling for problem-solving self-efficacy or problem-solving skills. 
However, there were a few exceptional correlations. In addition, the weaker relationship of 
problem-solving self-efficacy to communication skills was not supported. 
Problem-solving self-efficacy was positively related to all six dimensions of 
communication skills. Individuals with greater problem-solving self-efficacy might have 
better overall communication skills. In addition, more than half of the dimensions were 
modestly related to problem-solving self-efficacy. As exceptions to these relationships, 
decipherer ability and assertiveness were more highly related to problem-solving self-efficacy 
than expected. Decipherer ability refers to a basic linguistic ability similar to expressivity, and 
consists of the ability to understand verbal and nonverbal expressions (Fujimoto and Daibo, 
2007). Assertiveness refers to an interpersonal ability including skills of asserting oneself, 
leading, and dealing with others (Fujimoto and Daibo, 2007). These two dimensions may 
include some elements that are closely associated with the motivational aspect for engaging in 
problem-solving in everyday life. In a different sense, problem-solving self-efficacy may 
have characteristics that are closely linked to decipherer ability and assertiveness in 
communication skills. However, because the present results do not allow a plausible 
explanation for these relationships, further study is needed to examine the relationships. 
On the other hand, problem-solving skills positively related to five of the components of 
communication skills. Individuals who have greater perceived skills in problem-solving might 
generally possess better communication skills. As expected, these relationships were modest. 
Because of the independence between social problem-solving ability and communication 
skills, problem-solving skills may have a modest relationship to communication skills. Only 
one dimension of communication skills, i.e., expressivity, was not related to problem-solving 
skills. Expressivity in the ENDCORE model refers to a basic linguistic ability of effectively 
using verbal and nonverbal expression (Fujimoto and Daibo, 2007). Problem-solving skills 
may be more independent of this linguistic ability. Future research needs to be conducted to 
examine this relationship more closely. 
It was not supported that problem-solving self-efficacy would be more weakly related to 
the dimensions of communication skills than problem-solving skills. Although the 
ENDCORE model is not explicit about the association between the motivational elements and 
communication skills (Fujimoto, 2013; Fujimoto and Daibo, 2007), communication skills 
may implicitly contain motivational elements in the communication process. 
This study, like the other two studies in this chapter, was not free from limitations, such 
as the use of only college students, self-report measures, and cross-sectional design. In 
addition, it is necessary in future studies to examine how social problem-solving ability is 
related to communication skills based on other models. Despite these limitations, the results 
provide knowledge about additional characteristics of social problem-solving ability through 
the modest associations with most of the dimensions of communication skills. 
 
 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
171
GENERAL DISCUSSION 
 
This chapter aimed to clarify additional characteristics of social problem-solving ability 
through examining relationships with three constructs in three different studies. The three 
constructs addressed in the studies were reflectivity-impulsivity as a cognitive style, need for 
cognition as a cognitive-related and motivational construct, and communication skills as 
coping skills for interpersonal problems. As a result, some characteristics of social problem-
solving ability were found through the supported relationships. 
The findings obtained from Studies 1 to 3 can be classified according to the two major 
components of social problem-solving ability, a motivation component and a skill or style 
component. On the one hand, problem-solving self-efficacy corresponding to the motivation 
component was positively related to need for cognition and all the components of 
communication skills. In particular, it was found that the two components of communication 
skills, decipherer ability and assertiveness, were highly related to problem-solving self-
efficacy. Moreover, problem-solving self-efficacy had little relationship to reflectivity-
impulsivity. On the other hand, problem-solving skills corresponding to the skill or style 
component were positively associated with reflectivity, need for cognition, and all 
components of communication skills except for expressivity. 
These findings indicate to some extent different characteristics between the two 
components of social problem-solving ability. The differences are reflected in the 
relationships to reflectivity-impulsivity and three components of communication skills: 
expressivity, decipherer ability, and assertiveness. The different characteristics are naturally 
based on the major characteristic of each component, i.e., a motivational function and a skill 
or style of problem-solving. 
The characteristics unique to each component of social problem-solving ability perform 
an important role in the social problem-solving process. Moreover, these characteristics may 
have a combined effect as well as an independent effect on problem-solving. For example, the 
combination of a motivational function and the skill of problem-solving might be linked to 
greater enjoyment in problem-solving as a cognitive activity; namely, higher need for 
cognition, which then might produce better outcomes from the problem-solving process. 
Further study is needed to examine the combined effect. 
The findings in this chapter should be replicated and extended in future studies that 
overcome the limitations described in Studies 1 to 3. In addition, to extend the findings, social 
problem-solving ability needs to be assessed using measures with more detailed components, 
e.g., the SPSI-R. Moreover, in future research, it is important to clarify relationships to a 
variety of variables that were not examined in the studies covered in this chapter. Further 
understanding of social problem-solving ability would be very useful for a better life. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Anderson, J. R. (2014). Cognitive psychology and its implications (8th ed.). New York: 
Freeman. 
Ayabe, H. I. (1979). The curvilinear relationship between reflection impulsivity and locus of 
control. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 135(2), 309-310. 

Katsunori Sumi 
172
Block, J., Block, J. H. and Harrington, D. M. (1974). Some misgivings about the Matching 
Familiar Figures Test as a measure of reflection-impulsivity. Developmental Psychology, 
10(5), 611-632. 
Buhrmester, D., Furman, W., Wittenberg, M. T. and Reis, H. T. (1988). Five domains of 
interpersonal competence in peer relationships. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 55(6), 991-1008. 
Cacioppo, J. T. and Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 42(1), 116-113. 
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E. and Kao, C. E. (1984). The efficient assessment of need for 
cognition. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48(3), 306-307. 
Canary, D. J. (2003). Managing interpersonal conflict: A model of events related to strategic 
choice. In J. O. Greene and B. R. Burleson (Eds.), Handbook of communication and 
social interaction skills (pp. 515-549). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Chang, E. C., Downey, C. A. and Salata, J. L. (2004). Social problem solving and positive 
psychological functioning: Looking at the positive side of problem solving. In E. C. 
Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem solving: Theory, research, 
and training (2nd ed., pp. 99-116). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Chang, E. C., D’Zurilla, T. J. and Sanna, L. J. (2009). Social problem solving as a mediator of 
the link between stress and psychological well-being in middle-adulthood. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 33(1), 33-40. 
Cohen, A. R., Stotland, E. and Wolfe, D. M. (1955). An experimental investigation of need 
for cognition. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51(2), 291-294. 
Coutinho, S., Wiemer-Hastings, K., Skowronski, J. J. and Britt, M. A. (2005). Metacognition, 
need for cognition and use of explanations during ongoing learning and problem solving. 
Learning and Individual Differences, 15(4), 321–337. 
Duran, R. L. (1983). Communicative adaptability: A measure of social communicative 
competence. Communication Quarterly, 31(4), 320-326. 
Duran, R. L. (1992). Communicative adaptability: A review of conceptualization and 
measurement. Communication Quarterly, 40(3), 253-268. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. (1986). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence approach to clinical 
intervention. New York: Springer. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. (1990). Problem-solving training for effective stress management and 
prevention. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 4(4), 327-354. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Chang, E. C. (1995). The relations between social problem solving and 
coping. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 19(5), 547-562. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Goldfried, M. R. (1971). Problem-solving and behavior modification. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 78(1), 104-126. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (1995). Conceptual and methodological issues in 
social problem-solving assessment. Behavior Therapy, 26(3), 409-432. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Maydeu-Olivares, A. and Kant, G. L. (1998). Age and gender differences in 
social problem-solving ability. Personality and Individual Differences, 25(2), 241-252. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (1990). Development and preliminary evaluation of the 
Social Problem-Solving Inventory (SPSI). Psychological Assessment: A Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 2(2), 156-163. 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
173
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (1999). Problem-solving therapy: A social competence 
approach to clinical intervention (2nd ed.) New York: Springer. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (2007). Problem-solving therapy: A positive approach to 
clinical intervention (3rd ed.) New York: Springer. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (2010). Problem-solving therapy. In K. S. Dobson (Ed.), 
Handbook of cognitive-behavioral therapies (3rd ed., pp. 197-225). New York: Guilford. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2002). Social Problem-solving 
Inventory–Revised (SPSI–R): Technical manual. North Tonawanda, NY: Multi-Health 
Systems. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2004). Social problem solving: 
Theory and assessment. In E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social 
problem solving: Theory, research, and training (2nd ed., pp. 11-27). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
Elliott, T. R., Grant, J. S. and Miller, D. M. (2004). Social problem solving abilities and 
behavioral health. In E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem 
solving: Theory, research, and training (2nd ed., pp. 117-133). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
Fujimoto, M. (2013). [An empirical and conceptual examination of the ENDCORE model for 
practical work with communication skills]. [Japanese Journal of Personality], 22(2), 
156-167. [in Japanese]. 
Fujimoto, M. and Daibo, I. (2007). [ENDCORE: A hierarchical structure theory of 
communication skills]. [Japanese Journal of Personality], 15(3), 347-361. [in Japanese]. 
Graham, E. E. (2009). Interpersonal Communication Competence Scale (ICCS). In R. B. 
Rubin, A. M. Rubin, E. E. Graham, E. M. Perse, and D. Seibold (Eds.), Communication 
research measures II: A sourcebook (pp. 176-180). New York: Routledge. 
Gresham, F. M. and Elliot, S. (1990). Manual for the Social Skills Rating Scale. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources. 
Grigorenko, E. L. and Sternberg, R. J. (1995). Thinking styles. In D. H. Saklofske, and M. 
Zeidner (Eds.), International handbook of personality and intelligence (pp. 205-230). 
New York: Springer. 
Hargie, O. (2006). Skill in theory: Communication as skilled performance. In O. Hargie (Ed.), 
The handbook of communication skills (3rd ed., pp. 7-36). London: Routledge.  
Hargie, O. and Dickson, D. (2004). Skilled interpersonal communication: Research, theory 
and practice (4th ed.). London: Routledge. 
Hayashi, K. (1985). [Students’ attitudes to their problem solving and training program]. 
[Japanese Journal of Counseling Science], 17(2), 73-82. [in Japanese]. 
Heppner, P. P. (1988). The Problem Solving Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologist Press. 
Heppner, P. P. and Lee, D. (2009). Problem-solving appraisal and psychological adjustment. 
In S. J. Lopez and C. R. Snyder (Eds.), Oxford handbook of positive psychology. (pp. 
345-355). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Heppner, P. P. and Peterson, C. H. (1982). The development and implications of a personal 
problem-solving inventory. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 29(1), 66-75. 
Heppner, P. P. and Wang, Y. W. (2003). Problem-solving appraisal. In S. J. Lopez and C. R. 
Snyder (Eds.), Positive psychological assessment. (pp. 127-138). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 

Katsunori Sumi 
174
Jablin, F. M. and Sias, P. M. (2001). Communication competence. In F. M. Jablin, and L. L. 
Putnam (Eds.), The new handbook of organizational communication: Advances in theory, 
research, and methods (pp. 819-864). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kagan, J. (1965). Impulsive and reflective children: Significance of conceptual tempo. In J. 
D. Krumboltz (Ed.), Learning and the educational process (pp. 133-161). Chicago: Rand 
McNally. 
Kagan, J. (1966). Reflection-impulsivity: The generality and dynamics of conceptual tempo. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 71(1), 17-24. 
Kagan, J., Rosman, B. L., Day, D., Albert, J. and Phillips, W. (1964). Information processing 
in the child: A significance of analytic and reflective attitudes. Psychological 
Monographs: General and Applied, 78(1), 1-37. 
Kato, T. (2008). [A psychometric re-assessment of the Problem Solving Inventory: Proposing 
a two-factor model of problem solving appraisal]. [The Bulletin of Faculty of Sociology, 
Toyo University], 46(1), 83-101. [in Japanese]. 
Kouyama, T. and Fujihara, T. (1991). [A basic study of the Need for Cognition Scale]. 
[Japanese Journal of Social Psychology], 6(3), 184-192. [in Japanese]. 
Lazarus, R. S. and Folkman, S. (1984). Stress, appraisal, and coping. New York: Springer. 
McGuire, J. (2005). Social problem solving: Basic concepts, research, and applications. In M. 
McMurran and J. McGuire (Eds.), Social problem solving and offending: Evidence, 
evaluation and evolution (pp. 3-29). Chichester, UK: Wiley. 
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1995). A factor-analysis of the Social Problem-
Solving Inventory using polychoric correlations. European Journal of Psychological 
Assessment, 11(2), 98-107. 
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1996). A factor-analytic study of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory: An integration of theory and data. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 20(2), 115-133. 
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1997). The factor structure of the Problem Solving 
Inventory. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 13(3), 206-215. 
Messer, S. B. (1976). Reflection-impulsivity: A review. Psychological Bulletin, 83(6), 1026-
1052. 
Naira, U. K. and Ramnarayan, S. (2000). Individual differences in need for cognition and 
complex problem solving. Journal of Research in Personality, 34(3), 305-328. 
Nakazawa, J., Enomoto, J. and Nakamichi, K. (2007). [Effects of social problem solving on 
the adjustment of university students]. [Bulletin of the Faculty of Education, Chiba 
University], 55, 61-69. [in Japanese]. 
Nezu, A. M. (2004). Problem solving and behavior therapy revisited. Behavior Therapy, 
35(1), 1-33. 
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M. and Clark, M. A. (2008). Social problem solving as a risk factor for 
depression. In K. S. Dobson, and D. J. A. Dozois (Eds.), Risk factors in depression (pp. 
263-286). San Diego, CA: Elsevier. 
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (2007). Solving life’s problems: A 5-step guide 
to enhanced well-being. New York: Springer. 
Nezu, A. M., Wilkins, V. M. and Nezu, C. M. (2004). Social problem solving, stress, and 
negative affect. In E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem 
solving: Theory, research, and training (2nd ed., pp. 49-65). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 

Characteristics of Social Problem-Solving Ability … 
175
Petty, R. E., Briñol, P., Loersch, C. and McCaslin, M. J. (2009). The need for cognition. In 
M. R. Leary and R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of individual differences in social 
behavior (pp. 318-329). New York: Guilford Press. 
Petty, R. E. and Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). Communication and persuasion: Central and 
peripheral routes to attitude change. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Platt, J. J. and Spivack, G. (1975), Manual for the Means-Ends Problem-Solving Procedure 
(MEPS): A measure of interpersonal cognitive problem-solving skill. Philadelphia: 
Hahnemann Community Health/Mental Retardation Center. 
Priestley, P., McGuire, J., Flegg, D., Hemsley, V. and Welham, D. (1990). Social skills and 
personal problem solving: A handbook of methods. London: Routledge. 
Rich, A. R. and Bonner, R. L. (2004). Mediators and moderators of social problem solving. In 
E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem solving: Theory, 
research, and training (2nd ed., pp. 29-45). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Rubin, R. B. and Martin, M. M. (1994). Development of a measure of interpersonal 
communication competence. Communication Research Reports, 11(1), 33-44. 
Sadowski, C., Moore, L. A. and Kelley, M. L. (1994). Psychometric properties of the Social 
Problem Solving Inventory (SPSI) with normal and emotionally disturbed adolescents. 
Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 22(4), 485-500. 
Sato, H., Takahashi, F., Matsuo, M., Sakai, M., Shimada, H., Chen, J., Kaiya, H. and Sakano, 
Y. (2006). [Development of the Japanese version of the Social Problem-solving 
Inventory–Revised and examination of its reliability and validity]. [Japanese Journal of 
Behavior Therapy], 32(1), 15-30. [in Japanese]. 
Segrin, C. and Taylor, M. (2006). A social cognitive analysis of the effects of parental divorce 
on premarital couples’ communication skills. Journal of Divorce and Remarriage, 46(1-
2), 57-83. 
Spitzberg, B. H. (2003). Methods of interpersonal skill assessment. In J. O. Greene and B. R. 
Burleson (Eds.), Handbook of communication and social interaction skills (pp. 93-134). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Spitzberg, B. H. and Cupach, W. R. (1989). Handbook of interpersonal competence research. 
New York: Springer-Verlag.  
Spitzberg, B. H. and Cupach, W. R. (2002). Interpersonal skills. In M. L. Knapp and J. A. 
Daly (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal communication (3rd ed., pp. 564-612). London: 
Sage. 
Sumi, K. (2009a). [Characteristics of social problem-solving from the view of relationships to 
psychological adjustment and coping]. [Journal of Educational and Health Science], 
54(3), 187-197. [in Japanese]. 
Sumi, K. (2009b). [The relationships of social problem-solving to psychological and physical 
symptoms: Investigating gender differences]. [Journal of Educational and Health 
Science], 54(4), 273-283. [in Japanese]. 
Sumi, K. (2011). Relations of social problem solving with interpersonal competence in 
Japanese students. Psychological Reports, 109(3), 976-982. 
Sumi, K. (2012a). Relationship of social problem-solving ability with interpersonal 
relationships: a prospective study among Japanese women and men. Psychological 
Reports, 111(3), 929-937. 

Katsunori Sumi 
176
Sumi, K. (2012b). [The effects of social problem-solving on physical and psychological 
symptoms and psychological stress: An examination of longitudinal data]. [Journal of 
Educational and Health Science], 58(2), 192-199. [in Japanese]. 
Sumi, K. (2012c). [The influences of social problem-solving and personality traits on 
subjective well-being]. [Journal of Educational and Health Science], 57(3), 273-282. [in 
Japanese]. 
Sumi, K. (2013). [The influences of optimism and social problem-solving on depressive 
tendencies and psychosomatic tendencies]. [Japanese Journal of Applied Psychology], 
38(3), 291-292. [in Japanese]. 
Takigiku, K. and Sakamoto, A. (1991). [Development of the Cognitive Reflection-
Impulsivity Scale]. [Annual Meeting of the Japanese Group Dynamics Association], 39, 
39-40. [in Japanese]. 
Wada, M. (1992). [Reconstruction of nonverbal skill scale and social skill scale]. [Bulletin of 
Tokyo Gakugei University Sect. I.], (43), 123-136. [in Japanese]. 
Wang, X. (2007). A model of the relationship of sex-role orientation to social problem-
solving. Sex Roles, 57(5), 397-408. 
Weijers, H. G., Wiesbeck, G. A. and Boning, J. (2001). Reflection-impulsivity, personality 
and performance: A psychometric and validity study of the Matching Familiar Figures 
Test in detoxified alcoholics. Personality and Individual Differences, 31(5), 731–754. 
Wilson, S. R. and Sabee, C. M. (2003). Explicating communicative competence as a 
theoretical term. In J. O. Greene and B. R. Burleson (Eds.), Handbook of communication 
and social interaction skills (pp. 3-50). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Wright, J. C. (1972). The Kansas Reflection-Impulsivity Scale for Preschoolers (KRISP). St. 
Louis, MO: CEMREL. 
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SOCIAL PROBLEM 
SOLVING, ANXIETY AND EMPATHY AMONG 
ADOLESCENTS IN HUNGARIAN CONTEXT 
 
 
László Kasik1,*, Csaba Gáspár2, Kornél Guti3  
and Anikó Zsolnai1 
1University of Szeged, Institute of Education, Szeged, Hungary 
University of Szeged, Social Competence Research Group,  
Szeged, Hungary 
2University of Szeged, Doctoral School of Education, Szeged, Hungary 
3Dr. Farkasinszky Terézia Drug Center, Szeged, Hungary 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Research on social problem solving have been focusing on age, gender and cultural 
differences and development for a very long time. It is a widely known fact that the 
development of social problem solving depends on many mediator (e.g., super traits, 
anxiety, emotions) and moderator variables (e.g., family and school background). 
International studies agree that social problem solving has a profound influence on 
success in personal life, on mental health (e.g., Elliott et al., 2006), on academic 
achievement (e.g., Rodriguez-Fornells and Maydeu-Olivares, 2000), and, in turn, on the 
functioning of different social groups and society as a whole (e.g., Lindsay et al., 2011). 
Several studies have pointed out that mental health and school success also have an 
impact on social problem solving (e.g., McMurran and McGuire, 2005). The aim of our 
study was to examine the relationship between social problem solving and some mediator 
and moderator variables among 12- and 16-year-old Hungarian students (N = 445). We 
examined the relationship between social problem solving, state and trait anxiety and 
empathy, and we also intended to find relationship between social problem solving and 
some family background variables (e.g., family structure, parents’ educational level). We 
used the short version of SPSI–R (2002, Social Problem Solving Inventory–Revised, 
D’Zurilla, Nezu,  Maydeu-Olivares – factors: positive problem orientation, negative 
                                                           
* Corresponding Author address: Hungary, 6722 Szeged, Petőfi S. sgt. 30–34. Email: kasik@edpsy.u-szeged.hu. 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
178
problem orientation, rationality, impulsivity, avoidance); Davis’s IRI (1980, Interpersonal 
Reactivity Index – factors: perspective taking, fantasy, empathic concern, and personal 
distress) and Spielberger’s State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (1983). All of these 
measurements showed good reliability indices. According to the results, positive problem 
orientation was more typical of 12-year-olds and negative problem orientation, 
rationality, state anxiety, perspective taking and empathic concern were more common 
among 16-year-olds. The fitting of impulsivity and trait anxiety, and avoidance and trait 
anxiety are more solid in 16-year-olds. Regardless of age, the degree of negative problem 
orientation and avoidance is higher among those with increased anxiety as compared to 
those with lower levels of anxiety. Perspective taking has a strong connection to positive 
problem orientation and rationality in almost every age, while personal distress has 
greater influence only on negative problem orientation at the age of 16. The family 
structure and parents’ educational levels are the most profoundly influential in terms of 
social problem solving. 
 
Keywords: social problem solving, anxiety, empathy, Hungarian adolescents 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Social Problem Solving 
 
Social problem solving is a widely researched area of social functioning, which gave rise 
to a number of theoretical frameworks (e.g., McMurran and McGuire 2005). D’Zurilla, Nezu 
and Maydeu-Olivares (2004. 12) define social problem solving as a “[…] self-directed 
cognitive-behavioural process by which an individual, couple, or group attempts to identify or 
discover effective solutions for specific problems encountered in everyday living.” According 
to Maydeu-Olivares and D’Zurilla (1996), social problem solving has five different factors: 
positive and negative problem orientation, rational problem solving, impulsivity/carelessness, 
and avoidance. The Social Problem Solving Inventory–Revised (D’Zurilla et al., 2002), one 
of the most widely accepted instruments in social problem solving assessment, measures 
these five factors.  
Longitudinal studies with adults suggest that negative problem orientation predicts 
future depression, anxiety and stress (Ciarrochi and Scott, 2006). According to Ciarrochi. 
Leason and Heaven (2009), some adolescents also experience an increasingly negative 
problem orientation, and the negative problem orientation is in connection with worsening 
affect. D’Zurilla and Nezu (1990) suggested that having rationality improve the social 
behaviour of both children and adults. Rationality reduces impulsivity, as measures of 
impulsivity remained lower at one year follow up (e.g., Shure, 1999). However, some results 
(e.g., Cooper, 2011) indicated that having rationality alone does not improve behaviour in 
adolescence; for example, the early adolescents (11-year-olds) reported strong rationality and 
high aggressive behaviour (Kasik, 2014. 144). According to Takahashi, Koseki and 
Shimada’s research (2009), those adolescents who list less adequate modes of solution with 
regard to a problem situation tend to solve their conflicts more aggressively. An earlier study 
(Messer, 1976) also confirms that more impulsive children are worse problem-solvers if the 
means is not instantly apparent in a given situation. It is usually true, that boys can achieve 
higher scores in rationality, while positive problem orientation features girls more. Gender 
differencies considering impulsivity and avoidance varies, depending on the country the 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
179
survey was carried out (D’Zurilla, Maydeu-Olivares, and Kant, 1998; Kasik, 2015). These 
results can proceed cultural differences and socializational effects. 
In a previous Hungarian cross-sectional study (Kasik, 2009), the functioning of the five 
social problem solving factors among 12- and 14-year-olds was analysed. In addition to self-
evaluation, mothers and teachers also rated children’s social problem solving. Based on the 
self-assessment and mothers’ evaluation, positive problem orientation and rationality were 
higher among 14-year-olds and boys than 12-year-olds and girls. When all raters’ evaluations 
were considered, negative problem orientation was found to be higher among 14-year-olds 
than 12-year-olds and higher among girls than boys. According to the evaluations of children 
and teachers, impulsivity was higher among girls and features 14-year-olds than 12-year-olds 
more frequently. On the basis of teachers’ evaluation alone, avoidance turned out to be higher 
among 14-year-olds than 12-year-olds, and also more common among boys. The results were 
similar to those of other national studies; no data was available to assess development.  
Therefore, a decision to repeat the same study was made, one and two years later (2010 
and 2011), involving those children of the 2009 sample who were 12 years old (N = 183) at 
that time. Thus, it became possible to analyse development. In this study the raters were the 
children themselves, their mothers, and their teachers (the relationship between children’s and 
mothers’ responses is the strongest in most cases, and the largest divergence is observed 
between teachers’ and parents’ responses). Children’s and adults’ assessments of the five 
factors turned out to be different. The results of self-assessment indicated an increasing 
tendency with age in four factors (negative problem orientation, rationality, avoidance, and 
impulsivity), but in the case of positive problem orientation the values are similar. The 
mothers’ ratings remained almost the same across the studied ages in the case of positive and 
negative problem orientation, but they indicated an increasing tendency with age in the cases 
of impulsivity, rationality, and avoidance. According to teachers, negative problem 
orientation, rationality, and avoidance increase with age, while impulsivity and positive 
problem orientation are the highest among 12-year-olds and they are similar in the two last 
years (Kasik, 2014).  
Between 2014 and 2016 another longitudinal study was carried out, starting with 14 
years old students (N = 180) in 2014 (Kasik, 2014, 2015). Students filled out a self-reporting 
questionnaire and parents and teachers also evaluated them as in the case of the first 
longitudinal study (as with the first longitudinal study, the parent-children relationship is 
stronger than the children-teacher or parent-teacher connection in all studied years). The 
results of self-assessment indicated an increasing tendency with age in three factors (negative 
problem orientation, rationality, avoidance), decreasing tendency with age in one factor 
(positive problem orientation), but in the case of impulsivity the values remained similar. 
Mothers’ ratings stayed almost the same across the studied ages in the case of positive and 
negative problem orientation, rationality and impulsivity, but they indicated an increasing 
tendency with age in the case of avoidance. According to teachers, of the values of 
impulsivity are similar and avoidance increases with age. Negative problem orientation is the 
highest and positive problem orientation is the lowest among 16-year-olds. 
No significant difference was identified in the case of any of the factors among those 
who were 14 years old in 2011 and those who were the same age in 2012 (Kasik, 2014, 
2015). In light of this, the results of the two longitudinal queries can be handled together. In 
light of the compiled indicators of the two longitudinal studies, positive problem orientation 
is lower among 16-year-olds than at previous ages and negative problem orientation shows a 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
180
rising tendency; therefore, it can be concluded that their attitude towards problems and their 
solution gradually becomes more negative and 15-16-year-olds represent a decreased self-
sufficiency as compared to 12-13-year-olds. Impulsivity (emotional-based problem solving) is 
already high in the first examined years and it remained so throughout the study. Rationality 
and avoidance both exhibit considerably low correlation at all ages based on internal 
correlation values; these are the lowest of the positive correlations. In light of age-related 
changes it can be observed that rationality and avoidance are altogether not significant offsets 
to each other because both the former (consideration of possible scenarios, fact-based 
decisions) and the latter (abandoning the situation, quitting) show increase. The gender 
differences pointed out in the cross-sectional study were confirmed by the results of both 
longitudinal studies. Overall, it is clear that boys are more characterized by positive problem 
orientation and rationality, while girls are characterized by negative problem orientation, 
rationality and avoidance.  
 
 
Anxiety 
 
Virtually all the various trends in psychology (e.g., psychoanalytic/ psychodynamic, 
behaviourism, physiological, phenomenological, cognitive) study anxiety, its nature, 
interpretation and forms of representation (Strongman, 1995). The theoretical frameworks 
applied today draw a lot from these and upon constructing newer models they aspire to 
complexly describe anxiety as well as they try to integrate the information compiled by other 
scientific fields in their empirical studies. Allport’s theory of anxiety (1937) still provides the 
framework for a large number of research to present day (Endler and Kocovski, 2001). In 
order to measure state and trait anxiety as defined by Allport, Spielberger (1983) has 
developed the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) both for children and adults. Trait 
anxiety is a general, persistent predisposition: it is a consistent mode of reaction that 
manifests in different situations, a coherent, recurring and typical behavioural response which 
is characteristic of one when under pressure. State anxiety refers to those individual variations 
that regard the way one perceives the world and different events and how they react to them. 
In the meantime, Allport has emphasised that anxiety may be adaptive too which is rarer than 
anxiety that concurs with a feeling of discomfort that has a profoundly negative effect on 
one’s quality of life. 
Numerous biological and psychosocial changes take place during adolescence which 
may deepen state and trait anxiety. Based on international and Hungarian analysis (e.g., 
Garcia, Tully, Tarantino, South, Iacono, and McGue, 2013; Gádoros 1996; Guti, 2014; 
Haraszti, 1995; Oğuztürk, Bülbül, Özen, Ekici, Örnek, Ünlü, and Yüksel, 2012). State and 
trait anxiety levels of adolescents in a changing society, Kirikkale city 2012; Rachman, 2002), 
this period in one’s life is significant with regard to the display of symptoms of anxiety, 
however, the results of the research are various. According to Garcia et al. (2013), the 
heritability of trait anxiety increased with age, particularly between ages 14 and 18. Based on 
the research data collected by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), some forms of 
anxiety can be observed among 8-10% of the surveyed adolescents (between the ages of 13 
and 18). There has been no significant difference in levels of anxiety identified between the 
groups of 13-14, 15-16 and 17-18-year-old participants; however, the proportion of the ones 
with a high level anxiety was at around 25% in all groups. At the same time, a noteworthy 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
181
variance has been identified between boys’ and girls’ results; the latter have, in all cases, 
shown higher levels of anxiety. According to Oğuztürk et al. (2012), there are no differences 
in state and trait anxiety between boys and girls among 14- and 15-year-olds. Based on the 
research by La Greca and Lopez (1998), girls show more social anxiety than boys do in 
adolescent (in 10th through 12th grades).  
State and trait anxiety was examined by Guti (2014) among 14- (N = 123) and 18-year-
olds (N = 134) in Hungarian context. Based on the result, there is no significant difference 
between the two age groups concerning trait anxiety. Means and standard deviations are quite 
similar, and based on the differences of means, a slight difference can be concluded between 
the individuals. On the other hand, state anxiety features 14-year-olds more than 18-year-olds, 
and the difference is significant. The values of standard deviation in the case of 18-year-olds 
imply greater individual difference than in the case of 14-year-olds. Based on the calculating 
method used in clinical practice (l. Perczel-Forintos, Kiss, and Ajtay, 2005) high level of trait 
anxiety was found in the case of 16 students (12 girls and 4 boys) among 14-year-olds. 
Conserning state anxiety, a high level was revealed in 23 cases (16 girls and 7 boys) among 
14-year-old students. Among 18-year-olds, high level of trait anxiety was shown in 14 cases 
(9 girls and 4 boys) and high level of state anxiety in 17 cases (11 girls and 6 boys). Similar 
results were established among 13-year-old Hungarian students (N = 57). The proportion of 
people with high level of anxiety is approximately 12%, and more features boys than girls 
(Vizin, n. d.).  
 
 
Empathy  
 
Empathy is also a widely researched field of psychology, but it was approached in several 
ways during the last centuries, also depending on the culture. According to Davis (1980. 4) 
empathy is defined as a multidimensional construct to “[…] the ability to interpret and 
understand the experiences and feelings of others.“ Davis (1980) created a four-structure 
model of empathy differentiated the key components building up its psychological features: 
fantasy, perspective taking, empathic concern and personal distress. Based upon his model an 
instrument was constructed to measure the four factors of empathy, called Interpersonal 
Reactivity Index (IRI). For a long time it was the most widely accepted measurement of 
empathy, but nowadays it is criticized for its structure (Holgado Tello et al., 2013; Siu and 
Shek, 2005). Siu and Shek (2005) suggested a three-factor model of the measurement, by 
combining the major items of perspective taking and emphatic concern into one single factor.  
Based on international studies, seeds of empathy appear in early childhood, and 
developing during our whole life. The strongest level of empathy usually appears in early 
adolescence, but after that it can fade away, but in early adulthood it can also be as strong as 
before, but finally it decreases as time goes by (Buda, 2006). Stereotypes and popular culture 
suggest that women have a greater capacity for understanding others’ feelings and thoughts 
than men do (Klein and Hodges, 2001). Based on the empirical results famales are more 
emphatic than males and after the age of 14 gender differences starting to grow (Eisenber and 
Lennon, 1983; Mestre, Samper, Frías, and Tur, 2009). Gender differences in perspective 
taking emerged during adolescence. Girls showed higher level of empathic concern than boys, 
which level decreased from early to middle adolescence. Lower empathic concern was 
reported by physically more matured boys, than by their less physically developed peers (Van 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
182
der Graaff, Branje, De Wied, Hawk, Van Lier, and Meeus, 2014).  
Siu and Shek (2005) as well as Guti (2014) could not managed to identify the original 
four-factor of empathy, in their results perspective taking and emphatic concern creates one 
single factor. Based on the results of the three-factor model, there is no significant difference 
in fantasy among the two examined age groups, but the combined factor (perspective taking 
and emphatic concern) and personal distress significantly features 14-year-olds more. 
Personal disress is more common among 14 years old girls, than among boys in the same age. 
 
 
Relationship between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy in 
Adolescents – Some Earlier Results  
 
Studies on social problem solving have been focusing on age, gender and cultural 
differences and development for a very long time. The development of social problem solving 
depends on many mediator (e.g., super traits, anxiety) and moderator variables (e.g., family 
and school background). Data and findings draw attention to the fact that, on the one hand, 
adolescence is an important period regarding the manifestation of symptoms of anxiety and, 
on the other hand, its connection with other psychic features, for example with social problem 
solving and empathy, is already profound at this period in one’s life in light of which 
symptoms of anxiety may be even better treated (e.g., Chang, D’Zurilla, and Sanna, 2004). A 
considerable and growing number of international research papers focus on the characteristics 
of anxiety among adolescents and their relation to other aspects of personality features (e.g., 
Essau, Leung, Conradt, Cheng, and Wong, 2008; Rachman, 2002). 
Longitudinal studies involving adult participants suggest that negative problem 
orientation predicts future anxiety and stress (Ciarrochi and Scott, 2006). This pattern is also 
seen in adolescence: adolescents characterised dominantly by positive problem orientation 
were shown to exhibit positive emotions and empathy more frequently (Ciarrochi et al., 
2009). Furthermore, positive problem orientation also seems to be related to better family 
quality of life (e.g., through fewer parent-adolescent conflicts). This latter effect, in turn, has a 
positive influence on relationships with peers and on social problem solving at school. 
Rational problem solving improves the social behaviour of both children and adults, but this 
is still a matter of debate (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 1990). The findings of Shure (1999) seem to 
bear out this proposition while there is also evidence to suggest the opposite: in a study by 
Cooper (2011), early adolescents were found to exhibit rational problem solving and a high 
level of aggression and negative emotions at the same time. 
Nezu, Wilkins and Nezu (2004) point out that the connection between anxiety and social 
problem solving is still sizably diverse among young adults. Research shows that trait anxiety 
displays a strong link with positive problem orientation, and a positive coherence with 
negative problem orientation among them (e.g., Belzer, D’Zurilla, and Maydeu-Olivares 
2002; Bond, Lyle, Tappe, Seehafer, and D’Zurilla, 2002). Apart from problem orientation the 
solution style is also in tight accordance with anxiety, especially with regard to avoidance, to 
a lesser degree to impulsivity, and to the least to rationality (e.g., Belzer et al., 2002; Haaga, 
Fine, Terrill, Stewart, and Beck, 1995).  
Siu and Shek (2005) pointed out that empathy (empathic concern and perspective taking) 
has a significantly positive correlation with the positive dimensions of social problem solving, 
while the correlation with the negative dimensions of social problem solving is significantly 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
183
negative. Personal distress positively correlates with the negative, negatively with the positive 
factors of social problem solving. Fantasy has a good influence on positive problem 
orientation of problem solving. Batanova and Loukas (2011) examined the relationship 
between empathy and anxiety among 10 and 14 years old students. Based on their result there 
is no strong connection between the examined fields, but girls showed higher level of 
empathy and anxiety in both age groups.  
Guti (2014) found a similar relationship between anxiety and empathy among 14- and 
18-year-old Hungarian students. In connection with background variables, some new and 
important results were pointed out: almost all of the students, who have high level of state and 
trait anxiety, live in single-parent families, the parents have low educational level, the 
students have high level of personal distress and they have poor academic achievement. The 
results draw attention to the important role of moderator variables. 
 
 
Relationship between Social Problem Solving and Moderator Variables 
 
Evidence suggests that contextual variables also have a significant influence on the 
development of social problem solving. Family structure and one’s position within that 
structure during childhood and adolescence might be the most important factors to influence 
one’s problem solving behavior (e.g., Grusec and Davidov, 2007). The studies of Pakaslathi 
et al. (2002) and Keltikangas-Järvinen (2005) point out that the development of social 
problem solving is also strongly determined by the interactions within the family (e.g., 
between parents and children, between child and child), and by mothers’ and by fathers’ 
problem-solving strategies as models. Perez, Gesten, Cowen, Weissberg, Rapkin and Bolke 
(1981) found that children with family problems were less effective in terms of social 
problem solving in a school environment. Parenting techniques (influenced by the education 
they have received), and the parents’ behaviour during family free time activities and during 
learning with their children can also have a significant effect (e.g., Hofferth  Sandberg, 
2001). A number of studies (e.g., Jessor, Turbin,  Costa, 1998) reported higher levels of 
problem behaviour among adolescents of less advantaged demographic backgrounds. 
Adolescents with higher levels of positive problem orientation had higher levels of positive 
emotional and empathy. Higher levels of positive problem orientation were also related to 
better quality of family life (e.g., fewer parent-adolescent social problems and conflicts). The 
parents-adolescent relationship has an important and positive effect on relationship with peers 
and on social problem solution in school (Kasik, 2014, 2015). 
Upon the analysis of various national data cultural and social influences have to be taken 
into consideration as well which may draw up a picture of varying degrees regarding the 
characteristics and shifts in social problem solving (Chang et al., 2004). Variation can be 
considerable in terms of problem orientation (positive and negative), and problem-solving 
style (rationality, impulsivity, avoidance). According to Chang (2001), there are typical and 
well-described differences between Western and Eastern cultures, for instance in optimism 
and pessimism. A review of the literature on Hungary and other countries leads to the 
conclusion that Hungarians are very pessimistic in connection with their future and self-
efficacy in their own interpersonal relationships (Kopp, Skrabski, Réthelyi, Kawachi, and 
Adler, 2004). A considerable proportion of Hungarian males (10–15%) suffer from chronic 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
184
stress with symptoms of exhaustion and depression, often accompanied by pessimism and a 
confrontational attitude toward the world around them. Partly due to pessimism, avoidance 
and emotion-based tackling in conflicts are already displayed by a large number of 
adolescents (Kopp et al., 2004; Margitics and Pauvlik, 2008). 
 
 
AIMS AND HYPOTHESES 
 
In our research among 12- and 16-year-olds we studied (1) the characteristics of 
adolescents’ social problem solving, state and trait anxiety and empathy, (2) whether or not 
there are any gender differences in each age group (3) how social problem solving relates to 
state and trait anxiety and to empathy as well as (4) to some background variables (family 
type, parents’ educational level, family free time activities in family), where the factors of 
social problem solving were used as dependent variables, and the factors of state and trait 
anxiety and empathy, and background variables were used as independent variables. 
Regarding earlier international and Hungarian surveys, the assumption was that (1) state 
and trait anxiety, personal distress are both more common among older participants as well as 
negative problem orientation, rationality, impulsivity and avoidance, and positive problem 
orientation, empathic concern and perspective taking is more typical of the younger ones; (2) 
variation according to gender, especially in terms of solution style, is more characteristic 
among the older ones and girls have a higher level of state and trait anxiety and empathic 
concern and perspective taking; (3) negative problem orientation and avoidance show the 
closest correspondence with anxiety at both ages and that the social problem solving of those 
with a higher level of state and trait anxiety is different from those with a lower one (with 
regard to both orientation and solution style), and the positive dimensions of social problem 
solving shows a stronger relationship with empathic concern and perspective taking at both 
age groups, while negative problem orientation has a connection with personal distress; (4) of 
all the background variables it is the composition of one’s family and their parents’ education 
that define social problem solving the most. 
 
 
METHODS 
 
Participants 
 
The study was carried out in 2013 in 8 schools and 10 school classes in Hungary (N = 
245 – female: 54%, male: 46%). 12- and (M: 12.3, SD: .12 – N = 118) 16-year-olds (M: 16.1, 
SD: .13 – N = 127) participated in the survey. Gender proportion is similar to the whole 
sample’s gender ratio in the case of both subsamples. The native language of all participants 
was Hungarian. To analyse some characteristics of family background, we utilised our own 
instrument (Family Background Questionnaire – Kasik, 2009). The questionnaire includes 
five factors: (1) family type (FT); (2) mother’s educational level (MEL); (3) father’s 
educational level (FEL); (4) free time activities in family (FTA).  
Children specified FT in the first part of the questionnaire in their own words. Based on 
their responses, a system of categories was developed: 1 = mother and father with one child; 2 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
185
= mother and father with two or more children; 3 = mother with one child; 4 = mother with 
two or more children; 5 = father with one child; 6 = father with two or more children; 7 = 
grandparent/s with child/ren; 8 = other adult/s with child/ren; 9 = child with older brother or 
older sister. The distribution of FT categories was found to be similar in both studied groups 
(χ2 = 5.03 p = .72). The first category (mother and father with child) represented the largest 
percentage of family types (45–57%). The aggregate distribution of the first, second (16–
24%, mother and father with two or more children), and third (11–20%, mother with one 
child) categories added up to approximately 80%. 
The categories of MEL and FEL are: 1 = elementary school; 2 = vocational school; 3 = 
high school; 4 = college or university. The distribution of mothers’ and fathers’ educational 
levels were the same in the two groups (mothers: χ2 = 9.11 p = .79; fathers: χ2 = 6.45 p = .84). 
Among the mothers, those with college or university education were over-represented, while 
among the fathers, high school education was dominant (χ2 = 51.12 p = .03). FTA assesses 
the amount of time spent on free time activities (e.g., playing, watching TV, going to the 
cinema, etc.) with children in a week: 1 = less than 1 hour; 2 = 1-2 hours; 3 = 2-3 hours; 4 = 
3-4 hours; 5 = more than 4 hours. The distributions of free time activities in family categories 
turned out to be significantly different in the two groups (χ2 = 40.11 p = .03). The explanation 
of this difference lies in the finding that among the 12-year-olds the aggregate distribution of 
the first, second and third categories (up to 3 hours a day) was 68%, while in the case of the 
16-year-olds the mentioned categories added up to 83% of the entire distribution. In other 
words, time spent on shared FTA decreases with age. 
 
 
Instruments 
 
Social problem solving. We used the short version of SPSI–R (Social Problem Solving 
Inventory–Revised, D’Zurilla, Nezu,  Maydeu-Olivares, 2002). This version assesses the 
five factors of SPS: Positive problem orientation; Negative problem orientation; Rational 
problem solving; Impulsivity/Carelessness; Avoidance. All factors include five items 
(resulting in a total of 25 items). Positive problem orientation covers elements of constructive 
problem solving, such as self-efficacy and positive outcome expectancy. Negative problem 
orientation covers a set of dysfunctional cognitive-emotional schemes, for instance low self-
efficacy and negative outcome expectancy. Rational problem solving can be defined as a 
constructive problem solving style that is characterised by rational, deliberate, and systematic 
application of effective social-problem skills. Impulsivity/Carelessness is a set of 
dysfunctional problem solving attempts like impulsivity and carelessness. Avoidance is a 
dysfunctional dimension characterised by passivity and attempts to shift the responsibility of 
problem solving to others. The SPSI–R:S subscales consist of 5-point (from 0 to 4) Likert-
type items where: 0 = Not at all true of me; 1 = Slightly true of me; 2 = Moderately true of 
me; 3 = Very true of me; 4 = Extremely true of me. We got the original factor structure on the 
Hungarian sample,KMO is .73 (12-year-olds) and .76 (16-year-olds). The reliability 
(Cronbach-α) of the questionnaires is .86 (12-year-olds) and .89 (16-year-olds). The 
questionnaire had an adequate reliability in this survey, as well as in the case of previous 
studies.  
State and trait anxiety. To measure state and trait anxiety we have utilised the children’s 
version of the self-evaluative Spielberger’s State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (1983, Hungarian 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
186
adaptation: Sipos, Sipos,  Spielberger, 1988). 20 statements refer to state anxiety and 
another 20 to trait anxiety. The statements that relate to trait anxiety (e.g., I’m afraid for no 
particular reason; Occasionally, I cry; Occasionally, I can’t sleep) have to be assessed on a 
three-point scale (1 = hardly ever, 2 = sometimes, 3 = often). Regarding state anxiety, 
participants have to choose from three statements (e.g., I’m very calm; I’m calm; I’m not 
calm) at every given aspect (e.g., calmness). The calculation process as applied in clinical 
practice serves the purpose of identifying high levels of state and trait anxiety in every given 
child and adult (Perczel Forintos, Kiss, and Ajtay, 2005). Based on this procedure and in the 
case of trait anxiety, every answer has its own value: 1 point for hardly ever, 2 points for 
sometimes, and 3 points for often. In the case of state anxiety, a negative answer has a value 
of 3 (e.g., I’m not calm.), a positive answer has a value of 2 (e.g., I’m calm.), and an overly 
positive answer (e.g., I’m very calm.) has a value of 1. Trait anxiety is considered to be of a 
high level above 35 points and state anxiety above 38 points. The reliability (Cronbach-α) of 
the questionnaires are good (12: state = .85, trait = .81; 16: state = .87, trait = .83). 
Empathy. Interpersonal Reactivity Index (IRI) of Davis (1980) was adapted (Rózsa, n. d.) 
to measure empathy (perspective taking, fantasy, empathic concern, personal distress). The 
intrument contains 28 statements (7 statemants/factor). The items of fantasy gives us 
information about how can the individual imagine himself into a given character, or other 
persons place; perspective taking informs us about accepting spontaneously others 
perspective; the satements of empathic concern explore how can the individual able to care 
for others problems; and personal distress shows us the the level of anxiety for himself. The 
measurement contains Likert-type items where: 0 = Not at all true of me; 1 = Slightly true of 
me; 2 = Moderately true of me; 3 = Very true of me; 4 = Extremely true of me. The reliability 
(Cronbach-α) of the questionnaires is .61 (12-year-olds) and .75 (16-year-olds). We used a 
modified factor structure for measuring empathy. As it was suggested by some earlier 
international (e.g., Siu  Shek, 2005) and Hungarian (Guti, 2014) researchers, we used a 
three factors model for empathy. Based on the factor analysis for empathy only three factor 
appeared separately: fantasy, personal distress and a third one which is majorly the mixture of 
empathic concern and perspective taking (the KMO is .73 among 12-year-olds and .76 among 
16-year-olds). The reliability (Cronbach-α) of the IRI is .76 (12-year-olds) and .78 (16-year-
olds). 
 
 
Data Collection and Statistical Analysis 
 
Students filled in the SPSI–R:S, IRI and the Spielberger’s State-Trait Anxiety Inventory 
at school in the classroom. Mothers filled in the FBQ during parent-teacher meetings. 
Informed consent was obtained from all participants (in the case of children, the consent was 
obtained from their parents). All children’s parents allowed pedagogical evaluation and they 
have also verified their participation in the study and the evaluation their children with their 
signature (based on Hungarian Ethical Norms for Psychologist). For the analyses of age and 
gender differences the independent sample t test was utilised. In order to reveal the relation of 
the background variables to the factors, regression analysis was used. The distribution of the 
background variables was determined with the χ2 test.  
 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
187
RESULTS 
 
Social Problem Solving: Age and Gender Differences 
 
Table 1 shows the characteristics of social problem solving per factor in both age groups. 
Based on the results, positive problem orientation is significantly more typical of the 12-year-
olds while negative problem orientation, rationality, impulsivity, and avoidance are more 
common among the 16-year-olds. Impulsivity and avoidance are more distinctive among 16-
year-old girls (impulsivity: t = 1.42 p = .04; avoidance: t = 1.33 p = .03), and rationality is 
more representative among 16-year-old boys (t = 1.16 p = .03). 
 
Table 1. Social problem solving as per age and factor (M, SD, t, p) 
 
Factors of social problem solving 
12-year-olds 
16-year-olds 
t 
p 
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
 PPO 
11.22 
1.57 
11.20 
1.20 
1.22 
.04 
 NPO 
7.26 
1.09 
9.91 
1.41 
1.56 
.03 
 RPS 
10.03 
1.10 
11.78 
1.60 
1.33 
.04 
 ICS 
12.01 
1.25 
14.22 
1.24 
1.40 
.04 
 AS 
8.44 
1.66 
9.67 
1.47 
1.16 
.03 
Notes. PPO = Positive Problem Orientation; NPO = Negative Problem Orientation; RPS = Rational 
Problem Solving; ICS = Impulsivity/Carelessness Style; AS = Avoidance Style. 
 
 
Anxiety: Age and Gender Differences 
 
Table 2 shows the results of state and trait anxiety as per age. The difference between the 
two age groups is only significant in the case of state anxiety, and features 16-year-olds more. 
The level of trait anxiety is similar in the sample of both the 12- and 16-year-old participants. 
Variation among boys and girls is only noteworthy in the case of trait anxiety among the 12-
year-olds and state anxiety among the 16-year-olds. Trait anxiety is more typical of 12-year-
old girls (t = 2.33 p = .03) while state anxiety is more common amongst 16-year-old girls (t = 
1.56 p = .04), both as compared to their peers of the opposite sex. 
 
Table 2. State and trait anxiety as per age (M, SD, t, p) 
 
Anxiety 
12-year-olds 
16-year-olds 
t 
p 
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
 State 
1.44 
.28 
1.67 
.21 
1.78 
.04 
 Trait 
1.64 
.32 
1.70 
.41 
1.22 
.31 
 
The proportion of those with higher levels of state and trait anxiety amounts to about 
12% in both age samples on the basis of the clinical procedure that aims to filter the number 
of these students. 20 of them (12 girls and 8 boys) display increased trait anxiety (the lowest 
of the highest total points being 43 and the highest being 55). The three highest total points all 
belong to girls. 25 children (15 girls and 10 boys) demonstrate high levels anxiety in the case 
of state anxiety (the lowest of the highest total points being 45 and the highest 53). Of the 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
188
three highest total points two belong to girls and one to a boy. Ten students show increased 
levels in terms of both types of anxiety among the 12-year-olds, 7 of who are girls and 3 boys. 
Trait anxiety is high in the case of 14 students (10 girls and 4 boys) among the 16-year-
olds (the lowest of the highest total points being 42 and the highest being 51) and the highest 
number of total points all belong to girls. 15 children (10 girls and 5 boys) have an increased 
value of state anxiety (the lowest of the highest being 41 and the highest being 58). The 
highest value in terms of state anxiety belongs to a girl, once again, followed by boys in the 
second and third place. Both anxiety levels are high in the case of ten students; 8 girls and 2 
boys. 
 
 
Empathy: Age and Gender Differences 
 
In the case of empathy age differences cannot be shown on the basis of the original, four-
factor model of empathy. Based on the three-factor model (see Table 3), personal distress is 
more typical for the 16-year-olds than for the younger ones. In aspect of gender differences, it 
was shown that 16-year-old girls are more often characterized by empathic concern and 
perspective taking, and personal distress, than 16-year-old boys (t = 1,44 p = .03).  
 
Table 3. Empathy as per age and factor (M, SD, t, p) 
 
Factors of empathy 
12-year-olds 
16-year-olds 
t 
p 
M 
SD 
M 
SD 
 F  
2.22 
.63 
2.56 
.61 
1.12 
.07 
 PD  
2.54 
.41 
2.79 
.43 
1.89 
.04 
 ECPT  
2.55 
.51 
2.86 
.58 
1.05 
.06 
Notes. F = Fantasy; PD = Personal Distress; ECPT = Empathic concern and perspective taking. 
 
 
Relationship between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety, Empathy, and Some 
Moderator Variables – Results of Regression Analysis 
 
Factors of social problem solving have been added to the regression analysis as 
dependent variables while state and trait anxiety, empathy and the background variables have 
been included as independent variables. The analysis has been carried out age group-wise. In 
the case of both age groups and all the factors, the Goodness-of-fit value that expresses the 
alignment with the regression line was .67 or higher. The results are shown in Tables 4 (12-
year-olds) and 5 (16-year-olds).  
Based on the regression analysis (see Tables 4 and 5), the accounted for variations in the 
two age groups – except for positive problem orientation – are nearly similar in all factors. 
Independent variables account for positive problem orientation to a lesser degree among 16-
year-olds (R2 = .18) than among 12-year-olds (R2 = .26). State and trait anxiety explain the 
factors of social problem solving to a higher grade in the older participants (.010–.54) than in 
the younger ones (.009–.044). The effects of state anxiety are greater on the factors of social 
problem solving and both state and trait anxiety explains impulsivity and avoidance the 
utmost in both age groups. On the contrary, family variables among 12-year-olds (.023–.071) 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
189
appear to be more noticeable in terms of elucidating the factors than among the older ones 
(.023–.073). The family type determine negative problem orientation and impulsivity in both 
age, while the free time activities define the orientation of problem-solving mostly. Mothers’ 
educational level influences negative problem orientation the greatest, and fathers’ 
educational level impacts rationality.  
 
Table 4. The impact of independent variables on the factors of social Problem-Solving 
(dependent variables): 12-year-olds, N = 118 
 
Independent variables 
Social Problem-Solving’ factors (dependent variables) 
PPO 
NPO 
RPS 
ICS 
AS 
SA 
.016 
.016 
.009 
.023 
.044 
TA 
.013 
.011 
.010 
.016 
.031 
F 
.011 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
PD 
n.s. 
.033 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
ECPT 
.023 
n.s. 
.067 
n.s. 
n.s. 
FT 
.023 
.069 
.018 
.070 
.054 
MEL 
.064 
.096 
.049 
.049 
.040 
FEL 
.055 
.039 
.068 
.029 
.033 
FTA 
.068 
.072 
.034 
.073 
.061 
Explained variance (R2) 
.26 
.37 
.22 
.26 
.28 
Notes. PPO = Positive Problem Orientation; NPO = Negative Problem Orientation; RPS = Rational 
Problem Solving; ICS = Impulsivity/Carelessness Style; AS = Avoidance Style. SA = State 
Anxiety; TA = Trait Anxiety; F = Fantasy; PD = Personal distress; ECPT = Empathic concern and 
perspective taking; FT = Family Type; MEL = Mother’s Educational Level; FEL = Father’s 
Educational Level; FTA = Free Time Activities in family; in all cases p<.05. The values are the 
products of B (unstandardised estimates) and β (standardised estimates); n.s. = non significant. 
 
Table 5. The impact of independent variables on the factors of social Problem-Solving 
(dependent variables): 16-year-olds, N = 127 
 
Independent variables 
Social Problem-Solving’ factors (dependent variables) 
PPO 
NPO 
RPS 
ICS 
AS 
SA 
.011 
.023 
.010 
.029 
.054 
TA 
.015 
.021 
.015 
.021 
.035 
F 
.013 
n.s. 
.008 
n.s. 
n.s. 
PD 
n.s. 
.043 
n.s. 
.052 
.012 
ECPT 
.034 
n.s. 
.056 
n.s. 
.008 
FT 
.023 
.059 
.024 
.063 
.049 
MEL 
.051 
.087 
.048 
.034 
.042 
FEL 
.047 
.029 
.071 
.023 
.036 
FTA 
.042 
.039 
.023 
.039 
.035 
Explained variance (R2) 
.18 
.35 
.19 
.28 
.27 
Notes. PPO = Positive Problem Orientation; NPO = Negative Problem Orientation; RPS = Rational 
Problem Solving; ICS = Impulsivity/Carelessness Style; AS = Avoidance Style. SA = State 
Anxiety; TA = Trait Anxiety; F = Fantasy; PD = Personal distress; ECPT = Empathic concern and 
perspective taking; FT = Family Type; MEL = Mother’s Educational Level; FEL = Father’s 
Educational Level; FTA = Free Time Activities in family; in all cases p<.05. The values are the 
products of B (unstandardised estimates) and β (standardised estimates); n.s. = non significant. 
 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
190
The explanation power of the factors of empathy is lower than anxiety’s and background 
variables’. Fantasy affects positive problem orientation in both age, while it has an impact on 
rationality only at the older ones. Positive problem orientation and rationality are also 
explained by empathic concern and perspective taking in both age, as well as avoidance in the 
case of 16-year-olds, but very slightly. Personal distress also determines negative problem 
orientation in the case of both age group, but also influences impulsivity and avoidance at the 
age of 16.  
 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
The aim of our cross-sectional study was to shed light on links between 12- and 16-year-
olds’ social problem solving, empathy and state and trait anxiety also with regard to 
background variables. According to international research, adolescence is a prominent period 
in terms of manifesting different forms of anxiety that may also influence one’s later life. 
Adolescence is also an important time in terms of the development of social problem solving 
which can be influenced by their empathy. The results of the present study strengthen 
unequivocally international and Hungarian research experience in the same domain. The 
results extend our knowledge of adolescents’ social functioning. 
The hypothesis of the existence of age-related differences in social problem solving has 
been verified. In line with this, positive problem orientation was more typical of 12-year-olds 
and negative problem orientation, rationality, impulsivity and avoidance were more common 
among 16-year-olds, which was also proved by the results of our longitudinal study (Kasik, 
2014). Overall, it can be seen that all factors of social problem solving show an increasing 
tendency, except positive problem orientation: the 16-year-olds show a growing tendency to 
define problems, to make conscious decisions before actually solving, to interpret problems in 
multiple perspectives, and to take more potential solutions into consideration. It is also the 
16-year-olds who typically interpret having to solve problematic social situations as a 
negative phenomenon. Furthermore, children belonging to this cohort tend to base their 
decisions and realizations on emotions more frequently than members of the other studied 
cohorts. Problem avoidance and postponement of solution are more characteristic of 16-year-
olds than younger children. 
Gender-related hypotheses were also confirmed by the results, significant differences 
were found only among the older ones. In accordance with the hypothesis, gender-related 
variation is more apparent among 16-year-olds, with impulsivity and avoidance being more 
typical of girls and rationality of boys. This is perfectly in line with earlier Hungarian 
longitudinal research (Kasik, 2014). It is worthy to note that based on the results of an own 
developed avoidance questionnaire (Kasik, Guti, Tóth, and Fejes, 2016), the statements of 
avoidance factor of SPSI-R (forms of avoidance) are more common of girls at the age of 15 
and 18, but using the new questionnaire new form of avoidance can be examined, like 
annulment, avoidance because of external pressure and escape, which feature the boys more. 
Thus the gender-related difference is only true for those forms of avoidance which are 
measured by SPSI-R, in other cases generalization about girls tend to avoid more is not 
proved by the results. In the case of avoidance, it is worth to analyse this problem-solving 
style by forms of avoidance.  

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
191
Examining empathy, it was undoubtedly shown that personal distress is significantly 
stronger at age of 16 than at the age of 12. Based on the empirical result it is also can be 
assumed that personal distress is constantly increasing during age. In gender difference it was 
pointed out that girls are more often characterized by empathic concern, perspective taking, 
and personal distress, than boys, so our hypothesis was partially verified. This difference was 
proved in the case of personal distress in Hungarian context by Guti (2014). It is possible that 
personal distress already shows diffence in the first couple of years of puberty. According to 
Batanova and Loukas (2011), the girls showed higher level of empathy and anxiety in both 
10- and 14-year-olds. Based on the results famales are more emphatic than males and after the 
age of 14 gender differences starting to grow (Eisenber and Lennon, 1983; Mestre, Samper, 
Frías, and Tur, 2009). The statement about girls is more emphatetic should be preceised, 
because it depends on which component of empathy is examined. Based on the result of our 
and previous studies it also can be seen, that personal distress and emphatic cocern 
significantly features girls more.  
The theories regarding anxiety have been only partially verified as, based on the findings, 
it is only state anxiety that is more common among 16-year-olds. Trait anxiety is more typical 
of 12-year-old girls while state anxiety is more common among 16-year-old girls. This result 
is opposite with some earlier international data (e.g., Oğuztürk et al., 2012), but on the other 
hand confirmed parts of previous Hungarian results (Guti, 2014) concerning the characteritics 
of the age groups, but if we check the Hungarian studies, we can see really varied results 
about gender differences (e.g., Vizin, n. d.; Guti, 2014). It is also worth to examine, what kind 
of personality and environmental factors influence the development of anxiety among boys 
and girls in adolescence. Upon comparing results of current research with NIMH data, it may 
be concluded that, in addition to gender-related differences, age-related variations have also 
been identified in both age groups. As compared to boys, trait anxiety is more characteristic 
of 12-year-old girls while state anxiety is more specific to 16-year-old girls. The number of 
students with increased levels of (both state and trait) anxiety is in line with NIMH data 
(around 10%) and, in this respect, girls outnumber boys in our research as well. 
Results of surveys carried out with SPSI-R among adolescents and young adults (18-19-
year-olds) show that trait anxiety is in a positive relationship with negative problem 
orientation and in a negative one with positive problem orientation (e.g., Bond et al., 2002; 
Nezu et al., 2002), and rationality is in negative coherence with anxiety while it is in a 
positive one with avoidance and impulsivity (e.g., Haaga et al., 1995). Based on Siu and 
Shek’s (2005) results empathic concern and perspective taking have a significantly positive 
correlation with the positive problem orientation and rationality, while the correlation with 
the negative problem orientation, impulsivity and avoidance is significantly negative in 
adolescence. Personal distress positively correlates with the negative, negatively with the 
positive factors of social problem solving. Fantasy has a good influence on positive problem 
orientation of problem solving.  
Upon the regression analysis the factors of social problem solving are explained by both 
the factors of empathy, state and trait anxiety and background variables similarly among 12- 
and 16-year-olds. The only exception is the positive problem orientation where the explained 
variance is lower at the age of 16, than at the age of 12. Presumably other factors have 
influence on this field during years, which was experienced in our longitudinal study. We also 
saw that from mid-puberty more cognitive factors, like inductive reasoning, will be involved 
in the development of rationality (Kasik, 2012, 2014).  

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
192
With regard to the links between anxiety and social problem solving in participants with a 
higher level of trait anxiety, our findings are identical to other studies (e.g., Haaga et al., 
1995). Regardless of age, the degree of negative problem orientation and avoidance is higher 
among those with increased anxiety as compared to those with lower levels of anxiety. These 
links can be identified in adults as well; therefore, it may be assumed that the connection 
between these aspects of social problem solving and anxiety is more specific to those with 
higher levels of anxiety. 
Several studies have proven that the solution style is largely dependent of the family 
background, the patterns and forms of communication observed within it (e.g., Chang et al., 
2004; Pakaslahti et al., 2002). Hungarian cross-sectional and longitudinal studies (Kasik, 
2009, 2014) aimed at the characteristics of social problem solving both show that family 
background plays a crucial role pre-adolescence and, going forward, a decreasing one. This 
study supports the earlier research. The composition of one’s family and parents’ educational 
levels are the most profoundly influential in terms of social problem solving in both age 
groups. It is noteworthy that mothers’ education (one of the main determinants of their 
educational style and practice) significantly affects negative problem orientation while 
fathers’ education impacts rationality. Castan et al. (1985) obtained similar results in 
connection with mothers’ educational level. It has not been revealed by this research, but 
others (e.g., Coie, 1990; Webster-Stratton, 1988) have shed light on the fact that of the 
aspects influenced by mothers are profoundly affected by their exemplary problem-solving 
behaviour. Their impact is most significant among those adolescents whose mothers’ suffer 
from some form of psychic disease, for example depression. It is advisable to study in a 
Hungarian sample how mothers’ characteristics affect their children’s anxiety and what links 
do they bear with regard to the orientation and style of social problem solving. 
When interpreting our results in connection with social problem solving, empathy and 
anxiety, we have to take cultural differences into consideration. There are typical differences 
between Western and Eastern cultures, for example in optimism or pessimism (e.g., Chang, 
2001). Based on the international and Hungarian investigations, Hungarians are very 
pessimistic in connection with their future and self-efficacy in their own interpersonal 
relationships and the level of stress is high (e.g., Kopp et al., 2004).  
It is absolutely sensible to examine the relationship between social problem solving, 
empathy and anxiety with other instruments, extended to other age groups because, according 
to research in the field of the development and the success of development in adolescents, it is 
not only becoming more difficult to involve and keep anxious, avoiding and highly impulsive 
students in programmes, but making progress among them is less and less effective which can 
be partially accounted for with the collective presence of these characteristics (e.g., 
Frauenknecht and Black, 2009).  
The findings of current paper will serve as the basis of a proposed development 
programme planned for 2016/2017. The aim of the programme will be to enhance 
adolescents’ social problem solving within the school framework by taking the characteristics 
revealed in other fields (e.g., anxiety, competition, cooperation) and environmental factors 
(e.g., family background, being disadvantaged) into consideration.  
 
 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
193
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This research was supported by the European Union and the State of Hungary, co-
financed by the European Social Fund in the framework of TÁMOP 4.2.4. A/2-11-1-2012-
0001 (National Excellence Program). At the time of research, László Kasik was holder of 
Zoltán Magyary Postdoctoral Fellowship. At the time of writing this paper, László Kasik was 
holder of János Bolyai Research Fellowship of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. At the 
time of writing this paper, Csaba Gáspár was holder of the ’For the nation’s talents’ 
Scholarship awarded by the Ministery of Human Resources of Hungary (NTP-EFÖ-P-15).  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality – A psychological interpretation. New York: Henry Holt 
and Company.  
Batanova, M. D. and Loukas, A. (2011). Social anxiety and aggression in early adolescents: 
Examining the moderating roles of empathic concern and perspective taking. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence. 40, 1534-1543. 
Belzer, K. D., D’Zurilla, T. J. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2002). Social problem solving and 
trait anxiety as predictors of worry in a college student population. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 33, 573-585.  
Bond, D. S., Lyle, R. M., Tappe, M. K., Seehafer, R. S. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (2002). Moderate 
aerobic exercise, T’ai Chi, and social problem-solving ability in relation to psychological 
stress. International Journal of Stress Management, 9, 329-343. 
Buda, B. (2006). Empátia. A beleélés lélektana Empathy. Budapest: Urbis Könyvkiadó. 
Castan, B., Gallois, C. and Callan, J. V. (1985). Problem-Solving Interactions between Greek 
Mothers and Children. The Journal of Social Psychology, 125(3), 335-340.  
Chang, E. C. (2001). Optimism and pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and 
practice. Washington, DC, US: American Psychological Association. 
Chang, E. C., D’Zurilla, T. J. and Sanna, L. J. (2004). Social problem solving. Theory, 
research, and training. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Ciarrochi, J. and Scott, G. (2006). The link between emotional competence and well-being: a 
longitudinal study. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 34, 231-244. 
Ciarrochi, J., Leeson, P. and Heaven, P. C. L. (2009). A longitudinal study into the interplay 
between problem orientation and adolescent well-being. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 56, 441-449. 
Coie, J. D. (1990). Toward a theory of peer rejection. In S. R. Asher and J. D. Coie (Eds.), 
Peer rejection in childhood (pp. 365-401). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cooper, J. O. (2011). Aggression and Rational Problem-Solving Skills of Early Adolescence. 
UMI Dissertation Publishing.  
Davis, M. H. (1980). A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy. 
JSAS Catalog Select Documents Psychology, 10, 85. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (1990). Development and preliminary evaluation of the 
Social Problem-Solving Inventory. Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 2, 156-163. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Maydeu-Olivares, A. and Kant, G. L. (1998). Age and gender differences in 
social problem solving ability. Personality and Individual Differences, 25, 241-252.  

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
194
D’Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2002). Social Problem-Solving 
Inventory–Revised (SPSI–R): Technical Manual. North Tonawanda, NY: Multi-Health 
Systems. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2004). Social problem solving. Theory 
and assessment. In E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem 
solving. Theory, research, and training (pp. 11-29). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
Eisenberg, N. and Lennon, R. (1983). Sex differences in empathy and related capacities. 
Psychological Bulletin. 94(1), 100-131. 
Elliott, T., Bush, B. and Chen, Y. (2006). Social problem solving abilities predict pressure 
sore occurrence in the first three years of spinal cord injury. Rehabilitation Psychology, 
51, 69-77. 
Endler, N. S. and Kocovski, N. L. (2001). State and trait anxiety revisited. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders. 15, 231-245.  
Essau, C. A., Leung, P. W. L., Conradt, J., Cheng, H. and Wong, T. (2008). Anxiety 
symptoms in Chinese and German adolescents: Their relationship with early learning 
experiences, perfectionism, and learning motivation. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 801-
810. 
Frauenknecht, M. and Black, D. R. (2009). Is it social problem solving or decision making? 
Implications for health education. American Journal of Health Education, 41(2), 112-
123.  
Gádoros, J. (1996). Depresszió és szorongásos zavarok gyermek- és serdülőkorban 
Depression and anxiety in childhood and adolescence. Háziorvos Továbbképző Szemle, 
1, 76-78. 
Garcia, S., Tully, E. C., Tarantino, N., South, S., Iacono W. G. and McGue, M. (2013). 
Changes in Genetic and Environmental Influences on Trait Anxiety from Middle 
Adolescence 
to 
Early 
Adulthood. 
http://scholarworks.gsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent. 
cgi?article=1037&context=psych_facpub. 
Grusec, J. E. and Davidov, M. (2007). Socialization in the family: The roles of parents. In J. 
Grusec and P. Hastings (Eds.), Handbook of Socialization (pp. 284-308). New York: 
Guildford Press. 
Guti, K. (2014). A szorongás és az empátia kapcsolata 14 és 18 évesek körében Anxiety and 
empathy among 14- and 18-year-olds (MA thesis). University of Szeged, Hungary.  
Haaga, D. A. F., Fine, J. A., Terrill, D. R., Stewart B. L. and Beck, A. T. (1995). Social 
problem-solving deficits, dependency, and depressive symptoms. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 19, 147-158. 
Haraszti, L. (1995). A fóbiák pszichoterápiája Psychotherapy of phobias. Pszichoterápia, 4, 
251-265. 
Holgado Tello, F. P., Delgado Egido, B., Carrasco Ortiz, M. A. and Del Barrio Gandara, M. 
V. (2013). Interpersonal Reactivity Index: Analysis of Invariance and Gender 
Differences in Spanish Youths. Child Psychiatry and Human Development. 44(2), 320-
333. 
Hoffert, S. L. and Sandberg, J. F. (2001). How American Children Spend Their Time. 
Journal of Marriage and Family, 63(2), 295-308. 
Jessor, R., Turbin, M. S. and Costa, F. M. (1998). Risk and protection in successful outcomes 
among disadvantaged adolescents. Applied Developmental Science, 2, 194-208. 
Kasik, L. (2009). A szociálisérdek-érvényesítő, az érzelmi és a szociálisprobléma-megoldó 
képességek vizsgálata 4-8 évesek körében. A study of social interest realisation, 
emotional and social problem solving abilities in children between 4 and 18 years of 

Relationship Between Social Problem Solving, Anxiety and Empathy … 
195
age (PhD dissertation). University of Szeged, Hungary.  
Kasik, L. (2012). A szociálisprobléma-megoldó és az induktív gondolkodás kapcsolata 8, 12, 
15 és 18 évesek körében Relationship between social problem solving and inductive 
reasoning among 8-, 12-, 15- and 18-year-olds. Magyar Pedagógia, 112(4), 243-263. 
Kasik, L. (2014). Development of Social Problem Solving – A Longitudinal Study (2009–
2011) in a Hungarian Context http://www. tandfonline.com/doi/abs/ 10.1080/ 
17405629.2014.969702?journalCode=pedp20#.VLyN_WSG_AE 
Kasik, L. (2015). Személyközi problémák és megoldásuk Social problem solving. Budapest: 
Gondolat Kiadó.  
Kasik, L., Guti, K., Tóth, E. and Fejes, J. (2016). Az elkerülés mint folyamat – az elkerülés 
kérdőív bemérése 15 és 18 évesek körében Avoidance as a process – psychometric 
properties of the Avoidance Questionnaire among 15- and 18-year-olds. Magyar 
Pedagógia (in press).  
Keltikangas-Järvinen, L. (2005). Social Problem Solving and the Development of 
Aggression. In M. McMurran and J. McGuire (Eds.), Social Problem Solving and 
Offending: Evidence, Evaluation, and Evolution (pp. 31-49). New York: John Wiley and 
Sons Ltd. 
Klein, K. J. K. and Hodges, S. D. (2001). Gender Differences, Motivation, and Empathic 
Accuracy: When it Pays to Understand. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
27(6), 720-730.  
Kopp, M., Skrabski, Á., Réthelyi J., Kawachi, I. and Adler, N. (2004): Self Rated Health, 
Subjective Social Status and Middle-Aged Mortality in a Changing Society. Behavioral 
Medicine, 30, 65-70.  
La Greca, A., M. and Gomez, N. (1998). Social anxiety among adolescents: linkages with 
peer relations and friendships. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 26(2), 83-94. 
Lindsay, W. R., Hamilton, C., Moulton, S., Scott, S., Doyle, S. and McMurran, M. (2011). 
Assessment and treatment of social problem-solving in offenders with intellectual 
disability. Psychology, Crime and Law, 17, 181–197. 
Margitics, F. and Pauwlik, Zs. (2006). Megküzdési stratégiák preferenciájának összefüggése 
az észlelt szülői nevelői hatásokkal The relationship between the preference of coping 
strategies and perceptions of parenting. Magyar Pedagógia, 106(1) 43-62.  
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1996). A factor-analytic study of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory: An integration of the theory and data. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 20, 115-133.  
McMurran, M. and McGuire, J. (2005). Social problem solving and offending: Evidence, 
evaluation and evolution. Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons. 
Messer, S. B. (1976). Reflection–Impulsivity: a review. Psychological Bulletin, 83, 1026-
1052. 
Mestre, M. V., Samper, P., Frías, M. D. and Tur, A. M. (2009): Are women more empathetic 
than men? A longitudinal study in adolescence. The Spanish Journal of Psychology. 
12(1), 76-83. 
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) https://www. nimh.nih.gov/ ndex.shtml. 
Nezu, A. M., Wilkins, V. M. and Nezu, C. M. (2004). Social problem solving, stress, and 
negative affect. In E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla, and L. J. Sanna (Eds.), Social problem 
solving (pp. 49-65). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Oğuztürk, Ö. I., Bülbül, S. H., Özen, N. E., Ekici, M., Örnek, K., Ünlü, E. and Yüksel, S. 
(2012). State and trait anxiety levels of adolescents in a changing society, Kirikkale city, 

László Kasik, Csaba Gáspár, Kornél Guti et al. 
196
Turkey. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 19(2) 235-241. 
Pakaslahti, L., Karjalainen, A. and Keltikangas-Järvinen, L. (2002). Relationships between 
adolescent prosocial problem-solving strategies, prosocial behaviour, and social 
acceptance. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 26(2), 137-144. 
Perczel Forintos D., Kiss Zs. and Ajtay Gy. (2005). Kérdőívek, becslőskálák a klinikai 
pszichológiában Questionnaires in clinical psychology. Budapest: Országos 
Pszichiátriai és Neurológiai Intézet. 
Perez, V., Gesten, E. L., Cowen, E. L., Weissberg, R. P., Rapkin, B. and Bolke, M. (1981). 
Relationships between family background problems and social problem solving skills 
of young normal children. Journal of Primary Prevention, 2(2), 80-90. 
Rachman, S. (2002). Anxiety. East Sussex: Psychology Press. 
Rodríguez-Fornells, A. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2000). Impulsive/careless problem solving 
style as predictor of subsequent academic achievement. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 28, 639-635. 
Rózsa, S. (n. d.). Empátia kérdőív Empathy Questionnaire. Hungary. 
Shure, M. B. (1999). I Can Problem Solve. An Interpersonal Cognitive Problem-Solving 
Program. Washington: National Institute of Mental Health. 
Sipos, K., Sipos, M. and Spielberger, C. D. (1991). A State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) 
magyar változata. (Hungarian version of STAI). In F. Mérei and F. Szakács (Eds.), 
Pszichodiagnosztikai Vademecum. I. Explorációs és biográfiai módszerek, tünetbecslő 
skálák, kérdőívek. 2. (pp. 123-135). Budapest: Tankönyvkiadó. 
Siu, A. M. H. and Shek, D. T. L. (2005). Relations between Social Problem Solving and 
Indicators of Interpersonal and Family Well-Being among Chinese Adolescents in Hong 
Kong. In D. T. L. Shek, Y. K. Chan, and P. S. N. Lee (Eds.): Quality of Life in the 
Global Context: A Chinese Response (pp. 517-539). Social Indicators Research Series 
71. 1/3. 
Spielberger, C. D. (1983). Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo Alto, CA: 
Consulting Psychologist Press.  
Strongman, K. T. (1995). Theories of anxiety. http://www.psychology.org.nz/ wp-
content/uploads/NZJP-Vol242-1995-1-Strongman.pdf. 
Takahashi, F., Koseki, S. and Shimada, H. (2009). Developmental trends in children’s 
aggression and social problem-solving. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 
30(3), 265-272.  
Van der Graaff, J., Branje, S., De Wied, M., Hawk, S., Van Lier, P. and Meeus, W. (2014). 
Perspective taking and empathic concern in adolescence: gender differences in 
developmental changes. Developmental Psychology. 50(3), 881-888. 
Vizin, G. (n. d.). A serdülőkori szorongás gyakorisága, az intervenció lehetőségei Anxiety  
in adolescence and intervention. http:// docplayer.hu/1265968-10-vizin-gabriella-a-
serdulokori-szorongas-gyakorisaga-az-intervencio-lehetosegei.html. 
Webster-Stratton, C. (1988). Mothers’ and fathers’ perceptions of child deviance: Roles of 
parent and child behaviors and parent adjustment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 56(6), 909-915. 
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 10 
 
 
 
SELF-REGULATORY STRATEGIES DURING  
PROBLEM-SOLVING BY USING AN INQUIRY-BASED 
APPROACH: “MAKE SENSE OF PROBLEMS AND 
PERSEVERE IN SOLVING THEM” 
 
 
Areti Panaoura*  
Frederick University Cyprus 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
The present study investigates the effect of improving young students’ self-
regulatory strategies on their persistence to face and overcome cognitive obstacles  
and their problem-solving ability. The intervention program which was developed, 
emphasized the necessity to develop young students’ ability (8-9 years old) to react 
flexibly by self-reflecting on the strategies and processes which had been used and apply 
different processes in order to persevere working on the same problem. The inquiry–
based approach was the theoretical framework in order to enable teachers use real-life 
problem-solving situations which activate their students’ different cognitive and self-
regulatory processes. The intervention program, after the teachers’ training, was applied 
for 5 weeks to 167 students who constituted the experimental group. The pre and post-
test measurements were followed by a third measurement, two months after the 
intervention program in order to examine the stability of the expected improvement. 
Dynamic modelling indicated that growth in each of the ability was affected by the state 
of the others. The initial problem-solving ability was found to depend on the 
corresponding self-regulatory performance and the initial problem-solving perseverance 
and its advancement to rely on the development of the initial self-regulatory performance. 
Self-regulation seemed to have a predominant role on solving successfully real-life 
mathematical problems. Significant interrelations between the three abilities at the initial 
and the following up measurements are indicative for the possible changes which can be 
achieved at them by intervening on a related ability. 
 
Keywords: self-regulation, problem-solving, perseverance, inquiry-based teaching 
                                                           
* Corresponding author: Semelis 17, 1049 Nicosia Cyprus, Email: pre.pm@frederick.ac.cy. 

Areti Panaoura 
198
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Standards for Mathematical Practice, referred by NCTM, describe varieties of 
expertise that mathematics educators at all levels should seek to develop in their students. The 
first of the eight mathematical practices is about students’ ability to make sense of problems 
and persevere in solving them. The emphasis on developing problem-solving ability led to the 
development of teaching processes in order to develop problem-solving strategies, while the 
recent emphasis on the perseverance highlights the necessity of improving the metacognitive 
strategies of self-controlling the cognitive and affective aspects of the mind.  
Problem-solving is the area within mathematics education where the use of self-
regulatory skills is apparent, particularly in cases where students face authentic and realistic 
situations. Students usually try to understand the problem, pose a schedule that they follow 
and present a solution. When they face a difficulty and something seems to be unexpected for 
them, they do not react flexibly by evaluating the whole situation and the processes they had 
used in order to control them and make decisions. In most cases they ask for an external 
contribution, such as their teacher’s feedback and guidelines or they insist on following the 
same procedure without indicating flexibility. By this behaviour they actually do not follow 
one of the main features of the nature of mathematics which asks for flexibility and repeated 
attempts to overcome cognitive difficulties and mistakes in order to find out something new 
or construct an innovative proof. Many studies indicated that there is a difference among 
students according to their mathematical proficiency (e.g., Zimmerman, 2013; English and 
Kitsantas, 2013). The mathematically proficient students monitor and evaluate their progress 
and make the necessary changes, while the less proficient students either they do not realize 
their misunderstandings or they are not able to change the cognitive process they follow and 
handle the cognitive interruption of a schedule which proved to be inappropriate.  
Perseverance in mathematics means interest, will and skill to alter the plan. Many times 
students indicate persistence in using the same vein in which he or she has already worked; 
while they have to indicate perseverance in choosing a different strategy. Self-regulation and 
the self-regulatory strategies are key components in the process of self-reflecting and self-
controlling the processes and the feelings during an interruption of a problem-solving 
procedure. There are many different studies on the role of self-regulation during problem-
solving (e.g., Perels, Gurtler and Schmitz, 2005; Ilenthaler, 2012; Sengul and Katranci, 2015) 
at different educational levels. We believe that, particularly in the early stages of primary 
education, teachers have a predominant role on the development of students’ self-regulatory 
performance and consequently their perseverance on solving problems. The teachers’ 
contribution is on improving their self-regulatory strategies in a framework of providing them 
with experiences on investigating and exploring the mathematical concepts. In order to foster 
students to use self-regulatory strategies or controlling strategies teachers have to create a 
framework which enables students to come up against new situations and to face difficulties 
in order to be obliged to regulate their cognitive and affective behavior. De Corte, Vershaffel 
and Opt’Eynde (2000) suggested the main components of instruction that foster self-
regulation: realistic and challenging tasks, varieties of teaching methods and classroom 
climate that foster appropriate, positive dispositions towards learning mathematics.  
A widely held view is that self-regulatory behaviour, self-regulatory strategies, problem-
solving ability and problem-solving perseverance are interrelated. However, there is no 

Self-Regulatory Strategies During Problem-Solving  
199
convincing evidence substantiating the relationship between those components in order to be 
able to indicate that the development of a specific dimension will affect positively the 
development of another dimension. We envisage that a model depicting the development of 
the specific young students’ abilities could be useful at a theoretical level for the deeper 
understanding of the subject and at the practical side it will be useful in developing the 
appropriate teaching programs.  
 
 
Self-Regulation in Problem –Solving  
 
Research in mathematics education has tended to focus principally on cognition and far 
less on affect, due to the popular myth that mathematics is a purely intellectual endeavor in 
which emotions play no essential role (Goldin, 2002). Τhe last decades research on 
mathematics education highlighted the importance of considering both affective and cognitive 
components of classroom learning and the emphasis was on regulating the cognitive and  
the affective performance. Social cognitive theory contends that human behaviour, the 
environment and personal factors (e.g., cognition, emotion and motivation) operate 
reciprocally on one another (Chiu and Klassen, 2010) and affective variables are assumed to 
be important for learning. 
Self-regulation refers to the processes that coordinate cognition. It reflects the ability to 
use metacognitive knowledge strategically to achieve cognitive goals, especially in cases 
where someone has to overcome cognitive obstacles. It has become clear that one of the most 
important issues in self-regulated learning is the student’s ability to select, combine and 
coordinate strategies in an effective way (Boekaerts, 1997). According to Zimmerman (1998) 
self-regulated learning involves three major cyclical phases: forethought, performance control 
and self-reflection. The first involves analysing tasks and setting appropriate goals. 
Performance control refers to monitoring and controlling the cognitive, behavioural, 
emotional acts that affect performance. Self-reflection is concerned with making judgments 
about what has been accomplished and altering behaviour and goal orientation accordingly.  
The topic of how students become self-regulated as learners has been attracted 
researchers for decades (Zimmerman, 2008). Self-regulation is a metacognitive function 
essential to academic success in which interventions has been used in order to improve 
student’s mathematics performance even in the case of learning disabilities (Montague, 
2007). Strategic action to effectively monitor and regulate behaviour and problem-solving 
processes is an essential characteristic of self-regulated individuals. Wolters and Pintrich 
(1998) argued that very little empirical research had examined how the various components 
of self-regulated learning may vary as a function of contextual differences and they indicated 
that students tended to view mathematics as more important, useful and interesting than social 
studies.  
Self-regulated learning is a process that assists students in managing their thoughts, 
behaviours and emotions in order to successfully navigate their learning experiences 
(Zumbrunn and Tadlock, 2011). Morrison, Ponitz and McClelland (2010) claimed that self-
regulation predicts children’s early school success. Chatzistamatiou and Dermitzaki (2013) 
investigated elementary teachers’ strategies they use to activate and enhance students’ self-
regulated learning in mathematics. Their emphasis were on investigating the “teaching for 
self-regulation” which means that teachers provide instruction on effective strategies in order 

Areti Panaoura 
200
to have students who are able to plan their learning activities, to monitor the learning process 
and to evaluate themselves after dealing with a task. Classroom efforts should be dedicated at 
mastery mathematical skills and feedback on students’ work is important in enabling them to 
learn what they did correctly and handle their mistakes in order to improve on them 
(Ramdass, 2011).  
Hamidyan, Hadhighi and Andalib (2014) evaluated the effect of self-regulation strategies 
components specific in mathematics on performance-approach and performance–avoidance. 
Their results indicated that training components of self-regulation strategies affect positively 
on performance–approach but there was no significant relationship between training 
components of self-regulation strategies and performance–avoidance.  
People given novel problems learn that their old approaches do not lend themselves to 
success (Carr and Steele, 2009). The problem solver must have the cognitive resources to use 
the past experiences only in similar context and to act flexibly in order to face a new situation. 
Perseverance in mathematics expected students to regulate and evaluate their progress and 
make the necessary changes. Engaging students to persist requires them to understand that 
hard work is a natural part of learning. Milburne, Wildmann, Morret and Stipanovic (2014) 
asked students to keep a logbook of the different strategies they used in order to find a 
solution at an open problem, how they checked their solution and what they learned from 
each problem. By this way they gave students a record of their efforts to persevere, in order to 
evaluate the processes they had followed and in order to become conscious of those 
processes.  
In order to be successful in problem-based learning students must take responsibility for 
the teaching process by setting goals, monitoring, reflecting (English and Kitsantas, 2013). 
Therefore, the learning environment and teaching practices must be designed with intention  
to support students’ self-regulated learning. A teaching framework of exploring and 
investigating mathematical concepts as a part of an inquiry-based approach creates promising 
circumstances.  
 
 
The Inquiry-Based Teaching Framework 
 
Considerable research has been conducted on inquiry-based instruction (Wang, Yen, Wu 
and Wu, 2013). The inquiry–based learning engages students in active and meaningful 
learning activities, in a framework which enables the activation of cognitive and self-
regulatory processes. Inquiry–based teaching is characterized by a certain amount of 
experimental procedures and self-regulated leaning sequences where student’s autonomy is 
emphasized (Ropohl, Ronnebeck, Bernholt and Koller, 2013). When an inquiry has a 
problem-solving nature students are expected to ask themselves questions like what prior 
knowledge can help them develop a solution plan for the particular task, regulate the 
cognitive processes and compare the solution against the expected goals (De Corte et al., 
2000).  
Hegarty–Hazel (1986) categorized four levels of inquiry–based activities which ranged 
from specific guidance and close question to open exploration and open question. For 
example at the first level the teacher provides specific inquiry question, solving procedures 
and solution, while at the last level the teachers provide learning environment for students to  
 

Self-Regulatory Strategies During Problem-Solving  
201
generate inquiry question. Both teachers and students need slow and stable steps in order to 
be moved from the traditional algorithmic procedures to the challenge of the conceptual 
processes.  
Wang and Lin (2008) claim that the only way to improve teachers’ thinking and their 
respective practice in teaching is to involve them in the self-reflecting process. A 
presupposition for an inquiry-based approach is the personal teachers’ experience on inquiry-
based approach (Soprano and Yang, 2013). Without experience in inquiry-based learning in 
teacher preparation programs, teachers either omit inquiry-based teaching or rely on 
professional development programs (Lebak and Tinsley, 2010).  
One of the main emphases of the new proposed teaching model of Mathematics in the 
centralized educational system of Cyprus which is presented at the New Curriculum (NCM, 
2010) is the use of exploration and investigation of mathematical ideas, as two dimensions of 
the inquiry-based teaching and learning. The whole idea at the education system of Cyprus is 
to introduce a mathematical concept by using an “exploration” through which the teacher 
generates curiosity and interest in the topic and he/she asks students to express their ideas and 
communicate by using the language of mathematics. The emphasis is on using authentic and 
open-ended problem-solving activities without only one correct answer and each student is 
expected to respond in respect to his/her previous knowledge, experiences and unique way of 
thinking. Teachers are expected to support the students in working independently and 
creatively. The mathematical exploration is followed by a mathematical “investigation” 
where students are expected to pose hypotheses, draw specific conclusions while working 
individually or in peers and interpret or explain their results. An investigation is introduced by 
using an inquiry question that deals with the concept being taught. Problems to be 
investigated have to be meaningful and realistic, with multiple solutions and methods for 
reaching the solutions (Baron and Darking-Hammond, 2008). The teacher is expected to be a 
facilitator, asking questions and providing guidance whenever is needed but not destroying 
the challenge of thinking innovatively.  
Schunk and Ertmer (2000) recommend that research has to give students greater 
responsibility for their own learning, self-regulation should be taught in content areas and that 
greater research attention be given to self-reflective practice. The aim of the present study 
was to educate in-service teachers in activating and enhancing their students’ perseverance in 
solving authentic real life problems by using self-regulatory strategies in order to overcome 
the difficulties they face. We hypothesized that the use of inquiry-based teaching approach 
would enable teachers to develop their students’ self-regulatory strategies. The investigation 
of the interrelations between the factors of problem-solving ability, self-regulatory 
performance and perseverance in solving the problem would enable us to propose teaching 
processes in order to improve students’ problem-solving performance in mathematics. 
 
 
METHODOLOGY 
 
At the present section the procedure which was used is presented, the tools that were 
used, the participants and the statistical analyses.  
 
 

Areti Panaoura 
202
Procedure 
 
The study was divided into three main phases. At the first phase training was developed 
and applied for the teachers of the experimental group and the tools were used for the first 
measurement wave for both the experimental and the control group. At the second phase the 
intervention program was applied and the participants were taken part at the second 
measurement and two months after the intervention, both the groups were taken part at the 
third measurement, during the third phase of the study. The first measurement was taken in 
November, the second in January, and the third in early June, by the end of the school year. 
Choosing longer breaks between measurements would have created serious problems with the 
participants due to changes that result from a new school year. 
At the first phase of the study 8 teachers who teach mathematics at students 8-9 years old 
(3rd grade) were accepted our invitation to take voluntarily part at the study. After a training 
which lasted three weeks (5 meetings, 2 hours each time) they were asked to teach their 
students problem-solving by using inquiry-based approach with emphasis on self-regulatory 
strategies. Students were asked to keep a diary of their work and teachers had to give them 
feedback which was based on the regulation of the cognitive and affective processes.  
The emphasis of each one of the meetings with the teachers were the following: (1) The 
main features of the inquiry-based teaching approach in mathematics education, (2) the use of 
exploration and investigation at the teaching of mathematics, (3) the role of the teacher and 
the role of the student at the inquiry-based approach, (4) problem-solving strategies and the 
teaching of self-regulatory strategies, (5) examples of the teaching of problem-solving, the 
respective cognitive and self-regulatory strategies and the teachers’ role. At the end of the 
training they knew the problems that they had to use, the guidelines they had to follow and 
the research tools they had to use. In order to be sure about the procedure they would follow 
we had asked them to send us (by e-mail) at the end of each one of the five weeks during the 
application of the intervention program a text with their thoughts, questions, feelings and the 
processes they followed in comparison to their students’ procedures.  
At the end of the first phase of the study teachers were asked to administer to their 
students the research judgments for collecting the data for the first wave of measurement. At 
the second phase the researcher responded systematically to their messages in order to be sure 
about the procedures which were followed and at the end of the five weeks they administered 
to their students the research instruments for the second measurement. Two months later, 
before actually the end of the school year, they had administered the same tools for the third 
time.  
 
 
Research Instruments 
 
Three instruments were used in order to measure students’ self-regulatory performance, 
problem-solving ability and problem-solving perseverance.  
The first instrument which was used in order to measure students’ self-regulatory 
performance was constructed and used at a previous study (Panaoura, Gagatsis and 
Demetriou, 2009). The questionnaire comprised of ten couples of sentences and students had 
to choose which one expressed better their cognitive behaviour while they were trying to 

Self-Regulatory Strategies During Problem-Solving  
203
solve mathematical problems. The reliability of the questionnaire was high (Cronbach’s α was 
0.83).  
The second instrument was comprised of 5 mathematical problems which were scored on 
a pass-fail basis (0 and 1) and on the sufficiency of students’ justification (0 and 1). In order 
to immunize the suitability of the tasks for the specific age we asked primary education 
teachers to assess their relation to the teaching content.  
The third ability was measured by using a computer–based environment. Three problems 
were used, for which the solution was divided into three main phases: (a) the understanding of 
the problem, (b) the construction of a schedule for solving it and the application of the 
schedule which included the mathematical analysis and (c) the interpretation of the results. 
We had scored three things for each one of the phases: the time they worked at each one of 
the phases (it was measured automatically by the computer), the correctness at the three 
phases of their solution and the comments they had chosen in order to indicate the process 
they followed when a difficulty was faced. Four choices were presented: a) I stop working on 
it, b) There must be a mistake but I will continue, c) I will go back at the previous stage and 
d) I will go back to start from the beginning by trying a different strategy. For the analyses of 
the present chapter we had used only the score about the time they had spent in order to solve 
correctly the problem and the comments they had chosen. Each participant was tested 
individually on those problems while the questionnaire about the self-regulatory performance 
and the test on the problem-solving ability were presented in a paper and pencil form and 
were administered by the teachers.  
 
 
Participants  
 
Data were collected from 167 students (age 8-9 years old, third grade of primary 
education) who constituted the experimental group and 153 students who comprised the 
control group. The sample was not representative of the whole population as it was depended 
on their teachers’ willingness to contribute on the development of the study. The present 
chapter concentrates only on the quantitative results of the experimental group.  
 
 
Statistical Analyses 
 
In order to specify the dynamic relations during the three waves of measurements, 
dynamic modeling was used with the EQS (Bentler, 1995). A series of models tested in order 
to specify the best fitting model in relation to typical standards (CFI > 0.9, x2/df < 1.9, 
RMSEA < 0.05). The first dynamic model explored the relations among the three abilities 
(self-regulatory performance, problem-solving ability and problem-solving perseverance) 
across the three waves of measurement, while the second dynamic model explored possible 
relations among all the abilities across the three waves of measurement and mainly the impact 
of the initial performance.  
 
 

Areti Panaoura 
204
RESULTS 
 
The main hypothesis tested by the first dynamic model was that the variables at the 
second measurement were affected by the same variables at the first measurement and that 
those at the third measurement were affected by the same variables at the first measurement 
and the residuals of the variables at the second measurement. Using the residuals of the 2nd 
measurement ensured that this factor was purified from the component of the 1st measurement 
involved in it, so that we would specify the relation of the 2nd measurement as such with the 
3rd measurement. According to Bentler (1995) “if you want a dependent variable to covary 
with another you much have its residual variable carry that covariance” (p. 244). The second 
hypothesis at the same dynamic model was that significant relations would connect the 
different abilities at each one of the measurement waves.  
As it was expected, the model with the above hypotheses was good (x2 = 149.275, df = 
83, x2/df = 1.798, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.849, RMSEA = 0.065). After allowing a few error 
variances to correlate the fit of the model was excellent (x2 = 131.076, df = 76, x2/df = 1.72, p 
< 0.01, CFI = 0.976, RMSEA = 0.032). The parameter estimates of this model are presented 
in Figure 1.  
The results of the dynamic model indicate the coherence of the cognitive and self-
regulatory processes during problem-solving. The correlations between self-regulatory 
strategies with problem-solving ability and problem-solving perseverance were significant at 
the first measurement. This indicates that the individuals’ differences at the self-regulation 
ability appeared also at the problem-solving ability and the problem-solving perseverance. 
Students with high self-regulatory ability had at the same time high problem-solving ability 
(0.654) and high problem-solving perseverance (0.586). Additionally students with high 
problem-solving perseverance had high problem-solving ability (0.532). Extremely important 
is the induction of all those loadings at the second measurement, after the intervention 
program. The pattern of the interrelations remained the same; however the loading of the self-
regulatory ability with the problem-solving ability was 0.678 and with the problem-solving 
perseverance was 0.612. In a similar way the correlation of the problem-solving perseverance 
with the problem-solving ability was 0.684. The students’ inter-individual differences became 
stronger than in the first measurement. After the intervention program students with high self-
regulation was in a higher degree students with high problem-solving perseverance and 
problem-solving ability, indicating that the impact of the program had a higher contribution 
for those who had high performance and abilities. The loadings at the third measurement were 
lower than at the second measurement. However in all cases it seemed the coordinative role 
of the self-regulatory performance which indicated to influence directly or indirectly the 
students’ persistence on facing difficulties and overcoming obstacles in order to succeed in 
solving mathematical problems. Both self-regulation and problem-solving perseverance acted 
as presuppositions of having high performance in problem-solving. 
 Students’ self-regulatory ability at the first measurement persisted at the second 
measurement (0.613) and at the third measurement (0.412). The statistically significant 
relation means that the classification of students about their self-regulatory ability at the third 
measurement remained equally high as in the first measurement; however the highest loading 
on the second measurement than on the third measurement indicates the positive impact of the 
intervention program and the stability of the results two months later. By the same way the 

Self-Regulatory Strategies During Problem-Solving  
205
students’ problem-solving perseverance persisted at the second measurement (0.513) and the 
third measurement (0.327). The loading of the respective ability of the second measurement 
on the third measurement was statistically significant (0.502).  
The model parameters show that there was a general pattern of students’ differences at 
the first measurement that persisted at the second and the third measurement in the case of 
problem-solving ability as well. This is evidenced from the significant loadings. The loading 
of the problem-solving ability at the first measurement on the same ability at the second 
measurement was 0.762. Similarly the loading of the problem-solving ability and the loading 
of the same variable at the second measurement and at the third measurement were 0.717 and 
0.443 respectively. After the intervention program students with high self-regulation was in a 
higher degree students with high problem-solving perseverance and problem-solving ability 
indicating that the impact of the program had a higher contribution for those who had high 
performance and abilities rather than the students with low performance. 
The second dynamic model explored relations between the three variables across the 
three waves of measurement. The main hypothesis was that all the variables at the second 
measurement were affected by the respective variables at the first measurement and the 
variables at the third measurement were affected by the respective variables at the first 
measurement and the residuals of the same variables at the second measurement. 
Furthermore, the second hypothesis was that significant relations would connect the three 
variables at each wave of the measurements.  
The fit of the model with the above hypotheses was good (x2 = 151.173, df = 78, x2/df = 
1.93, p < 0.01, CFI = 0.873, RMSEA = 0.053). After allowing a few error variances to 
correlate, the fit of the model was excellent (x2 = 131.318, df = 71, x2/df = 1.85, p < 0.01, CFI 
= 0.949, RMSEA = 0.041). The parameter estimates of this model are shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. The dynamic model on problem-solving ability (PS), self-regulatory ability (SR) and 
problem-solving perseverance (PSP). (*) significance at the level 0.05; (1) first measurement; (2) 
second measurement; (3) third measurement. 

Areti Panaoura 
206
 
Figure 2. The dynamic model on problem-solving ability (PS), self-regulatory ability (SR) and 
problem-solving perseverance (PSP) through the three measurements. (*) significance at the level 0.05; 
(1) first measurement; (2) second measurement; (3) third measurement. 
The results of the second dynamic model underline the predominant role of the self-
regulatory ability on the problem-solving ability and on the problem-solving perseverance. 
The problem-solving ability at the second measurement was affected significantly by the 
initial condition of the self-regulatory ability during problem-solving (0.473), while the 
problem-solving ability at the third measurement was affected significantly by the same initial 
condition (0.389). The students’ perseverance on working on the same problem was affected 
significantly by the initial self-regulatory ability (0.513). Important was the lack of significant 
influence of the same ability on the problem-solving perseverance at the third measurement. 
However there was an indirect influence as the initial self-regulatory ability influenced the 
problem-solving ability at the second measurement and the last one influenced significantly 
the problem-solving perseverance at the third measurement (0.418).  
The model parameters of the second measurement show that there was a general pattern 
of students’ differences at the first measurement that persisted at the second and third 
measurement. There were significant loadings of each variable at different measurements. 
The loading of the problem-solving ability at the first measurement on the problem-solving 
ability at the second measurement was 0.403 and at the third measurement was 0.352. It is 
important to note that the effect of the initial self-regulatory ability (0.473) was higher than 
the effect of the initial problem-solving ability (0.403) on the problem-solving ability at the 
second measurement. At the same time the loading of the problem-solving ability at the 
second measurement on the third measurement was 0.328. Problem-solving abilty at the third 
measurement was affected by the initial condition of problem-solving performance at the 
second measurement (0.328) and the initial condition of the self-regulatory performance. 
Furthermore the self-regulatory ablity and the problem-solving perseverance at the second 
and third measurement were significantly affected by the same variables at the previous 
measurements.  

Self-Regulatory Strategies During Problem-Solving  
207
DISCUSSION 
 
Cognitive and self-regulatory processes are activated during a problem-solving 
procedure. Students have to match previous experiences with a new situation, control their 
thoughts and feelings, self-reflect on the processes and interpret their results. Especially in the 
case that they face a difficulty, a misunderstanding or an obstacle they have to overcome it by 
self-reflecting on the processes and by regulating cognitive and affective processes. Many 
studies (e.g., Perels, Gurtler and Schmitz, 2005) had shown that students did not insist on 
working on the same problem and very quickly asked for an external contribution. Marchis 
(2011) indicated that in the case of unsuccessful problem-solving only one third of the 
teachers ask students to present previous knowledge about the problem and try different 
methods.  
The findings of the present study led to some potentially important conclusions about the 
students’ problem-solving ability in mathematics. Although complicated figures are presented 
in the previous section, a few of the results should be highlighted regarding the interrelations 
of problem-solving ability, self-regulatory performance and problem-solving perseverance. 
First, the correlations between them indicated the coherence of the specific aspects of the 
cognitive and self-regulatory system. Second, results indicated that the development of each 
of the abilities was affected by the state of the others. In particular, self–regulation had a basic 
impact on the growth of problem-solving perseverance and problem-solving performance. 
From the analysis of the dynamic models, it is quite clear that self-regulation has a 
coordinating role in students’ problem-solving performance, even from the first measurement. 
There was a general pattern of differences that remained across measurements in all cases. 
Students need to develop strategies to regulate their cognitive and affective processes in 
order to persist on working on the same problem. The present study indicates that by 
improving students’ self-regulatory strategies we improve at the same time directly or 
indirectly their problem-solving perseverance and their problem-solving performance. 
However this improvement indicated to be higher in the case of students who had at the initial 
measurement the highest self-regulation. Probably an intervention program which lasted for a 
longer term could be necessary for students who had not already developed adequate self-
regulation processes. In education we cannot have prescriptions suitable for all the students 
but we have to recognize the inter-individual differences at cognitive and non-cognitive 
dimensions in order to take them into consideration for the development of interventions.  
The second dynamic model indicated that students at the age of 8-10 years old have the 
tendency to use the strategies or behavior which has already been developed at the earlier 
stages. Teachers starting from the 1st grade, have to teach to their students useful self-
regulatory strategies and to enforce them persist to overcome obstacles. Those abilities 
seemed to be useful at their problem-solving ability the following up school years.  
Self-regulation has been used in many studies in order to improve students’ mathematical 
performance (e.g., Montague, 2007). The present study indicates that it has to be used in order 
to improve problem-solving perseverance. The mathematically proficient students seemed to 
be more able to regulate their processes and persist on working until they find a solution 
which can be interpreted by them. Emphasis has to be given on improving the self-regulatory 
processes of the less proficient students. By asking them to continue working on a problem, 
we may succeed in enabling them to indicate insistence but they are not able to indicate 

Areti Panaoura 
208
perseverance. They are not able to realize their mistakes or misunderstanding and the 
necessity to self-reflect on the previous steps in order to use a different problem-solving 
strategy. Teachers have to use inquiry-based teaching approaches in order to help their 
students come up against new situations where they have to become conscious of their 
difficulties they face and the necessity to think flexibly. 
When we discuss about cognitive obstacles, self-regulation, persistence in facing the 
difficulties and perseverance in changing the strategy, we are talking about innovative real-
life situations where the person does not have directly the way to find the solution. The 
inquiry-based teaching approach provides the necessary framework in order to enable 
students come up against real-life mathematical difficulties which have to be overcome by 
regulating the cognitive and affective performance. The present study represents beginning 
steps in understanding how to develop self-regulatory learning and problem-solving 
perseverance in the mathematics classroom. There is much more to investigate and much 
more work to be done. In a future research it would be interesting to study the correlations 
between teachers’ guidance and their students’ self-regulation by using a qualitative approach 
in order to investigate further the impact of self-regulation on perseverance and its nature.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Barron, B. and Darling-Hammond, L. (2008). Teaching for meaningful learning: A review of 
research on inquiry-based and cooperative learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Bentler, P. M. (1995). EQS: Structural equations program manual. Encico, CA: Multivariate 
Software Inc.  
Boekaerts, M. (1997). Self-regulated learning: A new concept embraced by researchers, 
policy makers, educators, teachers and students. Learning and Instruction, 7 (2), 161-
186. 
Carr, P. and Steele, C. (2009). Stereotype threat and inflexible perseverance in problem-
solving. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 853-859. 
Chatzistamatiou, M. and Dermitzaki, I. (2013). Teaching mathematics with self-regulation 
and for self-regulation: Teachers’ reports. Hellenic Journal of Psychology, 10, 253-274.  
Chiu, M. and Klassen, R. (2010). Relations of mathematics self-concept and its calibration 
with mathematics achievement: Cultural differences among fifteen-years-olds in 34 
countries. Learning and Instruction, 20 (1), 2–17. 
De Corte, E., Verschaffel, L. and Op’t Eynde, P. (2000). Self-regulation: A characteristic and 
a goal of Mathematics Education. In M. Boekaerts, P.R. Pintrich, and M. Zeidner (Eds.), 
Handbook of Self-Regulation, (pp. 687-726). Academic Press. 
English, M. and Kitsantas, A. (2013). Supporting student self-regulated learning in problem 
and project based learning. The Interdisciplinary Journal of problem based learning, 7 
(2), 128-150. 
Goldin, R. (2002). Affect, meta-affect and mathematical beliefs structures. In G. Leder, E. 
Pehkonen, and G. Torner (Eds). Beliefs: A hidden variable in mathematics education? 
(59-72). Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publisher.  
Hamidyan, K., Haghighi, F. and Andalib, M. (2014). The effect of self-regulation strategies 
components specific in mathematics on performance – approach and performance – 

Self-Regulatory Strategies During Problem-Solving  
209
avoidance in female high school students. Indian Journal of Fundamental and Applied 
Life Sciences, 4 (3), 1150-1158. 
Hegarty-Hazel, E. (1986). Lab work SET: Research information for teachers, number one. 
Canberra: Australian Council for Education Research. 
Infenthaler, D. (2012). Determining the effectiveness of prompts for self-regulated learning in 
problem – solving scenarios. Educational Technology and Society, 15 (1), 38-52. 
Kogan, M. and Laursen, S. (2014). Accessing long-term effects of inquiry – based learning: A 
case study from college mathematics. Innovative Higher Education, 39, 183-199. 
Lebak, K. and Tinsley, R. (2010). Can inquiry and reflection be contagious? Science teachers, 
students, and action research. Journal of Science Teacher Education, 21, 953-970. 
Marchis, I. (2011). How mathematics teachers develop their pupils’ self-regulated learning 
skills. Acta Didactica Naposensia, 4 (2-3), 9-14. 
Milburn, J., Wildman, T., Morret, M. and Stipanovic, J. (2014). Classroom strategies to make 
sense and persevere. Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School, 20 (3), 144-151. 
Montague, M. (2007). Self-regulation and mathematics instruction. Learning Disabilities 
Research and Practice, 22 (1), 75-83.  
Morrison, F., Ponitz, C. and McClelland, M. (in press). Self-regulation and academic 
achievement in the transition to school. In M. Posner, S. Calkins and M. Bell (Eds). The 
Developing human brain: Development at the intersection of emotion and cognition. 
Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.  
Panaoura, A., Gagatsis, A. and Demetriou, A. (2009). An interventions to the metacognitive 
performance, self-regulation in mathematics and mathematical modelling. Acta Didactica 
Universitatis Comenianae Mathematics, 9, 63-79. 
Perels, F., Gurtler, T. and Schmitz, B. (2005). Training of self-regulatory and problem –
solving competence. Learning and Instruction, 15, 123-139. 
Ramdass, D. (2011). Enhancing mathematics skills and self-regulatory competency through 
observation and emulation. The International Journal of Research and Review, 7 (1), 24-
44. 
Ropohl, M., Ronnebeck, S., Bernholt, S. and Koller, O. (2013). A definition of inquiry – 
based STM education and tools for measuring the degree of IBE. Report from the FP7 
project: Assess Inquiry in Science, Technology and Mathematics Education.  
Sengul, S. and Katranci, Y. (2015). Metacogntive aspects of solving indenite integral 
problems. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 197, 622-629. 
Soprano, K. and Yang, L. (2013). Inquiring into my science teaching through action research: 
a case study on one pre-service teacher’s inquiry based science teaching and self-
efficacy. International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education, 11, 1351-1368. 
Schunk, D. H. and Ertmer, P. A. (2000). Self-regulation and academic learning: self-efficacy 
entrancing interventions. In M. Boekaerts, P.R. Pintrich and M. Zeiden (Eds.), Handbook 
of Self-regulation, (pp. 631-651). San Diego: Academic Press.  
Wang, J. and Lin, E. (2008). An alternative interpretation of the relationship between self-
concept and mathematics achievement: Comparison of Chinese and U.S. students as a 
context. Evaluation and Research in Education, 21(3), 154-174. 
Wang, P., Yen, Y., Wu, H. and Wu, P. (2013). The learning effectiveness of inquiry – based 
instruction among vocational high school students. Educational Research International, 2 
(2), 16-23. 

Areti Panaoura 
210
Wolters, C. and Pintrich, P. (1998). Contextual differences in student motivation and self-
regulated learning in mathematics, English, and social studies classrooms. Instructional 
Science, 26, 27-47. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (2000). Attaining self-regulation: A social-cognitive perspective. In M. 
Boekaerts, P. R. Pintrich, and M. H. Zeidner (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation, (pp. 
13-39). San Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (2008). Investigating self-regulation and motivation: historical background, 
methodological developments and future prospects. American Educational Research 
Journal, 45 (1), 166-183. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (2013). From cognitive modeling to self-regulation: A social cognitive 
career path. Educational Psychologist, 48 (3), 115-147. 
 
 
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH 
 
Areti Panaoura is an Associate Professor of Mathematics Education at Frederick 
University Cyprus. She received her Ph.D. degree in Mathematics Education from the 
University of Cyprus (2004). Her dissertation was about “The development of young pupils’ 
cognitive and metacognitive abilities in mathematics”. Additionally she has M.A in 
Mathematics Education from the University of Cyprus and M.Sc. in Educational Research 
from the University of Exeter. She has been invited to teach at the Master in Mathematics 
Education at the Department of Education at the University of Cyprus and at the Master in the 
Didactic of Mathematics at the Kapodestrian University of Athens. She is a member of many 
professional and scientific associations such as European Association for Research in 
Learning and Instruction (EARLI), International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics 
Education (PME), Sig on Metacognition of EARLI, the Greek Association for Mathematics 
Researchers in Education. Her research interests are in the area of cognitive and 
metacognitive abilities in mathematics, self-regulation, self-representation, the use of 
technology for the development of cognitive and affective abilities, curriculum development 
in mathematics for primary and pre-primary education and the use of representations for the 
understanding of different mathematical concepts. She has presented her work in many 
different international scientific conferences and she has many scientific publications in 
international journals such as Educational Studies in Mathematics, ZDM, International 
Journal of Mathematics and Science Education, International Journal of Mathematical 
Education in Science and Technology, International Psychology, Cognitive Development, etc. 
She was a member of the committee of the five academics for the development of the 
National Curriculum in Mathematics (2011) for the Educational System of Cyprus and she is 
one of the three scientific coordinators for the new teaching tools in mathematics for primary 
education. She is the Dean of the School of Education and Social Sciences. 
 
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 11  
 
 
 
IMPROVING UNDERGRADUATE STUDENT GENERIC 
PROBLEM SOLVING SKILLS BY USING PROBLEM-
BASED LEARNING IN A LARGE CLASSROOM SETTING 
 
 
A. Klegeris1, and H. Hurren2 
1Department of Biology, University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus,  
Kelowna, BC, Canada 
2Centre for Teaching and Learning, University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus, 
Kelowna, BC, Canada 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The ability to solve generic problems is a skill, which is highly valued in most 
modern workplaces. There are no well-defined instructional techniques, which are proven 
to facilitate development of this competency in undergraduate students as well as there 
are no widely available evaluation tools which would allow monitoring progress of 
students as problem solvers. By using a recently developed problem-solving test, we 
showed that problem-solving skills of undergraduate students were significantly 
improved after taking a course, which involved problem-based learning (PBL) as one of 
its components. Since these students were exposed to various other instructional 
approaches as well as to other courses, which they took at the same time, it was not clear 
whether the problem-based learning environment was responsible for the observed 
beneficial effect. To address this question, we used three similar problem-solving tests to 
measure the dynamics of problem-solving skills of students in the same class after the 
course schedule was modified in a way that all PBL activities were conducted in the 
second half of the semester. Our data show no change in problem-solving skills of 
students after the first half of the term and strong trend towards improvement after the 
second half of the term. This indicates that PBL activities could be responsible for the 
observed improvement in the generic problem-solving skills of students. Our data also 
indicate that exposing students to PBL over one half of a term is not as effective as 
                                                           
 Address for reprint requests and other correspondence: A. Klegeris, Department of Biology, University of British 
Columbia Okanagan Campus, 3187 University Way, Kelowna, BC, Canada V1V 1V7. E-mail: 
andis.klegeris@ubc.ca; Tel. 250 807 9557. 

A. Klegeris and H. Hurren 
212
spreading this activity over the full length of the term. These observations could assist 
other instructors with the design and implementation of strategies that are effective for 
developing generic problem-solving skills of undergraduate students. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The ability to solve problems upon graduation from university has been identified as one 
of the most desirable competencies by students themselves as well as by their future 
employers (Adams, 2014; OECD, 2014). Problem-solving skills can be broadly classified into 
discipline-specific and generic. Most research on problem-solving skills of undergraduate 
students performed thus far has been discipline specific and includes studies with 
mathematics (Adeyemo, 2010), physics (Latterell, 2003), and accounting students (Jones and 
Davidson, 2007). However, it is being increasingly recognized that generic (also known as 
domain general) problem-solving skills are also critical for future career success of students 
regardless of their field of study (Greiff et al., 2014). 
Currently, there are no well-described and proven techniques that could be used to 
develop generic problem-solving skills of students. It has been reasoned that discipline-
specific problem solving can be enhanced by employing contextualized content, but once 
developed, such problem-solving skills do not readily transfer to other subject matter (Tricot 
and Sweller, 2014). Adeyemo (2010) argued that problem-solving skills developed in one 
subject area will transfer to another subject area. Our study investigates development of 
transferable skills, since we measure the ability of students to solve generic problems before 
and after they have participated in the process of problem-based learning (PBL). Working in 
small groups on ill-defined problems could be one of the approaches leading to improved 
problem-solving abilities (Cooper et al., 2008).  
Lack of readily available tests that could be used to monitor the development of generic 
problem-solving skills presents an additional challenge. Existing measurement tools, for 
example, American College Testing, are costly and do not focus on problem-solving ability of 
students. The Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), which is managed by 
the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), began measuring 
generic problem-solving skills in 2012 and is developing a tool for assessing problem-solving 
skills of adults (OECD, 2012). 
In our previous study we adopted questions from the 2003 version of PISA generic 
problem-solving item bank to create two tests of similar difficulty level. These tests were 
used in a crossover fashion to compare the dynamics of problem-solving skills of students 
taking mainly lecture-based courses with that of students exposed to PBL activities. We found 
that students taking the course with a PBL component demonstrated statistically significant 
improvement in their problem-solving skills, which was not the case for students from three 
other courses where mainly lecture-based instruction was used (Klegeris et al., 2013). Even 
though there was a clear difference between the problem-solving skills of students taking 
these four courses with different instructional approaches, it was not possible to conclude that 
PBL exposure was responsible for the observed improvement in the problem-solving skills of 
students. For example, the four courses were instructed by four different instructors and the 
subject areas of the four courses were also different. In addition, the beneficial effect 
observed for the group of students exposed to PBL could be caused by activities they 

Improving Undergraduate Student Generic Problem Solving Skills … 
213
experienced in other courses they took in parallel to the course within which their problem-
solving abilities were monitored. 
Our current study was designed to further test the hypothesis that PBL in small groups 
has beneficial effects on undergraduate student generic problem-solving abilities. Our goal 
was to eliminate the possible effect of the instructor and the subject matter of studies as 
possible causes of the positive effect we observed in our previous study. To achieve this goal, 
we tested students taking the same course instructed by the same instructor the following 
year; only this time, student problem-solving skills were assessed three times instead of two: 
at the beginning, middle and end of the term. In addition, schedule of this course was 
modified to have only lectures delivered during the first half of the term and all PBL activities 
conducted during the second half of the term. We reasoned that if PBL was responsible for 
the improved generic problem-solving skills of the students taking this course, then delaying 
PBL activities to the second half of the term would lead to problem-solving skill 
improvement being observed only during the latter half of the term and not during the first 
half. 
 
 
2. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
 
2.1. Test Subjects 
 
The study was conducted within a third-year biochemistry course offered at the 
University of British Columbia (UBC) Okanagan campus in Canada. It is a 13-week long 
one-term course, which is scheduled as two 80-minute lecture periods per week. This course 
is mainly lecture based, but approximately 25% of the classroom time is spent to conduct two 
PBL cases where students work in small groups to solve problems related to clinical 
pharmacology. For detailed description of the PBL methodology used in this course, please 
refer to Klegeris and Hurren (2011). Each PBL case lasts for 3 weeks. Typically, the first 
PBL case is scheduled for the beginning of the term, while the second one is conducted closer 
to the end of the term. To achieve the objective of the current study, the course was 
rescheduled so that both PBL cases were conducted during the second half of the term. It is 
important to note that this change did not affect the numbers of lectures delivered or the 
amount of material covered compared to the previous year. The same instructor delivered all 
course content during this and the previous academic year. The study was made possible by 
the voluntary participation of the students enrolled in the course who signed an appropriate 
consent form. This study was approved by the UBC Human Research Ethics Board.  
 
 
2.2. Problem-Solving Tests 
 
Questions from the PISA problem-solving test tool developed by OECD (OECD, 2004) 
were adopted to design three comparable problem-solving tests (Tests 1, 2 and 3) comprised 
of six questions each. Two of these tests (Tests 1 and 2) were already used in our previous 
study (Klegeris et al., 2013). Since the PISA tool provides the difficulty level for the 
individual questions, it was possible to select questions of similar difficulty level for the three 

A. Klegeris and H. Hurren 
214
different problem-solving tests. The PISA questions are aimed at assessing generic problem-
solving abilities of students; therefore, the questions are not related to any particular subject 
matter, and these tests can be administered to all students regardless of their area of study. An 
example of a problem-solving question used in this study is presented in Table 1.  
 
Table 1. An example of a question used in the problem-solving test. 
 
The Zedish Community Service is organising a five-day Children’s Camp. 46 children (26 
girls and 20 boys) have signed up for the camp, and 8 adults (4 men and 4 women) have 
volunteered to attend and organise the camp 
 
List of Adults 
List of Dormitories 
Mrs. Madison 
Name 
Number of beds 
Mrs. Carroll 
Red 
12 
Ms. Grace 
Blue 
8 
Ms. Kelly 
Green 
8 
Mr. Stevens 
Purple 
8 
Mr. Neill 
Orange 
8 
Mr. Williams 
Yellow 
6 
Mr. Peters 
White 
6 
 
Dormitory rules: 
1. Boys and girls must sleep in separate dormitories. 
2. At least one adult must sleep in each dormitory. 
3. The adult(s) in a dormitory must be of the same gender as the children. 
 
Question 1: Dormitory allocation 
Fill the table to allocate the 46 children and 8 adults to dormitories, keeping to all the 
rules. 
 
Name 
Number of boys 
Number of girls 
Name(s) of adults(s) 
Red 
 
 
 
Blue 
 
 
 
Green 
 
 
 
Purple 
 
 
 
Orange 
 
 
 
Yellow 
 
 
 
White 
 
 
 
 
 
The purpose of designing three different problem-solving tests of similar difficulty level 
was to enable measurement of the dynamics of the problem-solving skills of students over the 
course of a term, including a mid-term measurement critical for achieving the objective of 
this study. At the beginning of the term (week 1) the three tests were administered to students 
in a random manner. Students were given 15 minutes to complete the test. In the middle of 
the term (week 7) and at the end of the term (week 13) the tests were administered again 
making sure that individual students did not write the same test twice. Thus, all students 

Improving Undergraduate Student Generic Problem Solving Skills … 
215
wrote three comparable in difficulty, yet different, tests at three different time points during 
the term. For the first six weeks, students were exposed to standard lectures only. PBL 
activities started immediately after the second testing during week 7. All tests were marked in 
a blinded fashion. To achieve this, the test answers were coded, and the student names and 
completion dates were removed, before randomly shuffling the tests into a single pile, which 
was given to blinded markers.  
 
 
2.3. Data Analysis 
 
Paired Student’s t-test was used to test the difference in the scores obtained by the 
students over the course of the semester. Data are presented as means ± standard error of the 
mean (SEM). P values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant.  
 
 
3. RESULTS 
 
Our previous study demonstrated that students who completed a biochemistry course, 
where they were exposed to two PBL cases, had statistically significant improvement in their 
generic problem-solving test scores. In order to determine whether this improvement was due 
to the in-class activities associated with the PBL, students taking the same course the 
following year were exposed to a modified curriculum, where all PBL activities were 
performed in the second half of the course, while the first half of the course involved lectures 
only. Students taking this course were offered to participate in a research study by writing 
problem-solving tests at three different times. This course was taken by 79 students, 60 of 
whom signed the consent form and participated in the study. Three comparable in difficulty 
tests were distributed randomly at the beginning of the term, but during the two subsequent 
testing cycles, the same tests were assigned (rotated) to individual students in a way that all 
students wrote each test only once. For example, students who wrote Test 3 at the beginning 
of the term wrote Test 1 in the middle, and Test 2 at the end of the term. 53 of the 
participating students completed all three tests; therefore, data obtained from these students 
were analysed by using paired Student’s t-test. Due to the random distribution of the tests to 
the class at the beginning of the term, numbers of students writing the three different tests 
during the three testing times were not equal exactly, but were comparable. Thus, at the 
beginning of the term, 16 students wrote Test 1, 17 students wrote Test 2, and 20 students 
wrote Test 3.  
Figure 1 shows that the average score obtained by students at the beginning of the term 
was 7.55 (out of 13); in the middle of the term the score obtained by the same students was 
7.58; and at the end of the term it was 8.32. Thus, there was only a small 0.4% increase (P = 
0.96) in the average score after the first half of the term, followed by a 9.8% increase after the 
second half of the term. Even though there were no statistically significant differences 
between the three different test scores, there was a trend towards significant increase in the 
test scores at the end of the term when compared to the middle of the term (P = 0.18), and 
even stronger trend when the end-of-the-term test scores were compared to the beginning-of-
the-term scores (P = 0.06).  

A. Klegeris and H. Hurren 
216
 
Figure 1. Average generic problem-solving test scores of students taking a third-year biochemistry 
course where PBL activities were offered during the second half of the term after the middle-of-the-
term testing. 53 students completed testing at the beginning, middle and end of the term by writing all 
three comparable tests in a way that students wrote each test only once. Maximal test score was 13. P 
values shown on the figure were calculated by paired Student’s t-test. 
 
4. DISCUSSION 
 
Data obtained in this study did not provide a conclusive answer to our research question. 
Even though the overall trends in the dynamics of the problem-solving skills of students were 
consistent with our hypothesis that PBL, and not the subject matter or the instructor, is 
responsible for the observed improvement in this skill set, no statistically significant effects 
were observed. Consistent with our original reasoning, there was negligible change (0.4% 
improvement) in problem-solving skills of students after the first half of the term when the 
course material was delivered by lectures only. However, after the second half of the term, 
when both PBL cases were conducted, which used almost half of the lecture periods, student 
problem-solving skills improved on average by about 10% with a trend towards significance 
(P = 0.18). It is possible that the numbers of participants were too low to achieve significant 
outcomes in this study. Nonetheless, our data indicate that the experimental design used in 
this study could potentially be effective in a larger student population for testing our 
hypothesis about the positive effects of PBL in a small group environment on student generic 
problem-solving skills. The double-crossover study design involving three different tests 
could be used to investigate the effects of any other pedagogical intervention on the generic 
problem-solving skills of students. The main advantages of this approach include 1) the fact 
that the same students serve as the control group as well as the test group exposed to PBL; 2) 
students are studying the same subject throughout the term when the testing occurs, 
eliminating subject-specific interferences with the results; 3) the same instructor delivers both 
halves of this course eliminating possible instructor-specific effects, which could be 
responsible for differences when control courses are used (Colliver, 2000; Belland et al., 
2008). 
Beginning        Middle
End
of the Term
0
2
4
6
8
Score (out of 13)
P = 0.06
P = 0.18     
P = 0.96     

Improving Undergraduate Student Generic Problem Solving Skills … 
217
 
Figure 2. Dynamics of the generic problem-solving skills of students taking a course that includes a 
PBL component. A. Our research conducted previous year showed that the problem-solving skills of 
students exposed to two PBL cases within a one-term course were statistically significantly improved 
by ~13% (Klegeris et al., 2013). Two different, but comparable tests were administered at the beginning 
and the end of the term. B. In the current study, students from the same course offered one year later 
were exposed to two PBL cases which were conducted during the second half of the course. There was 
no change (0.4% increase, P = 0.96) in student problem-solving skills after the first half of the term, 
while by the end of the term their average test score increased by ~ 10% with a strong trend (P = 0.06) 
towards significance. Three different but comparable tests were administered at the beginning, in the 
middle, and at the end of the term. 
Figure 2 compares data obtained in the current study with observations made previous 
year within the same biochemistry course. Data obtained previous year from 47 students 
showed a statistically significant 13% improvement in student problem-solving skills after 
one full term (13 weeks) of studies. Our current data collected from 53 students showed a 
strong overall trend towards improvement (10%, P = 0.06) after a full term of study. Since the 
same course material was delivered by the same instructor during these two consecutive 
years, the difference between these two sets of observations could be simply due to the fact 
that the data were collected from two different groups of students; however, it is also possible 
that exposing students to PBL for only one half of the term, as opposed to the same activities 
being spread over the whole term, does not give enough time for the beneficial effect to 
develop leading to lower level of problem-solving skill improvement. Even though these 
initial observations will require further confirmation and more in-depth studies, the trends in 
the dynamics of problem-solving skills of students taking this course are consistent with PBL, 
and not the instructor or the rest of the course content, being one of the major factors 
contributing to the previously observed beneficial effects on problem-solving skills of 
students taking this course. 
A.  Previous study design using control courses
B.  Current study using double-crossover design
PBL 1
Tests 1&2
Tests 2&1 
(~13% improvement, P<0.05)
Control courses, no PBL
Beginning        
Middle
End        of the Term
Tests 1&2
Tests 2&1 (no improvement)
Tests 1&2&3       Tests 2&3&1 
Tests 3&1&2
(no improvement)  (~10% trend towards improvement)
PBL 1
PBL 2
PBL 1

A. Klegeris and H. Hurren 
218
The problem-solving tests used as well as the overall study design could be adopted by 
other instructors who are interested in the development of generic problem-solving skills of 
students. Our data also lend additional support to small group work and PBL activities as 
effective strategies for improving generic problem-solving skills of undergraduate students. 
Cooper et al. (2008) found that problem-solving ability was improved by students working in 
small collaborative groups, which was similar to PBL activities. Gayon (2007) conducted 
research with students studying chemistry, and recommended PBL as an instructional method 
that enhanced problem-solving ability. Anderson et al. (2008) concur that using PBL cases 
increases student scores on assessments of problem-solving skills. PBL is increasingly being 
used as the preferred teaching strategy outside of its traditional use in medical and scientific 
fields of study. This will no doubt have the effect of creating greater capacity among 
undergraduate students for problem solving. 
Constructivist theory goes beyond PBL and introduces more general methods to enhance 
deeper learning and an improvement in problem-solving skills (Singh, 2015). This method 
involves students constructing their own understanding and knowledge through experience 
and reflection rather than receiving knowledge passively. Constructivist approaches to 
learning include cooperative learning and inquiry-based learning. Both these methods have 
produced positive results in developing problem-solving abilities of students (Cooper et al., 
2008; Hmelo-Silver, 2004).  
It is also important to note that the PBL technique used within this biochemistry course 
did not require use of additional tutors or resources. It was conducted by a single instructor 
after splitting the class into small groups, which all worked in the same large lecture hall. This 
tutor-less method of PBL instruction has been described in detail previously by Klegeris and 
Hurren (2011) and could be a cost-effective way of not only improving student problem-
solving skills, but also improving student overall satisfaction with their educational 
experiences (Klegeris and Hurren, 2011; Walsh, 2014).  
Our data support and complement previous studies showing that active, student-centred 
learning approaches provide additional beneficial student experiences, which translate into 
professional growth of students in addition to their mastery of course content and subject-
specific knowledge. Problem solving is a critical skill for 21st century learners (Adams, 2014). 
Our research has added weight to the idea that PBL as a teaching and learning method can 
improve the ability of students to problem solve. Further research will be done to capture a 
larger sample size of undergraduate students from diverse areas of studies and from different 
universities in an effort to identify other instructional techniques which have beneficial effects 
on the problem-solving skills of students. Our goal is to develop recommendations on 
methodologies that could be implemented in undergraduate classes to help students develop 
this important and valued skill set. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
We would like to thank UBC Okanagan biochemistry students for their participation in 
this study. Research funding by the University of British Columbia Okanagan campus 
internal grants, which made this study possible, is also acknowledged.  
 

Improving Undergraduate Student Generic Problem Solving Skills … 
219
REFERENCES 
 
Adams, S. (2014). The 10 skills employers most want in 2015 graduates. Forbes 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/susanadams/2014/11/12/the-10-skills-employers-most-want-
in-2015-graduates/ (accessed July 31, 2015). 
Adeyemo, S. A. (2010). Students’ ability level and their competence in problem-solving task 
in physics. International Journal of Educational Research and Technology, 1(2), 35-47. 
Anderson, W. L., Mitchell, S. M. and Osgood, M. P. (2008). Gauging the gaps in student 
problem-solving skills: assessment of individual and group use of problem-solving 
strategies using online discussions. CBE Life Sciences Education, 7(2), 254-262.  
Belland, B., French, B. and Ertmer, P. (2008). Validity and problem-based learning research: 
A review of instruments used to assess intended learning outcomes. Paper presented at 
the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New York, 
March 24-28. 
Colliver, J. (2000). Effectiveness of problem learning curricula: Research and theory. 
Academic Medicine, 75(3), 259-266. 
Cooper, M. M., Cox, C. T. Jr., Nammouz, M. and Case, E. (2008). An assessment of the 
effect of collaborative groups on students’ problem-solving strategies and abilities. 
Journal of Chemical Education, 85(6), 866-873. 
Gayon, E. E. P. (2007). The problem-solving ability of high school chemistry students and its 
implications in redefining chemistry education. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Science and Mathematics Education, Ponang, Malaysia. 
Greiff, S., Holt, D. V. and Funke, J. (2013). Perspectives on problem solving in educational 
assessment: Analytical, interactive, and collaborative problem solving. The Journal of 
Problem Solving, 5(2), 71-91. 
Hmelo-Silver, C. (2004). Problem Based Learning: What and how do students learn. 
Educational Psychology Review, 16(3), 235-266. 
Jones, S. and Davidson, R. (2007). Measuring the problem-solving abilities of accounting and 
other business students: A comparison and evaluation of three methods. Accounting 
Education, 16(1), 65-79. 
Klegeris, A. and Hurren, H. (2011). Impact of problem-based learning in a large classroom 
setting: Student perception and problem-solving skills. Advances in Physiology 
Education, 35(4), 408-415. 
Klegeris, A., Bahniwal, M. and Hurren, H. (2013). Improvements in generic problem-solving 
abilities of students by use of tutor-less problem-based learning in a large classroom 
setting. CBE Life Sciences Education, 12(1), 73-79. 
Latterell, C. M. (2003). Testing the problem-solving skills of students in an NCTM-oriented 
curriculum. The Mathematics Educator, 13(1), 5-14. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD. (2014). PISA 2012 
results: Creative problem solving: Student’ skills in tackling real-life problems (Volume 
V). Paris, France: OECD. 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD (2012). Assessment of 
higher education learning outcomes (AHELO) feasibility study report (Volume I). Paris, 
France: OECD. 

A. Klegeris and H. Hurren 
220
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, OECD. (2004). Problem solving 
for tomorrow’s world: First measures of cross-curricular competencies from PISA 2003. 
Paris, France: OECD. 
Singh, D. (2015). Enhancing problem solving ability through constructivism. Indian Journal 
of Applied Research, 5(3), 562-563. 
Tricot, A. and Sweller, J. (2014). Domain-specific knowledge and why teaching complex 
skills does not work. Educational Psychology Review, 26(2), 265-283. 
Walsh, K. (2014). Tutor-less problem-based learning in a large classroom setting – could it 
also save costs? CBE Life Sciences Education, 12(3), 315. 
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 12 
 
 
 
AN OVERVIEW OF  
PROBLEM-SOLVING THERAPY 
 
 
P. Otero1,*, F. L. Vázquez2, V. Blanco2 and A. Torres2 
1University of A Coruña, A Coruña, Spain 
2University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In this chapter, problem-solving therapy (PST) is presented as an effective 
intervention to prevent or reduce psychopathology and to enhance positive well-being by 
helping individuals cope more effectively with stressful life problems. First, the 
theoretical foundations of the social problem-solving model are presented to explain the 
major concept definitions (such as the social problem solving, the problem or the 
solution), the major problem-solving dimensions (two problem orientation dimensions 
and three different problem-solving styles), and the relational problem-solving model of 
stress and well-being. We also review the empirical support for the theoretical 
foundations of problem-solving therapy. Next, we describe the different phases of 
problem-solving therapy and discuss the most relevant guidelines and clinical 
considerations of the training and practical application. Later, we provide an overview of 
the scientific literature on the efficacy of problem-solving therapy. Finally, we analyze 
the main future challenges for both research on and clinical practice of problem-solving 
therapy. 
 
Keywords: problem-solving therapy, depression, anxiety 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
In our daily lives, we all face a variety of problems, some of them very complicated. This 
causes great wear and tear on our personal resources, and thus sometimes compromises our 
                                                           
* Department of Psychology. University of Coruña, Campus de Elviña, 15071. Coruña, Spain. Email: 
patricia.otero.otero@udc.es. 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
222
psychological well-being. The problem-solving therapy (PST) introduced in 1971 by 
D'Zurilla and Goldfried, is a type of clinical intervention focused on problem-solving training 
to help people manage their problems more effectively and thus promote a more positive 
attitude. Since its first introduction, this therapy has been extensively researched and it has 
been successfully applied to treat a variety of problems such as depression, suicidal ideation, 
anxiety, schizophrenia or substance abuse in people of different ages (from children to 
seniors) and in different formats (individual therapy, group, family). In this chapter we review 
PST, focusing on the most common mental disorders, depression and anxiety, in the adult 
population. To understand its philosophy, we first begin by presenting the theoretical 
foundations on which it is based. 
 
 
THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS 
 
Major Concepts Definitions 
 
The three major concepts in problem-solving theory are (a) social problem solving, (b) 
the problem, (c) the solution. Social problem solving is defined as the self-directed cognitive-
behavioral process by which any subject or group attempts to identify or develop effective 
solutions for specific problems of the everyday life (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007, 2010). 
Therefore, social problem solving is defined as a conscious, rational, effortful, and purposeful 
activity aimed at improving a problematic situation, reducing the negative emotional impact 
generated by the situation, or both these issues (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2010). Social problem 
solving is a process that can be learned, and that includes both a metaprocess of 
understanding, appraising and adapting to stressful life events as well as a method of self-
control. The term social does not imply that the framework of action of the PST is restricted 
to social problems, but it is used to emphasize the fact that problem solving is addressed to 
the real-world problems in our social environment (D'Zurilla, Nezu and Maydeu-Olivares, 
2004). In fact, it addresses all sorts of problems, including impersonal (e.g., economy, 
properties), personal (e.g., emotional or health problems) and interpersonal (e.g., family or 
marital conflict). 
A problem is defined as a task or situation (present or anticipated) that demands an 
effective response to achieve a goal or resolve a conflict when no effective response is 
immediately apparent or available to the person due to the presence of one or more obstacles 
(D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007).Therefore, it supposes a discrepancy between adaptive demands 
and the availability of effective coping responses (D'Zurilla and Nezu, 2010). The demands 
may originate in the environment (e.g., boss asks us to meet our objectives in a short period of 
time) or the within the person (e.g., we want to have a child). Obstacles may include novelty, 
ambiguity, unpredictability, conflicts of interests or demands, personal skills deficits or lack 
of resources. In addition, the problem may be specific or limited in time (e.g., missing the 
train to go to work, an acute illness like the flu), a series of similar or related events (e.g., 
excessive repeated demands at work, discussions with a partner) or a chronic condition (e.g., 
a chronic disease such as arthritis, loneliness). The person can immediately identify that a 
problem exists or can do so after trying unsuccessfully to solve the problem repeatedly. 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
223
The solution is a situation-specific coping response or pattern of responses that is the 
outcome of the problem-solving process when it is applied to a specific problem situation. A 
solution is effective when it achieves the problem-solving goal; that is, changing the situation 
for the better or reducing negative emotions (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007, 2010).  
 
 
Major Problem-Solving Dimensions 
 
After a number of years of investigation on this topic (D'Zurilla and Goldfried, 1971; 
D'Zurilla and Nezu, 1990; Maydeu-Olivares and D'Zurilla, 1995, 1996), it was determined 
that the ability to problem solve is largely determined by two main processes: problem 
orientation and problem-solving style. The problem orientation includes (a) positive problem 
orientation and (b) negative problem orientation, while the problem-solving style includes 
three possible styles: (a) rational problem solving style, (b) impulsivity/careness style, and (c) 
avoidance style (Maydeu-Olivares and D’Zurilla, 1995, 1996). We will discuss these 
dimensions in more detail. 
 
Problem-Solving Orientation  
The problem-solving orientation is a metacognitive process in which a set of cognitive-
emotional patterns are used, reflecting a general and personal knowledge and assessment of 
life problems, as well as one's ability to problem solve (D'Zurilla and Nezu, 2007). This 
component has a strong motivational role in solving problems and influences how we face 
them. As it has already been mentioned, it can be positive or negative. 
The positive problem orientation is a constructive and optimistic belief system that 
involves: (a) regarding problems as a part of life rather than as a tragedy, and as a challenge 
or opportunity to learn or achieve some benefit rather than a threat (b) believing that the 
problems are solvable and having expectations of a positive or optimistic outcome, (c) having 
confidence in oneself and believing in one’s own ability to solve problems successfully, (d) 
being aware that effective problem solving takes time, effort and persistence, and (e) 
committing oneself to face the problems rather than avoid them. This attitude generates 
positive emotions, helps address the problems, keeps the focus on the task and maximizes 
involvement, effort, persistence and tolerance of uncertainty and frustration when facing 
problems. 
By contrast, the negative problem orientation is a negative belief system that includes the 
tendency to: (a) regard problems as a tragedy or as something detrimental to one’s well-being, 
(b) doubt one’s own abilities to solve problems successfully (c) have low tolerance for 
uncertainty and frustration and experience high emotional distress when facing problems. 
This type of orientation generates negative emotions and a tendency toward problem 
avoidance, it increases the concerns and, unlike the positive orientation to problems, it 
reduces involvement, effort, persistence and tolerance of uncertainty and frustration when 
facing problems. 
 
Problem-Solving Style 
The problem-solving style refers to the cognitive and behavioral activities by which a 
person attempts to understand problems and discover effective solutions or ways of coping 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
224
with them. Three problem-solving styles have been identified (Nezu, Nezu and D’Zurilla, 
2007): rational, impulsivity/carelessness and avoidance. Positive problem orientation and 
rational problem-solving style are functional dimensions that increase the chances of solving 
problems and obtaining positive personal and social results. In contrast, negative problem 
orientation, impulsivity/carelessness style, and avoidance style are dysfunctional dimensions 
that disrupt or inhibit effective problem solving and bring negative consequences, as a result.  
More specifically, rational problem solving style is characterized by the tendency to 
actively seek a solution to the problems and systematically implement the steps necessary to 
achieve the best possible solution, using the appropriate personal skills. As shown in Table 1, 
these skills include: (a) problem definition and formulation, (b) the generation of alternative 
solutions, (c) decision making, and (d) solution implementation and verification. In problem 
definition and formulation the aim is to clarify and understand the problem, describing the 
problematic situation in clear, specific, relevant and objective terms, and to set a realistic goal 
(i.e., modify the situation or reduce the emotional distress that the situation generates). In the 
generation of alternative solutions the aim is to identify as many possible solutions as 
possible to increase the chances that the best solution is among them, following the principles 
of quantity (i.e., the more the better), variety (i.e., the more varied, the better) and deferment 
of the judgment (i.e., postpone any judgment or assessment of them). In decision making the 
aim is to choose the most appropriate solution after evaluating the advantages and 
disadvantages of each of the possible solutions. In solution implementation and verification 
the goal is to implement the chosen solution in real life and to monitor and evaluate the 
results. 
 
Table 1. Skills of the rational style of problem solving 
 
Skills 
Fundamentals 
Definition and 
formulation of the 
problem 
- Gather information about the problem 
- Understand the nature of the problem 
- Re-evaluate the importance of the problem 
- Set realistic goals 
Generating alternative 
solutions 
- Principle of quantity 
- Principle of variety 
- Principle of deferment of judgment 
Decision making 
-  Elimination of irrelevant solutions (unacceptable risk or low viability) 
-  Costs/benefits 
• Short-term consequences 
• Long-term consequences 
• Personal Impact 
• Impact on other people 
• The amount of time and effort required 
• Total cost/benefit ratio expected 
- Plan to implement the chosen solution 
Implementation of the 
solution and 
verification 
-  Implement the chosen solution 
-  Self-monitor and self-evaluate the results achieved 
-  Self-evaluate the result obtained by comparing it to what was expected 
-  Satisfaction with the end result produces self-reinforcement 
-  If the result is not as expected, check the problem-solving process. 
Make any necessary changes to find a more effective solution 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
225
People who solve their problems with a rational style gather information about the 
problem carefully and systematically, identify the demands and obstacles, set realistic goals, 
generate a variety of possible solutions, assess the consequences of different options, compare 
alternatives, choose the best of them, implement the solution and monitor and evaluate the 
results achieved. If they are satisfied with these results, they consider the problem solved; 
otherwise, they review the steps they took to repeat the process, making the necessary 
corrections. 
Impulsivity/carelessness style is characterized by active attempts to solve the problems, 
but in an unsystematic, impulsive, careless, hurried and incomplete way, without considering 
all possible options and without assessing their costs and benefits, or determining which one 
is the best. People with this style of problem solving often see few possible solutions, and act 
impulsively, applying the first solution that comes to their mind, without assessing the 
consequences. 
Avoidance style is characterized by procrastination, passivity, inaction and dependence 
when addressing the problems. People with this style prefer to escape or avoid problems 
rather than confront them, and try to postpone or wait to see if they resolve themselves or 
someone else solves them. 
 
 
Relational Problem-Solving Model of Stress and Well-Being 
 
From this model, stress is understood as a function of the reciprocal relationships 
between three main variables: (a) stressful life events, (b) emotional stress/well-being 
response, and (c) problem-solving coping (D’Zurilla and Nezu, 2007, 2010).  
Stressful life events are life experiences that present a person with demands for personal, 
social or biological readjustment (Bloom, 1985). There are two types of stressful life events: 
(a) major negative events, which are those experiences sufficiently threatening to the person 
as to force major restructure in their life (e.g., divorce, loss of a loved one, job loss, important 
disease) and (b) daily problems, which are more specific events characterized by a 
discrepancy between environmental demands and coping responses available at that time for 
the person (e.g., incompatibility of schedule between two events one wants to attend, lack of 
money to buy an item one needs, an argument). 
Emotional stress/well-being response refers to the immediate emotional response of a 
person to stressful life events. The response to the event can be modulated by cognitive 
appraisal (Lazarus, 1999). Depending on the nature of the stressful life event, the cognitive 
assessments and the coping behaviors that a person develops, the emotional responses may be 
negative (e.g., anxiety, fear, depression) or positive (e.g., serenity, hope, illusion). Negative 
emotional responses are likely to predominate when the person appraises the stressful event 
as threatening or harmful to their well-being, doubts his or her ability to cope effectively or 
performs ineffective, maladaptive or self-defeating coping responses. In contrast, positive 
emotional responses are present when the person appraises the stressful event as a challenge 
or opportunity for benefit, believes that he or she is capable of coping with the problem 
effectively, and has effective, adaptive and self-improving coping responses. 
Problem-solving coping is a process that integrates all cognitive appraisal and coping 
activities within a general social problem-solving framework (D'Zurilla and Nezu, 2007,  
 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
226
2010). These coping strategies can focus on the problem (e.g., changing the problematic 
situation) or on the emotions (e.g., reduce or change our negative emotions), or both. When 
the problem situation is controllable or can be modified, the coping strategies are directed 
mainly to the problem (without necessarily excluding effort to improve our emotions); 
however, when the problem situation can not be changed, coping strategies are mainly 
directed at changing or improving the emotions that are evoked by the situation. Regardless 
of what one changes, the ultimate goal of problem-solving coping is to minimize the negative 
effects of stressful life events on our well-being. 
As the Figure 1 shows, the relational problem-solving model of stress and well-being 
hypothesizes that the major negative events and daily problems influence each other 
reciprocally. For example, a major negative event, such as a job loss, is likely to result in 
daily problems such as financial difficulties or job searching; and conversely, an 
accumulation of little daily problems such as communication difficulties with the boss or 
conflicts with coworkers may eventually result in a major negative event, such as job loss. 
Moreover, both types of stressful life events have a direct impact on well-being, as well as an 
indirect effect on well-being via problem-solving coping.  
This model assumes that the problem-solving coping influences the relationship between 
stressful life events and well-being by functioning as a moderator or a mediator. As a 
moderator, the stressful life events interact with problem-solving coping to influence well-
being (i.e., poor problem-solving ability increases the negative impact of stressful life events 
on well-being while good problem-solving ability functions as a buffer). As a mediator, it is 
assumed that the stressful life events produce an impact on problem-solving behaviors, which 
in turn affect the well-being.  
 
 
Figure 1. Relationships within the relational problem-solving model of stress and well-being. 
Note. Adapted from D’Zurilla and Nezu (2007). Copyright by Springer Publishing Company, Inc. 
Republished with permission.  
On the other hand, this model also hypothesizes that a reciprocal relationship exists 
between daily problems and problem solving. In addition to the assumption that stressful life 
events may have a negative impact on problem solving, it is also assumed that problem 
solving is likely to influence the frequency of daily problems. For example, ineffective 
    Major negative events 
 
  
                                                               Problem-solving coping                           Well-being 
 
 
         Daily problems 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
227
problem solving is expected to result in an increase of daily problems, whereas effective 
problem solving is expected to reduce their frequency.  
Finally, it is expected that the relationship between the stressful life events and well-
being is reciprocal. In addition to the direct and indirect impact of stressful life events on 
well-being, the model assumes that well-being is likely to have an impact on future stressful 
events. Maladaptive states such as depression or anxiety are likely to result in an increase of 
daily problems and major negative events, whereas adaptive states such as hope, self-esteem, 
and competence, are likely to reduce the frequency of the stressful events.  
As one can see, in this model, problem-solving coping plays a central role as a coping 
strategy in achieving high well-being. It is expected that a person who effectively implements 
strategies for problem solving will reduce the negative impact of the discomfort derived from 
the stressful life events, promote adaptive functioning and as a result, increase their well-
being. Therefore, training in problem solving (basis of the problem-solving therapy), is a very 
useful tool in the psychological treatment of various mental diseases. 
 
 
EMPIRICAL SUPPORT FOR THE THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS OF 
PROBLEM-SOLVING THERAPY 
 
A large number of studies on the relationships between social problem solving and 
adjustment and well-being have provided scientific support to the relational problem-solving 
model. Thus, it has been found findings that: 
 
(a)  Establish a relationship between problem-solving skills and well-being. 
(b)  Support problem solving can be a moderator or mediator of the relationship between 
stressful life events and well-being. 
(c)  Demonstrate the relationship between well-being improvements after problem-
solving therapy with the increased ability to solve problems. 
 
 
(a) The Relationship between Problem-Solving Skills and Well-Being 
 
Several studies have provided evidence supporting the hypothesis that problem-solving 
skills are related to different adjustment results. It has been found that the problem-solving 
skills are positively related to self-esteem (Heppner, Reeder and Larson, 1983), positive 
affection (Elliot, Sherwin, Harkins and Marmarosh, 1995) and academic performance 
(D'Zurilla and Sheedy 1992; Rodríguez-Fornells and Maydeu-Olivares, 2000). 
In addition, deficits in problem-solving skills are associated with psychological distress, 
especially with symptoms of depression and anxiety. For depression, several studies have 
found that depressed subjects had significantly lower problem-solving scores than non-
depressed subjects in clinical samples of adults (Bates and Lavery, 2003; Marx, Williams and 
Claridge, 1992) and university students (Marx and Schulze, 1991; Ranjbar, Bayani and 
Bayani, 2013). More specifically, depressed individuals have more difficulties than their non-
depressed peers in generating alternative solutions (Marx et al., 1992; Nezu and Ronan, 1987)  
 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
228
and making decisions (Nezu and Ronan, 1987). Furthermore, negative problem orientation 
and the avoidant and impulsive styles are significantly correlated with depressive symptoms 
(Frye and Goodman, 2000; Reinecke, DuBois and Schultz, 2001). 
With respect to anxiety, problem solving is negatively associated with level of worry 
(Davey and Levy, 1998), even after adjusting for anxiety in college students (Belzer, 
D'Zurilla and Maydeu-Olivares, 2002). In addition, the problem-solving deficits have been 
shown to be significantly associated with anxiety (Kant, D'Zurilla and Mayudeu-Olivares, 
1997). In clinical trials, Ladouceur, Blais, Freeston and Dugas (1998) found that patients 
diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder had a negative orientation to the problems 
compared to patients with "moderate concerns". Furthermore, Brodbeck and Michelson 
(1987) found that people diagnosed with panic disorder and agoraphobia demonstrated a 
lower ability to generate alternative solutions and to make decisions compared with control 
subjects. 
 
 
(b) Support Problem Solving Can Be a Moderator or Mediator of the 
Relationship between Stressful Life Events and Well-Being 
 
Previous has identified that problem-solving skills moderate the relationship between the 
major negative events and depression. Nezu, Nezu, Saraydarian, Kalmar and Ronan (1986), 
in a sample of university students, found that the subjects who were the most effective 
problem solvers under high levels of stress reported significantly lower scores of depressive 
symptoms compared to subjects who were less effective problem solvers under similar stress 
levels. Subsequently, those results were replicated under more rigorous conditions by using a 
prospective design, controlling the previous depressive level, incorporating two measures of 
problem solving and including various methodological controls to increase the validity of the 
evaluation of stressful life events (Nezu and Ronan, 1988). Recently, Otero, Vázquez, 
Ferraces, Blanco and Torres (2015), demonstrated that the relationship of problem-solving 
training for caregivers with elevated depressive symptoms and their post-treatment decrease 
in depressive symptoms was moderated by global and functional problem-solving skills 
(positive orientation to problems and rational style).  
Furthermore, problem-solving skills mediated the relationship between major negative 
events and emotional well-being. Specifically, Nezu and Ronan (1985) found that stressful 
negative events were associated with depressive symptoms both directly and indirectly 
through increases in ongoing problems. In addition, they found that the problems had a direct 
impact on depressive symptoms and an indirect influence through problem solving. In a later 
study, Kant et al. (1997) found that all dimensions of problem solving mediated the 
relationship between negative life events and depressive and anxiety symptoms, with negative 
problem orientation as the largest contributor to the mediating effect. In addition, negative 
problem orientation – and impulsive and avoidant styles in women – has been identified as a 
mediator in the relationship between daily stressful events and depression and anxiety (Bell 
and D'Zurilla, 2009). 
 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
229
(c) Relationship between Well-Being Improvements after Problem-Solving 
Therapy with Improved Problem Solving Skills 
 
Significant relationships between reducing depressive symptoms after problem-solving 
therapy and increases in problem-solving skills after the intervention have been identified. 
Nezu and Perri (1989) in a study of depressed subjects compared complete PST, abbreviated 
PST (without the problem orientation component) and a wait list control group and identified 
a significantly greater increase in the problem-solving skills of the group receiving the 
complete PST compared to the other conditions. The complete PST group also had a greater 
reduction in depressive symptoms. More specifically, after applying a problem-solving 
intervention to caregivers with depressive symptoms, Otero, Vázquez, Ferraces et al. (2015) 
found a significant association between depressive symptomatology and positive and negative 
problem orientation and the generation of alternative solutions.  
 
 
APPLICATION OF PROBLEM-SOLVING THERAPY 
 
Phases of the Problem-Solving Therapy and Main Intervention Programs  
 
Although there are small differences in studies focusing on PST regarding to the phases 
involved in it, generally, it consists of the following five phases:  
 
1.  Positive problem orientation, in which one works with patients to increase their 
positive orientation and decrease their negative orientation to problems. 
2.  Problem definition and formulation, during which patients are taught to describe 
problems in a specific, objective manner. 
3.  Generation of alternative solutions, which addresses the production of alternative 
ideas with patients to find solutions to problems. 
4.  Decision making, where patients are trained to choose the most appropriate solution 
to problems. 
5.  Solution implementation and verification, where patients are encouraged to apply the 
chosen solution and are trained in the verification of the results achieved with the 
implemented solution. 
 
The objective of the PST throughout phases 2 to 5 is to improve rational problem-solving 
skills, reduce or prevent impulsive/careless problem solving and minimize the tendency to 
avoid problem solving. 
There are problem-solving intervention programs, specifically for depression, that have 
been demonstrated to be effective; these are described below. The most widely known and 
used intervention was designed by Nezu (1986) and Nezu and Perri (1989). This intervention 
was applied in eight sessions individually or in groups. The first session was devoted to 
introducing the approach to problem solving. Sessions 2 and 3 focused on the component of 
positive orientation to the problem. Sessions 4 and 5 focused on teaching and practice of the  
 
 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
230
four remaining problem-solving skills. In the last three sessions (sessions 6-8), all of these 
skills were applied to unresolved problems. Later, a 10 session version of the intervention 
implemented a few changes (Nezu, Nezu and Perri, 1989): in the session 1, the model is 
introduced and its rationale is explained. The 5 skills are introduced throughout sessions 2-6 
(one per session). During sessions 7-9, the focus is on maintaining and generalizing, and 
session 10 is devoted to aspects of completion of the therapy. In a subsequent adaptation to 
treat older adults with depression (Areán et al., 1993, 2010), the number of sessions was 
extended to 12. 
Mynors-Wallis, Gath, Lloyd-Thomas and Tomlinson (1995) designed a form of PST for 
depression to be applied by physicians and other primary care professionals who were not 
specialists in mental health. It consists of 6 sessions, with the first session being one hour 
long and subsequent ones 30 minutes long. The process of problem solving is taught in the 
following seven steps: (a) explanation of treatment and rationality, (b) clarifying and defining 
problems, (c) establishment of goals, (d) generation of alternative solutions, (e) selection of 
the best solution, (f) clarification of the steps required to implement the chosen solution, and 
(g) evaluation of progress. The patient learns all the steps in the first session with one of the 
problems, and in subsequent sessions the method is applied to the remaining problems. 
More recently, we designed a brief PST program for depression (Vázquez et al., 2013; 
Otero, Smit, Cuijpers, Torres et al., 2015; Vázquez Otero, Blanco and Torres, 2015). The 
intervention consisted of five 90-minute weekly group sessions, with about 5 participants per 
group. Table 2 shows the structure, contents and activities of this intervention program. In 
session 1, the therapist explains to patients the concept of depression, the relationship 
between problems and depressive symptoms, and how training in problem solving can help 
reduce these symptoms. In this first session, the therapist starts working on the positive 
orientation to problems. In the session 2, the patients are trained in the proper definition of the 
problems and in setting realistic goals. Each patient selects a present specific problem of their 
everyday life in order to train these skills in an applied way. A search for alternative solutions 
to the problems posed by the group members is conducted together by all of them. In session 
3, the patients perform the cost/benefit analysis of each of the possible solutions to their 
problem in order to select the most appropriate. Each patient personally makes the decision 
on what is the best solution for their problem, and plans how to implement it in their daily 
lives. For homework, the patients implement the selected solution in their daily lives. In 
session 4, the results achieved with the applied solution (benefits and costs that resulted from 
it) are checked. If the result achieved is satisfactory, the process of problem solving is 
finalized for that particular problem. If the result achieved is not satisfactory, the causes are 
analyzed and the problem-solving process is repeated. In addition, in this session, each patient 
repeats the entire process of problem solving applied to another problem that they are 
currently experiencing in order to consolidate their problemsolving skills. Once more, the 
application of the chosen solution is assigned as homework. Finally, at session 5, the results 
achieved with the applied solutions are verified, the therapist conducts a review of what was 
learned and relapse prevention is conducted to help patients to handle with possible 
difficulties in the future. 
 
 
 
 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
231
Table 2. Structure, contents and activities of PST by Vázquez et al. (Otero, Smit, 
Cuijpers, Torres et al., 2015; Vázquez et al., 2013, 2015) 
 
Session 
Content 
Activities 
Session 1 
Presentation 
Discussion on what is meant by depression 
Purpose of intervention 
Information about depression 
Explanation of PST 
 
 
Present problem solving and how it influences 
depression 
Identify targets and intervention components 
Positive problem orientation 
Positive orientations strategies to problems 
Homework 
Reflect on the list of their current problems and 
complete it 
Monitoring mood 
Self-reinforcement 
Session 2 
Definition of the problem 
 
 
 
Select a problem to work on in the session 
Train participants in a concrete formulation of 
the problem 
Decompose the problem, if necessary 
Setting goals 
Guidelines for setting realistic goals 
Generating alternative 
solutions 
 
Guidelines for alternative solutions 
Brainstorming to generate alternative solutions 
Homework 
Review and complete the alternative solutions 
Monitoring mood 
Self-reinforcement 
Session 3 
Decision making 
 
 
 
Run a cost/benefit analysis for each alternative 
solution 
Guidelines to recognize the most appropriate 
solution 
Make a decision 
Planning the chosen solution 
Planning for implementation of the chosen 
solution 
Homework 
Application of the chosen solution 
Monitoring mood 
Self-reinforcement 
Session 4 
Verification of the chosen 
solution 
Analyze the results achieved with the chosen 
solution (difficulties and achieved benefits) 
Repeat the process with 
another problem 
Repeat the problem solving processes with 
another problem 
Homework 
Apply the chosen solution to the new problem 
Monitoring mood 
Self-reinforcement 
Session 5 
Verification of the chosen 
solution 
Analyze the results achieved with the chosen 
solution (difficulties and achieved benefits) 
Maintenance of progress and 
relapse prevention 
 
 
Review model, encourage them to continue 
using it in the future, analyze possible difficulties 
in the future and how to handle them 
Importance of daily practice 
Assessment of the program 
 
Farewell and closing 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
232
Relevant Guidelines and Clinical Considerations of the Training and 
Practical Application  
 
Similar to other forms of cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy, the therapist applying PST 
needs to be proficient in various skills to facilitate the implementation of thetherapy 
(D'Zurilla and Nezu, 2007; Vázquez et al., 2015). A summary of the main factors contributing 
to the successful implementation of PST is included in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Summary of the factors contributing to the successful  
implementation of the PST 
 
1. 
Promoting a good therapeutic relationship 
2. 
Pedagogical and organizational capacity of the clinician 
3. 
Being enthusiastic and optimistic 
4. 
Being flexible and creative. Avoid presenting PST in a mechanical manner 
5. 
Being able to encourage active participation by modeling, practice and 
feedback 
6. 
Assigning homework and reviewing it 
7. 
Anticipate and address obstacles, but avoid direct, early and unsolicited advice 
8. 
Positive reinforcement of the efforts and achievements of the patients 
 
1. Promotion of a good therapeutic relationship. While the relationship between therapist 
and patient is not enough by itself to help patients, it is a key element in facilitating the 
therapeutic change. Trust, rapport, and friendliness are three key factors to developing a good 
relationship. 
Furthermore, 
maintaining 
confidentiality, 
showing 
empathy, 
being 
nonjudgmental of patients, having a genuine interest in them, using a soft voice, having a 
relaxed body posture and appropriate eye contact can help promote these factors.  
2. Pedagogical and organizational capacity of the clinician. The therapist applying a PST 
must train their patients in new skills. This includes not only the transmission of information 
or knowledge, but also and above all, helping to promote the internalization of new cognitive 
and behavioral skills. Therefore, explanations must be clear and adaptable to the educational 
level of the patients by avoiding technicalities and using examples and real-life problems. The 
therapist should check the level of understanding achieved by the patients and answers all 
questions. It is also essential that the therapist plans the training in problem solving in steps of 
increasing difficulty, starting with the easiest problems. 
3. Being enthusiastic and optimistic. The PST therapist must possess and transmit a 
positive orientation to problems. They must regard problems as challenges, rely on their own 
capabilities and those of their patients to solve them, tolerate uncertainty and persist in the 
tasks needed to reach solutions. 
4. Being flexible and creative. Avoid presenting PST in a mechanical manner. Among 
their personal characteristics, the therapist must be flexible and creative. The therapist must 
be flexible to accept different views and to allow patients to explore different options in their 
search for solutions. Creativity helps to promote the generation of alternative solutions. Also, 
the therapist should avoid presenting the PST in a mechanical manner. Each case is unique, 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
233
and therefore the therapist must adapt and customize the process of problem solving to each 
patient. 
5. Being able to encourage active participation by modeling, practice and feedback. The 
PST therapist should assume a leadership position and at the same time, must encourage the 
active participation of each patient. To do this, we recommend using modeling (in which the 
therapist or another patient with more skill shows the application of the different problem-
solving skills), practice (in which the patient practices how to apply the chosen solution), and 
feedback (in which the therapist provides corrective evaluations and progressively brings the 
patient to a better execution of their skills). 
6. Assigning homework and reviewing it. Homework serves to promote the independent 
practice of the skills acquired and the generalization of what they learned during the session 
to everyday life. The amount of homework performed by patients in PST is a predictor of 
depressive symptoms at the end of the intervention (Otero, Vázquez, Hermida, Díaz and 
Torres, 2015). Therefore, the therapist must assign realistic and relevant homework to 
patients, review their compliance at the beginning of each session and reinforce the patients 
who completed the assigned task. 
7. Anticipate and address obstacles, but avoid direct, early and unsolicited advice. Both 
the therapist and the patient should try to identify foreseeable obstacles that may prevent them 
from achieving the desired objectives and identify ways to solve them. However, providing 
direct, early and unsolicited advice can result in solutions that are inadequate for the patient or 
provoke resistance from the patient that can interfere with the therapeutic process. 
8. Positive reinforcement of the efforts and achievements of the patients. It is essential 
that the therapist explicitly reinforces the effort of each patient (irrespective of the result 
achieved) and their progress in their program to increase their motivation and positive 
orientation to problems, especially at the start of treatment.  
 
 
THE EFFICACY OF PROBLEM-SOLVING THERAPY 
 
To determine the efficacy of PST, we present an overview of research into the therapeutic 
outcomes of PST. Because a comprehensive review of the literature is beyond the scope of 
this chapter, we will focus on the findings of the most important randomized controlled trials 
that have evaluated PST (as the sole therapy or as a component of the treatment package) in 
the context of depression and anxiety in adults. Tables 4 and 5 present a summary of the 
studies, including authors, year, sample size, comparisonconditions and results achieved in 
depression and anxiety. 
 
 
Depression  
 
Nezu (1986) was the first to publish on the efficacy of PST in the treatment of 
depression. In this initial study, 32 participants were assigned to three groups: (a) PST; (b) 
problem-focused therapy; or (c) wait list control group. Both active treatment programs were 
implemented in eight weekly sessions of one hour and a half in group format. The 
intervention included problem-solving training in all phases of the PST. In the problem-

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
234
focused therapy group, no systematic model for solving problems was provided, but 
participants were encouraged to discuss their problems with other group members. At the end 
of treatment, the PST group had significantly lower depression scores than the other two 
groups. This difference was maintained at 6 months follow-up.  
 
Table 4. Research on the results of problem-solving therapy in depression 
 
Research 
Studies 
Subjects  
(N, % 
predominant 
gender, mean 
age) 
Comparison conditions 
Results 
Post-treatment 
Last Follow-up 
Nezu 
(1986) 
N = 32 
75.0% women 
41.7 years old  
 
Problem-solving Therapy 
(PST; n = 12) 
Problem-focused Therapy 
(PFT; n = 11) 
Wait List Control  
(WLC; n = 9) 
Significant differences 
between PST and PFT 
(ES = 1.28) and PST 
and WLC (ES = 2.01)  
 
Significant differences 
at 6 months between 
PST and PFT (ES = 
1.90) 
 
Nezu and 
Perri (1989) 
N = 43 
81.5% women 
45.8 years old 
Problem-solving Therapy 
(PST; n = 15) 
Abbreviated Problem-solving 
Therapy (APST;  
n = 15) 
Wait List Control (WLC;  
n = 13) 
Significant differences 
between PST and ATSP  
(TE = 1.51); and PST 
and WLC (ES = 3.00) 
 
Significant differences 
at 6 months follow up 
between PST and 
ATSP  
(ES = 0.99) 
 
Areán et al. 
(1993) 
N = 75 
75.0% women 
66.4 years old 
Problem-solving Therapy 
(PST, n = 28) 
Reminiscence Therapy  
(RT, n = 27) 
Wait List Control (WLC, n = 
20) 
Significant differences 
between PST and WLC 
(ES = 0.83) 
 
There were no 
significant differences 
at 3 months between 
PST and RT 
(ES = 0.12)  
 
Mynors-
Wallis et al. 
(1995) 
N = 91 
76.8% women 
37.1 years old 
Problem-solving Therapy 
(PST; n = 30) 
Amitriptyline (AM; n = 31) 
Placebo (PL; n = 30) 
Significant differences 
between PST and PL 
(ES = 0.69); no 
significant differences 
between PST and AM 
 
Mynors-
Wallis et al. 
(2000) 
N = 151 
76.8% women 
35.0 years old 
 
Problem-solving Therapy 
applied by physicians (PSTM; 
n = 39) 
Problem-solving Therapy 
applied by nurses 
 (PSTN; n = 41) 
Fluvoxamine or paroxetine 
(PA; n = 36) 
Problem-solving Therapy + 
antidepressants (PST + A; 
 n = 35) 
There were no 
significant differences 
between PSTM and PA; 
nor between PSTN and 
PA; nor between PSTM 
and PST + A; nor 
between PSTN and PST 
+ A  
 
There were no 
differences in 
depressive symptoms 
in the four conditions 
at week 52 of follow-
up 
Areán et al. 
(2010) 
N = 221 
 
73 years old 
Problem-solving Therapy 
(PST, n = 110) 
Supportive Therapy 
 (ST, n = 111) 
Significant differences 
between PST y ST  
(ES = 0.39) 
 
Otero, Smit, 
Cuijpers, 
Torres et al. 
(2015) 
N = 173 
100% women 
53.9 years old 
Problem-solving Therapy 
(PST, n = 89) 
Usual-care Control 
(UCC, n = 84) 
Significant differences 
between PST and UCC  
(ES = 1.54) 
 
Significant differences 
between PST and 
UCC 
(ES = 1.14) 
 
Note: ES = Effect size (M1 – M2/intragroup standard deviation). 
 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
235
Later, in the study of Nezu and Perri (1989) 43 participants with depression were 
assigned to (a) a PST group, (b) an abbreviated PST group or (c) a wait list control group. The 
two active therapies were applied over 10 weekly sessions of two hours each. In the PST 
group, therapy included problem orientation and the skills involved in rational problem-
solving. In the abbreviated PST group, participants were trained only in the skills involved in 
rational problem-solving, excluding the problem orientation component. At the end of the 
intervention, PST participants reported significantly lower depression scores than subjects 
both in the abbreviated PST and the control group. Further, participants of the abbreviated 
PST scored significantly lower in depression than the control group. At 6 months follow-up, 
therapeutic benefits were maintained in both treatment conditions, but were higher in the PST 
group. Therefore, this study not only confirms the efficacy of PST, but it demonstrated the 
relevance of problem orientation component. 
Areán et al. (1993) conducted a study with 75 elderly people with major depression who 
were randomly assigned to one of three groups (a) PST (b) reminiscence therapy and (c) wait 
list control group. The two therapies were applied over 12 weekly sessions of one hour and a 
half. The PST applied was an adaptation of that proposed by Nezu et al. (1989). Immediately 
post-treatment, and at the 3 months follow-up, the researchers found that both therapies had 
significantly reduced depressive symptoms compared to the control group. The PST had a 
significantly stronger effect in reducing depressive symptoms than the reminiscence therapy 
at the end of treatment, but their results converged at the 3 months follow-up. However, the 
PST did better than reminiscence therapy on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression. 
Mynors-Wallis et al. (1995) compared antidepressant medication (amitriptyline) to their 
modality of PST as it was applied by physicians and other primary care professionals who 
were not specialists in mental health, for the treatment of depression in primary care patients. 
Participants with severe depression (n = 91) were randomized to one of three groups: (a) PST, 
(b) amitriptyline or (c) placebo. In all three groups, participants received six individual 
sessions of 30 to 60 minutes for 12 weeks. At post-treatment, PST and amitriptyline scored 
significantly lower in depression than placebo, with no significant differences between the 
two experimental conditions.  
In a later study, Mynors-Wallis, Gath, Day and Baker (2000) evaluated the effectiveness 
of the combination of antidepressant drugs and their modality of PST. They randomly 
assigned 151 patients with severe depression to one of four groups: (a) PST applied by 
primary care physicians, (b) PST applied by nurses, (c) antidepressant medication prescribed 
by primary care physicians or (d) combination of PST and antidepressant (fluvoxamine or 
paroxetine). The treatments were applied within 6-7 sessions over 12 weeks. Patients in all 
groups showed a clear improvement during treatment. The combination of PST and 
antidepressant drug was no more effective than either treatment at post-treatment or follow-
up.  
Areán et al. (2010) analyzed the efficacy of the PST in the treatment of elderly patients 
with major depression and executive dysfunction; a population that is often resistant to drug 
treatment with antidepressants. They randomly assigned 221 people aged 60 or over to one of 
2 groups (a) PST or (b) supportive therapy. The two therapies were applied over 12 weekly 
sessions. The PST applied was an adaptation of the approach proposed by Nezu et al. (1989). 
The supportive therapy was similar to person-centered psychotherapy. After the intervention, 
the PST group presented with a greater reduction in the severity of symptoms, higher 
response rates to the therapy and higher rates of remission of depression.  

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
236
Otero, Smit, Cuijpers, Torres et al. (2015) evaluated the efficacy of PST to prevent 
depression in caregivers with elevated depressive symptoms. They randomly assigned 173 
participants to (a) the PST or (b) the usual-care control group. The intervention was 
implemented in five sessions of 90 minutes in group format. After the intervention and up to 
12 months of follow-up, the intervention group demonstrated a significantly lower incidence 
of depression as well as a significant delay in the time of onset of the disorder and minor 
depressive symptoms compared to the control group. 
 
 
Anxiety  
 
Research into the efficacy of PST in the treatment of anxiety has been sparser and is less 
well established. For example, the study by DiGiuseppe, Simon, McGowan and Gardner 
(1990) compared interpersonal cognitive PST vs. rational-emotive therapy vs. cognitive 
therapy vs. self-instruction training vs. assertion training vs. wait list control group for the 
treatment of social anxiety. Seventy-nine adults were randomly assigned to one of the five 
treatment conditions or the control group. Treatment for all therapy conditions was conducted 
in group format that met weekly for 10 weeks for 90 minute sessions. Results indicated that 
participants in all the therapy groups reported significantly less social avoidance, less fear of 
negative evaluations and less anxiety at post-treatment, compared to pretreatment. However, 
in the control group there were no significant differences between pretreatment and post-
treatment. Moreover, at post-treatment, participants in all treatments, with the exception of 
assertion training, reported significantly less anxiety than subjects in the wait list control 
group. 
Ladouceur et al. (2000) evaluated the efficacy of an intervention for generalized anxiety. 
They randomly assigned 26 patients with generalized anxiety disorder to (a) a treatment 
group or (b) a control group. Treatment consisted of 16 one-hour weekly sessions, which 
included awareness training, correction of erroneous beliefs about worry, problem orientation 
training and cognitive exposure. The results indicated that the treatment package produced 
significant statistical and clinical changes in the post-treatment, which were still present at 6- 
and 12-months follow up.  
Dugas et al. (2003) studied the efficacy of an intervention for the treatment of generalized 
anxiety. They randomly assigned 52 patients to (a) a treatment group or (b) a wait list control 
group. The treatment comprised 14 weekly group sessions of 2 hours and it included a 
reevaluation of positive beliefs about worry, exposure and PST. Compared with the control 
group, the treatment group showed significantly greater improvement in self-report and 
clinician ratings of generalized anxiety disorder symptoms, intolerance to uncertainty, 
anxiety, depression and social adjustment. In addition, participants made further gains over 
the course of a 2-year follow-up period. 
Seekles, van Straten, Beekman, van Marwijk and Cuijpers (2011) evaluated the efficacy 
of a stepwise intervention in primary care patients diagnosed with a mood disorder or anxiety. 
They randomly distributed 120 patients to (a) a stepped care program or (b) a usual-care 
control group. The stepped care program consists of four successive interventions according 
to the patient’s needs: (1) watchful waiting during four weeks, (2) guided self-help courses 
including PST and exposure during six weeks and (3) medication and/or specialized mental 
health care. The patients assigned to care as usual were advised to see their GP if they wanted 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
237
care. At post-treatment, it was found that for patients with anxiety disorder treated with the 
stepped care program, the anxiety symptoms decreased significantly compared to the care-as-
usual group. 
 
Table 5. Research on the results of PST in anxiety 
 
Research 
Studies 
Subjects (N, % 
predominant 
gender, mean 
age) 
Comparison conditions 
Results 
Post-treatment 
Last Follow-up 
DiGiuseppe 
et al. (1990) 
N = 79 
45.6% women 
36.2 years old 
 
Interpersonal Cognitive Problem-
solving Skills Training  
(ICPS; n = 12)  
Rational-emotive therapy 
 (RET; n = 15)  
Cognitive therapy (CT; n = 13) 
Self-instructional training 
(SIT; n = 14)  
Assertion training (AT; n = 14) 
Wait list control (WLC; n = 11)  
Significant 
differences in anxiety 
across all treatments 
(except AT) and 
WLC 
 
 
Ladoceur et 
al. (2000) 
N = 26 
76.9% women 
39.7 years old 
 
Treatment with a problem-solving 
component (TPSC; n = 14) 
Wait list control (WLC; n = 12) 
Significant 
differences between 
TPSC and WLC 
(ES = 0.79) 
Changes after the 
intervention 
remained until 12 
months 
 (ES = 0.69) 
Dugas et al. 
(2003) 
N = 52 
71.2% women 
41.2 years old 
Treatment with a problem-solving 
component 
 (TPSC; n = 25) 
Wait list control (WLC; n = 27) 
Significant 
differences between 
TPSC and WLC (ES 
= 1.03) 
Changes after the 
intervention 
remained until 2 
years of follow-up 
(ES = 1.01) 
Seekles et 
al. (2011) 
N = 120 
66.7% women 
50.6 years old 
Stepped care program with a 
problem solving component 
(SCPPSC; n = 60) 
Usual care control (UCC;  
n = 60) 
Significant 
differences between 
SCPPSC and UCC  
(ES = 0.65) 
 
Note: ES = Effect size (M1 – M2/ intragroup standard deviation). 
 
 
FUTURE CHALLENGES  
 
Although there is solid scientific evidence and proven efficacy of PST as a treatment for 
a variety of clinical problems, particularly depression, it is a constantly evolving field that 
continuously incorporates the latest advances in research. In the subsequent paragraphs, we 
want to highlight some recommendations for research and clinical practice that have the 
potential to improve previous limitations and add interesting contributions. 
First, only a few studies (e.g., Nezu and Perri, 1989; Otero, Vázquez, Ferraces et al., 
2015) have included measures to assess improvement in problem-solving skills after PST, and 
analyzed the relationship between such improvements and the results obtained in the scores of 
the outcome variables (e.g., depression or anxiety). Without these measures, it is not possible 
to determine whether the reduction in emotional distress is related to the learning of problem-
solving skills, to the fact that patients were able to solve their problems or due to other 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
238
unspecific factors (e.g., expectations of the subject). In the case of patients who experience 
anxiety, the improvement described in the studies could be due to avoidance of their problems 
and the consequent reduction in discomfort from anticipatory concern about the identified 
problems that still remain unresolved. In future research, researchers should include 
instruments for measuring problem-solving skills and should report not only their results but 
also any correlation between their results and the therapeutic outcomes. 
Only a handful of studies (e.g., Areán et al., 1993; Otero, Smit, Cuijpers, Torres et al., 
2015) have made an effort to study the adherence of therapists to the intervention protocols, a 
key issue to determine whether the therapy was applied as originally intended. It is 
recommended to add this information to increase the rigor of the studies. 
Similarly, there are few studies that have identified what dimensions of problem solving 
influence the therapeutic outcomes, and these have contradictory results. On the one hand, 
Elliot, Berry and Grant (2009) and Otero, Vázquez, Ferraces et al. (2015) found that the 
increase in score in positive problem orientation and in rational style was associated with 
decreased depressive symptoms. On the other hand, Rivera, Elliot, Berry and Grant (2008) 
found that this was produced by the decrease in score of negative orientation and impulsive 
and avoidant styles. We suggest more research in this area. In addition, few studies (e.g., 
Otero, Smit, Cuijpers, DeRubeis et al., 2015) analyze whether the demographic characteristics 
of the subjects (e.g., age, sex, education level) interact with interventions to increase (or 
decrease) the therapeutic effect. Considering these moderators in further research and clinical 
decision-making could contribute to matching treatments and health service users in a more 
personalized and effective way. 
It is also necessary to research the factors that influence the permanence of the effects of 
the treatments over time. For example, if the subjects continue to use the skills learned after 
ending the intervention, and if the relationship between the prevention of psychological 
problems and their continued use could influence the permanence of the effects of the 
treatment. 
Finally, most research in problem solving has focused on psychopathology and 
maladaptive functioning. Considering the growing interest in positive psychology, more 
research is needed on the role of problem solving in improving positive functioning and well-
being. Some studies have already demonstrated the relationship between problem-solving 
skills and self-esteem (Heppner et al., 1983), positive affect (Elliot et al., 1995) or academic 
performance (D'Zurilla and Sheedy, 1992; Rodríguez-Fornells and Maydeu-Olivares, 2000). 
However, new research focused on other areas of individual competence such as performance 
and conflict resolution at work or partner satisfaction is suggested. 
 
 
CONCLUSION  
 
PST is a positive approach to clinical intervention that focuses on training in adaptive 
problem-solving skills. PST theory is based on the relational problem-solving model,  
which postulates that psychopathology is the product of mutual relations between stressful 
life events and problem-solving coping. Therefore, the PST can prevent and reduce 
psychopathology by increasing problem-solving skills to effectively address the problems in 
their lives. This includes changing the problematic situation (problem-focused coping) or 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
239
adapt to adverse conditions that can not be changed or controlled by us (emotion-focused 
coping). 
The phases of PST found in intervention programs that have been demonstrated efficacy 
include positive orientation to problems, the definition and formulation of the problem, 
generation of alternative solutions, decision making and the implementation and verification 
of the chosen solution. Moreover, a large body of research supports the efficacy of PST for 
the treatment of frequent psychological problems such as depression and anxiety. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Areán, P. A., Perri, M. G., Nezu, A. M., Schein, R. L., Christopher, F. and Joseph, T. X. 
(1993). Comparative effectiveness of social problem-solving therapy and reminiscence 
therapy as treatments for depression in older adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 61, 1003-1010. 
Areán, P. A., Raue, P., Mackin, R. S., Kanellopoulos, D., McCulloch, C. and Alexopoulos, G. 
S. (2010). Problem-solving therapy and supportive therapy in older adults with major 
depression and executive dysfunction. American Journal of Psychiatry, 167, 1391-1398.  
Bell, A. C. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (2009). The influence of social problem-solving ability on the 
relationship between daily stress and adjustment. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 33, 
439-448. 
Bates, G. W. and Lavery, B. J. (2003). Social problem-solving and vulnerability to depression 
in a clinical sample. Psychological Reports, 92, 1277-1283. 
Belzer, K. D., D’Zurilla, T. J. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2002). Social problem solving and 
trait anxiety as predictors of worry in a college student population. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 33, 573-585. 
Bloom, B. L. (1985). Stressful life event theory and research: Implications for primary 
prevention. Rockville, MD: National Institute of Mental Health. 
Brodbeck, C. and Michelson, L. (1987). Problem-solving skills and attributional styles of 
agoraphobics. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 11, 593-610. 
Davey, G. C. L. and Levy, S. (1998). Internal statements associated with catastrophic 
worrying. Personality and Individual Differences, 26, 21-32. 
DiGiuseppe, R., McGowan, L., Simon, K. S. and Gardner, F. (1990). A comparative outcome 
study of four cognitive therapies in the treatment of social anxiety. Journal of Rational-
Emotive and Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 8, 129-146. 
Dugas, M. J., Ladouceur, R., Léger, E., Freeston, M. H., Langlois, F., Provencher, M. D. and 
Boisvert, J. M. (2003). Group cognitive-behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety 
disorder: Treatment outcome and long-term follow-up. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 71, 821-825. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Goldfried, M. R. (1971). Problem solving and behaviour modification. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 78, 107-126.  
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (1990). Development and preliminary evaluation of the 
Social Problem-Solving Inventory. Psychological Assessment, 2, 156-163. 
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (2007). Problem-solving therapy: A positive approach to 
clinical intervention (3rd edition). New York: Springer Publishing Company. 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
240
D’Zurilla, T. J. and Nezu, A. M. (2010). Problem-solving Therapy. In K. S. Dobson (Ed.) 
Handbook of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapies (3rd edition, pp. 197-225). New York: 
Guildford Press. 
D’Zurilla, T. J., Nezu, A. M. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (2004). Social problem solving: 
Theory and assessment. In E. C. Chang, T. J. D’Zurilla and L. J. Sanna (Eds.) Social 
problem solving. Theory, research and training (pp. 11-27). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
D'Zurilla, T. J. and Sheedy, C. F. (1992). The relation between social problem-solving ability 
and subsequent level of academic competence in college students. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 16, 589-599. 
Elliot, T. R., Berry, J. W. and Grant, J. S. (2009). Problem-solving training for family 
caregivers of women with disabilities: A randomized clinical trial. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 47, 548-558. 
Elliot, T. R., Sherwin, E., Harkins, S. W. and Marmarosh, C. (1995). Self-appraised problem-
solving ability, affective states, and psychological distress. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 42, 105-115. 
Frye, A. A. and Goodman, S. H. (2000). Which social problem-solving components buffer 
depression in adolescent girls? Cognitive Therapy and Research, 24, 637-650. 
Heppner, P. P., Reeder, B. L. and Larson, L. M. (1983). Cognitive variables associated with 
personal problem-solving appraisal: Implications for counseling. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 30, 537-545. 
Kant, G. L., D’Zurilla, T. J. and Maydeu-Olivares, A. (1997). Social problem-solving as a 
mediator of stress-related depression and anxiety in middle-aged and elderly community 
residents. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 21, 73-96.  
Ladouceur, R., Blais, F., Freeston, M. H. and Dugas, M. J. (1998). Problem solving and 
problem orientation in generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 12, 
139-152. 
Ladouceur, R., Dugas, M. J., Freeston, M. H., Léger, E., Gagnon, F. and Thibodeau, N. 
(2000). Efficacy of a cognitive-behavioral treatment for generalized anxiety disorder: 
Evaluation in a controlled clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 
68, 957-964. 
Lazarus, R. S. (1999). Stress and emotion: A new synthesis. New York: Springer Publishing 
Company. 
Marx, E. M. and Schulze, C. C. (1991). Interpersonal problem-solving in depressed students. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 47, 361-370.  
Marx, E. M., Williams, J. M. and Claridge, G. C. (1992). Depression and social problem 
solving. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101, 78-86.  
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1995). A factor analysis of the Social Problem-
Solving Inventory using polychoric correlations. European Journal of Psychological 
Assessment, 11, 98-107. 
Maydeu-Olivares, A. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (1996). A factor-analytic study of the Social 
Problem-Solving Inventory: An integration of theory and data. Cognitive Therapy and 
Research, 20, 115-133.  
Mynors-Wallis, L. M., Gath, D. H., Day, A. and Baker, F. (2000). Randomised controlled 
trial of problem solving treatment, antidepressant medication, and combined treatment for 
major depression in primary care. British Medical Journal, 320, 26-30.  

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
241
Mynors-Wallis, L. M., Gath, D. H., Lloyd-Thomas, A. R. and Tomlinson, D. (1995). 
Randomised controlled trial comparing problem solving treatment with amitriptyline and 
placebo for major depression in primary care. British Medical Journal, 310, 441-445.  
Nezu, A. M. (1986). Efficacy of a social problem-solving therapy approach for unipolar 
depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 196-202.  
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M. and D’Zurilla, T. J. (2007). Solving life’s problems. A 5-step guide 
to enhanced well-being. New York: Springer Publishing Company. 
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M. and Perri, M. G. (1989). Problem-solving therapy for depression. 
Theory, research and clinical guidelines. New York: John Willey and Sons. 
Nezu, A. M., Nezu, C. M., Saraydarian, L., Kalmar, K. and Ronan, G. F. (1986). Social 
problem solving as a moderating variable between negative life stress and depressive 
symptoms. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 10, 489-498.  
Nezu, A. M. and Perri, M. G. (1989). Social problem-solving therapy for unipolar depression: 
An initial dismantling investigation. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 
408-413. 
Nezu, A. M. and Ronan, G. F. (1985). Life stress, current problems, problem solving, and 
depressive symptoms: An integrative model. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 53, 693-697. 
Nezu, A. M. and Ronan, G. F. (1987). Social problem solving and depression: Deficits in 
generating alternatives and decision making. Southern Psychologist, 3, 29-34. 
Nezu, A. M. and Ronan, G. F. (1988). Social problem solving as a moderator of stress-related 
depressive symptoms: A prospective analysis. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 35, 
134-138.  
Otero, P., Smit, F., Cuijpers, P., DeRubeis, R. J., Torres, A. and Vázquez, F. L. (2015). 
Differential response to depression prevention among a sample of informal caregivers: 
Moderator analysis of longer-term follow-up trial data. Psychiatry Research, 230, 271-
278. 
Otero, P., Smit, F., Cuijpers, P., Torres, A., Blanco, V. and Vázquez, F. L. (2015). Long-term 
efficacy of indicated prevention of depression in non-professional caregivers: 
Randomized controlled trial. Psychological Medicine, 45, 1401-1412. 
Otero, P., Vázquez, F. L., Ferraces, M. J., Blanco, V. and Torres, A. (2015). Prevention of 
depression in non-professional female caregivers: Relation between problem solving 
skills and depressive symptoms. Clinical and Health, 26, 1-7. 
Otero, P., Vázquez, F. L., Hermida, E., Díaz, O. and Torres, A. (2015). Relationship of 
cognitive behavioral therapy effects and homework in an indicated prevention of 
depression intervention for non-professional caregivers. Psychological Reports, 116, 841-
854. 
Ranjbar, M., Bayani, A. A. and Bayani, A. (2013). Social problem solving ability predicts 
mental health among undergraduate students. International Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 4, 1337-1341. 
Reinecke, M. A., DuBois, D. L. and Schultz, T. M. (2001). Social problem solving, mood, 
and suicidality among inpatient adolescents. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 25, 743–
756.  
Rivera, P. A., Elliot, T. R., Berry, J. W. and Grant, J. S. (2008). Problem-solving training for 
family caregivers of persons with traumatic brain injuries: A randomized controlled trial. 
Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 89, 931-941. 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
242
Rodríguez-Fornells, A. and Mayudeu-Olivares, A. (2000). Impulsive/careless problem 
solving style as predictor of subsequent academic achievement. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 28, 639-645. 
Seekles, W., van Straten, A., Beekman, A., van Marwijk, H. and Cuijpers, P. (2011). 
Effectiveness of guided self-help for depression and anxiety disorders in primary care: A 
pragmatic randomized controlled trial. Psychiatry Research, 187, 113-120. 
Vázquez, F. L., Otero, P., Torres, A., Hermida, E., Blanco, V. and Díaz, O. (2013). A brief 
problem-solving indicated-prevention intervention for prevention of depression in 
nonprofessional caregivers. Psicothema, 25, 87-92. 
Vázquez, F. L., Otero, P., Blanco, V. and Torres, A. (2015). Terapia de solución de 
problemas para la depresión. Una breve guía práctica en grupo [Problem-solving 
therapy for depression. A brief guide for group group]. Madrid: Alianza Editorial. 
 
 

In: Problem-Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes 
ISBN: 978-1-63485-513-6 
Editor: Karla Newton 
© 2016 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 13 
 
 
 
PROBLEM SOLVING IN OUR KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY 
AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
 
 
Michael Gr. Voskoglou* 
Graduate Technological Educational Institute of Western Greece 
Koukouli Patra, Greece 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
The importance of Problem Solving for human cognition and the evolution of our 
society has been recognized for centuries. The First Industrial Revolution, started at  
the end of the 19th Century, was characterized by the replacement of human hands  
by machines as power sources and the parallel development of transportation/ 
communication means. The first was followed by the Second Industrial Revolution, 
started during the 1940s’ and characterised by the replacement of humans by machines 
(mainly by the computers) as means of control. As a result, the human society has been 
trasformed to our nowadays era of Knowledge and Globalization. In the present work we 
investigate the status of Problem Solving in our modern society. We also explore its 
perpectives in the forthcoming Third Industrial Revolution, which, according to the best 
shelling author J. Rifkin, will be characterized by the “Internet of Things and Energy.” 
Through this, energy, goods and services will be provided, almost free of cost, in the 
same way as information does through our nowadays Internet.  
 
Keywords: Problem Solving (PS), Knowledge Society, Globalization, First, Second and 
Third Industrial Revolutions, 3-D Printing, Mathemattical Modelling (MM), Analogical 
Reasoning (AR), Case-Based Reasoning (CBR), Critical and Computational Thinking 
(CT), Fuzzy Logic (FL) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
* Corresponding Author address: Ag. Saranda 6-8, 26222 Patras, Greece Email: mvosk@hol.gr. 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
244
INTRODUCTION 
 
The importance of the Problem (in its wide, not necessarily mathematical meaning) has 
been realized by authors and scientists for such a long time that in a direct or indirect way 
affects our daily lives for ages. Volumes of research have been written about Problem Solving 
(PS), which is considered to be as one of the main components of human cognition, and 
attempts have been made by many educationists and psychologists to make it accessible to all 
in various degrees (e.g., see [32]).  
In this work we examine the status of PS in our modern society and its future 
perspectives in the forthcoming era of the Third Industrial Revolution. The rest of the 
manuscript is formulated as follows: In the next Section we briefly describe the conditions 
under which the human society has been transformed to our modern society of Knowledge 
and Globalization and we present the ideas of the best shelling author J. Rifkin about the 
forthcomiong Third Industrial Revolution. In the third Section we examine the status of PS in 
our modern society, while in the fourth section we explore its perspectives in the future digital 
era of the green energy and of the “zero marginal cost” for goods and services and we state 
our general conclusions. 
 
 
OUR KNOWLEDGE SOCIETY AND THE THIRD  
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION 
 
During the last 150 years enormous changes of radical character took place in the 
fundamental structures of our society. In fact, the main characteristic of the First Industrial 
Revolution, which started at the end of the 19th Century, was the gradual replacement of 
human hands by machines as power sources. At the same time, the development of the 
transportation/communication means led to the establishment of big industries and enterprises 
that spread in a national at first place, and international later, level. This phenomenon created 
the need of the coordination of the management of these big trusts by utilzing scientific 
methods, instead of the simple, usually empirical, methods used by the managers of the 
relatively small factories and enterprises existed until that time. As a result, new scientific 
branches were developed (Information Theory, Decision – Making, Operations’ Research, 
etc) supported by smart mathematical tools, like Statistics, Probability Theory, Markov 
Processes, Linear, Dynamic and Integer Programming, etc (e.g., see [28]). 
The first was followed by the Second Industrial Revolution, otherwise known as the era 
of Automation, which started during the 1940s’. The main characteristic of this new 
“revolution” was the replacement of humans by machines (mainly by the computers) as 
means of control. As a result, the human society has been transformed to our nowadays 
society of Knowledge and Globalization.  
The New York Times best shelling author Jeremy Rifkin in his recent (2011) book “The 
Third Industrial Revolution” and its newest book “The Zero Marginal Cost Society” explores 
how Internet Technology, Renewable Energy and 3D-Printing (see sample in Figure 1) are 
merging to create a powerful Third Industrial Revolution and the Digital Revolution, which 
will speed us in an era of nearly free energy, goods and services. In fact, the new technology 
machines will be supplied by sensors enabling the transportation of energy from machine to 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
245
machine and from place to place through the Web. On the other hand, the 3D-printers using 
powder, molten plastic or medals are able to transfer and reproduce by the Internet 
technology multiple copies of a good in marginal cost, just like a photocopy machine does! 
 
 
Figure 1. A sample of 3D-printing. 
In this way an “Internet of Things and Energy” will be created, through which energy, 
goods and services will be provided, almost free of cost, in the same way as information does 
through our nowadays Internet (for more details see [23]). Some of the leading information 
technology companies in the world are already busy at work on the built-out of this new 
Internet. GE’s “Industrial Internet,” Cisco’s “Internet of Things,” IBM’s “Smarter Planet” and 
Siemens “Sustainable Cities” are among the many initiatives currently under way to bring on 
line an intelligent infrastructure that can connect neighbourhoods, cities, regions, continents 
and the global economy in what industry observers call a global “neutral network.”  
 
 
THE STATUS OF PROBLEM SOLVING IN OUR MODERN SOCIETY 
 
The explosion of information technology and our moving away from an industrial to a 
knowledge society makes our day to day problems more and more composite and 
complicated. Thus, the attitude to think critically became a prerequisite (necessary condition) 
for solving non-routine problems. Critical thinking is considered to be a higher mode of 
thinking involving analysis, synthesis, abstraction, evaluation and decision making, which 
often generates multiple solutions [35].  
However, critical thinking is not always a sufficient condition too for PS, especially when 
tackling complicated technological problems, where computers are frequently used as a 
supporting tool. In this case the need for Computational Thinking (CT) is another prerequisite 
for PS. The term CT, consecrated by Wing in 2006 [42] due to its extensive use of Computer 
Science techniques is the modern expression for algorithmic thinking. According to Liu and 
Wang [17] CT is a hybrid of other modes of thinking including abstract, logical, modelling 
and constructive thinking. It synthesizes the existing knowledge with critical thinking and 
applies them for solving complicated problems, for building engineering systems, for 
interpreting data, etc (for more details see [40] in this book).  

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
246
Therefore, there is no wonder that PS has been entrenched nowadays in the educational 
politics of most countries (e.g., [11, 26], etc). New mathematical tools, compatible to the 
logic of computers and more friendly to our natural language expressions, were initiated for 
advancing the PS process, like Zadeh’s Fuzzy Logic (FL) which is based on the notion of 
fuzzy set [44], Mandelbrot’s Geometry of Fractals [18], etc. And whenever numerical 
problems are involved, from the elementary addition of natural numbers to the complex 
numerical analysis, technological tools (from simple calculators to last technology computers) 
have been developed to assist the solution of problems effectively and efficiently. Gone are 
the logarithmic tables and slide rules. However, despite the existence of all the above means 
for facilitating PS, it is by all agreed that the PS process is a complex situation. Even 
graduates have nowadays difficulty for solving real life problems. Somehow, they can not 
apply theory into practice, or theorise/reflect on practice [6]. 
Mathematics by its nature is a subject whereby PS forms its essence. In an earlier paper 
[32] we have examined the role of the problem for learning mathematics and we have 
attempted a review of the evolution of research on PS in mathematics education from its 
emergency as a self sufficient science at the 1960’s until today. A brief account of that 
progress with a rough chronological order is also presented in this book [40]. 
 
 
Figure 2. The MPSF of Carlson and Bloom [4]. 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
247
While early work on PS focused mainly on analyzing the PS process and on describing 
the proper PS strategies (heuristics) that could be used in each of its stages (Polya’s “How to 
Solve it” [22], Schoenfeld’s “Expert Performance Model” [24], Lester, Garofalo and Kroll 
[15], etc), more recent investigations have focused mainly on solvers’ behaviour and required 
attributes during the PS process. Carlson and Bloom [4] drawing from the large amount of 
literature related to PS developed a broad taxonomy to characterize major PS attributes that 
have been identifying as relevant to PS success and created a ‘Multidimensional PS 
Framework’ (MPSF). The main steps of MPSF (Orienting, Planning, Executing, Checking) 
together with the “Conjecture sub-cycle” attached to the step of Planning and its “flow-
diagram” (cycling back and forward) are depicted in the following Figure 2: 
The MPSF shares many similarities with the Schoenfeld’s “Expert Performance Model” 
[24], their main qualitative difference being that the former focuses on the solver’s behaviour 
at each step of the PS process, while the latter focuses on the heuristic strategies that could be 
used at each step of the PS process (for more details see [32], pp. 76-77). Note that views 
have been also appeared in the literature disputing the effectiveness of teaching the PS 
strategies at school and turning the attention to the acquisition of the proper schemas and the 
automation of rules ([14, 20], etc).  
More comprehensive models for the PS process in general (not only for mathematics) 
were also developed by Sternberg and Ben-Zeev [27], by Schoenfeld [25] and others. 
Schoenfeld [25], after a many years effort and research for building a theoretical framework 
providing rigorous explanations on how and why people during the PS process make the 
choices they did, concluded that the PS process, as well as many other human activities like 
cooking, teaching a lesson and even a brain surgery (!), are all examples of a “goal-directed 
behaviour.” Thus, the individual’s “acting in the moment” can be explained and modelled by 
a theoretical architecture in which knowledge, goals, orientations and decision-making are 
involved. The different individuals’ decision choices can be seen as modelled by “expected-
value” computations, where the quantities are the “subjective values” assigned by them. In 
fact, the expected value of a decision equals the probability for the decision to be correct 
multiplied by the value of its profit minus its cost. But from each person’s subjective point of 
view the value of a decision’s profit is different and therefore its expected value is also 
different. That explains why different people will decide differently, because the subjective 
values they assigned are different. Schoenfeld [25] argues that, once you understand an 
individual’s orientations, you can see how the individual priorizes goals and outcomes and 
therefore you can model the possible courses of his action. But, when you understand how 
something skilful is done, you can help the others to do it successfully.  
One very commonly used PS strategy is the strategy of the analogous problem, the major 
focus of which is to find a way to transfer the solution of an identified problem (source 
problem) to the present problem (target problem), which is called the mapping process ([8, 
19, 30], etc). In a more general context, Analogical Reasoning (AR), which is highly based on 
analogical PS, is a human cognitive action using existing knowledge to produce new 
knowledge (transfer of knowledge); e.g., see Section 2 of [37].  
Usually, when computers are utilized to facilitate the AR process, we speak about Case-
Based Reasoning (CBR). However, the term CBR stands also for a general cognitive theory 
for PS and learning [1, 13, 33, 37], while its typical methods, in contrast to AR, focus on 
single-domain cases only (a form of intra-domain analogy) [10]. A CBR system’s expertise is 
embodied in a collection (library) of past cases rather, than been encoded in a set of rules, as 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
248
it happens with the classical rule-induction algorithms. Each case typically contains a 
description of the problem plus a solution and the outcomes. Thus, when using CBR, the need 
for knowledge acquisition can be limited to establishing how to characterize cases. CBR 
allows the case-library to be developed incrementally, while its maintenance is a relatively 
easy task usually carried out by domain experts. Longstanding research in Artificial 
Intelligence and related fields has produced a number of paradigms for building intelligent 
and knowledge-based systems. Being one of these paradigms CBR has received a great deal 
of attention in recent years and has been used successfully in diverse application areas, which 
among others include: 
 
 
Diagnostic systems, whose symptom lists are similar in nature to that of the new 
case, (e.g., see Section 4 of [37] for such applications in Medicine). 
 
Help-desk applications in the customer service area. 
 
Decision-making systems, in which people, when faced with a complex problem, 
often look for analogous problems for possible solutions. 
 
Assessment processes, where CBR systems are used to determine values for 
variables on comparing them to the known value of something similar. Such tasks are 
quite common in finance and marketing domains. 
 
Systems to support human designers in architectural and industrial design. These 
systems assist the user only for retrieving past cases and would need to be combined 
with other forms of reasoning to support the full design process.  
 
The failure of introduction of the “new mathematics” in school education [12] turned the 
attention of researchers and educators to PS processes and in particular to the process of 
“Mathematical Modelling (MM) and Applications” [38]. We recall that a model is simplified 
representation of the real system including only the system’s entities and features related to 
the corresponding problem. It becomes clear that the study of a system’s behaviour through 
its model saves time and reduces the relevant cost. There are several types of models in use 
according to the form of the corresponding problem ([28], section 1.3.1). The representation 
of a system’s operation through the use of a mathematical model is achieved by a set of 
mathematical expressions (equalities, inequalities, etc) and functions properly related to each 
other. The solutions provided by a mathematical model are more general and accurate than 
those provided by the other types of models. However, in cases where a system’s operation is 
too complicated to be described in mathematical terms (e.g., biological systems), or the 
corresponding mathematical relations are too difficult to deal with in providing the problem’s 
solution, a simulation model can be used, which is usually constructed with the help of 
computers. 
Until the middle of 1970’s MM was mainly a tool in hands of scientists and engineers for 
solving real world problems related to their disciplines (physics, industry, constructions, 
economics, etc). One of the first who described the process of MM in such a way that it could 
be used for teaching mathematics was Pollak [21]. He represented the interaction between 
mathematics and the real world with the scheme shown in Figure 3, which is known as the 
“circle of MM.” 
 
 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
249
 
Figure 3. The Pollak’s circle of MM. 
The most important feature of Pollak’s scheme is the direction of the arrows, representing 
a looping between the other (real) world (including all the other sciences and the human 
activities of everyday life) and the “universe” of mathematics: Starting from a real problem of 
the real world we transfer to the other part of the scheme, where we use or develop suitable 
mathematics for its solution. Then we return to the other world interpreting and testing on the 
real situation the mathematical results obtained. If these results are not giving a satisfactory 
solution to the real problem, then we repeat the same circle again one or more times.  
From the time that Pollak presented this scheme in ICME-3 (Karlsruhe, 1976) until 
nowadays much effort has been placed to analyze in detail the process of MM. A brief but 
comprehensive account of the different models used for the description of the MM process 
can be found in Haines and Crouch [7] including the present author’s model [29, 31], where 
the MM circle is treated as a Markov chain process dependent upon the transition between the 
successive discrete steps of the MM process. These steps involve: 
 
 
S1: Analysis of the problem (understanding the statement and recognizing the 
restrictions and requirements of the real system. 
 
S2: Mathematization (formulation of the problem and construction of the model). 
 
S3: Solution of the model. 
 
S4: Validation (control) of the model, which is usually achieved by reproducing, 
through the model, the behaviour of the real system under the conditions existing 
before the solution of the model and by comparing it to the existing, from the 
previous “history” of the corresponding real system, real data. In cases of systems 
having no past history, an extra simulation model can be used for the validation of 
the initial mathematical model. 
 
S5: Interpretation of the final mathematical results and implementation of them to the 
real system, in order to give the “answer” to the real world problem. 
 
 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
250
Voskoglou’s model is depicted in Figure 4, where the arrows represent the possible 
transitions between steps. When the solution of a problem is completed (step S5), it is 
assumed that a new problem is given for solution and therefore the MM process starts again 
from the beginning (step S1). 
 
 
Figure 4. Voskoglou’s model for the MM process. 
MM appears today as a dynamic tool for teaching and learning mathematics, because it 
connects mathematics with our everyday life giving the possibility to students to understand 
its usefulness in practice and therefore increasing their interest about mathematics [38]. But 
we must be careful! The process of MM could not be considered as a general and therefore 
applicable in all cases method for teaching mathematics. In fact, such a consideration could 
lead to far-fetched situations, where more emphasis is given to the search of the proper 
applications rather, than to the consolidation of the new mathematical knowledge [39]! 
There are several experimental results reported in the literature, according to which the 
use of computers as a tool in teaching mathematics enhances the students’ PS skills ([2, 16, 
36, 41, 43], etc). It seems that the animation of figures and mathematical representations, 
provided by suitable computer software packages, videos, etc, increases the students’ 
imagination and helps them in finding easier the solutions of the corresponding problems. 
The role of mathematical theory after this is not to convince, but to explain.  
As we have seen in the beginning of this section, modelling thinking is a principal 
component of CT. In this book [40] we utilize the Triangular and Trapezoidal Fuzzy Numbers 
as assessment tools for comparing the MM skills of two student groups of the Graduate T. E. 
I. of Western Greece. The students of the experimental group studied their first term 
mathematical course with the support of computers, while the students of the control group 
studied the same course in the classical way on the board participating to the solution of more 
applications and examples. Our outcomes demonstrated, in contrast to what it was normally 
expected, a slight superiority of the experimental group. Note that FL, due to its nature of 
characterizing the ambiguous situations with multiple values, offers more realistic sources for 
the assessment purposes than the classical bi-valued logic does [34].  
 
 
 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
251
FUTURE PERSPECTIVES FOR PROBLEM SOLVING 
 
The above exploration into PS can be summarized by the following phrases:  
 
 
PS: PS is a cognitive action performed by the solver. Once he/she becomes aware of 
the problem, various cognitive processes (recall from memory, use of thinking skills 
and so on) come into being. 
 
PS in Mathematics Education: While early work on PS focused mainly on analyzing 
the PS process and on describing the proper PS strategies that could be used in each 
of its steps, more recent investigations have focused mainly on solvers’ behaviour 
and required attributes during the PS process (e.g., Carlson’s and Bloom’s MPSF) 
Views have been also appeared disputing the effectiveness of teaching the PS 
strategies at school and turning the attention to the acquisition of the proper schemas 
and the automation of rules. Recently, more comprehensive models for the PS 
process in general (not only for mathematics) have been developed. Schoenfeld, for 
example, argues that the PS process, as well as many other human activities, are all 
examples of a “goal-directed behaviour.” 
 
Complexity: The complexity of a problem requires analysis and synthesis, deciding 
on its best solution method, paying attention to detail and so on. All these are critical 
thinking skills. 
 
Technological problems: Technology requires a different approach than other fields 
since, if computers are involved, then one has to “think like them,” but also to 
encourage others to “think like a computer.” All these are achieved through CT that 
synthesises critical thinking and existing knowledge and applies them to solve the 
problem using computer science concepts and techniques. 
 
AR and CBR: The process of solving problems by analogy focuses on finding a way 
to transfer the solution of an identified problem (source problem) to the present 
problem (target problem). In a more general context, AR is a cognitive process 
highly based on analogical PS, which utilizes existing knowledge to produce new 
knowledge. When computers are involved to facilitate AR, then we speak about 
CBR, which has been developed to a general theory for PS and learning. On the other 
hand, as an Artificial Intelligence’s method CBR has received a great deal of 
attention in recent years and has been used successfully in diverse application areas.  
 
Mathematical modelling: MM involves the formulation and solution of a special type 
of mathematical problems generated by corresponding problems of the real world 
and our day to day life. MM appears today as a dynamic tool for teaching and 
learning mathematics, because it connects mathematics with our everyday life giving 
the possibility to students to understand its usefulness in practice and thus increasing 
their interest about it. Modelling thinking is a principal component of CT. 
 
Computers: A very useful tool for the development and improvement of student PS 
skills.  
 
Fuzzy Logic: FL is a recently developed mathematical tool that is widely used for 
advancing the PS process. Due to its nature of characterizing the ambiguous 
situations with multiple values it is closer to our natural language than classical 
mathematics and compatible to the logic of computers. Therefore it has a greater 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
252
capacity than Probability theory for modelling the uncertainty and for solving related 
problems. It also offers more realistic sources for the assessment purposes than the 
classical bi-valued logic does. 
 
At this point we must underline a big threat hiding behind the above reality. Indeed, 
people today using the convenient small calculators can make quickly and accurately all kinds 
of numerical operations. Further, the existence of a variety of suitable software mathematical 
packages gives the possibility of solving automatically all kinds of equations, to make any 
kind of algebraic operations, to calculate limits, derivatives, integrals, etc, and even more to 
obtain all the existing proofs of the basic mathematical theorems and in some cases to 
produce new ones. Based on the above facts a number of scientists, mainly among the 
specialists of Computer Science, have already reached to the conclusion that teachers will not 
be needed in future for the development of students’ knowledge base and learning skills, 
since everything could be done by the computers (possibly at home). “The use of horses is not 
necessary, from the time that cars were invented,” argue some of them. 
But, this is actually an illusion! In fact, the acquisition of information is valuable for the 
learner, but the most important thing is to learn how to think rationally and creatively. The 
latter is impossible to be succeeded through the help of computers only, because computers 
have been created by humans and, although they dramatically exceed in speed and memory, 
logically they will never reach the quality of human thinking. In concluding, the student 
practice with numerical, algebraic and analytic calculations, with the solution of problems in 
the classical way and the rediscovery of proofs of the known mathematical theorems, must be 
continued. Otherwise students will gradually loose the sense of numbers and symbols, the 
sense of space and time, and they will become unable to create new knowledge and 
technology. 
All the above solemnities lead us to the following ideas/forecasts about the future 
perspectives of PS in the era of the forthcoming Third Industrial Revolution: 
 
 
The teaching of heuristic strategies for PS must be continued, although it need not be 
a separate topic in school mathematics curricula. It can be performed by the teacher 
in practice at any time and level through the solution of the appropriate problems and 
the rediscovery of the proofs of the known mathematical theorems. Our strong belief 
is that, in school level, Euclidean Geometry offers many such opportunities to the 
teacher, since it is the mathematical topic that fits better than any other to the 
spiritual maturity of the children of this age (solid, without abstract notions, children 
can “see” what they are doing). However, the best results could be obtained when 
this approach is combined with the teacher’s care for the acquisition of the proper 
schemas and the automation of rules by students.  
 
The use of computers for advancing student PS skills will be extended to a principal 
didactical component in school education. However, the student practice with 
numerical, algebraic and analytic calculations, with the solution of problems in the 
classical way and the rediscovery of proofs of the known mathematical theorems, 
must be continued.  
 
The learning of Programming will become a demanding task in our society [9], 
where CT is required to describe a complex problem and to propose a solution. And 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
253
although students should become trained to CT before learning Programming, the 
latter is probably the best way to learn CT explicitly. 
 
CBR applications will be extended to almost all sectors of human activity with 
emphasis to the Medicine domain. On the other hand, CBR will become a valuable 
tool for the individuals’ PS and learning tasks. 
 
MM will strengthen its status as an effective method for teaching and learning 
mathematics. Moreover, when combined with Problem-Posing, i.e the process of 
extending existing problems or creating new problems [3], could have spectacular 
results for learning mathematics and developing student PS skills. However this 
demands a comfort of time, which unfortunately rarely happens in our nowadays 
intensive school education.  
 
We shall close by copying the following paragraph from the report of the Working Group 
on PS of the 10th International Conference of Mathematics Education into the 21st Century 
project [5]: “Future mathematics teaching has not only to focus on concepts and teaching 
techniques of computing, but also on PS and Problem Posing to reach general aims like 
creativity, ability of systematisation, abilities of communication, argumentation, presenting 
mathematics results, and ability of working in a team as well as getting a vivid view and a 
positive belief about mathematics and its applications in real world.”  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Aamodt, A.; Plaza, E. (1994). Case-Based Reasoning:: Foundational Issues, 
Methodological Variations, and System Approaches. A. I. Communications 7(1), 39- 
52. 
[2] 
Asiala, M., et al. (1996). A framework for research and curriculum development in 
undergraduate mathematics education. Research in Collegiate Mathematics Education 
II, CBMS Issues in Mathematics Education, 6, 1-32. 
[3] 
Brown, S. A.; Walters, M. A. (1990). The Art of Problem Posing; Laurence Erlbaum 
Associates: Hillsdale, NJ. 
[4] 
Carlson, M. P.; Bloom, I. (2005). The cyclic nature of problem solving: An emergent 
multidimensional problem-solving framework. Educational Studies in Mathematics 58, 
45-75. 
[5] 
Graumann, G. (2009). Working Group Report on Problem Solving. 10th International 
MEC21 Conference, Dresden, Germany. Available on line at http://math.unipa.it/ 
~grim/21Project.htm/21Project_dresden_sept_2009.htm. 
[6] 
Green, A. J. K.; Gillhooly, K. (2005). Problem Solving; In: Braishy, N.; Gelatly, A. 
(Eds.); Gognitive Psychology; Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
[7] 
Haines, C.; Crouch, R. (2010), Remarks on a Modelling Cycle and Interpretation of 
Behaviours.; In Lesh, R.A. et al. (Eds.); Modelling Students’ Mathematical Modelling 
Competencies (ICTMA 13), 145-154, Springer, USA. 
[8] 
Holyoak, K. J. (1985), The pragmatics of analogical transfer. In: G. H. Bower (Ed.), 
The psychology of learning and motivation, 19, 59-87; Academic Press, New York, N 
Y. 

P. Otero, F. L. Vázquez, V. Blanco et al. 
254
[9] 
Kazimoglu, C.; Kiernan, M.; Bacon, L.;MacKinnon, L. (2011). Understanding 
Computational Thinking before Programming: Developing Guidelines for the Design of 
Games to Learn Introductory Programming through Game-Play. International Journal 
of Game-Based Learning 1(3), 30-52. 
[10] Kedar-Cabelli, S. (1988), Analogy from a unified perspective, In D. H. Helman (Ed.); 
Analogical Reasoning, 65-103. 
[11] King, P. M.; Baxter-Magolda, M. B. (1996). A developmental perspective on learning; 
Journal of College Student Development 37(2), 163-173. 
[12] Kline, M. (1973). Why Johnny can’t add; St. Martin’s Press Inc. 
[13] Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-Based Reasoning; Morgan Kaufmann.  
[14] Lawson, M. (1980) The case of instruction in the use of general Problem Solving 
strategies in Mathematics teaching: A comment on Owen and Sweller. J. for Research 
in Mathematics Education, 21, 403-410. 
[15] Lester, F. K.; Garofalo, J.; Kroll, D. L. (1989). Self-confidence, interest, beliefs and 
meta-cognition: Key influences on problem-solving behavior. In: Mcleod, D. B.; 
Adams, V. M. (Eds.); Affect and Mathematical Problem Solving: A New Perspective, 
75-88; Springer-Verlag: New York, NY 
[16] Lewandowski, G.; Bouvier, D.; McCartney, R.; Sanders, K.; Simon, B. (2007). 
Common sense computing (episode 3): Concurrency and concert tickets. Proceedings 
of the Third International Workshop on Computing Education Research (ICER ’07). 
[17] Liu, J.; Wang, L. (2010). Computational Thinking in Discrete Mathematics. 
Proceedings IEEE 2nd International Workshop on Education Technology and Computer 
Science, 413-416.  
[18] Mandelbrot, Benoit B. (1983). The Fractal Geometry of Nature. W. H. Freeman and 
Company. 
[19] Novick, L. R. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem similarity and expertise. J. 
Educational Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 10-520. 
[20] Owen E. and Sweller J. (1989). Should Problem Solving be used as a learning device in 
Mathematics? J. for Research in Mathematics Education 20, 322-328. 
[21] Pollak, H. O. (1979). The interaction between Mathematics and other school subjects; 
New Trends in Mathematics Teaching, Volume IV, Paris, UNESKO.  
[22] Polya, G. (1945). How to solve it; Princeton University Press; Princeton. 
[23] Rifkin, J. (2016). The Third Industrial Revolution, retrieved on April 18, 2016 from 
www.thethirdindustrialrevolution.com. 
[24] Schoenfeld, A. (1980). Teaching Problem Solving Skills. American Mathematical 
Monthly 87, 794-805. 
[25] Schoenfeld, A. (2010) How we think: A theory of goal-oriented decision making and its 
educational applications; Routledge: New York, NY. 
[26] South African Qualifications Authority (1998), Regulations under the South African 
Qualifications Act, 1995” (Act No. 58 of 1995), Government Gazette No 6140, Vol. 
393, No 18787, Pretoria, South Africa. 
[27] Sternberg, R. J.; Ben-Zeev, T. (2001). Complex cognition: The psychology of Human 
thought; Oxford University Press: Oxford. 
[28] Taha, H. A. (1967). Operations Research – An Introduction; Second Edition, Collier 
Macmillan, N.Y., London. 

An Overview of Problem-Solving Therapy 
255
[29] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (1994). An application of Markov Chain to the process of 
Modelling; International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and 
Technology 25(4), 475-480. 
[30] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2003), Analogical problem solving and transfer; Proceedings 3d 
Mediterranean Conference in Mathematics Education, 295-303, Athens, Greece.  
[31] Voskoglou, M. G. (2006). A stochastic model for the modelling process . In: Chaines, 
Chr., Galbraith, P., Blum, W., Khan, S. (Eds.); Mathematical Modelling: Education, 
Engineering and Economics (ICTMA 12), 149-157.  
[32] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2011). Problem solving from Polya to nowadays: A review and 
future perspectives. In: Nata, R. V. (Ed.); Progress in Education; Nova Publishers: New 
York, N. Y.; Vol. 22, Chapter 4, pp. 65-82. 
[33] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2011). Case-Based Reasoning: History, Methodology and 
Development Trends. In: Leeland, A. M. (Ed.); Case-Based Reasoning: Processes, 
Suitability and Applications; Nova Publishers: New York, N. Y.; Chapter 3, pp. 59-76. 
[34] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2011). Stochastic and fuzzy models in Mathematics Education, 
Artificial Intelligence and Management; Lambert Academic Publishing, Saarbrucken, 
Germany. 
[35] Voskoglou, M. Gr.; Buckley, S. (2012). Problem Solving and Computers in a Learning 
Environment.. Egyptian Computer Science Journal 36(4), 28-46. 
[36] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2013). Problem Solving, Fuzzy Logic and Computational 
Thinking; Egyptian Computer Science Journal 37(1), 131-145.  
[37] Voskoglou, M. Gr.; Salem. A.-B. (2014). Analogy Based and Case Based Reasoning: 
Two Sides of the Same Coin; International Journal of Applications of Fuzzy Sets and 
Artificial Intelligence 4, 5-51. 
[38] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2015). Mathematical modelling as a teaching method of 
mathematics, Journal for Research in Innovative Teaching (National University, CA) 
8(1), 35-50. 
[39] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2015). Teaching Mathematics or Mathematical Modelling? (An 
Answer to a Comment). ICTMA Newsletter, 8(1), 12-13, 2015. 
[40] Voskoglou, M. Gr. (2016), Computational Thinking and Fuzzy Logic in Problem 
Solving. In: Problem- Solving: Strategies, Challenges and Outcomes; Nova Publishers 
New York, N. Y. (to appear). 
[41] Weller, K.; Clark, J.; Dubinsky, E.; Loch, S.; McDonald, M.; Merkowsky, R. (2003). 
Student performance and attitudes in courses based on APOS theory and the ACE 
teaching style. In: Selden, A.; Dubinsky, E.; Harel, G.; Hitt, F. (Eds.); Research in 
collegiate mathematics education; American Mathematical Society: Providence, RI, 
Volume V, 97-131. 
[42] Wing, J. M. (2006). Computational thinking; Communications of the ACM 49, 33-35. 
[43] Yadav, A., Zhou, N., Mayfield, C., Hambrusch, S. and Korb, J. T. (2011). Introducing 
Computational Thinking in Education Courses, Proceedings of the 42nd ACM Technical 
Symposium on Computer Science Education 11, 465-470. 
[44] Zadeh, L. A. (1965). Fuzzy Sets. Information and Control 8, 338-353. 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
A 
abstraction, 2, 6, 7, 22, 245 
academic learning, 209 
academic performance, 227, 238 
academic success, 199 
access, 32, 35, 48, 88, 109, 110, 111 
accommodation, 5 
accountability, 71 
accounting, 212, 219 
acculturation, 71 
acquisition of knowledge, 4, 5, 101 
action research, 209 
active coping, 141, 148 
Active Problem-Solving Style, 134, 135, 137, 141, 
142, 147, 149 
active-strategies cluster, 133, 145 
adaptability, 172 
adaptations, 110, 119, 120, 122, 123, 132, 148, 157, 
186, 230, 235 
adaptive functioning, 227 
ADHD, 104, 132 
adjustment, 54, 159, 173, 174, 175, 196, 227, 239 
adolescents, 104, 105, 110, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 126, 129, 130, 
132, 175, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 195, 241 
adult education, 71 
adulthood, 105, 125, 172, 181 
adults, 105, 108, 110, 112, 114, 115, 117, 118, 120, 
123, 125, 127, 131, 132, 178, 179, 180, 182, 192, 
212, 214, 227, 230, 233, 236, 239 
advancement, 197 
adverse conditions, 239 
aerobic exercise, 193 
affordances, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 45, 60 
Africa, 254 
age, 47, 63, 100, 110, 119, 120, 121, 128, 130, 135, 
161, 164, 168, 177, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 
185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 195, 203, 207, 
234, 237, 238, 252 
aggression, 105, 113, 115, 182, 193, 196 
aggressive behavior, 119 
agoraphobia, 228 
alcohol use, 121 
alcoholics, 176 
algorithm, 8, 60, 87, 89, 91, 92 
American Educational Research Association, 219 
American Psychological Association, 61, 172, 173, 
174, 175, 193, 194, 195, 209, 240 
Analytical, 6, 11, 133, 138, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 
147, 219 
anger, 115 
ANOVA, 145, 146 
antidepressant medication, 235, 240 
antidepressants, 234, 235, 240 
antisocial behavior, 110 
anxiety, 110, 112, 113, 115, 117, 118, 121, 122, 124, 
134, 149, 151, 152, 153, 159, 177, 178, 180, 181, 
182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 
193, 194, 195, 196, 221, 222, 225, 227, 228, 233, 
236, 237, 239, 240, 242 
anxiety disorder, 121, 122, 152, 237, 242 
appraisals, 133, 135, 141, 157 
aptitude, 103, 104 
Argentina, 114 
Aristotle, 23 
arithmetic, 10, 12, 13, 52 
arthritis, 222 
articulation, 108, 167 
ASI, 21, 80 
ASS, 129 
assertiveness, 112, 128, 155, 167, 170, 171 
assessment, 1, 2, 3, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 22, 86, 97, 98, 
104, 109, 111, 113, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 172, 

Index 
258
173, 174, 175, 178, 194, 219, 223, 224, 240, 250, 
252 
assessment techniques, 1, 3 
assessment tools, 113, 127, 250 
attitudes, 23, 80, 107, 158, 173, 174, 255 
attribution, 105, 108, 114, 118, 119, 129 
authority, 116 
autism, 104, 112, 122, 123, 125, 127, 128, 129, 131, 
132 
automation, 247, 251, 252 
autonomy, 200 
avoidance, 85, 87, 110, 115, 134, 137, 151, 157, 158, 
178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 187, 188, 190, 191, 
192, 200, 209, 223, 224, 236, 238 
awareness, 70, 79, 116, 236 
B 
base, 77, 111, 190, 252 
behavior modification, 125, 172 
behavior rehearsal, 128 
behavior therapy, 129, 130, 152, 174 
Behavioral, 81, 103, 105, 106, 109, 111, 112, 113, 
115, 117, 122, 124, 125, 126, 129, 130, 132, 133, 
134, 138, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 147, 152, 153, 
156, 157, 158, 173, 195, 196, 209, 222, 223, 232, 
239, 240, 241 
behavioral aspects, 157 
behaviors, 35, 36, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109, 116, 121, 
127, 196, 225 
beneficial effect, 211, 212, 213, 217, 218 
benefits, 8, 65, 82, 115, 224, 225, 230, 231 
bias, 108, 116 
biochemistry, 213, 215, 216, 217, 218 
biological systems, 248 
Bosnia, 62 
brain, 241, 247 
brainstorming, 149 
Bulgaria, 25 
burnout, 121, 130 
C 
Cairo, 24, 26, 29 
calculus, 33 
calibration, 208 
cancer, 118, 130 
candidates, 53, 56 
career success, 212 
caregivers, 118, 119, 122, 126, 130, 228, 229, 236, 
240, 241, 242 
case study, 209 
causal attribution, 103, 105, 106, 114, 116, 119 
causal relationship, 87, 89, 91, 92, 96, 97, 98, 99, 
159 
causality, 163 
CFI, 203, 204, 205 
challenges, 8, 53, 92, 103, 104, 221, 232 
Chicago, 174 
childhood, 122, 126, 181, 183, 193, 194 
children, 53, 57, 104, 105, 108, 110, 111, 113, 114, 
115, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 124, 125, 127, 128, 
130, 131, 132, 174, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 185, 
186, 187, 188, 190, 192, 194, 196, 199, 214, 222, 
252 
China, 62 
chronic illness, 118 
cities, 168, 245 
clarity, 98 
classes, 53, 167, 184, 218 
classical logic, 2 
classification, 86, 98, 109, 115, 204 
classroom, 14, 19, 20, 32, 40, 53, 57, 66, 71, 74, 122, 
186, 198, 199, 208, 213, 219, 220 
classroom settings, vii 
climate, 198 
clinical assessment, 131 
clinical problems, 237 
clinical psychology, 127, 196 
clinical trials, 113, 228 
close relationships, 128 
cluster analyses, 144 
cluster analysis, 143, 148 
clusters, 133, 144, 145 
coding, 7, 111, 130 
cognition, 3, 21, 22, 72, 88, 96, 106, 115, 116, 126, 
151, 155, 160, 163, 164, 165, 171, 172, 174, 175, 
199, 209, 254 
cognitive abilities, 107 
cognitive activity, 171 
cognitive appraisal, 133, 135, 136, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 146, 148, 149, 150, 225 
cognitive biases, 111 
cognitive dimension, 207 
cognitive flexibility, 52, 60 
cognitive map, 85 
cognitive perspective, 210 
cognitive process, 62, 69, 118, 120, 198, 200, 251 
cognitive processing, 69 

Index 
259
Cognitive Reflection-Impulsivity Scale, 160, 161, 
162, 176 
cognitive science, 69 
cognitive skills, 96, 97, 98, 99 
cognitive style, 155, 159, 160, 163, 171 
cognitive technologies, 34, 46 
cognitive theory, 122, 199, 247 
cognitive therapy, 117, 236 
cognitive variables, 88 
cognitive-behavioral therapy, 239 
coherence, 182, 191, 204, 207 
collaboration, 7, 33, 82 
collaborative learning, 71, 81 
college students, 118, 155, 160, 161, 163, 165, 167, 
168, 170, 228, 240 
colleges, 161, 168 
Colombia, 114 
combined effect, 171 
common sense, 54 
communication, 31, 32, 45, 72, 81, 82, 110, 123, 
155, 160, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 172, 173, 
175, 176, 192, 226, 243, 244 
communication competence, 166 
Communication Skills, 110, 155, 160, 165, 166, 167, 
168, 169, 170, 171, 173, 175 
communication technologies, 31, 32 
communities, 72 
community, 35, 45, 46, 66, 71, 117, 119, 124, 156, 
159, 240 
community service, 119 
compatibility, 97 
competition, 192 
compilation, 113 
complement, 218 
complexity, 4, 72, 87, 89, 96, 106, 251 
compliance, 233 
composition, 77, 89, 184, 192 
comprehension, 76, 85, 87, 89 
computer, 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 17, 58, 62, 163, 166, 
203, 250, 251 
computer simulations, 62 
computer software, 2, 250 
computing, 6, 7, 21, 56, 63, 253, 254 
conceptual model, 85, 91 
conceptualization, 172 
concordance, 109 
concreteness, 106 
conference, 81 
confidence in their problem-solving abilities, 149 
confidentiality, 232 
configuration, 34, 35, 36, 37, 45, 86, 89, 91, 93 
conflict, 53, 105, 108, 113, 114, 120, 122, 128, 167, 
222, 238 
conflict resolution, 238 
Congress, 46 
congruence, 109 
consensus, 7, 72, 77 
consent, 186, 213, 215 
consolidation, 250 
construction, 33, 41, 42, 54, 57, 58, 71, 79, 90, 203, 
249 
constructivism, 4, 220 
Consultative, 133, 137, 141, 142, 144, 145, 147 
consulting, 127, 133 
consumers, 128 
consumption, 121, 122 
content analysis, 158 
context, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 45, 51, 52, 57, 65, 66, 67, 
70, 71, 72, 73, 75, 77, 78, 80, 85, 86, 87, 92, 96, 
97, 112, 116, 181, 191, 194, 200, 209, 233, 247, 
251 
context rich problems (CRP), 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 
71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77,78, 79 
control condition, 117, 118 
control group, 2, 17, 20, 113, 117, 119, 120, 121, 
202, 203, 216, 229, 233, 235, 236, 250 
controlled trials, 233 
convergence, 110 
conversations, 81, 112 
cooking, 247 
cooperation, 74, 192 
cooperative group work, 67 
cooperative learning, 71, 208, 218 
cooperative student groups, 65, 67, 73 
coordination, 82, 244 
coping, 110, 115, 116, 117, 119, 122, 124, 126, 127, 
129, 130, 134, 146, 147, 148, 149, 151, 155, 156, 
158, 159, 171, 172, 174, 175, 195, 222, 223, 225, 
226, 227, 238 
coping strategies, 110, 115, 127, 141, 146, 148, 149, 
151, 159, 195, 226 
correlation, 110, 122, 141, 143, 144, 146, 160, 162, 
169, 180, 182, 191, 204, 238 
correlation analysis, 143 
correlation coefficient, 141, 143, 146 
correlations, 109, 110, 111, 135, 141, 143, 144, 150, 
162, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170, 174, 204, 207, 208, 
240 
cost, 218, 224, 230, 231, 243, 244, 245, 247, 248 
counseling, 117, 240 
course content, 213, 217, 218 
course work, 74 

Index 
260
creative thinking, 5, 8 
creativity, 7, 8, 53, 78, 253 
criminals, 115 
critical thinking, 1, 21, 22, 23, 152, 245, 251 
cross-sectional study, 179, 180, 190 
cues, 99, 103, 104, 105, 108 
cultural differences, 177, 179, 182, 192 
culture, 71, 167, 181 
curricula, 46, 219, 252 
curriculum, 34, 35, 62, 63, 210, 215, 219, 253 
curriculum development, 210, 253 
customer service, 248 
cycles, 215 
cycling, 247 
Cyprus, 46, 79, 197, 201, 210 
D 
daily living, 158 
data set, 87, 89, 92, 95, 96, 98, 99 
decision-making process, 107 
deep learning, 69, 70, 72 
deficiencies, 117 
deficiency, 159 
deficit, 131 
Delta, 21 
demographic characteristics, 238 
denial, 108 
Denmark, 62 
Department of Education, 46, 210 
dependent variable, 145, 184, 188, 189, 204 
depression, 115, 117, 118, 122, 123, 124, 127, 128, 
159, 174, 178, 184, 192, 221, 222, 225, 227, 228, 
229, 230, 231, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 239, 240, 
241, 242 
depressive symptomatology, 229 
depressive symptoms, 117, 124, 128, 194, 228, 229, 
230, 233, 234, 235, 236, 238, 241 
depth, 75, 103, 217 
derivatives, 15, 252 
Design Guide, 101 
designers, 248 
developmental change, 196 
developmental disorder, 127 
deviation, 19, 106, 181 
digital technologies, 31, 32, 33, 35, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49 
disability, 195 
disabled patients, 104 
disciplinary discourse, 69, 71, 82 
disclosure, 167 
discomfort, 117, 180, 227, 238 
discursive moves, 72 
discussion groups, 32 
diseases, 227 
disorder, 125, 127, 131, 132, 151, 236 
disposition, 4, 151, 152 
distress, 107, 157, 178, 181, 182, 183, 184, 186, 188, 
189, 190, 191 
distribution, 185, 186, 215 
divergence, 179 
diversity, 60 
DOI, 46, 47, 48, 82, 123 
dragging, 31, 35, 45 
drawing, 5, 35, 37, 39, 247 
drug treatment, 235 
drugs, 7, 121, 235 
Dynamic Geometry System (DGS), 31, 32, 35, 36, 
45 
dynamic representation, 34, 35, 36 
dynamism, 45 
E 
economics, 248 
Ecuador, 62 
education, 7, 23, 46, 47, 48, 53, 61, 62, 65, 66, 71, 
81, 82, 83, 86, 122, 129, 130, 166, 183, 184, 185, 
192, 198, 199, 201, 203, 207, 209, 210, 219, 238, 
248, 252, 253 
educational assessment, 219 
educational experience, 218 
educational process, 174 
educational psychology, 61 
educational research, 67 
educational system, 86, 201 
educators, 97, 198, 208, 248 
Egypt, 24, 26, 29 
EIS, 113 
elementary school, 83, 185 
elementary teachers, 199 
e-mail, 202 
emergency, 3, 246 
emotion, 108, 110, 117, 128, 148, 184, 199, 209, 
239, 240 
emotion regulation, 128 
emotional disorder, 151, 153 
emotional distress, 223, 224, 237 
emotional intelligence, 122 
emotional problems, 130 
emotional responses, 225 
emotional well-being, 228 
emotion-focused, 148, 239 

Index 
261
empathy, 103, 105, 167, 177, 178, 181, 182, 183, 
184, 186, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 232 
empirical and formal arguments, 32 
empirical studies, 180 
employers, 212, 219 
employment, 120 
empower, 35 
encoding, 20, 105 
ENDCORE model, 167, 168, 170, 173 
ENDCOREs, 167, 168 
end-of-chapter textbook exercise, 67, 68, 77 
energy, 243, 244, 245 
engineering, 6, 7, 8, 47, 62, 66, 74, 79, 99, 245 
England, 25, 26, 62 
environment, 33, 37, 68, 76, 85, 89, 92, 106, 156, 
183, 199, 203, 216, 222 
environmental control, 167 
environmental factors, 191, 192 
environments, 33, 46, 89, 97 
epistemology, 72 
equipment, 71 
ethnic background, 74 
ethnicity, 74 
Eurasia, 78 
European Social Fund, 193 
European Union, 193 
everyday context, 67, 68, 72, 76, 80 
everyday life, 2, 3, 6, 19, 66, 68, 72, 73, 75, 78, 156, 
159, 160, 165, 166, 170, 222, 230, 233, 249, 250, 
251 
evidence, 4, 111, 113, 116, 117, 120, 182, 199, 227, 
237 
evolution, 3, 130, 174, 195, 243, 246 
examinations, 97 
exclusion, 125 
execution, 233 
exercises, 3, 14, 15, 67, 68, 69, 70, 73, 74, 77 
expected-actual correlation, 143 
experimental condition, 235 
experimental design, 216 
expert, 4, 7, 69, 70, 76, 79, 80, 132, 138, 247 
expertise, 52, 60, 86, 198, 247, 254 
exploratory talk, 72, 75, 77 
exposure, 14, 212, 236 
expressiveness, 167 
expressivity, 155, 167, 170, 171 
extraversion, 159 
F 
factor analysis, 110, 114, 134, 186, 240 
factories, 244 
families, 132, 183 
family life, 183 
fantasy, 178, 181, 182, 186 
far right, 57 
favorable, 133, 138, 140, 141, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
149 
favorable expectation, 133, 138, 144, 145 
fear, 152, 153, 225, 236 
feelings, 104, 106, 108, 114, 118, 119, 138, 157, 
181, 198, 202, 207 
financial, 226 
Finland, 62 
fixation, 54 
flaws, 108 
flexibility, 53, 198 
fluvoxamine, 235 
Focus, 32, 34, 35, 36, 51, 62, 65, 77, 104, 110, 115, 
118, 131, 132, 133, 136, 137, 138, 140, 141, 142, 
143, 144, 145, 147, 148, 152, 182, 199, 212, 223, 
226, 230, 233, 247, 253 
force, 67, 72, 225 
forensic psychology, 132 
formal education, 86, 88 
formation, 73 
formula, 11, 16, 18, 69, 70, 85, 87, 92 
foundations, 221, 222 
framing, 92 
France, 219, 220 
free energy, 244 
funding, 218 
future, 6, 14, 20, 22, 53, 67, 69, 82, 86, 111, 125, 
129, 133, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 144, 147, 
148, 155, 163, 165, 170, 171, 178, 182, 183, 192, 
208, 210, 212, 221, 227, 231, 237, 238, 243, 244, 
251, 252, 253, 255 
fuzzy sets, 9, 17, 22 
G 
garbage, 8 
gender, 74, 77, 80, 112, 120, 125, 128, 159, 172, 
175, 177, 178, 180, 181, 182, 184, 186, 187, 188, 
190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 196, 214, 234, 237 
gender differences, 125, 159, 172, 175, 180, 181, 
184, 186, 188, 191, 193, 196 
generalizability, 150, 163 
generalized anxiety disorder, 151, 152, 153, 228, 
236, 239, 240 
geometry, 33, 34, 35, 51, 57, 61 
Germany, 25, 51, 62, 253, 255 

Index 
262
Gestalt, 51, 54, 55, 57, 60, 61, 62 
Gestalt psychology, 54, 55, 57, 61, 62 
Gestalt theory, 51, 57, 62 
gestures, 116 
gifted, 104, 114, 119, 122, 124, 131 
global economy, 245 
global warming, 72 
goal setting, 105, 106 
goal-oriented behaviour, 4 
goods and services, 243, 244, 245 
GPA, 1, 3, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20 
grades, 15, 16, 17, 18, 181 
graduate students, 135 
grants, 218 
graph, 9, 10, 12, 14, 18, 19, 58 
gravity, 1, 2, 22, 100, 105 
Great Britain, 130 
Greece, 1, 14, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 243, 250, 255 
grounding, 166 
group ownership, 74, 75 
group therapy, 117 
group treatment, 116 
group work, 67, 71, 72, 75, 78, 120, 218 
grouping, 79 
growth, 7, 49, 53, 54, 197, 207 
guidance, 77, 200, 201, 208 
guidelines, 198, 202, 221, 241 
H 
habituation, 52 
happiness, 149 
health, 8, 117, 124, 129, 130, 136, 173, 177, 194, 
222, 238 
health education, 194 
health problems, 222 
height, 14, 36, 40, 45 
heritability, 180 
heterogeneous groups, 73, 74, 77 
heuristic strategies, 3, 4, 33, 247, 252 
Hierarchical regression, 146 
high school, 37, 48, 59, 118, 123, 166, 185, 209, 219 
higher education, 65, 66, 67, 219 
higher-order thinking, 2 
history, 134, 249 
homework, 120, 230, 232, 233, 241 
homogeneous groups, 73, 74, 120 
Hong Kong, 196 
hopelessness, 117 
horses, 252 
hostility, 115 
House, 130 
human, 2, 5, 20, 22, 32, 62, 199, 209, 243, 244, 247, 
248, 249, 251, 252, 253 
human activity, 253 
human behavior, 5, 62 
human brain, 209 
human cognition, 243, 244 
Hungary, 177, 183, 184, 193, 194, 195, 196 
hybrid, 245 
hypothesis, 5, 190, 191, 204, 205, 213, 216, 227 
hypothesis test, 204 
I 
ICS, 187, 189 
ideal, 16, 78, 97 
identification, 66, 104, 108, 116, 117 
ill-defined problems, 212 
illusion, 225, 252 
images, 27, 55, 134 
imagination, 2, 250 
imitation, 69 
immersion, 68 
improvements, 76, 109, 113, 114, 116, 117, 118, 
119, 121, 227, 237 
impulsive, 107, 111, 115, 160, 178, 192, 225, 228, 
229, 238 
impulsivity, 155, 157, 160, 161, 162, 163, 171, 172, 
174, 176, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185, 187, 
188, 189, 190, 191, 195, 223, 224, 225 
incidence, 236 
incompatibility, 225 
independence, 53, 166, 170 
independent variable, 184, 188, 189 
India, 24, 27, 85 
indirect effect, 146, 159, 226 
individual differences, 108, 125, 148, 156, 163, 175, 
193, 204, 207 
individual students, 214, 215 
individuals, 71, 75, 77, 112, 123, 125, 129, 134, 135, 
145, 147, 160, 162, 163, 166, 181, 199, 204, 221, 
227, 247, 253 
Indonesia, 27 
induction, 54, 87, 204, 248 
industries, 244 
industry, 7, 245, 248 
inequality, 58, 60, 63 
inferences, 88, 163 
information processing, 4 
information seeking, 134, 135, 142, 148, 149, 151 
information technology, 2, 4, 7, 245 

Index 
263
informed consent, 164, 168 
infrastructure, 245 
initial state, 4 
injuries, 136, 140, 241 
inoculation, 115 
institutions, 4 
integration, 51, 63, 70, 128, 174, 195, 240 
intelligence, 61, 103, 104, 107, 130, 173 
interaction effect, 146 
interactive engagement, 66 
interdependence, 71 
interference, 69 
internal consistency, 111, 113, 162, 164, 168 
internalization, 232 
internalizing, 128 
internship, 131 
interpersonal communication, 117, 128, 173, 175 
interpersonal conflict, 103, 105, 111, 114, 120, 126, 
167, 172 
interpersonal conflicts, 103, 105, 114 
interpersonal relations, 159, 167, 175, 183, 192 
interpersonal relationships, 159, 167, 175, 183, 192 
interpersonal skills, 104, 105, 107, 114, 118, 119, 
122, 131, 132, 166, 167 
interrelations, 197, 201, 204, 207 
intervention, 103, 104, 109, 111, 113, 114, 115, 116, 
117, 118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 128, 
130, 131, 151, 172, 173, 196, 197, 202, 204, 205, 
207, 216, 221, 222, 229, 230, 231, 233, 235, 236, 
237, 238, 239, 241, 242 
introductory level of physics, 67 
introversion, 148 
invariances, 32, 45 
inventiveness, 8 
IQ scores, 120 
IRI, 178, 181, 186 
iron, 71 
issues, 7, 33, 47, 61, 66, 67, 70, 81, 111, 120, 125, 
172, 199, 222 
item bank, 212 
J 
Japan, 62, 133, 152, 153, 155, 161, 164, 168 
Japanese women, 175 
joint problem space, 70 
Jordan, 27, 127 
justification, 203 
K 
Keltikangas-Järvinen, 195 
knowledge acquisition, 5, 248 
knowledge base, 77, 252 
Korea, 62 
L 
labeling, 57 
laptop, 119 
later life, 190 
Latin America, 128 
Latinos, 124 
laws, 9, 66, 67, 69, 76, 100 
lead, 12, 19, 36, 52, 58, 60, 70, 74, 105, 106, 108, 
117, 134, 147, 150, 163, 213, 250, 252 
leadership, 73, 233 
learners, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 41, 45, 53, 71, 76, 
79, 82, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 95, 97, 199, 
218 
learning, 3, 4, 7, 22, 31, 32, 33, 35, 45, 46, 47, 48, 
52, 53, 55, 61, 62, 65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 72, 74, 76, 
77, 78, 79, 81, 82, 86, 88, 89, 92, 97, 98, 99, 115, 
116, 117, 118, 119, 126, 127, 132, 172, 183, 194, 
198, 199, 200, 201, 208, 209, 210, 211,218, 219, 
237, 246, 247, 250, 251, 252, 253, 254 
learning disabilities, 132, 199 
learning environment, 31, 32, 33, 35, 46, 48, 52, 55, 
66, 71, 86, 88, 89, 92, 97, 99, 200, 211 
learning outcomes, 219 
learning process, 77, 115, 119, 200 
learning skills, 209, 252 
learning task, 253 
legs, 57 
lens, 8, 82 
lesions, 125 
life experiences, 225 
lifelong learning, 4 
lifetime, 119 
light, 5, 179, 182, 190, 192 
Likert scale, 110, 136 
loci, 31, 35, 42, 43, 44, 45 
locus, 34, 38, 171 
logistics, 7 
loneliness, 222 
longitudinal study, 179, 190, 191, 193, 195 
low appraisal of threat, 149 
low strategy use cluster, 133, 145 

Index 
264
M 
major depression, 123, 235, 239, 240, 241 
major depressive disorder, 127 
majority group, 74 
Malaysia, 219 
management, 110, 115, 166, 167, 244 
manipulation, 85, 88 
mapping, 6, 93, 247 
Margitics, 195 
marital conflict, 222 
marketing, 248 
Markov chain, 249 
mass, 23, 73 
materials, 61, 82 
mathematical knowledge, 32, 33, 35, 45, 59, 250 
Mathematical problem solving, 31, 32, 33, 47, 48, 
51, 53, 57, 63 
mathematical relationships, 31, 32, 45 
mathematical thinking, 33, 36, 46, 53, 61 
mathematics, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 15, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
32, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 53, 57, 60, 61, 62, 63, 69, 
71, 74, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 207, 208, 209, 
210, 212, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 253, 
255 
mathematics education, 3, 22, 23, 46, 47, 48, 52, 62, 
198, 199, 202, 208, 246, 253, 255 
matrix, 20 
matter, 3, 60, 85, 86, 182, 212, 213, 214, 216 
McGuire, 195 
McMurran, 195 
meaning-making process, 71 
means-end analysis, 69 
measurements, 1, 2, 36, 134, 150, 153, 157, 172, 
178, 181, 186, 197, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 
212, 214 
median, 150 
mediation, 119, 146 
medical, 48, 121, 128, 218 
medication, 236 
medicine, 166 
Mediterranean, 255 
melting, 72 
membership, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13 
memorizing, 85, 87, 92 
memory, 3, 88, 92, 101, 106, 126, 251, 252 
mental disorder, 222 
mental health, 117, 121, 123, 126, 177, 230, 235, 
236, 241 
mental illness, 116 
mental imagery, 96, 98 
mental model, 85, 96 
mental processes, 88 
mental representation, 85, 88, 97, 98 
mental state, 116 
messages, 202 
meta-analysis, 117, 123, 124, 128 
metacognition, 21, 47 
metacognitive knowledge, 199 
meter, 98 
methodology, 77, 82, 116, 119, 150, 213 
Mexico, 31, 47, 62 
mimesis, 75 
minorities, 74 
minority students, 74 
misconceptions, 53 
misunderstanding, 207, 208 
mixing, 108 
Mobile devices, 32 
modelling, 4, 5, 6, 8, 14, 15, 22, 65, 70, 197, 209, 
245, 250, 251, 252, 255 
models, 4, 6, 36, 69, 70, 71, 76, 85, 88, 91, 99, 104, 
107, 146, 170, 180, 183, 203, 207, 247, 248, 249, 
251, 255 
moderation, 146 
moderators, 134, 149, 175, 238 
modern society, 243, 244 
momentum, 72 
mood disorder, 236 
moral reasoning, 123 
motivation, 7, 57, 149, 159, 163, 171, 194, 199, 210, 
233, 253 
multidimensional, 4, 21, 147, 148, 157, 166, 181, 
193, 247, 253 
multi-dimensional, 133, 150 
multiple purpose technologies, 31, 32, 45 
multiplication, 15, 54 
N 
nanotechnology, 82 
National Institute of Mental Health, 180, 195, 196, 
239 
National Research Council, 32, 47 
NATO, 21, 25, 80 
nature of the problem, 2, 133, 137, 142, 144, 147 
Need for cognition, 155, 160, 163, 164, 165, 171, 
172, 174, 175 
Need for Cognition Scale, 163, 164, 165, 174 
negative affectivity, 159 
negative consequences, 224 
negative effects, 150, 226 

Index 
265
negative emotions, 182, 223, 226 
negative outcomes, 134 
negative relation, 143 
negotiating, 103 
negotiation, 105 
Netherlands, 63, 208 
neutral, 245 
Nicaragua, 62 
no change, 140, 143, 144, 146, 211, 217 
no expected change, 138, 144, 145 
nonverbal cues, 116 
normal children, 196 
Norway, 62 
novice, 69, 70, 76, 79, 80, 86 
numerical analysis, 246 
nurses, 121, 234, 235 
nursing, 128 
O 
observed behavior, 111 
obstacles, 4, 106, 107, 108, 110, 116, 197, 199, 204, 
207, 208, 222, 225, 232, 233 
OCD, 132 
OECD, 212, 213, 219, 220 
offenders, 115, 117, 122, 123, 195 
one dimension, 91, 93, 94, 97, 98, 170 
online information, 32, 44 
operations, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 52, 106, 116, 252 
opportunities, 70, 74, 75, 76, 77, 126, 252 
optimism, 125, 159, 176, 183, 192 
organize, 106 
outcomes, 1, 19, 75, 114, 115, 117, 120, 121, 133, 
134, 135, 136, 138, 139, 140, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
147, 148, 149, 150, 158, 159, 171, 194, 216, 219, 
233, 238, 247, 248, 250, 255 
outpatients, 130, 159 
over-determined, 68, 75, 77 
ownership, 65, 66, 74, 75, 77, 78, 81 
P 
Pacific, 61 
pain, 105 
panic disorder, 228 
parallel, 213, 243 
parameter estimates, 204, 205 
parenting, 195 
parents, 104, 110, 119, 121, 122, 177, 179, 183, 184, 
186, 192, 194 
paroxetine, 234, 235 
participants, 66, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 
120, 121, 133, 134, 135, 136, 140, 141, 143, 146, 
147, 148, 149, 150, 161, 164, 168, 180, 182, 184, 
186, 187, 188, 192, 201, 202, 216, 230, 231, 233, 
235, 236 
path analysis, 146, 159 
pathways, 66, 77 
Patterns of Strategy Use, 144 
Pauwlik, 195 
pedagogy, 52, 53, 57, 60, 63 
peer rejection, 193 
peer relationship, 172 
perfectionism, 194 
permission, 226 
perpendicular bisector, 34, 45 
perseverance, 197, 198, 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 
206, 207, 208 
personal life, 177 
personal problems, 119, 133, 135, 136, 150 
personality, 135, 136, 140, 142, 143, 146, 148, 149, 
150, 161, 173, 176, 182, 191 
personality traits, 135, 141, 142, 143, 146, 148, 149, 
150, 176 
persuasion, 175 
Peru, 132 
pessimism, 111, 125, 183, 192, 193 
pharmacology, 213 
Philadelphia, 79, 129, 175 
physicians, 230, 234, 235 
physics, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 
77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 212, 219, 248 
Physics education, 65, 66, 71, 82 
pilot study, 118, 130 
PISA, 212, 213, 219, 220 
placebo, 235, 241 
plausibility, 35 
playing, 92, 117, 185 
Poland, 25 
police, 68 
policy, 88, 208 
policy makers, 208 
politics, 246 
population, 71, 118, 119, 120, 121, 129, 159, 193, 
203, 216, 222, 235, 239 
positive correlation, 134, 141, 143, 144, 161, 162, 
165, 166, 180, 182, 191 
positive emotions, 182, 223 
positive relationship, 135, 142, 143, 159, 191 
posttraumatic stress, 127 
preparation, 46, 60, 63 

Index 
266
preparedness, 118 
preschool, 81, 104, 110, 123 
pressure sore, 194 
prevention, 121, 122, 125, 172, 230, 231, 238, 239, 
241, 242 
primary school, 83, 104 
principles, 2, 5, 33, 46, 55, 57, 67, 68, 69, 90, 224 
prior knowledge, 3, 53, 60, 200 
probability, 15, 20, 107, 247 
probability theory, 15 
Problem orientation, 118, 125, 155, 157, 158, 159, 
161, 163, 164, 165, 168, 177, 178, 179, 182, 183, 
184, 185, 187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 221, 223, 
224, 228, 229, 231, 235, 236, 238, 240 
problem representation, 31, 32, 69, 97 
Problem Schema, 88, 91, 95, 99 
problem solving competencies, 32, 33 
problem solving process, 33, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 
73, 75, 86, 87, 88, 92, 231 
problem space, 70 
problem-based learning, 22, 200, 211, 212, 219, 220 
problem-focused, 148, 149, 233, 234, 238 
problem-focused coping, 148, 149, 238 
problem-solving behavior, 21, 51, 160, 226, 254 
Problem-Solving Confidence, 137, 141, 142, 147 
problem-solving in groups, 75 
problem-solving learning environment, 89, 99 
problem-solving path, 75 
problem-solving self-efficacy, 155, 158, 159, 161, 
162, 165, 169, 170, 171 
Problem-Solving Self-Efficacy Scale, 158, 161, 162, 
164, 165, 168, 169 
problem-solving skills, 60, 77, 86, 96, 104, 109, 115, 
116, 117, 118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 155, 157, 158, 
159, 161, 162, 163, 165, 168, 170, 171, 211, 212, 
213, 214, 216, 217, 218, 219, 227, 228, 229, 230, 
233, 237, 238 
Problem-Solving Skills Scale, 158, 161, 162, 164, 
165, 168, 169 
problem-solving strategies, 57, 60, 80, 133, 134, 135, 
136, 146, 147, 148, 150, 183, 196, 198, 202, 208, 
219 
problem-solving style, 107, 136, 137, 141, 142, 147, 
157, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162, 183, 190, 221, 223 
problem-solving task, 120, 121, 219 
procedural knowledge, 67, 73, 85, 88 
professional development, 201 
professional growth, 218 
professionals, 109, 130, 230, 235 
profit, 247 
project, 66, 78, 82, 83, 123, 208, 209, 253 
proposition, 182 
protection, 194 
prototype, 97 
PST, 117, 118, 221, 222, 229, 230, 231, 232, 233, 
234, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239 
psychiatry, 129, 130 
psychological distress, 159, 227, 240 
psychological problems, 238, 239 
psychological processes, 80 
psychological resources, 115 
psychological stress, 158, 159, 176, 193 
psychological well-being, 118, 125, 172, 222 
psychology, 22, 62, 73, 115, 129, 132, 158, 166, 171, 
173, 180, 181, 196, 238, 253, 254 
psychometric properties, 127, 134, 163, 164, 195 
psychopathology, 116, 221, 238 
psychopathy, 152 
psychosocial interventions, 116 
psychosomatic, 176 
psychotherapy, 117, 128, 132, 232, 235 
puberty, 191 
Q 
QED, 40 
qualitative problems, 70 
qualitative research, 130 
quality of life, 180, 182 
questioning, 4, 96 
questionnaire, 110, 113, 118, 126, 135, 136, 151, 
160, 161, 164, 168, 179, 184, 185, 190, 202, 203 
R 
radius, 37, 38 
rating scale, 109, 118, 122, 161 
rationality, 119, 178, 179, 180, 182, 183, 184, 187, 
189, 190, 191, 192, 230 
reactions, 7, 80 
reading, 89 
real numbers, 9, 10, 11, 13 
real time, 76 
reality, 6, 72, 117, 130, 252 
reasoning, 6, 9, 20, 33, 35, 45, 47, 48, 54, 60, 70, 
108, 191, 195, 216, 248 
recall, 3, 16, 248, 251 
recalling, 97 
reciprocal relationships, 225 
recognition, 60, 108, 114, 116, 119, 120 
recommendations, 60, 111, 218, 237 

Index 
267
reconstruction, 32, 36, 39 
recovery, 116 
reflective practice, 201 
reflectivity, 155, 160, 161, 162, 163, 171 
Reflectivity-impulsivity, 155, 160, 161, 162, 163, 
171 
regression analysis, 146, 186, 188, 191 
regression line, 188 
regulatory system, 207 
rehabilitation, 116, 126 
rehabilitation program, 116 
reinforcement, 112, 129, 224, 231, 232, 233 
rejection, 113, 193 
relaxation, 167 
relevance, 72, 235 
reliability, 109, 110, 114, 136, 140, 143, 150, 151, 
161, 162, 164, 168, 175, 178, 185, 186, 203 
remission, 235 
replication, 113 
repression, 134, 150 
requirement, 120 
requirements, 70, 85, 87, 249 
research programs, 33 
researchers, 7, 24, 110, 111, 112, 113, 118, 166, 167, 
186, 199, 208, 235, 238, 248 
residuals, 204, 205 
resilience, 122 
resistance, 233 
resolution, 110, 114, 119 
resources, 1, 31, 32, 33, 61, 71, 76, 106, 108, 147, 
149, 200, 218, 221, 222 
response, 56, 112, 116, 147, 148, 156, 157, 163, 164, 
180, 222, 223, 225, 235, 241 
response format, 164 
restrictions, 4, 249 
retention rate, 7 
risks, 65, 82, 111, 118, 121, 123, 125, 130, 132, 174 
RMSEA, 203, 204, 205 
role-playing, 113 
roots, 4, 8, 33, 58, 118 
rote learning, 69 
routes, 32, 175 
rules, 9, 12, 88, 116, 119, 214, 246, 247, 251, 252 
Russia, 62 
S 
SAS, 145 
Saudi Arabia, 24 
schema, 85, 86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 
99 
schemata, 69 
schizophrenia, 104, 115, 116, 122, 124, 126, 127, 
130, 222 
school, 45, 53, 57, 61, 62, 67, 71, 76, 81, 82, 86, 96, 
118, 136, 140, 177, 182, 183, 184, 185, 186, 192, 
199, 202, 207, 209, 247, 248, 251, 252, 253, 254 
school success, 177, 199 
school work, 136 
science, 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 22, 46, 47, 62, 74, 79, 82, 99, 
166, 209, 246, 251 
scientific method, 8, 244 
scientific publications, 210 
scope, 233 
SCT, 122 
secondary school students, 166 
secondary schools, 63 
self-assessment, 179 
self-concept, 208, 209 
self-confidence, 110 
self-control, 105, 115, 167, 198, 222 
self-efficacy, 104, 107, 155, 158, 159, 161, 162, 165, 
169, 170, 171, 183, 185, 192, 209 
self-esteem, 128, 227, 238 
self-reflection, 199 
self-regulation, 2, 197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 204, 205, 
207, 208, 209, 210 
self-sufficiency, 180 
semantic information, 88 
seminars, 57, 61 
sensitivity, 107, 113, 131 
sensitization, 134, 150 
sensors, 244 
Serbia, 62 
services, 119 
sex, 112, 161, 164, 168, 176, 187, 238 
sexual abuse, 132 
sham, 118 
shape, 31, 56, 108 
showing, 20, 94, 120, 148, 218, 232 
signals, 103, 105, 108 
signs, 21 
silent-thinking, 133, 145 
simulation, 6, 101, 248, 249 
simulations, 5, 8 
Singapore, 63 
skilled performance, 173 
skills base, 157, 167 
skills training, 115, 121, 123, 127, 129, 130 
SLE, 89 
sociability, 167 
social acceptance, 196 

Index 
268
social adjustment, 121, 236 
social anxiety, 109, 126, 129, 181, 236, 239 
social behaviour, 105, 126, 175, 178, 182 
social cognition, 106, 114, 116 
social competence, 110, 122, 125, 126, 127, 151, 
166, 172, 173 
social construct, 72 
social constructivism, 72 
social context, 71, 112, 126 
social desirability, 163 
social environment, 156, 222 
social group, 177 
social influences, 183 
social interaction, 130, 172, 175, 176 
social life, 106, 107 
social networks, 32 
social perception, 116 
social phobia, 115, 116, 129 
social problems, 103, 107, 109, 156, 158, 161, 166, 
183, 222 
Social problem-solving, 104, 105, 106, 107, 109, 
111, 115, 116, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 124, 125, 
126, 127, 130, 137, 149, 151, 155, 156, 157, 158, 
159, 160, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 
171, 172, 175, 176, 193, 194, 195, 196, 221, 225, 
239, 240, 241 
social problem-solving ability, 125, 155, 158, 159, 
160, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 170, 171, 
172, 175, 193, 239, 240 
social problem-solving theory, 156, 157, 158, 159, 
160, 162 
social relations, 113, 121 
social sciences, 8 
social situations, 120, 190 
social skills, 104, 105, 109, 110, 112, 115, 116, 117, 
118, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 
129, 130, 131, 132, 166 
social skills training, 115, 116, 117, 121, 123, 127, 
129 
social withdrawal, 117, 119 
socialization, 120, 121 
society, 2, 4, 5, 19, 62, 80, 115, 167, 177, 180, 195, 
243, 244, 245, 252 
sociology, 166 
Socrates, 4 
software, 5, 6, 15, 35, 252 
solid solutions, 7 
solution, 5, 7, 8, 15, 20, 33, 46, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 
58, 59, 60, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 85, 
87, 88, 89, 96, 104, 106, 107, 108, 113, 116, 118, 
119, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 143, 148, 149, 
151, 156, 157, 160, 162, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 
190, 192, 198, 200, 203, 207, 208, 221, 222, 223, 
224, 225, 229, 230, 231, 233, 239, 246, 247, 248, 
249, 250, 251, 252 
solution generation, 135, 148, 151 
solution process, 70 
solution space, 46 
Solving the problem, 69, 93, 96, 112, 133, 137, 140, 
141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 148, 149, 201 
somatization, 159 
South Africa, 254 
Spain, 31, 48, 62, 103, 116, 131, 132, 221 
specialists, 230, 235, 252 
specialization, 81 
specific knowledge, 88, 218, 220 
speech, 108, 116 
speed of light, 8 
spinal cord, 194 
spinal cord injury, 194 
stability, 197, 204 
standard deviation, 162, 164, 168, 181, 234, 237 
standard error, 215 
standardization, 113 
state, 3, 4, 52, 60, 67, 70, 147, 148, 177, 180, 181, 
183, 184, 185, 187, 188, 190, 191, 197, 207, 244 
states, 4, 6, 12, 69, 72, 76, 109, 147, 227, 240 
statistics, 140 
stochastic model, 255 
Story problems, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 92, 96, 97, 99 
strategy use, 133, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 149, 150 
stress, 92, 105, 115, 125, 127, 134, 135, 146, 147, 
148, 149, 150, 151, 158, 159, 172, 174, 176, 178, 
182, 184, 192, 193, 195, 221, 225, 226, 228, 239, 
240, 241 
stress management, 127, 172 
stress response, 149 
stressful events, 227, 228 
stressful life events, 159, 222, 225, 226, 227, 228, 
238 
stressors, 115, 122, 150 
stroke, 118, 126 
structural knowledge, 88 
structure, 5, 6, 31, 33, 35, 59, 60, 70, 72, 87, 88, 89, 
90, 91, 93, 95, 96, 98, 99, 114, 116, 130, 173, 
174, 177, 181, 183, 185, 186, 230 
structuring, 79 
student motivation, 210 
student ownership, 65, 74, 75, 78, 81 
style, 23, 96, 107, 111, 115, 134, 135, 136, 137, 141, 
142, 147, 149, 155, 157, 158, 159, 160, 162, 171, 

Index 
269
182, 183, 184, 185, 190, 192, 196, 223, 224, 225, 
228, 238, 239, 242, 255 
subdomains, 120 
subjective well-being, 159, 176 
substance abuse, 104, 115, 132, 222 
substitution, 97 
subtraction, 12, 13, 52 
suicidal behavior, 117, 122, 130 
suicidal ideation, 222 
supervision, 89 
surface learning, 69 
survivors, 118, 126 
sustainable development, 81 
Sweden, 65, 78, 80, 81, 82 
symbolism, 52 
symptoms, 117, 118, 128, 151, 152, 153, 175, 176, 
180, 182, 184, 194, 227, 228, 229, 230, 235, 236, 
237 
syndrome, 113, 123, 125 
synthesis, 5, 8, 240, 245, 251 
T 
target, 52, 120, 147, 247, 251 
target population, 120 
taxonomy, 247 
teacher preparation, 201 
teachers, 18, 33, 51, 52, 53, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 
66, 67, 71, 72, 73, 79, 81, 82, 92, 97, 98, 179, 
197, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 203, 207, 208, 209, 
252 
teams, 121 
techniques, 1, 2, 5, 71, 96, 109, 111, 116, 118, 122, 
183, 211, 212, 218, 245, 251, 253 
technology(ies), 2, 6, 8, 31, 32, 33, 34, 36, 37, 45, 
46, 47, 48, 58, 60, 62, 63, 81, 83, 210, 244, 246, 
252 
temperature, 68, 72, 73, 75, 76 
tempo, 174 
tension, 116 
terminally ill, 115 
tertiary education, 81 
test data, 79 
test items, 96, 97, 98, 99 
test scores, 215, 216 
testing, 5, 85, 88, 96, 97, 100, 215, 216, 249 
textbook, 67, 68, 70, 77 
The future, 47, 86, 133, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 
142, 143, 144, 145, 147, 150, 230, 231, 244, 252 
The nature of the problem, 2, 133, 137, 141, 142, 
143, 144, 145, 147, 148, 224 
the zone of proximal development, 71 
theoretical approach, 110 
therapeutic benefits, 235 
therapeutic change, 232 
therapeutic effect, 238 
therapeutic process, 233 
therapeutic relationship, 232 
therapist, 119, 230, 232, 233 
therapy, 115, 117, 123, 125, 127, 128, 129, 151, 152, 
153, 172, 173, 221, 222, 227, 229, 230, 233, 234, 
235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 241, 242 
think critically, 2, 4, 19, 245 
think-aloud method, 134, 151 
thinking styles, 135 
thoughts, 109, 114, 118, 119, 133, 134, 138, 151, 
181, 199, 202, 207 
threats, 149 
ToM, 116 
trainees, 110, 123 
training, 18, 52, 67, 68, 104, 105, 106, 109, 115, 116, 
118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 126, 128, 129, 
130, 131, 132, 172, 173, 174, 175, 193, 194, 197, 
200, 202, 221, 222, 227, 228, 230, 232, 233, 236, 
237, 238, 240, 241 
training programs, 105, 109, 115, 119, 121, 122 
trait anxiety, 159, 177, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 
187, 188, 190, 191, 192, 193, 194, 195, 239 
traits, 109, 111, 135, 141, 142, 146, 177, 182 
transcripts, 75 
transformations, 33 
translation, 6, 137 
transmission, 232 
transplant, 7 
transportation, 243, 244 
traumatic brain injury, 131 
treatment, 104, 113, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 
121, 127, 129, 131, 195, 227, 228, 230, 233, 234, 
235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241 
trial, 92, 127, 240, 241, 242 
Turkey, 196 
U 
Ukraine, 28, 30 
unacceptable risk, 224 
under-determined problem, 68, 75 
unfavorable, 133, 135, 138, 140, 141, 143, 144, 145, 
146, 147, 149, 150 
unfavorable expectation, 138, 144, 145 
uniform, 100 

Index 
270
United States (USA), 7, 25, 29, 30, 51, 60, 62, 125, 
127, 253 
universality, 129 
universe, 249 
universities, 62, 66, 218 
university education, 185 
V 
Valencia, 129 
validation, 20, 73, 125, 126, 131, 151, 249 
valuation, 97, 240 
variables, 68, 71, 85, 91, 117, 120, 133, 146, 158, 
159, 165, 171, 177, 182, 183, 184, 186, 188, 189, 
190, 191, 199, 204, 205, 206, 225, 237, 240, 248 
variations, 52, 92, 97, 180, 188, 191 
varieties, 198 
varimax rotation, 137 
vein, 198 
velocity, 91, 92, 94, 100 
videos, 2, 250 
videotape, 116 
violence, 115 
vulnerability, 239 
vulnerability to depression, 239 
Vygotsky, 52, 62, 71, 80 
W 
Washington, 47, 61, 78, 172, 173, 174, 175, 193, 
194, 195, 196, 209, 240 
water, 20, 51, 52, 61, 68, 73 
well-being, 118, 119, 121, 125, 156, 157, 159, 166, 
172, 174, 176, 193, 221, 222, 223, 225, 226, 227, 
228, 238, 241 
Wertheimer, Max, 51 
work environment, 120 
workers, 121, 122 
workplace, 120, 123, 132 
worry, 133, 134, 135, 136, 139, 142, 146, 148, 149, 
150, 151, 152, 153, 193, 228, 236, 239 
Y 
yield, 60 
young adults, 122, 182, 191 
 

