Lecture Notes in Production Engineering
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/10642

Berend Denkena and Ferdinand Hollmann (Eds.)
Process Machine Interactions
Predicition and Manipulation of Interactions
between Manufacturing Processes
and Machine Tool Structures
ABC

Editors
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Berend Denkena
Leibniz Universität Hannover
Coordinator of Priority Program 1180
Garbsen
Germany
Dr.-Ing. Ferdinand Hollmann
German Research Foundation
Program Director Engineering Science
Bonn
Germany
ISSN 2194-0525
e-ISSN 2194-0533
ISBN 978-3-642-32447-5
e-ISBN 978-3-642-32448-2
DOI 10.1007/978-3-642-32448-2
Springer Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2012947591
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of
this publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the
Publisher’s location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer.
Permissions for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations
are liable to prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of pub-
lication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for any
errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with respect
to the material contained herein.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

Preface
The Priority Program 1180 “Prediction and Manipulation of Interactions between
Structure and Process” was funded by the German Research Foundation DFG from
2005 to 2012. It was initiated by researchers from the German Academic Society
for Production Engineering WGP and accompanied by a working group on process
machine interaction within the International Academy for Production Engineering
CIRP. The priority program dealt with the modeling and prediction of interactions
between machine structures and manufacturing processes in technical systems. The
objective was a sound reproduction of these interactions and a basic understanding
of the acting inter-relationships in order to be able to speciﬁcally inﬂuence and plan
manufacturing processes in the future. The understanding of process machine inter-
actions is a big issue in modern production technology. These interactions can be the
cause of erroneous processes, which directly lead to undesired quality problems. To
cope with rising quality demands and the ongoing need to increase production efﬁ-
ciency in the future, 20 interdisciplinary research projects were funded for a 6 years
period by the DFG. In these projects, models and simulation tools were developed
for a variety of manufacturing technologies, such as cutting, grinding or forming.
Due to the intensive collaboration of researchers from different disciplines, such
as Production Engineering, Mechanical Engineering or Mathematics, it was possi-
ble to gain a deep understanding of process machine interactions. In addition, de-
tailed models and efﬁcient simulation techniques to predict the interactions within a
reasonable calculation time were developed.
Process-machine-interactions have become a central research topic in production
engineering within the last years, not only in academic research but also in indus-
trial companies. Machine tool builders are expanding the use of simulation methods
to design machine tools, particularly considering process-machine-interactions. Ac-
cording to the resulting demand for access to research results and exchange, a series
of International Conferences on Process Machine Interactions has been success-
fully implemented with a steadily increasing number of participants. The Priority
Program 1180 contributed to this important research topic by providing elementary
experimental methods and mathematically veriﬁed computation models.

VI
Preface
This book consists of the four parts “Basics”, “Grinding”, “Cutting” and “Form-
ing”. Part I “Basics” gives an overview of the applied and developed methods in
Measuring Technology, Modeling and Simulation and Mathematical Methods. The
following 3 parts “Grinding”, “Cutting” and “Forming” contain the main scientiﬁc
results and modeling approaches of all 20 research projects, covering a wide range
of topics, e. g. tool grinding, milling and deep drawing. Despite the large number
of different manufacturing methods investigated by the projects, some topics, such
as dynamic self-excitation of machine tools, known as “chatter vibration”, the static
deﬂection of machine tool parts due to the acting process forces or the inﬂuence of
thermal effects, were addressed by nearly all of the research projects.
Prof. Dr.-Ing. Berend Denkena
Dr.-Ing. Ferdinand Hollmann
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover
German Research Foundation
Coordinator of Priority Program 1180
Program Director Engineering Science

Contents
Part I: Basics
Measurement and Test Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
E. Abele, J.C. Aurich, B.-A. Behrens, D. Biermann, C. Brecher,
E. Brinksmeier, M. Czora, B. Denkena, U. Engel, K. Großmann, U. Heisel,
D. Heinisch, R. Hermes, B. Kirsch, F. Klocke, A. Krause, T. Kroiß,
R. Laurischkat, M. L¨oser, F. Mahr, H. Meier, M. Pischan, P. Rasper,
A.V. Scheidler, M. Storchak, E. Uhlmann, M. Weiß
Modeling and Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
C. Brecher, A. Bouabid, M. Deichmueller, B. Denkena, K. Großmann,
A. Hardtmann, D. H¨omberg, R. Hermes, F. Klocke, M. L¨oser, O. Rott,
P. Steinmann, M. Weiß
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods . . . .
53
M. Andres, H. Blum, C. Brandt, C. Carstensen, P. Maaß, J. Niebsch,
A. Rademacher, R. Ramlau, A. Schr¨oder, E.-P. Stephan, S. Wiedemann
Part II: Grinding
High-Performance Surface Grinding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
81
J.C. Aurich, A. Bouabid, P. Steinmann, B. Kirsch
Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke
Grinding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
101
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, H. Wegner
Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding . . . . .
121
D. Biermann, H. Blum, A. Rademacher, A.V. Scheidler, K. Weinert
Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding . . . . . . . . . . .
143
M. Deichmueller, B. Denkena, K.M. de Payrebrune, M. Kr¨oger,
S. Wiedemann, A. Schr¨oder, C. Carstensen

VIII
Contents
Part III: Cutting
HPC - Stability Simulation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
179
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, M. Esser
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool for the Identiﬁcation
of Stable Milling Processes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
203
D. H¨omberg, E. Uhlmann, O. Rott, P. Rasper
Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
225
K. Großmann, M. L¨oser
Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process
Interaction for Path Manipulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
J. Bauer, M. Friedmann, T. Hemker, M. Pischan, C. Reinl, E. Abele,
O. von Stryk
Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
265
E. Uhlmann, F. Mahr, Y. Shi, U. von Wagner
Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon
of Tool Extraction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
285
B. Denkena, E.P. Stephan, M. Maischak, D. Heinisch, M. Andres
Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
309
P. Eberhard, U. Heisel, M. Storchak, T. Gaugele
Surface Generation Process with Consideration of the Balancing State
in Diamond Machining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
329
C. Brandt, A. Krause, J. Niebsch, J. Vehmeyer, E. Brinksmeier, P. Maaß,
R. Ramlau
Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process . . . .
361
R. Britz, T. Maier, F. Schwarz, H. Ulbrich, M.F. Zaeh
Part IV: Forming
Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
383
K. Großmann, A. Hardtmann, H. Wiemer, L. Penter, S. Kriechenbauer
Consideration of the Machine Inﬂuence on Multistage Sheet Metal
Forming Processes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
403
B.-A. Behrens, A. Bouguecha, R. Krimm, T. Matthias, M. Czora
Optimization of Tool and Process Design for the Cold Forging
of Net-Shape Parts by Simulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
419
T. Kroiß, U. Engel

Contents
IX
Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling
Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
439
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, G. Hirt
Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts Utilizing a
Model-Based Path Planning for Robot-Based Incremental Forming . . . .
459
H. Meier, S. Reese, Y. Kiliclar, R. Laurischkat
Gear Rolling Process. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
475
R. Neugebauer, U. Hellfritzsch, M. Lahl, M. Milbrandt, S. Schiller,
T. Druwe
Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming
of Tubular Parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
491
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, A.E. Tekkaya
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 513
Subject Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 515

List of Authors
Abele, E.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Institute of Production Management,
Technology and Machine Tools
Andres, M.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute for Applied Mathematics
Aurich, J. C.
University of Kaiserslautern, Institute for Manufacturing Technology
and Production Systems
Bach, F.-W.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Material Science
Bauer, J.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Institute of Production Management,
Technology and Machine Tools
Behrens, B.-A.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Metal Forming and Metal Forming
Machine Tools
Biermann, D.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Institute of Machining Technology
Blum, H.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Faculty of Mathematics (LS X)
Bouabid, A.
Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Chair of Applied Mechanics
Bouguecha, A.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Metal Forming and Metal Forming
Machine Tools
Brandt, C.
University of Bremen, Center for Industrial Mathematics

XII
List of Authors
Brecher, C.
RWTH Aachen University, Laboratory of Machine Tools and Production
Engineering, Chair of Machine Tools
Brinksmeier, E.
University of Bremen, Foundation Institute of Materials Science, Laboratory of
Precision Machining
Britz, R.
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Institute of Applied Mechanics,
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Carstensen, C.
Humboldt University of Berlin, Department of Mathematics
Czora, M.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Metal Forming and Metal Forming
Machine Tools
De Payrebrune, K.M.
Technische Universit¨at Bergakademie Freiberg, Institute for Machine Elements,
Design and Manufacturing
Deichmueller, M.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Production Engineering and Machine
Tools
Denkena, B.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Production Engineering and Machine
Tools
Druwe, T.
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology
Eberhard, P.
Universit¨at Stuttgart, Institute of Engineering and Computational Mechanics
Engel, U.
Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Chair of Manufacturing Technology
Esser, M.
RWTH Aachen University, Laboratory of Machine Tools and Production
Engineering
Franzke, M.
RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Metal Forming
Friedmann, M.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Department of Computer Science, Simulation,
Systems Optimization and Robotics Group
Gaugele, T.
Universit¨at Stuttgart, Institute of Engineering and Computational Mechanics

List of Authors
XIII
Großmann, A.
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institute of Machine Tools and Control
Engineering
Hardtmann, A.
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institute of Machine Tools and Control
Engineering
Heinisch, D.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Production Engineering and Machine
Tools
Heisel, U.
Universit¨at Stuttgart, Institute for Machine Tools
Hellfritzsch, U.
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology
Hemker, T.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Department of Computer Science, Simulation,
Systems Optimization and Robotics Group
Hermes, R.
RWTH Aachen University, Laboratory of Machine Tools and Production
Engineering, Chair of Machine Tools
Hirt, G.
RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Metal Forming
H¨omberg, D.
Weierstrass Institute, Berlin
Kiliclar, Y.
RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Applied Mechanics
Kirsch, B.
University of Kaiserslautern, Institute for Manufacturing Technology and
Production Systems
Kleiner, M.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Institute of Forming Technology and Lightweight
Construction
Klocke, F.
RWTH Aachen University, Laboratory of Machine Tools and Production
Engineering, Chair of Manufacturing Technology

XIV
List of Authors
Krause, A.
University of Bremen, Laboratory for Precision Machining
Kriechenbauer, S.
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institute of Machine Tools and Control
Engineering
Krimm, R.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Metal Forming and Metal Forming
Machine Tools
Kr¨oger, M.
Technische Universit¨at Bergakademie Freiberg, Institute for Machine Elements,
Design and Manufacturing
Kroiß, T.
Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Chair of Manufacturing Technology
Lahl, M.
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology
Laurischkat, R.
Ruhr-University Bochum, Chair of Production Systems
L¨oser, M.
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institute of Machine Tools and Control
Engineering
Maaß, P.
University of Bremen, Center for Industrial Mathematics
Mahr, F.
Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Institute of Machine Tools and Factory Management
Maier, T.
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Institute for Machine Tools and Industrial
Management, Department of Mechanical Engineering
Maischak, M.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute for Applied Mathematics
Matthias, T.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute of Metal Forming and Metal Forming
Machine Tools
Meier, H.
Ruhr-University Bochum, Chair of Production Systems
Milbrandt, M.
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology
Neugebauer, R.
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology

List of Authors
XV
Niebsch, J.
Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics,
Austrian Academy of Sciences
Penter, L.
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institute of Machine Tools and Control
Engineering
Pischan, M.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Institute of Production Management,
Technology and Machine Tools
Puchhala, S.
RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Metal Forming
Rademacher, A.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Faculty of Mathematics (LS X)
Ramlau, R.
Johannes Kepler University Linz, Industrial Mathematics Institute
Rasper, P.
Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Institute of Machine Tools and Factory Management
Reese, S.
RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Applied Mechanics
Reinl, C.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Department of Computer Science, Simulation,
Systems Optimization and Robotics Group
Rott, O.
Weierstrass Institute, Berlin
Scheidler, A. V.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Institute of Machining Technology
Schiller, S.
Fraunhofer Institute for Machine Tools and Forming Technology
Schr¨oder, A.
Humboldt University of Berlin, Department of Mathematics
Schwarz, F.
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Institute for Machine Tools and Industrial
Management, Department of Mechanical Engineering
Shi, Y.
Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Departments of Mechanics, Chair of Mechatronics
and Machine Dynamics

XVI
List of Authors
Steinmann, P.
Universit¨at Erlangen-N¨urnberg, Chair of Applied Mechanics
Stephan, E. P.
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Institute for Applied Mathematics
Storchak, M.
Universit¨at Stuttgart, Institute for Machine Tools
Tekkaya, A. E.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Institute of Forming Technology and Lightweight
Construction
Uhlmann, E.
Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Institute of Machine Tools and Factory Management
Ulbrich, H.
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Institute of Applied Mechanics,
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Vehmeyer, J.
University of Bremen, Center for Industrial Mathematics
von Stryk, O.
Technische Universit¨at Darmstadt, Department of Computer Science, Simulation,
Systems Optimization and Robotics Group
von Wagner, U.
Technische Universit¨at Berlin, Departments of Mechanics, Chair of Mechatronics
and Machine Dynamics
Wegner, H.
RWTH Aachen University, Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production
Engineering
Weinert, K.
Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering,
Institute of Machining Technology
Weiß, M.
RWTH Aachen University, Laboratory for Machine Tools and Production
Engineering
Wiedemann, S.
Humboldt University of Berlin, Department of Mathematics
Wiemer, H.
Technische Universit¨at Dresden, Institute of Machine Tools and Control
Engineering
Zaeh, M.
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, Institute for Machine Tools and Industrial
Management, Department of Mechanical Engineering

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part I 
Basics 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 3–27. 
springerlink.com                                        © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 1  
Measurement and Test Techniques 
E. Abele, J. C. Aurich, B.-A. Behrens, D. Biermann, C. Brecher,  
E. Brinksmeier, M. Czora, B. Denkena, U. Engel, K. Großmann,  
U. Heisel, D. Heinisch, R. Hermes, B. Kirsch, F. Klocke, A. Krause,  
T. Kroiß, R. Laurischkat, M. Löser, F. Mahr, H. Meier, M. Pischan,  
P. Rasper, A. V. Scheidler, M. Storchak, E. Uhlmann, and M. Weiß 
Abstract. Nowadays, different measurement and test techniques are used to inves-
tigate the interaction between processes and machine tool structures. Machine and 
workpiece properties are determined after analyzing the individual factors of 
process metrology, which have an effect on the process. This chapter explains the 
measurement methods for the structural analysis of the machine tool as well as for 
manufacturing processes and for the workpiece analysis. In addition, an overview 
of different measurement and test techniques based on selected examples related 
to the priority program 1180 is given. 
1.1   Introduction 
This chapter analyzes the metrological possibilities in order to determine the inte-
raction between process and machine structure. The metrological analysis is sub-
divided into three main sections: Section 1.2 refers to the structural analysis of the 
machine tool, section 1.3 to the process analysis and section 1.4 to the analysis of 
the workpiece. In section 1.2 different measurement and test techniques of the 
static and the dynamic machine tool behavior, the kinematics and the temperature 
of machine tools are described. Section 1.3 describes different measurements and 
test techniques for force, acoustic emission and temperature, whereas section 1.4 
describes refuse to surface and geometry assessment. Here, a small imported out-
line can be obtained and its influence must be analyzed to understand the interac-
tion between process and machine tool structure for specific examples. 
1.2   Structural Analysis of Machine Tools 
Working precision, performance, environmental behavior and reliability of ma-
chine tools affect the quality of manufactured products and the efficiency of the 
processes significantly. Technological progress in the machine tool industry and 
the competition pressure to increase productivity ask for higher performance, 
higher spindle speeds, higher feed rates and longer material removal rates. Hence, 
new and optimized machine tool structures have to be developed. In addition, due 

4 
E. Abele et al.
 
to significantly increased process loads the demands concerning the working accu-
racy of the machine tool have increased as well. Thus, apart from performance 
values like spindle power and speed or feed rate the structural and mechanical 
properties of the machine tool have to be known in order to assess the accuracy 
and productivity [1]. 
To analyze and improve the machine tool behavior it is essential to describe the 
machine tool characteristics by defined parameters. Despite the good progress in 
calculating machine tool parameters, the experimental determination of the struc-
tural properties is still essential for the parameterization and evaluation of machine 
tool models. The accuracy of machine tools is primarily affected by deviations at 
the tool-workpiece interface. Depending on the transmission behavior of the  
machine tool thermal, static or dynamic loads result in kinematic and geometric 
deviations from the desired working motions. Therefore, the thermal and dynamic 
behavior limits the theoretical performance of the machine tool. Due to dynamic 
instabilities and displacements caused by thermal dilatation the full potential of 
machines cannot be exploited, which results in a negative impact on the productiv-
ity. To ensure the efficiency of machine tools the interactions between process and 
structure have to be determined. In the following sections, different measurement 
methods for the analysis of the static, dynamic and thermal structure, their beha-
vior as well as the kinematics are described. 
1.2.1   Static Machine Tool Behavior 
Static process forces between the workpiece and the tool lead to a static stress on 
all components and joints of the machine structure included in the flow of force. 
Thus, the stiffness properties of the machine are the sum of the individual stiff-
nesses of the concerned elements. The influence of the machine properties on the 
workpiece is usually of particular interest; hence, investigations of the machine 
tools stiffness focus on the interface between tool and workpiece. Therefore, the 
relative displacement between the tool and the workpiece as a result of static 
process loads has to be investigated. While the process load is usually applied in 
the three Cartesian coordinate directions, the measured displacements are divided 
into tilts and deflections. These are each described by a translational and a tilting 
stiffness matrix, in which the main stiffnesses are located at the principal diagonal 
of the matrix with the cross stiffnesses next to them. Figure 1.1 shows an example 
of the analysis of the main stiffness in the z-direction and the tilting about the x-
axis by applying a load in z-direction. Machine structures usually show a progres-
sive development of stiffness. After overcoming the clearances in the bearings, the 
guidance and the screw connections as well as the internal friction in the gears and 
seals, the stiffness rises with increasing load. Changing contact conditions and in-
ternal friction in the joints and contact points cause a hysteresis between loading 
and load relieving. In this section, the determination of the static stiffness is ex-
plained by a press and an industrial robot. 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
5
 
 
Fig. 1.1 Characterization of static machine compliance (based on [1]) 
A method to determine the deflection of presses under a static load is described 
in the standard DIN 55189 “Determination of the ratings of presses for sheet metal 
working under static load“ for mechanical presses (part 1), as well as for hydraulic 
presses (part 2) [2]. By means of this method the press is loaded by a hydraulic 
system, which is applied torque-free by means of a compensation device in z-
direction (Fig. 1.2).  
 
Fig. 1.2 Measurement setup according to the DIN 55189 and resulting displacement  
development 
 
 
Pressure pad
Compensation device
(Cardan calotte)
Force 
transducer Distance 
plates
2
3
4
5
6
1
x
y
z
Ram
Bolster plate
Fz
δz
Δz
ΔFz
Linear
Non-
linear
1
6
-
Displacement transducers

6 
E. Abele et al.
 
The standard describes the determination of the deflection in forming direction 
caused by a centric load and the tilting of the ram as well as its horizontal dis-
placement by an eccentric load. The investigated force-displacement characteristic 
can be classified into two periods, an initial non-linear displacement and tilting pe-
riod, which occurs due to bearing clearances, and a period during which the press 
deflects linear elastically. The relevant static press characteristics such as the hori-
zontal displacement, the tiltings about the x- and y-axis and the stiffnesses, are  
also defined in DIN 55189 and can be determined by the recorded force-
displacement and force-tilting characteristics. The static press characteristics make 
it possible to compare different types of presses with each other. 
In the following paragraph, the determination of the static stiffness of an articu-
lated robot is shown. In Figure 1.3, the measurement setup as well as a typical 
stiffness in the working space is presented. 
 
Fig. 1.3 Experimental setup (left) and typical results (right) of an articulated robot 
The setup consists of a force measurement rod to apply and detect tensile and 
compressive forces and laser distance sensors to measure the displacement of the 
robot due to the force. The difference in the tensile and compressive cycles  
indicates hysteresis. The backlash amounts to approximately 0.2 mm at the mea-
surement point x = 1,900 mm, y = 0 mm and z = 600 mm in the base coordinate 
system. Furthermore the measured curves show a slight s-shape due to a non-
linear structural behavior. Using the least-squares method a linear slope can be  
fitted into the measured curve. The gradient of the measured curve then indicates 
the stiffness. 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
7
 
1.2.2   Dynamic Machine Tool Behavior 
The accuracy of a machine tool is determined by the deflection occurring at the 
contact point between tool and workpiece at the specified target position. Apart 
from the influences of the static loads, which are described in the previous chap-
ter, the dynamic behavior under varying loads is also a criterion for the perfor-
mance of a machine tool system. Unbalanced dynamic properties of this system 
lead to oscillation phenomena, which can result in a poor surface quality of the 
workpiece, increased machine and tool wear, tool breakage and damage of the 
machine tool. The latter mentioned damages have to be considered particularly 
with regard to the occurrence of regenerative chatter oscillations, which increase 
as a result of the interactions between the dynamic machine tool behavior and 
process behavior during the machining process [1], [4]. 
Therefore, the aim of investigating the dynamic machine behavior is to describe 
possible weak points of the mechanical structure quantitatively using the tools of 
frequency response measurement and experimental modal analysis [40]. A major 
application of modal analysis in mechanical engineering is trouble-shooting. As an 
example, chatter vibrations in machine tools are often caused by structural insta-
bilities, which can be identified using experimental modal analysis techniques. 
Recently, the investigation of the dynamic machine tool behavior has become 
more important for the configuration and alignment of simulation models. Nowa-
days, an important application is the correlation of finite element models with ex-
perimental data from modal analysis in order to improve the accuracy of structural 
dynamic simulations. This is very useful for sensitivity analyses and the prediction 
of the dynamic behavior due to structural modifications. 
The investigation of the dynamic machine tool behavior is always based on the 
measurement of the frequency-dependent rigidity of the structure [3], [4]. Among 
signal processing and analog digital conversion (ADC), the required measurement 
chain can be divided into three major systems. The first is the excitation of the 
structure. This can be done in several ways. The most commonly used are an at-
tached shaker or a hammer blow. Electromagnetic or electrohydraulic shakers are 
controlled by a signal generator providing the ability to induce various loads into 
the structure. These loads can be, for example, sinusoidal, periodic, random or 
transient. Especially sinusoidal loads, such as sine sweep or stepped sine, are pre-
ferably used to investigate non-linear system behavior by analyzing the structure 
with varying load amplitudes. However, the use of a shaker requires a connection 
to the structure, which remains attached throughout the test. This makes shaker 
testing less flexible for in-the-field testing. In contrast, hammer testing provides 
the advantage of inducing the excitation force in a contactless way. As the ham-
mer impact excites the structure over a wide frequency band, hammer testing is a 
very fast and convenient way to determine the compliance behavior of a machine 
tool. Since manipulation of the frequency content and amplitude of the compact is 
limited, it is less appropriate for analyzing non-linear system behavior. [6] 
The second subsystem of the measurement chain provides the detection of the 
loads, which are induced into the machine tool structure. Therefore, piezoelectric 
crystals or strain gauges are used, which are integrated into the force flux between 

8 
E. Abele et al.
 
the machine tool structure and the exciter. The third subsystem consists of the 
measurement technique for detecting the vibration response of the machine tool 
structure. In addition to systems for direct measurement of the displacement, e.g. 
inductive transducers or optical measurement techniques piezoelectric accelero-
meters are used as well. 
1.2.2.1   Frequency Response Function 
The frequency response functions (FRF) represent the dynamic compliance beha-
vior of a machine tool structure in frequency domain. Also, process stability and 
the occurrence of forced vibrations can be assessed on the basis of these mea-
surement data. 
For the determination of the frequency response function Fast-Fourier-
Transformation-analyzers (FFT) are used. Therefore, the analog force and deflec-
tion/acceleration signals are sampled and digitalized. The sample rate determines 
the frequency range and the number of samples defines the frequency resolution of 
the analysis. To suppress high frequency disturbances analog force and deflection 
signals must be filtered before the digitalization. 
The sampled time signals can be weighted by a so-called window function to 
avoid errors, which may occur when the signals are transformed into frequency 
domain. The type of window function depends on the signal that has to be ana-
lyzed. Commonly used functions are transient window (impact force), exponential 
window (response to an impact) and Hanning window. The transformation of the 
weighted signals into frequency domain is carried out by a discrete Fourier Trans-
formation. The result of the transformation is a complex frequency spectrum, 
which can be depicted either as real part and imaginary part, magnitude and phase 
or as a Nyquist plot (Fig. 1.4). Separately from the depiction FRF describes the 
frequency-dependent deflection answer of a mechanical system regarding the dy-
namic load acting on it. 
 
Fig. 1.4 Principle of the measurement of frequency response functions 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
9
 
1.2.2.2   Experimental Modal Analysis 
Experimental modal analysis is a method for determining the dynamic characteris-
tics of a structural system: its natural frequencies, mode shapes and damping fac-
tors. With these characteristics a mathematical model of the dynamic behavior of 
the system, a so called “modal model”, can be formulated [5], [6]. The vibration of 
a linear time-invariant system can be described by a linear combination of its 
mode shapes, which are inherent to the dynamic system and determined by its 
physical properties (mass, stiffness and damping) and their spatial distributions. 
Coming from an analytical model, the system may be given in forms of partial dif-
ferential equations and their solution provides the natural frequencies and mode 
shapes [7]. A more realistic physical model usually comprises mass, damping and 
stiffness matrices, which characterize the system properties. By solving the eigen-
value problem the modal data can be obtained. Utilizing finite element analysis 
almost every structure can be discretized into differential equations of motion and 
hence permits theoretical modal analysis.  
Experimental modal analysis is a technique used to determine the modal model of 
a linear time-invariant system. By measuring the vibration response at one or more 
locations and the excitation force at the same or a different location and calculating 
their ratio several FRFs can be obtained. From these FRF-measurements a modal 
model of the mechanical system can be derived. In order to obtain an accurate  
 
 
 
Fig. 1.5 Geometry model with measurement locations of a horizontal milling machine 

10 
E. Abele et al.
 
modal model of the examined system the proper selection of excitation and re-
sponse locations is of particular importance. The mathematical models obtained 
from modal analysis can also be used for the prediction of structure responses due 
to exciting forces or for substructure coupling when a simple dynamic representa-
tion is more suitable than a complex finite element model. 
Figure 1.5 shows a geometric model of a horizontal milling machine. Each 
geometry point represents a measurement location in the machine tool. The struc-
ture was excited with an impulse hammer at several locations and the vibration  
response was measured using tri-axial acceleration sensors. The obtained modal 
model can be used, for example, to predict chatter vibrations or to identify struc-
tural instabilities. 
1.2.3   Measurement of Kinematics 
The accuracy of machine tools depends on a large variety of different influences. 
Geometric deviations in dimension of machined and formed workpieces can, ac-
cording to [1], result in: 
• Deviation of tool dimensions out of tolerances due to insufficient tool manufac-
turing 
• Process-induced deviations such as tool wear or built-up edges 
• Elastic deformation of the tool, the workpiece, clamping and support structures 
• Deviations of the tool path regarding relative movement between tools and 
workpieces including force-induced deviations of the machine tool structure 
Depending on the process the listed influences need to be considered when model-
ing the process machine interaction. A lot of different methods are available to 
measure the accuracy of the translational and rotational axes of machine tools. The 
spectrum reaches from simple measuring setups with test gauges, measuring 
straightness, parallelism, perpendicularity and concentricity up to complex and 
highly accurate methods. Some of these methods are described below. 
1.2.3.1 Circularity Test 
The circularity test allows the determination of the accuracy of a circular path, in-
terpolated by a computer control unit. The deviations and vibrations can be traced 
back to the control unit, the drives and the machine kinematics. The test can be 
conducted using a double-ball-bar or a grid encoder. In the case of a grid encoder 
a photoelectric sensor moves over a plate, which contains a very precise measur-
ing grid without contact. Using a double-ball-bar the circularity of the machine 
tool is determined by a position-measuring system. The system is integrated in the 
gauge. Performing the test with large radii gives information about the machine 
geometry, whereas small radii are used for the evaluation of the feed drive dynam-
ics [1]. Afterwards, the measured path can be compared with the desired path. 
Figure 1.6 presents the measuring setup with a grid encoder (left) and a double-
ball-bar (right). 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
11
 
 
Fig. 1.6 Measuring setup for the ball-bar test with a grid encoder (left) and a double-ball-
bar (right) [1] 
1.2.3.2   Back-Step Test 
During the back-step test several positions are approached from both sides. This is 
repeated for each axis. The current position is detected by an external measuring 
system at the tool-center-point (e. g. a grid encoder or a laser interferometer) and 
is compared with the desired position. According to the VDI/DGQ 3441 standard 
the parameters positional tolerance, positional deviation, reversal error, position-
ing scatter band and position uncertainty can be determined from the measurement 
data (see Fig. 1.7). 
 
Fig. 1.7 Procedure of the back step method (left); characteristic diagram and determined 
parameters (right) 

12 
E. Abele et al.
 
1.2.3.3   Measurement of the Machine Axes using Laser Interferometry 
An approach for the determination of the kinematics of a machine tool is the mea-
surement of the procedure movement of the machine axes. The measurement of 
the procedure axis is briefly described on the basis of a face grinding machine 
(Geibel & Hotz FS 635-Z CNC). The temporal response of the machine control 
was examined for the input of a correcting variable. The velocity and the accelera-
tion of the machine table were measured. A laser interferometer system with a 
scanning rate of fa = 20 Hz was used in order to avoid the influence of machine 
vibrations on the velocity and acceleration measurements. The change of move-
ment between the interferometer and the retro reflector was measured with evalua-
tion software. [8] 
For the investigations the strokes were measured by several sequential starting 
points with constant, well-defined point distances at different workpiece veloci-
ties. The dependency of the workpiece velocity on the selected step size is shown 
in Figure 1.8.  
 
Fig. 1.8 Dependency of the workpiece velocity on the selected step size [8] 
1.2.4   Thermal Machine Tool Behavior 
Heat affects the static and dynamic properties of machine tools. The heat-related 
deformation on the machine components varies according to the material proper-
ties, the machine´s geometry and the conditions of the heat transfer. Consequently, 
the stiffness of the machine components is affected by the temperature. This has 
an impact on the production process and leads to dimensional deviations of the 
workpiece. The heat sources can be classified into internal and external sources 
according to where the heat is generated. 
The internal heat sources include thermal dissipation losses, which have their 
origin in the limited electrical and mechanical efficiency of the machine compo-
nents. The external heat sources result from heat transfer mechanisms such as 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
13
 
conduction, convection or radiation caused by ambient heat flow. In addition, the 
process-induced energy losses due to the friction between the tool and the work-
piece as well as the process heat have an impact on the temperature field of the 
machine [9]. Temperature measurements on machine tools and machining centers 
can be carried out according to the standards ISO 230-3 and ISO 10791-10 
[10, 11]. The temperature distribution of the machine can be measured either at a 
finite number of individual points using thermocouples (contact measurement) or 
extensively via optical measurement systems (non-contact measurement via ther-
mography camera / pyrometer) [12]. 
Especially the infrared thermography is applicable for this kind of measure-
ment, for instance at press frames, because its surface has a homogenous radiance 
constant. Therefore, the emission factor of the radiating object, which can be de-
termined by means of a reference measurement with an additional measuring sys-
tem, has to be known. For the measurements of a finite number at individual 
points thermocouples or resistance thermometers can be used. These two types of 
temperature sensors differ in their measurement accuracy, cost, size, capability of 
measuring the surface temperature and vibration resistance (Tab. 1.1). 
Table 1.1 Comparison of contact and non-contact measurement of temperature [12] 
Contact measurement 
Non-contact measurement 
lower costs 
no influence on measuring subject 
more precise 
local and extensive temperature mea-
surement possible 
easy to handle 
 
Thermocouples are available for different applications and then classified into 
different types. For example, thermocouples of the type T have an accuracy of 
± 0.5 °C for a measurement range between approx. - 200 °C and 300 °C. Further-
more, this type is capable of measuring temperatures in fluids such as in the lubri-
cating oil system [13]. In Figure 1.9, some types of temperature sensors are 
shown. 
For measuring the temperature of the main eccentric shaft of a press electrically 
insulated thermocouples with screw threads are often applied as close as possible 
to the shaft. This can be done by fixing the sensor directly to the bearing of the ec-
centric shaft within the press frame or the connecting rod. For measurements 
which do not allow a screwing fixation of the thermocouples the sensors can be 
fixed with a thermal conductance paste and adhesive tape [9]. The signals of the 
thermocouples can be recorded with a PC including a measuring board. The mea-
suring board should be equipped with an internal cold-junction compensation, 
which is required for thermocouples. Within this compensation the reference tem-
perature is simulated by means of an integrated transistor. The difference in tem-
perature between the junction and the measurement point induces an electrical 
voltage. For the measurement of the oil temperature in larger containers electrical-
ly-shielded resistance thermometers can be applied [13]. 

14 
E. Abele et al.
 
 
Fig. 1.9 Different types of temperature sensors for measuring the temperature of machine 
tool components 
To consider thermal convection effects the temperature of the environment is 
defined as the reference. The characteristic temperature profile of a machine con-
verges exponentially with time. The temperature at the components of the machine 
rises with high gradients during the starting phase of the machine in usage and 
converges gradually with further operating time towards a certain value. The tem-
perature gradients and the end temperature are much higher for machine tools used 
for machining than for those used in metal forming. For the determination of a 
steady thermal condition of the machine the temperature increase of all relevant 
machine components has to be taken into account. Once a steady thermal condi-
tion is reached the production process of the workpiece is no longer influenced 
significantly by temperature effects. Figure 1.10 shows the different thermal con-
ditions of a high speed stamping machine [9]. 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
15
 
 
Fig. 1.10 Temperature profile of a high speed stamping machine [9] 
1.3   Process Analysis 
As depicted in section 1.2., precise knowledge about the machine tool structure is 
essential in order to achieve the best productivity and accuracy. Since the machine 
tool behavior interacts with the machining process, characteristics such as thermal, 
statical or dynamical loads have to be taken into consideration. Therefore, an ex-
perimental determination of process factors has to be carried out. The measured 
data such as process forces, temperatures, sound and vibration can be used for pa-
rameter identification and the evaluation of process models. In conjunction with 
the identified parameters of the machine tool behavior the boundary conditions for 
comprehensive process machine interaction (PMI) models can be defined. 
In the following section, different measurement methods for the analysis of 
process forces (see Sect. 1.3.1) are described. Measurement methods and applica-
tions of acoustic emission (see Sect. 1.3.2) and temperatures (see Sect. 1.3.3) are 
given consecutively. 

16 
E. Abele et al.
 
1.3.1   Process Force Measurements 
Process forces are commonly used values for the characterization of manufactur-
ing processes. Since there is a large variety of manufacturing processes where 
force measurements are of interest, the boundary conditions also differ. According 
to the different processes appropriate measuring devices have to be deployed con-
sidering the force magnitude and the process dynamics. For this purpose, the mea-
surement procedure as well as the post-processing of the measured data may vary. 
In this section, two commonly used measurement methods are described, which 
can be applied to cutting and forming processes. Subsequently, examples of force 
measurements covering a force bandwidth from a few tenths of newtons to several 
kilonewtons are given. 
1.3.1.1   Force Transducer based on Strain Gauges 
This kind of load cell consists of a steel body – the sensing device – which acts as 
a spring. On this body, strain gauges are applied as measuring devices. Thus, the 
forces are converted into elastic deformation. A calibration permits the correlation 
between the elastic strains and the applied force [14]. 
The basic effect of a strain gauge is the change of resistance in an electrical 
conductor due to the effect of mechanical stress, discovered by Wheatstone and 
Thomson [15]. This change of resistance in a single wire is very small. For that 
purpose, metal strain gauges with “wound wires”, which form a kind of grid, have 
been developed. For an efficient production the grids are manufactured by etched 
foil technology nowadays. Apart from metal strain gauges there are other types of 
electrical resistive strain gauges, e. g. semi-conductor and vapor-deposited strain 
gauges [16]. 
Strain gauge-based force transducers can be used for static and dynamic mea-
surements and are available in a variety of scales with nominal forces from about 
10 N up to 5 MN. This range can be necessary, for example, for the measurement 
of forming forces in cold forging. However, with larger nominal loads the height 
of the transducers increases noticeably up to about 180 mm at 5 MN. Via a mea-
suring amplifier and an analog digital converter the output signal can be recorded 
and processed electronically. 
1.3.1.2   Force Measurement Based on Piezoelectric Elements 
The piezoelectric effect is based on an interaction between electrical field strength, 
electrical displacement and the mechanical factors displacement and stress. If the 
piezoelectric element, e.g. quartz, is deformed mechanically, atoms in the crystal 
lattice are displaced. This leads to an outward charge displacement. Piezoelectric 
force transducers usually use the longitudinal effect in one direction. Long lasting 
quasi-static measurements require special attention to avoid drift of the output sig-
nal. A detailed description of piezoelectricity and measuring with piezoelectric 
sensors is given in [17]. 
Piezoelectric measurement devices, e.g. load washers and dynamometers, do  
not need a sensing device showing a considerable elastic deflection, which the 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
17
 
measuring devices are applied on. In this case, the piezoelectric element itself is 
exposed to the force and also emits the electric output signal. Piezoelectric measur-
ing devices possess a high stiffness and can be manufactured in a very compact de-
sign. Since they cover a large range of force magnitudes, which can be measured at 
high sampling rates they are predestinated for the use in processes with interrupted 
cutting conditions. The high resolution is also advantageous for measuring very 
small cutting forces as they occur, e.g. in ultra precision cutting. Compared to force 
transducers based on strain gauges, quartz load elements at a comparable measur-
ing range for forming processes have a more compact design and a higher stiffness. 
However, piezoelectric force transducers are more expensive. 
1.3.1.3   Force Measurement in Ultra-Precision Machining 
In ultra-precision machining, all process parameters are - compared to conven-
tional machining - reduced or scaled down to some extent, e.g. cutting depth and 
feed rate range within a few microns only. Thus, the process forces Fi are very 
small as well (Fi ≤ 1.5 N). For this reason, dynamometers with the capability of 
detecting very small forces in the specified range are required, e.g. the triaxial dy-
namometer described in Chapter 15 (piezoelectric, Kistler Type 9256A1, which 
has a threshold of less than 0.002 N). 
For most of the ultra-precision machining applications low rotational speeds 
(150 rpm (≈ 2.5 Hz) < n < 5000 rpm (≈ 83.33 Hz)) are used. Therefore, process-
induced dynamic excitation with frequencies ν > 100 Hz can be neglected for ul-
tra-precision turning, given a continuous cut. Due to unbalances the machine tool 
is excited by the rotation of the workpiece. For processes with discontinuous cut 
(e. g. eccentric turning, circumferential milling (fly cutting)) an impact excitation 
affects the tool and the machine tool whenever the tool engages the workpiece. 
One major issue in measuring the forces for ultra-precision machining is the 
post-processing (Fig. 1.11) of the data obtained. As the forces are very small, ex-
ternal sources (e. g. current flow of the cross table) can add noise to the measure-
ment data. To remove this noise low pass filters are used with cut-off frequencies 
of the filters depending on whether the dynamic influences of the unbalances are 
of interest or not. 
 
Fig. 1.11 Measured forces before (left) and after post-processing (offset and drift removed, 
low-pass filter applied) 
0
50
100
150
s
250
-0,5
0
0,5
N
1,5
Time t
Thrust force
Cutting force
Feed force
0
50
100
150
s
250
-2
-1
0
N
2
Time t
Force Fi
Thrust force
Cutting force
Feed force

18 
E. Abele et al.
 
1.3.1.4   Force Measurement in Micro and High Speed Cutting (HSC) Milling 
For the force measurement of processes with interrupted cutting conditions at high 
spindle speeds some particularities have to be taken into consideration. Due to the 
periodical tooth engagement the machine tool structure is excited by high dynami-
cal loads. Depending on spindle speed and number of cutting teeth the tooth pass-
ing frequency may achieve values of up to several kHz. Since the cutting force 
does not match an ideal sine wave the force signal also contains the harmonics of 
the tooth passing frequency. Thus, if the actual cutting force has to be measured, a 
very high sample frequency must be chosen. Another problem occurs when the 
tooth passing frequency exceeds the measurement device’s eigenfrequency. 
Therefore, it is also very challenging to obtain time signals of the actual process 
forces acting on the cutter (e. g. to compare them with simulated force signals). 
However, in a lot of cases it is much easier and less error-prone to evaluate low-
pass filtered or averaged signals (e. g. to identify cutting force coefficients). 
Dynamometers based on piezoelectric elements are the most suitable solution 
in terms of the highest possible eigenfrequencies and of achievable measuring res-
olution. The measuring device is usually located between the machine table and 
the workpiece. Solutions for force sensors integrated into the tool holder are also 
available. 
1.3.1.5   Force Measurement in Cold Extrusion 
Measuring the forces in cold extrusion processes requires the consideration of the 
following specific process characteristics: The high flow stress in cold forging due 
to forming at room temperature leads to high forces even if the die dimensions are 
small. In the full forward extrusion process investigated in the project “Optimiza-
tion of Tool and Process Design for the Cold Forging of Net-Shape Parts by Simu-
lation” (chapter 19), forces of about 200 kN occur with a die diameter of only 
12 mm above and 6 mm below the die shoulder. Thus, force transducers with a 
high load capacity are necessary. Because of the high forces the presses and tool-
ing systems in use have to be stiff and compact. As a consequence, only limited 
space is available for the force measurement. In contrast, the quasi-static characte-
ristic of extrusion processes with a smooth force increase does not imply high de-
mands on the dynamic behavior of the load cells. 
Figure 1.12 shows the measurement setup in a tooling system for lateral cold 
extrusion. The use of quartz load washers is required due to the limited height in 
the press. The closed-die tooling system will be used on a single-acting stroke-
controlled press. The press has to apply the closing force, via disc springs, and the 
forming force at the same time. To be able to measure both forces two quartz load 
washers 9091A from Kistler Instrumente GmbH (nominal force 1200 kN) with a 
height of only 28 mm are used. The washer (1) on the top is for measuring the en-
tire press force, the one (2) between the top tool plate and the disc springs for the 
closing force. Subtracting these forces from each other leads to the punch force. 
With the presented tooling system interactions between process, tool and machine 
in closed-die forging will be investigated in the above-mentioned project (see 
chapter 19). 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
19
 
 
Fig. 1.12 Tooling system for closed-die lateral cold extrusion with two quartz load washers 
Kistler 9091A (1 and 2) for measuring press force and closing force 
1.3.2   Acoustic Emission (AE) Measurements 
Sensors for acoustic emissions to monitor process noise emitted during machining 
and forming processes are vibratory systems. Their resonance points are deter-
mined by their construction. As a result, these sensors, which work proportionally 
to acceleration, represent filter systems that have a dampening or amplifying effect 
according to the frequency range. The AE sensor thus determines the evaluable 
frequency spectrum by its frequency behavior to a great extent [18]. 
Acoustic emission Sensors are used in machining for different operations: 
• first contact control, 
• collision monitoring, 
• balancing of grinding wheels, 
• dressing monitoring in grinding, 
• chatter detection, 
• monitoring of grinding wheel wear and 
• process monitoring of forming processes. 
In the project “Process Machine Interaction in Speed-Stroke Grinding” the AE-
signal was used as a trigger signal (see Sect. 5.2). As the contact times between 
the grinding wheel and the workpiece are in the range of milliseconds, the run-in 
and run-out phase can take less than 2 ms. Hence, the sensitive AE-signal was 
used to identify the exact moment of the first contact, which alleviates the analysis 
of the force measurement. 

20 
E. Abele et al.
 
1.3.3   Process Temperature Measurements 
Various methods and techniques are used to conduct temperature measurements. 
One possible method is the use of thermo-chromic colors with special coating ma-
terials, which indicate changes in temperature by changing the color or tone [19]. 
Frequently used current methods are thermo-electric and radiation measurement 
methods [20]. The so-called tool-workpiece-thermal elements and thermocouples 
are used in thermo-electric measurements [21]. Pyrometry involves a non-contact 
measurement of the absolute temperature; i. e. the self-radiation of the body is 
measured without contacting the object itself [22]. In contrast, thermography in-
volves a measurement of the temperature distribution, i. e. relative differences in 
temperature are measured but not, as in pyrometry, the absolute values. The radia-
tion measurement methods in general have a significantly higher time resolution 
in comparison to thermo-electric methods. However, pyrometry is faster than 
thermography due to its simple setup. Moreover, these are non-contact measure-
ment methods, which guarantee a considerably higher flexibility of the measure-
ments. Non-contact measurement methods exhibit a specific measuring error due 
to a surface layer that forms in free air on the surfaces to be measured. In recent 
years, the measurement of cutting temperatures by means of pyrometry and ther-
mography has gained considerable importance. A short overview of the used me-
thods of temperature measurement for cutting and grinding is given. 
1.3.3.1   Investigation of the Temperatures in Cutting 
Thermocouples have a relatively low time resolution and it is difficult to place 
them directly in the cutting zone. Single-wire thermal elements represent an ex-
ception since they can easily be placed in the secondary cutting zone [23]. The 
main problem for both of these methods as well as for the tool-workpiece-thermal 
element measurement method is the calibration of the measuring chain. Hence, 
these measurement methods are not commonly used. Only an average cutting 
temperature is measured in the contact zone when the tool-workpiece-thermal 
element method is used [21]. 
1.3.3.2   Investigation of the Temperatures in Grinding 
In grinding, the major part of energy input is dissipated as heat. The heat flows in-
to the chips, the coolant, the environment, the workpiece and the grinding wheel. 
The degree of thermal damage of the workpiece surface depends on the machining 
parameters. Diffusion, chemical reaction and soft annealing appear in the contact 
area as a result of thermal stresses. These effects depend exponentially on the heat 
development [24]. The productivity is limited by the heat development at increas-
ing process parameters [25]. The quantification of these thermal effects in  
grinding can be applied to specify the workpiece properties which are subsequent-
ly required in the application [26]. Based on this knowledge, simulations can be 
implemented to determine adequate parameters for the NC-machine in advance. 
One method for determining the transformation of the microstructure by heat input 
is to examine micro-sections [27]. 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
21
 
An overview of different methods for temperature measurements is presented 
in [28]. Temperature measurements in grinding are primarily performed using 
thermocouples and thermographic cameras. The disadvantage of these temperature 
measurement methods is that the temperature can only be determined at the work-
piece. The best results using thermocouples are achieved using epoxy resin for 
fixation [29]. Temperature measurements on the workpiece surface using a ther-
mographic camera are influenced by the coolant supply, which affects the work-
piece surface. Therefore, the workpiece has to be isolated from the coolant supply 
[30, 31]. An option is to transport the infrared radiation from the contact area by 
means of a glass fiber [32]. A further development is to measure directly inside 
the grinding wheel using micro sensors. Here, the temperatures are measured  
in-situ in the contact area between the grinding wheel and the workpiece. The 
measurement signal is transferred by complex equipment in the grinding wheel; 
therefore the temperature measurement is very complex [33] 
1.3.3.3   Experimental Investigation of the Temperature in the Cutting Zones 
To determine the temperature in the cutting zone, experimental investigations are 
conducted by means of semi-artificial thermocouples [34-36]. This method can be 
used to investigate the temperature distribution in the workpiece and in the chip. 
One leg of the thermocouple is made of constantan wire, the other from the ma-
terial to be machined. The basic scheme of this measurement method is shown in 
Figure 1.13 a. According to the scheme the wires are welded to the workpiece 
with a condenser welding machine. Each constantan leg is placed on a preset 
height hi and length relative to the border of the workpiece. If the exact start of the 
measurement, which is determined by a trigger signal, and the cutting speed are 
known, the distances li can be calculated. Thus, the exact position of the individual 
constantan legs relative to the point of the wedge can be calculated and the exact 
position of the point is to be measured accordingly. A specimen with the welded 
constantan wires is shown in Figure 1.13 b. 
 
Fig. 1.13 a) Scheme of the setup for temperature measurement and b) workpiece with 
welded thermocouples 

22 
E. Abele et al.
 
In this example, C45 was used as test material and the standard carbide plates 
P20 of the company Walter AG were used as inserts. A value of 5° was selected 
for the rake angle and a value of 8° for the clearance angle. Characteristic temper-
atures in the primary cutting zone and in the chip are shown in Figure 1.14 [36]. 
Regarding the starting point of the cutting process, the temperature signal for the 
sensor position can be identified. Thus, the temperature in the cutting zones and in 
the basic material can be determined. The signal shape and the amplitude during 
cutting correspond to the position of the temperature sensor or the constantan leg 
respectively in the different layers of the material. 
 
Fig. 1.14 Characteristic signal profile in the primary cutting zone and in the chip 
In practice, this method can only be applied for comparably large cutting depths to 
achieve reasonable results and so as to be able to determine the position of the constan-
tan leg precisely. This method was used in [37] for the experimental investigation of 
the temperatures in the primary and tertiary cutting zone and in the base material. 
1.4   Workpiece Analysis  
Parts or their surfaces are machined to enable specific functions or tasks. Depend-
ing on these functions the geometry and/or the surface properties are specified. To 
validate whether the machined parts meet these specifications their properties have 
to be determined after machining. Below, examples are given, which describe the 
assessment of surface topography and part geometry. Additionally, some post-
processing procedures are presented. 
1.4.1   Surface Assessment 
The roughness of technical surfaces is commonly detected via tactile measure-
ments. Therefore, the probe tip, usually a pyramid-shaped diamond, is moved over 
the surface of the workpiece at a constant feed rate. The topographical data is de-
scribed by the vertical position shift of the probe tip with reference to the measur-
ing position in the so-called primary profile. To gain the waviness and the rough-
ness profile the measured data is processed with filters which are standardized 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
23
 
within the ISO Standard 11562 [38]. The waviness profile is smoothed and yields 
long-wave information without roughness data. On the other hand, the roughness 
profile consists only of short-wave information without waviness data. The com-
monly used characteristic values of the surface roughness are derived from the 
roughness profile. These are the arithmetic mean surface roughness Ra, the ten-
point height Rz and the maximum roughness Rmax. Of course, there are more 
roughness values available for various tasks having different specifications, which 
will not be mentioned and explained here.  
The arithmetic mean surface roughness Ra is an integral value over the whole 
measuring length, which is also used in industrial application and in research. 
When calculating Ra, peak values, which can be disadvantageous for some appli-
cations, are averaged. In these cases, the ten-point height Rz is more suitable. To 
determine this value the whole measuring length is divided into five sections. In 
each section, the maximum roughness, i. e. the difference of the maximum and 
minimum height of the profile, is determined. The average value of these five val-
ues is called Rz. The maximum roughness Rmax is the difference of the maximum 
and minimum height of the profile over the entire measuring length. It is a very 
important value for technical applications such as sealing surfaces where peak 
values as well as outliers can lead to difficulties. 
Further methods for surface assessment are optical measurement techniques 
like interferometry or white light interferometry. For the measurement a beam of 
light is divided via a beamsplitter to illuminate two surfaces - workpiece and pla-
nar reference. The reflected beams from workpiece and reference are recombined 
and directed to interfere at a detector. Depending on the phase shift of the measur-
ing and reference beam typical fringe patterns can be observed, e. g. parallel 
fringes for tilted planar surfaces. 
For white light interferometry (Fig. 1.15) the workpiece is scanned in vertical di-
rection so that the light reflected from the surface points interfering with the refer-
ence beam at certain heights will be recorded as surface data. The interferometric 
measurement principle is only applicable for optical surfaces; it provides the same 
roughness values as mentioned above but considers an area instead of a line profile. 
 
Fig. 1.15 White Light Interferometer (left) and measured surface topography of a diamond 
turned sample (right) 

24 
E. Abele et al.
 
The main advantages of optical measurements are the short measuring time 
(only a few seconds) and, most importantly for optical surfaces, the absence of 
any mechanical contact during the measurement. Therefore, the surface cannot be 
damaged. Another advantage is the possibility of obtaining spatial structure in-
formation for the surface topography instead of only 2-dimensional information 
(profilometry). One disadvantage is the low capability of measuring surfaces with 
high slopes which can occur e.g. for spherical, aspherical, structured and free-
formed surfaces. If the slopes exceed a certain angle (typically > 15° to 25°) de-
pending on the numerical aperture of the applied objective, the reflected light  
will not enter the microscope objective. For these areas, no measurement data is 
recorded.  
1.4.2   Geometry Assessment 
Similar to the described surface assessment geometric measurements can be car-
ried out either by using mechanical (tactile) techniques or optical techniques. 
Therefore, the same advantages and disadvantages apply. Additionally, a fast 
evaluation of complex workpieces with a high decomposition can be realized for 
optical geometry measurements. 
White light fringe projection belongs to the 3-D imaging techniques, which can 
create a spatial exposure without the operation of additional axes. The application 
range of white light fringe projection lasts from quality conformance tests, reverse 
engineering and medical applications to archaeology.  
A scanner reaching with white light fringe projection consists of a CCD camera 
and a projector. For the registration of a surface the projector generates a periodi-
cal equidistant interference fringe pattern. This projection is distorted by the ob-
ject´s geometry. During the projection, the generated striped pattern is captured by 
the CCD-camera. The result of the distortion is a level difference in the structured 
image, which is a rate for the altitude h. The dimension h can be calculated by the 
scanner software using the principle of triangulation. The distance between projec-
tor and camera is the length L (see Fig. 1.16), and the operating distance A can be 
found between the sensor and the surface area. The width of the measuring field is 
designated by M, while the angle θ is related to the position of the camera and the 
projector. The angle of projection α is between the projector and the surface area. 
The observation angle of the camera to the current measuring point is designated 
with β. The formula for the calculation of h is given by [39]: 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
25
 
 
Fig. 1.16 Measuring configuration of a white light fringe projection [38] 
The workpiece is scanned from several different positions during the exposures. 
After the scanning process is finished the individual exposures are coarsely-
merged to a 3-dimensional general view. This happens by means of characteristic 
features on the surface. Afterwards, a precision alignment algorithm is used. The 
calculated 3-D model can be exported. The scanner as well as the scanned part can 
be seen in Figure 1.17. 
 
Fig. 1.17 Scanner system (a) and a scanned workpiece (b) 
The determination of the resulting deviation is evaluated by comparing the 
milled part with the reference model. For this purpose, the deviations of all dot 
pitches of the actual to the reference model are calculated and plotted in a false 
color image [36]. 
1.5   Conclusion 
This chapter presents a general overview of the state of the art for different mea-
surements and test techniques, which are used for the analysis of the interaction 
between process and machine tool structure. It has been shown that, depending 
upon a special process and machine tool, different measurement and test  

26 
E. Abele et al.
 
techniques can be used, depending on the special parameters to be determined. 
Additionally, this chapter provides information as to which measuring and testing 
procedures are used for the investigation of the process machine interactions. 
References 
[1] Weck, M.: Werkzeugmaschinen 5: Messtechnische Untersuchung und Beurteilung, 
dynamische Stabilität. Springer, Berlin (2006) 
[2] DIN55189, Ermittlung von Kennwerten für Pressen der Blechverarbeitung bei sta-
tischer Belastung. Beuth Verlag (1988) 
[3] Schindler, J.: Experimentelle Strukturanalyse im Werkzeugmaschinenbau. Antriebs-
technik 34(5), 30 (1995) 
[4] Weck, M.: Dynamisches Verhalten spanender Werkzeugmaschinen. Einflussgrößen, 
Beurteilungsverfahren, Meßtechnik. Aachen (1971) 
[5] He, J., Fu, Z.-F.: Modal Analysis. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford (2001) 
[6] Ewins, D.J.: Modal Testing: Theory, Practice and Application, 2nd edn. Research 
Studies Press Ltd., Hertford-shire (2000) 
[7] Heylen, W., Lammens, S., Sas, P.: Modal Analysis Theory and Testing. Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven (2007) 
[8] Jansen, T.: Entwicklung einer Simulation für den NC-Formschleifprozess mit To-
russchleifscheiben. Dissertation, Technische Universität Dortmund, Essen, Band 43 
(2007) 
[9] Derenthal, M.-J.: Bewertung und Optimierung der thermischen Eigenschaften schnel-
llaufender Umformanlagen. Dissertation, Leibniz Universität Hannover (2009) 
[10] DIN/ISO 10791-10. Test conditions for machining centres – Part 10: Evaluation of 
thermal distortion, Genf. (2007) 
[11] ISO 230-3, Test code for machine tools- Part 3: Determination of thermal effects, 
Genf. (2007) 
[12] Behrens, B.-A., Reuß, C., Vieregge, T.: Thermografie zur Gesenküberwachung. 
Schmiede-Journal, Ausgabe, 33–36 (September 2009) 
[13] Bernhard, F.: Technische Temperaturmessung. Springer, Berlin (2003) ISBN: 
3540626727, 1. Auflage 
[14] Rohrbach, C.: Handbuch für elektrisches Messen mechanischer Größen, p. 498. VDI-
Verlag, Düsseldorf (1967) 
[15] Thomson, W.: On the Electro-dynamic Qualities of Metals. Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London (1856) 
[16] Hoffmann, K.: An Introduction to Measurements using Strain Gauges. Hottinger 
Baldwin Messtechnik GmbH, Darmstadt (1989) 
[17] Tichy, J., Gautschi, G.: Piezoelektrische Messtechnik, Physikalische Grundlagen, 
Kraft-, Druck- und Beschleunigungsaufnehmer, Verstärker. Springer, Heidelberg 
(1980) 
[18] Klocke, F.: Process Design. Manufacturing Processes 2 – Grinding, Honing, Lapping, 
pp. 251–287. Springer, Berlin (2009) 
[19] Rosetto, S., Koch, U.: On Investigation of Temperature Distribution on Tool Flank 
Surface. CIRP Annals 19(3), 551–557 (1971) 
[20] Müller, B.: Thermische Analyse des Zerspanens metallischer Werkstoffe bei hohen 
Schnittgeschwindigkeiten. Dissertation. RWTH Aachen (2004) 
[21] Vieregge, G.: Zerspanung der Eisenwerkstoffe. Verlag Stahleisen M.B.H., Düsseldorf 
(1970) 

1   Measurement and Test Techniques 
27
 
[22] De Witt, D.P., Nutter, G.D.: Theory and Practice of Radiation Thermometry. Wiley, 
New York (1988) 
[23] Kitagawa, T., Kubo, A., Maekawa, K.: Temperature and Wear of Cutting Tools in 
High-speed Machining of Inconel 718 and Ti-6Al-6V-2Sn. Wear 202, 142–148 
(1997) 
[24] Kim, N.K., Gou, C., Malkin, S.: Heat Flux Distribution and Energy partition in 
Creep-feed grinding. CIRP Annals 46(1), 227–232 (1997) 
[25] Lavine, A.S., Malkin, S., Jin, T.C.: Thermal aspects of grinding with CBN wheels. 
CIRP Annals 38(1), 557–560 (1989) 
[26] Fischbacher, M.: Schleifen - Möglichkeiten zur Beherrschung der Prozesswärme. 
IDR 42(I), 44–47 (2007) 
[27] Büttner, A.: Das Schleifen sprödharter Werkstoffe mit Diamant-Topfscheiben unter 
besonderer Berücksichtigung des Tiefschleifens. Dissertation. Technische Universität 
Hannover, Hannover (1968) 
[28] Davies, M.A., Ueda, T., M’Saoubi, R., Mullany, B., Cooke, A.L.: On The Measure-
ment of Temperature in Material Removal Processes. CIRP Annals 56(2), 581–604 
(2007) 
[29] Shen, B., Xiao, G., Guo, C., Malkin, S., Shih, A.J.: Thermocouple Fixation Method 
for Grinding Temperature Measurement. Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engi-
neering 139, 0510141–0510148 (2008) 
[30] Hoffmeister, H.-W., Maiz, K.: Wärmemanagement beim Flachprofilschleifen. In: 
Hoffmeister, H.-W., Denkena, B. (eds.) Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, Läppen und Po-
lieren, vol. 61, pp. 17–26. Vulkan-Verlag, Essen (2004) 
[31] Hoffmeister, H.-W., Machanova, I., Maiz, K.: Simulation of Grinding Processes with 
FEA. In: CIRP International Workshop on Modelling of Machining Operations, pp. 
329–333 (2005) 
[32] Hwang, J., Kompella, S., Chandrasekar, S., Farris, T.N.: Measurement of Tempera-
ture Field in Surface Grinding Using Infra-Red (IR) Imaging Systems. Journal of Tri-
bology 125, 377–383 (2003) 
[33] Brinksmeier, E., Heinzel, C., Meyer, L.: Development and Application of a Wheel 
Based Process Monitoring System in Grinding. CIRP Annals 54(1), 301–304 (2005) 
[34] Körtvelyessy, L.V.: Thermoelement Praxis. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (1981) 
[35] Frohmüller, R., Knoche, H.-J., Lierath, F.: Aufbau und Erprobung von Temperatur-
messeinrichtungen durch das IFQ im Rahmen des Schwerpunktprogramms Spanen 
Metallischer Werkstoffe mit hoher Geschwindigkeit. In: Spanen Metallischer 
Werkstoffe Mit Hohen Geschwindigkeiten Kolloquium des Schwerpunktprogramms 
der DFG, pp. 108–115 (1999) 
[36] Zacher, M.: Integration eines optischen 3D-Sensors in ein Koordinatenmessgerät für 
die Digitalisierung komplexer Oberflächen. RWTH Aachen, Dissertation (2004) 
[37] Heisel, U., Storchak, M., Stehle, T., Korotkih, M.: Temperaturbestimmung in den 
Zerspanzonen. wt Werkstattstechnik Online 100(5), 365–370 (2010) 
[38] EN ISO 11562, Geometrical Product Specifications (GPS) – Surface texture: Profile 
method – Metrological characteristics of phase correct filters (1998) 
[39] Abele, E., Bauer, J.: Kamerabasierte Bahnkorrektur für das Fräsen mit Industrierobo-
tern. wt Werkstatttechnik Online, 9 (2010) 
[40] Brecher, C., Denkena, B., Grossmann, K., Steinmann, P., Bouabid, A., Heinisch, D., 
Hermes, R., Löser, M.: Identification of Weak Spots in the Metrological Investigation 
of Dynamic Machine Behaviour. Production Engineering – Research and Develop-
ment 9(6), 679–689 (2011) 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 29–51. 
springerlink.com                                          © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 2 
Modeling and Simulation 
C. Brecher, A. Bouabid, M. Deichmueller, B. Denkena, K. Großmann,  
A. Hardtmann, D. Hömberg, R. Hermes, F. Klocke, M. Löser,  
O. Rott, P. Steinmann, and M. Weiß 
Abstract. One focus of the Priority Program 1180 is the prediction of process  
machine interactions. The investigated manufacturing processes as well as the ma-
chine tool behavior and the physical phenomena vary within the projects of this 
program. So depending on the issues that were investigated, the modeling ap-
proach that is best suitable for the specific problem has to be applied. To predict 
the interactions these models have to be coupled and simulated. Besides the mod-
eling approaches different simulation techniques have also been applied. This 
chapter gives an overview of the applied models of the structural machine beha-
vior and the manufacturing processes, the coupling of these models as well as the 
simulation techniques that were used.  
2.1   Introduction 
The prediction of process machine interactions requires models of the subsystems 
“machine” and “process”. Which modeling approach is appropriate for a specific 
problem depends on the type of process, the character of the investigated interac-
tion and the physical phenomena relevant for this interaction. However, other  
factors may also have an impact, for example, the computation time or the effort 
for modeling as well as the effort of a parameter identification based on measured 
data. 
A comprehensive overview of current issues and approaches in the field of pre-
dicting process machine interactions is given by Brecher et al. [1]. This chapter 
focuses on issues that are relevant within the projects of the Priority Program 
1180. It gives basic information about the modeling techniques and the coupling 
methods. Most of the projects within the priority program scrutinized the interac-
tions between the process forces and the static and dynamic displacements at the 
contact zone of tool and workpiece. 
To describe the dynamic behavior of the machine multi-body systems, finite 
element models and analogous models are applied. The first two approaches con-
tain structural information of the machine. This makes it much easier to apply 
changes of structural parameters. The analogous models are abstract models where 
information about the structure is lost but they can be parameterized much easier 

30 
C. Brecher et al.
 
using measured frequency response functions. The different approaches to model 
the machine behavior differ, for example, in terms of degrees of freedom or the 
ability of coping with nonlinearities. 
The applied approaches of process models differ for cutting, grinding and form-
ing processes. In cutting, simple empirical models are applied in most cases. In 
grinding, empirical models as well as finite element models are applied. In form-
ing simulations, only finite element approaches were used. To couple and simulate 
the process and machine models coupled simulations as well as model integration 
within the same software were applied. 
2.2   Models of the Machine Behavior 
2.2.1   Multi-Body Models 
A multi-body simulation (MBS) system generally consists of different stiff bodies, 
which can conduct defined movements. They are connected by different kinds of 
joints like revolute, prismatic, ball or cardan joints. Movements and reactions of 
the bodies can be simulated using algebraic-kinematic relations and external 
forces in the time domain. The main advantage of MBS is the possibility to simu-
late large scale movements and rotations. In contrary to a MBS a linear FE-
simulation e. g. is able to represent the dynamic behaviour of a machine tool only 
in one defined position. Thus, non-linearities cannot be simulated [2]. 
In a flexible MBS model, the advantages of both MBS and FE-simulation are 
combined. As the FEM is able to simulate deformations of parts and the MBS can 
realize movements of the modelled parts the dynamic machine behaviour can be 
described for every position of the machine tool slides. 
For the implementation of a flexible MBS the structural parts of a machine tool 
have to be converted into flexible bodies. A flexible body allows the description of 
its flexible properties in defined points of force transmission. The count of possi-
ble part deformations is reduced by means of modal superposition. Hence, linear 
part deformations can be described by the combination of linear eigenmodes. 
Fig. 2.1 shows the difference of a flexible MBS model and a moveable flexible 
MBS using the example of a machine table. As the flexible MBS uses fixed ele-
ments to constrain the machine table to the machine bed the moveable flexible 
MBS realizes a movement of the machine table. The occurring forces are  
transferred to the machine bed by dividing the load onto different nodes of the 
guideway. Hence, a variable load transmission can be realized and the machine 
behavior can be depicted in more detail. 
 
 
 
 
 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
31
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1 Principle of flexible and moveable flexible multi-body simulation [3] 
2.2.2   Finite Element Models 
In contradiction to the multi-body systems treated in the last section, structural 
analyses are primarily concerned with deformable structures, which consist of an 
infinite number of single material points. Also, structural analyses are more inter-
ested in the distribution of physical quantities within the structure, e. g. the stress 
distribution. 
In machine tools, the finite element method can be applied in order to analyze 
both the static and the dynamic machine behavior. In particular, time-dependent 
and coupled processes are of high interest. Machine tools consist, in many cases, 
of spinning cylindrical parts, which permit some simplifications of the solution 
procedure through their form and periodic motion. Then, computationally more ef-
ficient solution techniques can be used, e. g. the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian 
(ALE) approach. In the following, the basics of a transient finite element solution 
procedure are presented, exemplarily for the case of a spinning wheel, which can 
represent a grinding wheel, for example. Detailed information can be found in [4]. 
Bold symbols denote vectors or tensors while scalars are denoted in normal font 
style. 
In the ALE approach, three states (or configurations) of the spinning wheel can 
be distinguished, Fig. 2.2. B0 denotes the non-deformed state. In this configura-
tion, each of the material points constituting the wheel can be localized by the co-
ordinates X0. By means of a time-dependent rotation matrix R(t) one passes to the 
rotated (or reference) configuration Br, where material points are described by the 
coordinates 
( )
0
X
R
X
⋅
=
t
                                                        (2.1) 
X0 describes the geometry of the spinning wheel at the idle state and does not de-
pend on the time t. X is time-dependent since the position of a material point 
changes due to the rotation, regardless of whether the angular velocity ω is con-
stant or not. 

32 
C. Brecher et al.
 
Finally, the deformation of the spinning wheel is given at the deformed (or to-
tal) configuration Bt by the function ϕ0 or ϕ, depending on the choice of the con-
figuration one takes as reference, i. e. B0 or Br respectively. Thus, the coordinates 
x of a material point in the total configuration can be given by 
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
t
t
t
t
t
,
,
,
0
0
0
X
R
X
X
x
⋅
=
=
=
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
                   (2.2) 
The total deformation ϕ depends on the time t in two ways: indirectly via X(t) and, 
in addition, in an explicit way via t. The dependency on X(t) includes the fact that 
the less important part of the kinematics, i. e. the rigid body rotation, is anticipated 
in the model formulation. The direct dependency on time t, however, expresses the 
most important part of the kinematics, i. e. the transient deformation due to the 
process forces. For the position vector x, a total and a partial time derivative x 
and
x
t∂
 can be defined, depending on whether the rigid body rotation is included 
or not. 
 
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
t
t
t
t
t
,
,
,
0
0
0
X
R
X
X
x
⋅
=
=
=
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
 
 
 
Fig. 2.2 Configurations corresponding to the ALE approach. In addition to the initial non-
deformed state and the total deformed state there is an intermediate rotated state one refers 
to when solving the problem 
The stress tensor can be defined in different ways. Relating a force increment 
dF to a surface element da, both in the total configuration, results in the Cauchy or 
true stress tensor σ. Taking, however, the surface element in the initial or rotated 
configuration dA0 or dA leads to the Piola-stress tensor P0 or P respectively. 
In the following, the basic relations of the finite element model of the spinning 
wheel are given. All equations are written with respect to the rotated configuration 
Br. The balance of momentum writes 
x
b
P

r
r
ρ
=
+
Div
                                                 (2.3) 
where ρr is the material density. The external body forces br, caused by gravity for 
example, are not important for the present presentation. The total acceleration x 
X0
X
x
Initial 
Configuration B0 
Deformed 
Configuration Bt 
Reference 
Configuration Br
0
X
R ⋅
 
ϕ
0
ϕ

2   Modeling and Simulation 
33
 
can be determined by totally deriving the position vector x twice. After some deri-
vations and transformations one obtains the following relations: 
Total velocity:                          
v
X
F
X
F
x
+
⋅
=
∂
+
⋅
=



ϕ
t
 
(2.4) 
Total acceleration: 
[
] [
]
a
X
L
Ω
F
X
X
G
x
+
⋅
+
⋅
+
⊗
=




2
:
 
(2.5) 
Herein, the following entities have been used: 
Deformation gradient:                              
ϕ
X
∂
=
F
 
(2.6) 
Velocity gradient:                             
v
L
X
Xt
∂
=
∂
=
ϕ
2
 
(2.7) 
Gradient of the deformation gradient:    
F
G
X
∂
=
 
(2.8) 
Local velocity:                                         
ϕ
t∂
=
v
 
(2.9) 
Local acceleration:                          
v
a
t
tt
∂
=
∂
=
ϕ
2
                                                (2.10) 
Spin tensor:                                  [
]




−
=
0
0
ω
ω
Ω ij
                                             
(2.11) 
Guiding velocity:                                 
X
Ω
X
⋅
=

                                                   (2.12) 
Stresses are related to the strains by means of a material law, e. g. according to the 
Neo-Hookean model. In this model, the isotropic strain energy function W is given 
by 
[
]
J
J
W
2
2
2
:
2
ln
ln
λ
μ
μ
+
−
−
=
1
C
                                  
(2.13) 
The Piola-stress results from the relation 
S
F
P
⋅
=
                                                   (2.14) 
with the Piola-Kirchhoff stress 
[
]
[
]
1
1
2
1
2
2
−
−
−
+
−
=
∂
∂
=
C
C
C
S
1
μ
λ
J
W
                         
(2.15) 
In Eq. (2.13)-(2.15), λ and μ designate the Lamé parameters. In addition, the fol-
lowing entities have been used: 
Right Cauchy-Green strain tensor:    
F
F
C
⋅
=
t
                                               (2.16) 
Jacobian of the deformation gradient F:    
F
Det
=
J
                                     (2.17) 
Finally, the material stiffness results from 
C
C
C
S
∂
⊗
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
=
W
2
4
2
C
                                             
(2.18) 

34 
C. Brecher et al.
 
Now, when the spinning wheel problem is discretized first with respect to space 
and then time and when substituting Eq. (2.3) for Eq. (2.4)-(2.12), one can show, 
that the forces at an arbitrary node I can be written at time step tn+1 as: 
Spinning forces:     
[
][
]

⋅
⋅
∂
−
=
+
+
r
B
r
h
h
1
n
h
I
X
r
spn
1
n I
dV
N
X
F
X


ρ
F
                
(2.19) 
Internal forces:      
[
]

∂
⋅
⋅
=
+
+
+
r
B
r
I
X
h
1
n
h
1
n
int
1
n I
dV
N
S
F
F
                             
(2.20) 
Inertia forces:      

+
+ =
r
B
r
h
n
I
r
ine
1
n
I
dV
N
1
a
ρ
F
                                         
(2.21) 
Coriolis-type forces:   

⋅
+
+
⋅
=
r
B
r
h
h
n
I
r
cor
1
n
I
dV
N
X
L
1
2
ρ
F
                
(2.22) 
where the notation (⋅) h means that after spatial discretization the corresponding 
entity (⋅) has, of course, to be written in discretized form, i. e. as a function of the 
value at node I, weighted by the element shape function N I. The local velocity and 
acceleration at time step tn+1 can be written according to the Newmark-scheme as 
n
n
n
n
n
t
1
n
t
t
t
a
v
d
d
d
v




Δ
−
Δ
+



−
+
−
Δ
≈
∂
=
+
+
+
β
γ
β
γ
β
γ
2
1
]
[
1
1
             
(2.23) 
[
]
n
n
n
n
n
tt
n
t
t
a
v
d
d
d
a




−
−
Δ
−
−
Δ
≈
∂
=
+
+
+
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
β
β
β
               
(2.24) 
Herein, Δt and dn+1 denote the time increment to be appropriately chosen and the 
time-dependent nodal position vector to be solved for respectively. Also, it has 
been assumed that the state of the wheel is known at time step tn. The parameters β 
and γ appearing in Eq. (2.23)-(2.24) are the Newmark parameters to be chosen 
such that 
(
)






=
2
1
,
4
1
,γ
β
                                                   
(2.25) 
Relations (2.19)-(2.22) in sum give the force residual vector 
cor
n
ine
n
n
spn
n
n
1
1
int
1
1
1
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
−
F
F
F
F
R
                                   (2.26) 
to be iteratively solved, e. g. by means of the Newton-Raphson procedure when 
appropriate boundary conditions have been defined. The linearization of the force 
residual vector R leads to the stiffness matrix K, which relates the force at a node I 
with the displacement at a node J caused by that force. In analogy to the force, the 
stiffness can be given in form of the following single contributions: 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
35
 
Spinning part:      
[
][
]

⋅
∂
⋅
∂
−
=
+
r
B
r
h
J
X
h
I
X
r
spn
1
n 
IJ
dV
X
N
X
N
I


ρ
K
       
(2.27) 
Geometric part:   
[
]

∂
⋅
⋅
∂
=
+
+
r
B
r
J
x
h
n
I
x
geo
n
IJ
dV
N
N
I
S
1
1
K
                            
(2.28) 
Material part:      
[
] [
]

+
+
+
+
⋅
∂
⋅
⋅
∂
⋅
=
r
B
r
t
h
n
J
x
h
n
I
x
h
n
mat
n
IJ
dV
N
N
1
1
1
1
F
C
F
K
              (2.29) 
Inertia part:        









Δ
=
+
r
B
r
J
2
I
r
ine
1
n 
IJ
dV
N
t
N
I
β
ρ
1
K
                            
(2.30) 
Coriolis-type part:  









⋅
∂
Δ
=
⋅
+
r
B
r
h
I
x
I
r
cor
n
IJ
dV
N
t
N
I
X
β
γ
ρ
2
1
K
             (2.31) 
Herein, I denotes the identity matrix. By summing all stiffness parts, the total 
stiffness results in 
cor
1
n
ine
1
n
mat
1
n
geo
1
n
spn
1
n
1
n
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
=
K
K
K
K
K
K
                        (2.32) 
which again results together with the force residual R in the Newton-Raphson step 
1
n 
1
n
1
n
+
+
+
=
Δ
⋅
R
K
d
                                             (2.33) 
where Δdn+1 denotes the iterative increment of the nodal displacement vector. 
Once the nodal position vector dn+1 is known all other entities, e. g. the stress or 
the strain tensor, can be determined. 
2.2.3   Analogous Models 
The multi-body and the FE models are based on the structure of the mechanical 
system. In some cases, it sufficient to describe the dynamic behaviour by abstract 
models, for example when only the dynamic behaviour at the tool center point 
(TCP) is of interest for the desired simulation results. 
The dynamic behaviour of the structure is represented by a system of masses 
and spring/dampers, which act like the machine at observed points. In a simple 
case, the frequency response function at one point can be written as the sum of the 
frequency responses of n single degree of freedom mass spring damper systems 
(
) 
+
+
−
=
n
n
n
n
c
d
j
m
j
G
ω
ω
ω
2
1
                                
(2.34) 
with the modal mass m, the damping d and the stiffness c. The parameters of these 
models can be identified from frequency response functions measured at the real 

36 
C. Brecher et al.
 
machine structure. For this, commercial software for a modal analysis or self-
written routines can be used. In many cases, the fitting between the dynamic be-
havior of the real structure and the model is better than the one that can be 
achieved by structure based models, especially in the case of multi-degree of free-
dom behavior of the machine, see chapter 1. Since the abstract models contain 
only a few degrees of freedom the computation time for simulations is much 
shorter than when structure-based models – like FE or MBS models - are applied. 
A disadvantage of the analogous models is the loss of information about the 
structure of the machine. These abstract models are only valid for a given configu-
ration or state of the machine. Therefore, a change of local parameters or a change 
of the position of the axes can only be considered by a new set of modal parame-
ters. A structure-based model can help to identify local parameters of the real 
structure that cannot be measured directly. An analogous model is not appropriate 
for such a task. 
2.3   Process Models 
2.3.1   Cutting Force Models 
In addition to the term describing the dynamic machine tool behavior the cutting 
process term is needed to resemble the process-machine interaction in a closed 
loop. The cutting process responds to a change in the cutting geometry with an al-
teration in process forces. The calculation of process forces regarding the dynamic 
variation of the depth of cut was the priority of the research in the years 1960-
1980 [5]. Cutting forces are not only influenced by a relative motion between the 
workpiece and cutting tool (inner chip thickness modulation) but also by the ripple 
left on the workpiece surface (outer chip thickness modulation) at the previous 
revolution (turning) or by the last cutting edge (milling). Not only the modeling of 
the milling process demands for a considerable effort but also the determination of 
the force coefficients is known as an extensive procedure. In addition to modeling 
the determination of force coefficients, which had been defined by the simulation 
model, was extensive. Radharamanan summarizes the work on this field of re-
search in detail [6]. 
A common method to estimate the cutting forces acting in turning and milling 
processes is the analytical description of the interrelationships at the cutting edge 
[7, 8]. There are three analytical formulations in literature, which differ in their 
mathematical depiction and the determination of the characteristic force 
coefficients, Fig. 2.3. The method of mechanistic description is based on the 
modeling of so-called shear planes. In this regard, a forming process is adopted in 
the ablated material. The assumed shear stress influences the amount of the 
calculated process forces decisively. In this context, for example, the shear plane 
model by Merchant [9] or the "Slip-line field" model by Fang [10] have to be 
mentioned. 
 
 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
37
 
 
Kic=f(vc, WZ / WST)
Kie=f(vc, WZ / WST)
Ki=f(vc, WZ / WST)
xi=f(vc, WZ / WST)
Ki1.1=f(vc, WZ / WST)
1-mi=f(vc, WZ / WST)
e.g. by Stèphán, Feng
Ernst & Merchant
Kic=f(vc, WZ / WST)
Kie=f(vc, WZ / WST)
Ki=f(vc, WZ / WST)
xi=f(vc, WZ / WST)
Ki1.1=f(vc, WZ / WST)
1-mi=f(vc, WZ / WST)
e.g. by Altintas
e.g. by Kienzle
e.g. by Fang et al.,           
Ernst & Merchant
e.g. by Fang et al.,           
Ernst & Merchant
Linear Models
Models based on Exponential Functions
Mechanistic Model
ie
ic
i
K
b
h
b
K
F
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
=
ie
ic
i
K
b
h
b
K
F
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
=
ie
x
i
i
K
b
h
K
b
F
i
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
=
ie
x
i
i
K
b
h
K
b
F
i
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
=
i
m
1
1
.
1i
i
h
K
b
F
−
⋅
⋅
=
i
m
1
1
.
1i
i
h
K
b
F
−
⋅
⋅
=
h
F
h
F
h
F
h
F






φ
⋅
⋅
τ
=
c
s
s
sin
h
b
F






φ
⋅
⋅
τ
=
c
s
s
sin
h
b
F
Cutting Tool
φc
αc
Workpiece
Model Parameterization 
through Cutting Tests
Model Parameterization 
through Cutting Tests
Model Parameterization 
through Cutting Tests
Model Parameterization 
through Experimental Analysis
 
Fig. 2.3 Analytical formulation of cutting forces 
Especially for the simulation of process stability linear models and models 
based on exponential functions have been established to estimate the process 
forces. Using such simulation models emerging friction between the workpiece 
and the cutting edge can be captured by appropriate additional terms [7, 11]. 
These linear models assume a linear relationship between process forces and chip 
thickness. There are different approaches for this purpose, e. g. by Tlusty [12], 
Altintas [13] and Weck [14]. 
Models based on exponential functions derive process forces out of a non-linear 
relationship to the chip thickness. Appropriate models for the description of the 
processes have been developed, for example by Stepan [15] and Feng [16]. 
Investigations have shown that the feed motion-dependence of the dynamic force 
variation may explain differences in process stability, which were also partially 
observed in practice. The parameterization of the shown force models is  
carried out on the basis of cutting tests and therefore valid only for one defined 
cutting edge-workpiece material combination. In some cases, the parameterization 
can be adapted to different experimental conditions with the help of adjusting 
factors [17]. 
Especially for the depiction of chip formation, burr formation and the chip tem-
perature the cutting simulation using the finite element method is an important 
tool [18]. In such a simulation tool, the chip formation is discretized for a small 
surrounding between the workpiece and the cutting tool by finite elements in a 
sufficiently small mesh size. These simulations are not linear since large dis-
placements and deformations, temperature and strain rate-dependent plasticity of 
the workpiece at the cutting point as well as contact between tool and workpiece 
must be taken into account. The results of the force calculation using FEM do not 
provide sufficiently accurate results for the passive force in particular. 
 

38 
C. Brecher et al.
 
For mapping the cutting forces in order to simulate the process stability of a 
machining process in most cases the afore-mentioned analytical models are used. 
However, the problem is modeling the dynamic cutting forces using data from sta-
tionary chipping processes. Fig. 2.4 shows the geometric engagement of a cutting 
edge for dynamic cutting conditions in one plane. The rapid change of the oscillat-
ing engagement conditions leads to digressive results in cutting force calculation. 
Regardless of the approach of modeling process forces (mechanistic, empirical) 
a multiplicity of research works have demonstrated, that dynamic effects have to 
be taken into account additionally for stability simulation in the case of improving 
process models. These models consider the inner chip thickness modulation 
(wave-cutting) and the outer chip thickness modulation (wave-removing) as an 
independent input parameter as well as a phase shift between the dynamic cutting 
force and chip thickness modulation. 
The entire current average 
depth h is composed of static 
and dynamic portions.
Location and size of the 
primary shear zone vary.
A direct connection between 
the chip thickness h and the 
process force F is in contrast 
to the mechanical conditions .
vc :
Cutting Speed
F :
Total Process Force
Fc :
Cutting Force (in Direction vc)
Fp :
Passive Force (perpendicular to vc)
xstat : 
Static Portion of Tool Deflection
xd(t) :
Dynamic Portion of Tool Deflection
xd(t-Tt) : Dynamic Portion of Tool Deflection
Previous Revolution 
xstat
xd(t-Tt)
F
Fc
Fp
F
Fc
Fp
vc
h = xstat + xd(t) - xd(t-Tt)
xd(t)
 
Fig. 2.4 Plain dynamic cutting 
In particular, the variation of the position of the shear plane is quite often used 
for the determination of the dynamic cutting forces from existing static models. 
Kim and Lee [19], for example, give an analytical description of the shear angle 
regarding the inner and outer chip modulation. This dynamic force model 
considers the transfer function of the tool and its derivation in the direction of 
cutting speed and direction of the chip thickness variation. Although the 
mentioned models can be used for stability simulation they have not been applied 
for this purpose so far. 
Van Brussel [20] and Werntze [21] propose simpler, empirical models. These 
take into account the influence of the inner and outer chip thickness modulation in 
terms of a proportional relation and a phase shift. The phase shift allows the 
modeling of a time lag between changes in chip thickness and the corresponding 
changes in force. 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
39
 
2.3.2   Abrasive Machining 
In contrast to conventional machining where workpiece material is removed by a 
small number of defined cutting edges a large number of abrasive particles or 
grains acts in abrasive machining processes. In loose abrasive processes like po-
lishing or lapping, the grains are not connected to each other and move indepen-
dently from each other. In bonded abrasive processes like grinding or honing, the 
grains are connected by a bond, e. g. resin, vitrified or metal bond. Numerous 
models to describe grinding processes exist today. They can be divided into fun-
damental approaches, kinematic models, finite element method (FEM), molecular 
dynamics, artificial neural networks and rule based models. An overview is given 
in [22, 23]. Process machine interaction models for grinding are summarized in 
[1, 24]. Grinding models describe the influence of various parameters like depth of 
cut or cutting speed on forces, temperatures or surface roughness, for example. 
Since a universal model for all grinding processes has not yet been developed [25] 
it depends on the grinding operation and the contact conditions, which model is 
suitable. In general, the grinding models can be divided into microscopic and ma-
croscopic approaches which are described in the following. 
Restrictions
Macroscopic Approaches
Microscopic Approaches
FEM, Kinematic-
geometrical simulations
Detailed simulation of
chip formation, grinding
forces, heat and surface
quality 
High computation time,
high effort to model
grinding wheel geometry 
Kinematic-geometrical
simulations (Dexel, Voxel)
Modelling
methods
Simulation of material
removal, geometric
description of contact area,
and application of grinding
force models   
Lower resolution in
simulation result than with
microscopic approaches,
surface quality cannot be
simulated.
Application
area 
 
Fig. 2.5 Modeling approaches for grinding processes 

40 
C. Brecher et al.
 
2.3.2.1   Microscopic Approaches 
The aim of microscopic process models is to calculate e. g. local stresses or tem-
perature, or to gain knowledge on chip formation mechanisms. The microscopic 
shape of a grinding wheel is determined either by topography measurement [26] or 
by generative modeling using a mathematical description of the grain morphology 
[27]. Mostly, statistical methods are applied for modeling the grain distribution 
[28]. Kinematic-geometrical models, as exemplarily described in [27], assume an 
ideal chip formation without plowing or similar effects. Process forces are calcu-
lated on the basis of undeformed chips of single grains. In other approaches, the 
finite element method is used to model the engagement of grinding wheel and 
workpiece [29]. Due to the high computation time, especially of 3D-FEM, only 
small parts of a grinding wheel are modeled, normally on a small set of grains or 
single grit scratching tests [30]. 
2.3.2.2   Macroscopic Approaches 
In macroscopic approaches, the grinding process is modeled by calculating the en-
gagement of grinding wheel and workpiece geometrically from a macroscopic 
view, i. e. no grains are modeled. In macroscopic approaches, parameters like 
equivalent chip thickness heq or geometrical contact length lg are calculated and 
empirical or FEM grinding force models applied [31]. In the kinematic-
geometrical simulation, the workpiece is discretized using dexels, voxels, or 
boundary representation models, for example. A more detailed description of 
process models for surface grinding, NC-shape grinding, pendulum and speed 
stroke grinding and tool grinding can be found in the section “Grinding” of this 
book. 
2.3.3   Metal Forming 
During an optimal process design the determination of the stresses, forces and 
energy is an important topic. While the processes of the sheet-metal forming are 
often limited by workpiece-lateral demands such as tensions and instabilities the 
process limits of the bulk forming can usually be detected in the tools. Hence, 
considering temporally and locally different loads the tool and workpiece must be 
dimensioned in such a way that the tool is predicted from plastic deformations and 
breakage and the tool wear adjusted to the desired life time. For the optimal ma-
chine selection the knowledge of value and localization of the necessary forming 
force as well as the value of the deformation energy are important. At present, 
there is a set of methods for the pre-determination of the stresses and forces. Ta-
ble 2.1 shows a selection of widely-used methods [32]. 
 
 
 
 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
41
 
Table 2.1 Methods for the determination of stresses, forces and energy: dxi - infinitesimal 
small dimension, kf – yield stress, V – forming volume, η – deformation efficiency, W – 
deformation energy, Fm – temporal mean value of deformation force F, σc, τc – contact 
stresses, σm – temporal and local mean value of normal stress [32] 
 
Increase of simplifying  
assumptions 
Increase of effort and  
accuracy 
Method 
Number 
of dxi 
input value 
output value 
Method of deformation energy 
0 
kf, V, η 
σm, Fm, W 
Strip method 
1 
kf, V, τc or μ 
σ, F, (W) 
Slip-line method 
2 
kf, τc 
σ, 
Method of upper and lower 
bounds 
3 
kf, τc or μ 
F 
Finite-Element-Method 
3 
kf, σc, τc or μ 
σ, F 
The methods are tabulated according to the increasing value of an infinitesimal 
small dimension dxi, which is the basis for the selected section models. Such as the 
number of simplifying assumptions is reduced, the effort and accuracy of the cal-
culation as well as the number of the included small dimensions are increased. The 
first two methods are regarded to the elementary theory, the other ones to the 
higher theory of plasticity. 
The majority of elementary methods is valid under the following conditions 
[33]: 
• The workpiece volume remains constant during the forming process. 
• The material behaves homogeneously and isotropically, i. e. locally different 
material properties are generally not considered. 
• The elastic deformations are negligibly small compared with the plastic defor-
mations. 
• The yield stress is given as function of material, (equivalent) strain, strain rate 
and temperature. 
• The material behavior follows the Tresca’s yield criterion (Maximum Shear 
Stress Theory) and the v. Mises’ yield criterion (Distortion Energy Theory) re-
spectively. 
• The contact shear stress is given with a friction formulation, e. g. using the fric-
tion value µ or the friction shear factor m.  
• Forces of inertia and weight are neglected. 
The most frequently applied theoretical methods are  
• Method of deformation energy, 
• Strip method,  
• Slip-line method,  
• Method of the upper and lower bounds,  
• Method of weighted residuals and 
• Finite-Element-Method.  

42 
C. Brecher et al.
 
The method of deformation energy is the most elementary method to calculate the 
deformation forces. This method is based on the law of energy conservation with 
the applied outer energy 
s
F
Wa
⋅
=
                                                      (2.35) 
equaling the inner strain energy  
φ
V
k
η
1
W
fm
i
⋅
=
.                                                (2.36) 
In this formula, kfm is the mean value of yield stress and ϕ the equivalent plastic 
strain. The inner energy is equivalent to the total deformation energy  
B
Sh
FR
id
tot
W
W
W
W
W
+
+
+
=
,                                    (2.37) 
summarizing the expressions for ideal, frictional, shearing and bending energy. 
The ratio of ideal deformation energy and total deformation energy is referred to 
as the deformation efficiency 
tot
id
W
W
η =
.                                                     (2.38) 
With these preliminary considerations, the determination of deforming forces can 
be derived for several forming processes. In order to exemplify this procedure the 
derivation of the forming forces is shown for solid forward extrusion and deep 
drawing in Fig. 2.6 and Fig. 2.7. 
u
Ext
a
s
F
W
⋅
=
, 
φ
V
k
η
1
W
fm
i
⋅
=
 
with 
u
0s
A
V =
 and 
1
0
A
A
ln
φ =
 
i
a
W
W =
: 
1
0
u
0
fm
u
Ext
A
A
ln
s
A
k
η
1
s
F
⋅
=
⋅
 
1
0
0
fm
Ext
A
A
ln
A
k
η
1
F
⋅
=
 
(2.39)
d0 (A0)
d1 (A1)
su
FExt
h0
 
Fig. 2.6 Solid forward extrusion 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
43
 
u
max
,
D
a
s
F
W
⋅
=
,  
φ
V
k
η
1
W
fm
i
⋅
=
 
with 
u
0
1
s
s
d
π
V
⋅
=
 and 
0
1
d
d
ln
φ =
 
i
a
W
W =
: 
0
1
u
0
1
fm
u
max
,
D
d
d
ln
s
s
d
π
k
η
1
s
F
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
 
0
1
0
1
fm
max
,
D
d
d
ln
s
d
π
k
η
1
F
⋅
=
 
(2.40)
su
d1
d0
dp
s0
FD
FBH
FBH
rM
 
Fig. 2.7 Deep drawing of a cylindrical cup 
In both examples, the friction, shear and bending behavior are summarized in 
the deformation efficiency factor. More detailed approaches considering the fric-
tion between die and workpiece result in the following formulas, calculating the 
maximal forming forces in solid forward extrusion [34] 
0
0
f
0
1
0
0
fm
Ext
h
k
d
A
A
ln
2
sin
1
tan
3
2
A
k
F
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
+











+
+
⋅
=
μ
π
α
μ
α
    
(2.41) 
and for deep drawing processes [35] 








+






⋅
⋅
+
⋅
=
M
0
fmII
0
m
BH
m
p
fmI
2
0
m
max
,
D
r
2
s
k
s
d
F
2
d
d
ln
k
15
.1
e
s
d
F
π
μ
π
μπ
.        (2.42) 
This includes the blankholder force FBH, the mean wall diameter 
0
1
m
s
d
d
+
=
 and 
the outside diameter of the flange when the drawing force has achieved a maxi-
mum value 
2
m
2
0
p
d
3.0
d
7.0
d
+
=
. 
The presented elementary methods provide a solution for a set of problems 
without substantial effort. This is achieved with simplifying assumptions deviating 
from the real behavior. If the simplifying assumptions do not meet the require-
ments of accuracy, the Finite-Element-Method (FEM) could be used, however, 
with a higher effort and costs. Thus, the following factors can be considered in an 
improved way:  
• different material characteristics, 
• complicated geometry of the parts as well as 
 

44 
C. Brecher et al.
 
• inhomogeneous and unsteady mechanical and thermal behavior.  
• The FEM is used in metal forming for the simulation of forming processes to 
determine instantaneous and intermediate states as well as the design of highly-
stressed active elements of metal-forming tools (e. g. forging or extrusion dies) 
[36]. 
2.4   Coupling of Models 
2.4.1   Analytical Considerations  
2.4.1.1   General Setting 
In general, independent representations for structure and process are the starting 
point for the development of models describing the process-structure interaction. 
Depending on the properties of interest engineers can choose among a large varie-
ty of structure models. Mathematically, structure models are understood as equa-
tions of motion corresponding to 
• a complex multi-body system, 
• an abstract system with multiple degrees of freedom describing the dynamics of 
a selected point of a large structure, 
• a system of partial differential equations discretized with finite elements in 
space, 
• a coupled system of ordinary and discretized partial differential equations. 
The above-mentioned models can be summarized by the following system of dif-
ferential (algebraic) equations 
(
)
(
)
f
M
p
q
q
t
f
q
p
q
t
M
,
,
,
,
,

=
,                                 (2.43) 
with pM, pf denoting parameter vectors, which are usually determined fitting struc-
ture simulation results to the corresponding experimental data. The vector q 
represents the general set of coordinates. If (2.43) has been directly derived from 
modal analysis data, the mass matrix is usually constant and the right hand side is 
a linear function of q and q. 
Process models relate a geometrical parameter vector g and the relative velocity 
v between tool and workpiece to the cutting force vector F acting on the tool. In 
milling, the geometrical parameter vector consists of cutting width b and uncut 
chip thickness h. A large class of process models can be expressed in terms of the 
force they exhibit 
)
,
,
(
~
g
p
v
g
F
F =
,                                            (2.44) 
where pg represents an empirical parameter vector depending on tool and work-
piece material and on the tool geometry, see section 2.3.1.  
In stationary cutting or grinding processes with sufficiently small cutting 
forces, the geometrical parameters and the relative velocity do not deviate notice-

2   Modeling and Simulation 
45
 
ably from the desired values regulated by the machine control system. However, if 
the cutting forces become large, increasing machine structure oscillations induce 
larger variations of the geometry parameter vector and the relative velocity. This, 
in turn, leads to undesired cutting force variations, which possibly cause a further 
increase of the machine structure oscillations. In order to describe these process 
structure interaction phenomena both aspects have to be incorporated into the 
model equations. The variation of the geometrical parameter can be formulated as 
a non-linear functional involving the history of the state variable arising from the 
structure model (2.43), i. e. 
()
[
]
( )
(
)

=
=
t
t
ds
s
q
s
g
q
t
g
0
,
~
.
,
.                                     (2.45) 
The relative velocity between tool and workpiece is usually also a non-linear func-
tion depending on the state variable and the corresponding time derivative, i. e. 
(
)
q
q
t
v
v

,
,
~
=
                                                   (2.46) 
Moreover, an additional term appearing on the right hand side of (2.43) has to be 
introduced to model the effect of the varying process forces arising from (2.44) 
and (2.45), (2.46). Since the forces usually act on the tool or, in terms of the struc-
ture model, on an element representing the tool an additional model equation has 
to be developed to get the appropriate contribution to the right hand side of (2.43). 
In a general setting, such an expression is given by 
(
)
F
q
t
f
f
F
F
,
,
~
=
.                                               (2.47) 
Thus, the modified structure model involving the additional term due to the pres-
ence of process forces reads 
(
)
(
)
(
)
F
q
t
f
p
q
q
t
f
q
p
q
t
M
F
f
M
,
,
~
,
,
,
,
,
+
=


                             (2.48) 
As outlined above, phenomena related to process structure interactions can be 
modeled by strongly coupled systems, possibly involving the history of the state 
variable. The equations (2.48), (2.47), (2.46) and (2.45) are an abstract example 
for the model equation corresponding to an interacting system. In each applica-
tion, the adoption of the general system may lead to different equations, which 
have to be solved with tailored numerical algorithms, as shown in the following 
sections. However, in order to illustrate the different aspects of the general model 
we focused on a simple milling system at first.  
2.4.1.2   Example: A Simple Milling System 
A simple system possessing all the important features to model stability problems 
in milling is illustrated in Fig. 2.8. 
 
 
 

46 
C. Brecher et al.
 
 
ky
kx
dx
dy
fz
Ff
ϕ
m
y
x
Fc
h
 
Fig. 2.8 Scheme of a simple milling system 
For the present example, the equation of motion representing the machine struc-
ture reduces to the system 






+












−












−
=











y
x
y
x
y
x
F
F
y
x
k
0
0
k
y
x
d
0
0
d
y
x
m
0
0
m




,                (2.49) 
The unknown model parameters are pM = m and pf = (dx,dy,kx,ky)T. Note that (2.49) 
is a very simple form of (2.48). The cutting force model corresponding to (2) is a 
linear function relating the cutting cross section h ap and the cutting forces acting 
on the tip of the cutting edge, i. e. 
h
a
K
K
F
F
p
c
f
c
f






=






.                                             (2.50) 
The parameter vector is pg = (Kf,Kc)T. The expression corresponding to (2.45), i. e. 
the variation of the geometrical parameter, consists of a stationary part hstat and a 
dynamic part hdyn. The dynamic part hdyn represents the modulation of the uncut 
chip thickness due to the structure oscillations 
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
(
)
ϕ
τ
ϕ
τ
ϕ
cos
sin
sin
−
−
+
−
−
+
=
+
=
t
y
t
y
t
x
t
x
f
h
h
h
z
dyn
stat
   (2.51) 
Note that instead of h nonlinear models usually involve the positive part of the un-
cut chip thickness, i. e. h+ = max(h,0). Since the cutting force components in 
(2.50) are given in the rotating reference frame of the cutter an additional trans-
formation has to be introduced to get the corresponding force components into the 
global reference frame, i. e. 
( )











−
−
=






c
f
y
x
F
F
F
F
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
γ
sin
cos
cos
sin
,                          (2.52) 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
47
 
with γ: [0, 2 π ]  {0,1} denoting a function that switches from one to zero, if the 
corresponding tooth is not cutting. Again, equation (2.52) can be interpreted as a 
simple version of (2.47). Since the expressions for the cutting forces, the uncut 
chip thickness, and the transformation of the cutting forces are given explicitly 
(2.52), (2.51), (2.50) and (2.49) can be summarized by the following first order 
delay differential equation (DDE) 
( )
( )
[
] ( )
( ) (
)
( )t
b
t
u
t
C
t
u
t
C
A
t
u
stat
+
−
+
−
=
τ

,                    (2.53) 
where C(t) denotes a non-smooth τ-periodic matrix. The vector bstat(t) represents 
the external forces related to the stationary uncut chip thickness hstat. The incorpo-
ration of process structure interaction effects leads to an additional state-dependent 
term hdyn in the uncut chip thickness (2.51). Without this term the matrix C(t) va-
nishes and (2.53) reduces to an inhomogeneous linear ordinary differential equa-
tion (ODE) with constant coefficients. Simulating the solution of (2.53) with the 
Matlab dde23 solver and comparing it to the corresponding solution v(t) of the 
system with C(t) = 0 for two different values of ap reveals the additional benefit of 
the interaction model. 
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
|u−v|/|v|
time / [sec]
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
|u−v|/|v|
time / [sec]
 
Fig. 2.9 Stable (a) and unstable (b) solutions of system (2.53) 
In the stable case, the solution of (2.53) converges to the solution of the corres-
ponding ODE. Consequently, the relative difference of both solutions converges to 
zero. Such an evolution of the relative difference is shown in Fig. 2.9(a). In the 
unstable case, the solution of (2.53) does not converge to the solution of the cor-
responding ODE, which remains bounded for all times. Consequently the relative 
difference of both solutions diverges, as illustrated by Fig. 2.9(b). In the experi-
ments, the evolution of the DDE-solution is called chatter. While the DDE model 
properly reproduces the onset of chatter the ODE model has a bounded solution of 
all positive values of ap and is thus not capable of reproducing chatter phenomena. 
2.4.2   Simulation 
In the previous sections, the different approaches of modeling of the machine and 
the process behavior have been presented. The coupling of the models differs  
for the different processes. This section gives a short overview of the simulation 

48 
C. Brecher et al.
 
techniques, which have been applied within the different projects of the priority 
program. 
Within the Priority Program 1180, the analysis of the process machine interac-
tions for cutting operations focuses on the coupling of process forces and the  
deflection of the tool. As shown in the example of a simple milling model, the 
coupling for cutting processes is given by a change of the intersection between 
tool and workpiece: 
• change of cutting geometry caused by the deflection of the tool/workpiece 
• modulation of cutting forces caused by the changing cutting geometry 
For the computation of the tool workpiece intersection the following approaches 
have been applied: 
• intersection between a discrete workpiece (e. g. Dexel model) and the envelope 
of the tool (e. g. CSG model) 
• intersection between a discrete workpiece and a micro-model of single grains as 
well as a macro-model of the grinding wheel for abrasive processes 
• analytical computation of the chip thickness, as shown in the example in the 
preceding section 
In sheet metal forming, the position and deformation of the tool represent the 
boundary conditions for the FE simulations of the forming of the blank. The re-
sulting forces at the nodes of the blank model act on the tool causing deflections 
and deformations. For the computation of static or dynamic interaction respective-
ly two principle methods have been applied.  
• Offline coupling, i. e. iterative computation of process forces and deflections of 
the ram 
• Integration of the model of the machine in the FE model of the forming process 
For the simulation of commercial software tools as well as in-house developments 
were used. The coupling was carried out in the same solver or by coupled simulations. 
• Exchange of forces and deflections between two simulators with a fixed time 
step 
• Exchange of forces and deflections between two simulators with a variable time 
step 
• Exchange of forces and deflections in the same tool (model integration, time 
domain simulations) 
• Mode-dependent exchange of forces and deflections in the same tool. 
• Integration of a force model in the equations of motion. Taking the repetitive 
tooth engagement into account leads to a system of delayed differential equations. 
The different simulation techniques are illustrated in Fig. 2.10 
 
 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
49
 
 
machining results
stability
workpiece: geometry, 
  surface roughness
process behavior
forces
temperatures
modeling techniques
machine behavior
static/dynamic
compliance
model coupling
analogous models
in-house development
FE-models
FE-models 
 + model reduction
multi-body models
multi-body models 
 + model reduction
math tools
time domain
frequency domain
digital block simulation
time domain
offline coupling
code export
co-simulation
code export
alternative
in-house development
 
Fig. 2.10 Simulation techniques applied in the Priority Program 1180 
2.5   Conclusion 
An overview of the applied modeling approaches has been provided. It has been 
demonstrated which approach is suitable under specific conditions regarding the 
machine and process behavior. An overview of the coupling methods and the si-
mulation techniques has also been given. The choice as to which approach has to 
be applied depends on the intension of the simulation of the process machine inte-
raction, i. e. the interaction phenomenon that is to be investigated. This chapter 
has given only basic information on the principle methods. Detailed information 
will be provided in the following chapters, showing the application of these ap-
proaches to the project specific problems. 

50 
C. Brecher et al.
 
References 
[1] Brecher, C., Esser, M., Witt, S.: Interaction of manufacturing process and machine 
tool. CIRP Annals – Manufacturing Technology 58, 588–607 (2009) 
[2] Klocke, F., Brecher, C., Sitte, B., Weiß, M.: Analyse der dynamischen Wechselwir-
kungen bei Pendel- und Schnellhubschleifprozessen. In: Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, 
Läppen und Polieren, vol. 64, Ausgabe, Essen (2010) 
[3] Hoffmann, F.: Optimierung der dynamischen Bahngenauigkeit von Werkzeugma-
schinen mit der Mehrkörpersimulation. Dissertation, WZL of RWTH Aachen Univer-
sity (2008) 
[4] Oden, J.T., Lin, T.L.: On the general rolling contact problem for finite deformations 
of a viscoelastic cylinder. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing 57, 297–367 (1986) 
[5] Tlusty, J.: Analysis of the State of Research in Cutting Dynamics. Annals of the 
CIRP 27(2), 583–589 (1978) 
[6] Radharamanan, R.: The Measurement of the Dynamic Cutting Coefficients and the 
Analysis of Chatter Behaviour in Turning. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Disserta-
tion (1977) 
[7] Altintas, Y., Weck, M.: Chatter Stability of Metal Cutting and Grinding. In: Annals of 
the CIRP, vol. 53(2), pp. 619–642 (2004) 
[8] Stephenson, D.A., Agapiou, J.S.: Metal Cutting. Theory and Practice. Marcel Dekker 
Inc., New York (1996) 
[9] Merchant, M.E.: Mechanics of the metal cutting process. Journal of Applied Phys-
ics 16, 318–325 (1945) 
[10] Fang, N., Jaeahir, I.S.: Analytical Predictions and Experimental Validation of Cutting 
Forces Ratio, Chip Thickness, and Chip Back-Flow Angle in Restricted Contact Ma-
chining Using the Universal Slip-Line Model. International Journal of Machine Tools 
and Manufacture 42, 681–694 (2000) 
[11] Clausen, M.: Zerspankraftprognose und -simulation für Dreh- und Fräsprozesse. 
Hannover. Diss (2005) 
[12] Tlusty, J., Ismail, F.: Basic Non-Linearity in Machining Chatter. Annals of the 
CIRP 30(1), 299–304 (1981) 
[13] Altintas, Y.: Modeling Approaches and Software for Predicting the Performance of 
Milling Operations at MAL-UBC. Machining Science and Technology 4(4), 445–478 
(2000) 
[14] Weck, M., Brecher, C.: Werkzeugmaschinen. Automatisierung von Maschinen und 
Anlagen; 6. Auflage. Springer (2006) 
[15] Stépán, G., Insperger, T.: Stability of the Milling Process. Periodica Polytechnica Ser. 
Mech. Eng. 44 (2000) 
[16] Feng, H.-Y., Azeem, A., Wang, L.: Simplified and Efficient Calibration of a Mecha-
nistic Cutting Force Model for Ball-End Milling. International Journal of Machine 
Tools and Manufacture 44, 214–268 (2004) 
[17] Witt, S.: Integrierte Simulation von Maschine, Werkstück und spanendem Ferti-
gungsprozess. Dissertation. Aachen. RWTH Aachen, Werkzeugmaschinenlabor 
RWTH Aachen (2007) 
[18] Marsolek, J., Fleischer, J., Schmidt, C., Schermann, T.: Simulation von Zerspa-
nungsprozessen mit Abaqus. Tagungsband ABAQUS Benutzerkonferenz, Nürnberg 
(2005) 

2   Modeling and Simulation 
51
 
[19] Kim, J.S., Lee, B.H.: An Analytical Model of Dynamic Cutting Forces in Chatter Vi-
bration. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 31(3), 371–381 
(1991) 
[20] van Brussel, H.: Dynamische Analyse van het Verspaningsproces. Katholieke Un-
iversiteit Leuven, Dissertation (1971) 
[21] Werntze, G.: Dynamische Schnittkraftkoeffizienten. Bestimmung mit Hilfe des Digi-
talrechners und Berücksichtigung im mathematischen Modell zur Stabilitätsanalyse. 
RWTH Aachen, Dissertation (1973) 
[22] Brinksmeier, E., Aurich, J.C., Govekar, E., Heinzel, C., Hoffmeister, H.W., Peters, J., 
Rentsch, R., Stephenson, D.J., Uhlmann, E., Weinert, K., Wittmann, M.: Advances in 
Modeling and Simulation of Grinding Processes. Annals of the CIRP 55(2), 667–696 
(2006) 
[23] Tönshoff, H.K., Peters, J., Inasaki, T., Paul, T.: Modelling and Simulation of Grind-
ing Processes. Annals of the CIRP 41(2), 677–688 (1992) 
[24] Aurich, J.C., Biermann, D., Blum, H., Brecher, C., Carstensen, C., Denkena, B., 
Klocke, F., Kröger, M., Steinmann, P., Weinert, K.: Modelling and simulation of 
process: machine interaction in grinding. Production Engineering 3(1), 111–120 
[25] Mackerle, J.: Finite Element Analysis and Simulation of Machining: an Addendum. A 
Bibliography (1996-2002). International Journal of Machine Tools & Manufac-
ture 43, 103–114 (2003) 
[26] Hou, Z.B., Komanduri, R.: On the Mechanics of the Grinding Process-Part 1. Sto-
chastic Nature of the Grinding Process. International Journal of Machine Tools & 
Manufacture 43, 1579–1593 (2003) 
[27] Zitt, U.-R.: Modellierung und Simulation von Hochleistungsschleifprozessen. Uni-
versity of Kaiserslautern, Dissertation (1999) 
[28] Chang, H.-C., Junz Wang, J.-J.: A stochastic grinding force model considering ran-
dom grit distribution. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 48, 
1335–1344 (2008) 
[29] Doman, D.A., Warkentin, A., Bauer, R.: Finite element modeling approaches in 
grinding. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 49(2), 109–116 
[30] Werner, K., Klocke, F., Brinksmeier, E.: Modelling and Simulation of Grinding 
Processes. In: 1st European Conference on Grinding. Aachen, pp. S.8-1 – S.8-27 
(2003) 
[31] Denkena, B., Deichmueller, M., Kröger, M., Popp, K.M., Carstensen, C., Schroeder, 
A., Wiedemann, S.: Geometrical Analysis of the Complex Contact Area for Modeling 
the local Distribution of Process Forces in Tool Grinding. In: Proceedings of the 1st 
International Conference on Process Machine Interaction, pp. 289–298 (2008) 
[32] Voelkner, W.: Spannungs- Kraft- und Arbeitermittlung beim Umformen. Ferti-
gungstechnik und Betrieb 25(12), 739–743 (1975) 
[33] Voelkner, W.: Ein Beitrag zur Streifen- und Gleitlinienmethode. Wissenschaftliche 
Zeitschrift der TU Dresden 25(3), 613–618 (1976) 
[34] Lange, K. (ed.): Handbook of Metal Forming. Society of Manufacturing Engineers, 
Dearborn, MI (1994) 
[35] Petzold, W., König, J., Eberlein, L. (eds.): Umform- und Zerteiltechnik. Lehrbrief 
Tiefziehen und Drücken, Dresden (1981) 
[36] Neugebauer, R. (ed.): Umform- und Zerteiltechnik. Verlag Wissenschaftliche Skrip-
ten, Chemnitz (2005) 
 

Chapter 3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical
Optimization Methods
M. Andres, H. Blum, C. Brandt, C. Carstensen, P. Maaß, J. Niebsch,
A. Rademacher, R. Ramlau, A. Schr¨oder, E.-P. Stephan, and S. Wiedemann
Abstract. This chapter focuses on the topics of mathematical research in the pri-
ority program and on the application of the results to engineering problems. First, a
posteriori estimates and adaptive methods based on them are presented for contact
problems. In detail, frictional contact problems using a linear elastic material law,
which are discretized by a dual-dual method, are considered. Using a different ap-
proach, adaptive methods are derived for elasto-plasticity with contact and friction.
Then results for contact problems involving inertial effects are introduced. Second,
parameter identiﬁcation and inverse problems are considered. After an introduction
into the general problem of setting and solution techniques, the balancing of a rotat-
ing system is discussed as a prototypical industrial application.
3.1
Introduction
Modeling, simulation and optimization are typical steps in computer-aided man-
ufacturing. The mathematical topics addressed in this priority program are fo-
cussed on developing efﬁcient simulation and optimization techniques as well as
on parameter-identiﬁcation tasks based on inverse problems.
The basic ideas are introduced by using a well-known example. We consider
a heat conduction problem in a perfectly isolated bar: Let us assume that the bar
consists of an inhomogeneous material of conductivity c(x) and speciﬁc heat ζ(x),
the bar is heated at its left endpoint and the resulting temperature at the endpoint on
the right is measured. The real temperature distribution inside the bar is denoted by
u⋆, which is a function of time t and a spatial variable x ∈[0,1]. The heat distribution
in the bar can be modeled by the one dimensional heat equation, i.e. u satisifes
ζ(x) ˙u(t,x)−div c(x) ∇u(t,x) = 0
for t ≥0, x ∈[0,1],
d
dxu(t,0) = q0(t,0)
for t ≥0,
u(0,x) = u0(x)
for x ∈[0,1].
(3.1)
B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 53–77.
springerlink.com
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

54
M. Andres et al.
The heat inﬂow is described by the function q0 and the initial temperature by u0.
First, we address the task of efﬁciently approximating the solution u for known
c,ζ,q0 and discuss the various error terms involved. In order to approximate u we
compute a discrete solution ukh using a space-time ﬁnite element method (FEM).
However, we are not able to determine the exact solution of the FEM on a computer
but get an approximate solution ˜ukh. For example, we only determine approximate
solutions of the linear systems.
Thus, three types of errors have to be considered: The modeling error u⋆−u,
the discretization error u −ukh, and the numerical error ukh −˜ukh. The modeling
error cannot be estimated using mathematical techniques, one has to validate the re-
sults by experiments instead. The numerical error is negligible, if suitable numerical
techniques are used. In the run-up to the computation, a priori error estimates of the
discretization error show the convergence of the discrete solution ukh to u as well as
the convergence rate. However, a posteriori error estimates provide an estimate of
the discretization error for a computed discrete solution. They also yield informa-
tion about the distribution of the error. Based on this information, adaptive FEMs
modify the scheme such that the discretization error is reduced optimally. Hence, the
efﬁciency of the simulation increases. In the Sections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, some results
concerning adaptive FEMs are presented for contact problems . The application of
these methods in the simulation of engineering problems is discussed in Chapters 6,
7 and 14.
Next, we consider the case, where the parameter c, which is allowed to vary spa-
tially, is not known at all or only a rough estimate is available. The mathematical
technique of parameter identiﬁcation (inverse problems) provides a systematic ap-
proach to determine such model parameters. The most widely used approach takes
an a priori guess c1, simulates the resulting data u1(t,1) and determines an update
by minimizing the deviation between the simulation and the measured data g(t)
min
c ∥u1 −g∥2
(3.2)
by a suitable, stable updating strategy.
The same approach can be used for optimizing manufacturing processes. Here,
the model and the simulation depend on structure and process parameters, which
can be manipulated in order to obtain optimal manufacturing results. We are also
able to determine their inﬂuence on unsatisfactory manufacturing results with the
help of parameter identiﬁcation. Such tasks give rise to inverse problems requiring
speciﬁc regularization techniques, see Section 3.5. Examples of the application of
these techniques to engineering problems are described in Chapters 6, 9, and 15.
3.2
Adaptive Dual-Dual Methods for Frictional Contact
Problems in Linear Elasticity
In order to present an adaptive method for elastic contact problems we consider the
following contact problem in 2D elasticity with Coulomb friction. Assume a linear

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
55
elastic body occupying an open-bounded domain Ω ⊂
 2. The smooth boundary
Γ := ∂Ω is divided into three disjoint parts, the Dirichlet boundary ΓD, where a
homogeneous Dirichlet condition holds, the Neumann boundary ΓN, where a pre-
scribed traction is acting on the body and the contact boundary ΓC where the body
is supposed to come into contact with a rigid foundation. Then, the displacement
vector ﬁeld u in Ω satisﬁes the following partial differential equation (PDE):
−divσ(u) = f
in Ω,
u = 0
on ΓD,
σ(u)·n = t0
on ΓN,
un ≤g; σn ≤0; (un −g)σn = 0
on ΓC,
if |σt| < μf |σn|,
then ut = 0
on ΓC,
if |σt| = μf |σn|,
then ∃s ≥0 : ut = −sσt
on ΓC,
(3.3)
where the stress tensor σ(u) is connected to the strain tensor ε(u) via Hooke’s law
for linear elasticity. The volume body force f ∈L2(Ω), the prescribed traction t0 ∈
H−1
2 (ΓN), the positive gap function g ∈H
1
2 (ΓC) and the friction coefﬁcient μf are
assumed to be given. To handle the Coulomb friction numerically it is approximated
by a sequence of contact problems using Tresca friction, as described by Neˇcas et
al. in [25]. For this reason, the friction law in (3.3) is replaced by the following
|σt| ≤F; σt ·ut + F |ut| = 0 on ΓC,
(3.4)
with a given friction function F ∈L2(ΓC).
The aim is to derive a formulation, which can be handled numerically and consid-
ers the stress tensor σ as primary unknown. Approximating the stresses with ﬁnite
elements saves error-prone post-processing and therefore leads to a better prediction
of the real contact situation. In the following, we will present a dual-dual formula-
tion for problem (3.3). A detailed derivation of this formulation and a corresponding
a posteriori error estimator is carried out in Andres [2].
Starting from the complementary energy minimization problem, see Sokolnikoff
[41], we apply Fenchel’s duality theory as described in Ito and Kunisch [26]. This
results in a saddle-point formulation of dual type involving Lagrange multipliers for
the governing equation, the symmetry of the stress tensor as well as the boundary
conditions on the Neumann and the contact boundaries. For the saddle-point prob-
lem, we can derive an equivalent variational inequality problem using results from
Ekeland and T´emam [20]. Both formulations include a non-differentiable functional
arising from the frictional boundary condition. Therefore, an additional dual La-
grange multiplier denoting the friction force is introduced. This procedure yields a
dual-dual formulation of a two-fold saddle-point structure involving the stress ten-
sor σ as primary variable as well as the displacements u in Ω and ϕ, λt and λn on
the Neumann and contact boundaries respectively. Furthermore, the rotation tensor
η and the friction force ν are considered as additional unkowns.

56
M. Andres et al.
We use the PEERS elements, see Arnold et al. [3], to approximate (σ, u, η)
and continuous, piece-wise linear functions to approximate the displacements on
the boundaries as well as piecewise constant functions to approximate the friction
force. The corresponding discrete variational inequality problem reads:
Find ((σh,νˆh),(uh,ηh,ϕ ˜h,λt,˜h,λn,˜h)) such that the following variational inequal-
ities are satisﬁed for all test functions ((τ,κ),(v,ξ,ψ,μt,μn))
˜a(σh,τ)+ B((uh,ηh,ϕ ˜h,λt,˜h),τ)+ dC,n(λn,˜h,τ)= g(τ)
B((v,ξ,ψ,μt),σh)−q(μt,νˆh)
= f(v,ψ)
dC,n(μn −λn,˜h,σh)
≤
0
∀μn ≥0
q(λ
˜h
t ,κ −νˆh)
≤
0
∀|κ| ≤1.
(3.5)
The bilinear forms and linear forms are deﬁned by
˜a(σ,τ) :=

Ω
σ :
−1τ dx,
dC,n(μn,τ) := ⟨μn,τn⟩ΓC,
B((v,ξ,ψ,μt),τ) :=

Ω

u·divτ + η : τ

dx+ ⟨ψ,τ ·n⟩ΓN + ⟨μt,τt⟩ΓC,
q(μt,κ) := ⟨μt,κ⟩ΓC,
g(τ) := ⟨g,τn⟩ΓC,
f(v,ψ) := (v,f)0 + ⟨ψ,t0⟩ΓN .
(3.6)
ΓD
ΓD
ΓN
ΓC
Ω
t0 =

0
−800(1−x2
2 + x4
16 )

g
(−4,1)
(4,−1)
Fig. 3.1 Geometry, boundary parts and rigid foundation (red).
The discrete system (3.5) can be solved by a nested Uzawa-type algorithm, see
Glowinski et al. [22] or Ekeland and T´emam [20] for an explanation of Uzawa
algorithms. The choice of different mesh-sizes h, ˜h and ˆh within the discrete for-
mulation is necessary due to the discrete inf-sup conditions for the bilinear form
B((v,ξ,ψ,μt),τ)+ dC,n(μn,τ), on the one hand, and for the bilinear form q(μt,κ),
on the other hand. They ensure the convergence of the nested Uzawa algorithm.
Within the algorithm, the new iterates for the normal displacement and the friction
force are projected onto the corresponding convex sets in each iteration step.
As a numerical example, we consider the domain Ω := [−4m,4m] × [−1m,1m]
with boundary Γ divided into the Dirichlet part ΓD := {−4m}×[−1m,1m]∪{4m}×

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
57
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−10
−8
−6
−4
−2
0
2x 10
−3
contact boundary ΓC
displacement [m]
(a) Normal displacement λ ˜hn on ΓC.
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−600
−500
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
100
contact boundary ΓC
normal stress [N/m2]
(b) Normal stress σhn on ΓC.
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4x 10
−3
contact boundary ΓC
displacement [m]
(c) Tangential displacement λ ˜ht on ΓC.
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
−600
−400
−200
0
200
400
600
contact boundary ΓC
tangential stress [N/m2]
(d) Tangential stress σht on ΓC.
Fig. 3.2 Approximated solutions on the contact boundary with mesh-size h = 0.0078m cor-
responding to 4 million degrees of freedom.
[−1m,1m], the Neumann part ΓN := [−4m,4m] × {1m} and the contact part ΓC :=
[−4m,4m]× {−1m}.
We choose Young’s modulus E := 200000 N/m2 and shear modulus G :=
80000 N/m2. The friction coefﬁcient is μf = 0.5 and the volume body force is
set to zero. On the contact boundary, we assume the body Ω to come into contact
with a rigid foundation, which has a positive distance g = 0.01m to Ω. In Figure 3.1
we show the domain and the distribution of the boundary.
In Figure 3.2, we display normal displacement and normal stress and tangential
displacement and tangential stress respectively. Due to the large system (3.5), the
number of degrees of freedom grows fast using the h-version. Since our solution
algorithm uses a nested loop to solve the inequalities in (3.5) the solution time is
very sensitive to the number of unknowns. Therefore, we are interested in adaptive
methods based on error estimators, which reﬁne the ﬁnite element mesh in those
regions of the domain, where the estimated error is large.

58
M. Andres et al.
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) After 4 adaptive iteration steps
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(b) After 12 adaptive iteration steps
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(c) After 24 adaptive iteration steps
Fig. 3.3
Meshes created during the adaptive reﬁnement process using the maximal local
error.
Using a Helmholtz decomposition of the error of the stress tensor similar to
Carstensen and Dolzmann [14], we can derive a residual error estimator involv-
ing additional indicators for all Lagrange multipliers. We use two different adaptive
methods based on the residual error estimator. The difference lies in the decision
process whether a ﬁnite element is reﬁned or not. The ﬁrst one determines the el-
ement with the largest error estimate ηmax and reﬁnes all elements T whose error
estimate ηT is larger than a constant θ ∈(0,1] times the maximal error ηmax, see
Figure 3.3(a)-(c). The second one is the ﬁxed-fraction method, see Bangerth and
Rannacher [4]. The estimates for all elements are ﬁrst sorted by magnitude. Then,
the constant θ denotes the percentage of reﬁned elements, see Figure 3.4(a)-(c).
The methods lead to comparable adaptive reﬁnements. There are three areas of
the domain Ω, where the elements are reﬁned frequently. The ﬁrst one is near the
Neumann boundary at the top of the domain. The indicator concerning the residuum
of the Neumann boundary condition σh · n −t0 has a big inﬂuence there and in

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
59
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(a) After 1 adaptive iteration step
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(b) After 5 adaptive iteration steps
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
2
3
4
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
(c) After 7 adaptive iteration steps
Fig. 3.4
Meshes created during the adaptive reﬁnement process using the ﬁxed fraction
method.
addition the boundary condition is changing in the corners. Moreover, the residuum
of the friction force (σh)t −νˆhF leads to a reﬁnement of the elements near the
part of the contact boundary where the domain is in contact. Finally, the indicator
referring to the antisymmetric part of the stress tensor (σh −σT
h ) leads to a reﬁne-
ment of those elements near the two corners at the bottom of the domain. As in the
ﬁrst case, the change of boundary conditions in the corners enforces this reﬁnement
additionally.
The application of adaptive methods for the dual-dual formulation of a frictional
contact problem leads to a faster convergence of the algorithm. First, the two-
fold saddle-point structure of the formulation involves several Lagrange multipli-
ers some of them requiring a different mesh-size. For this reason even the coarsest
discretization exhibits a large number of degrees of freedom. Therefore, a uniform
mesh-reﬁnement strategy can be applied ony few times, which may result in an
unsatisfactory accuracy of the solution in the contact zone. Second, the nested
Uzawa algorithm is very sensitive to the number of unknowns. Hence, applying
adaptive methods decreases the convergence time of the algorithm.

60
M. Andres et al.
3.3
Adaptive Mixed Schemes for Elasto-Plasticity with Contact
and Friction
In this section, we will discuss static contact problems in elasto-plasticity and the
approximation of their solutions by adaptive ﬁnite elements . We will focus on one
quasi-static time step of elasto-plasticity with linear kinematic hardening and homo-
geneous initial conditions. In elasto-plastic material models, the strain ε(u) is usu-
ally decomposed into the trace-free plastic part P ∈Q := {q ∈L2(Ω)2×2
sym|tr(q) = 0}
and the elastic part e := ε(u) −P. The stress is decomposed asσ = σb + σ p with
the backstress σb = Hp and the plastic stress σ p, see [16]. Here, the tensor H
describes the hardening behavior of the elasto-plastic material. Similar to Sec-
tion 3.2, the stress σ is coupled to the elastic part of the strain via Hooke’s law
σ(u,P) = C(ε(u)−P), where C is the tensor of elasticity. To model elasto-plasticity
with contact and friction we extend the system (3.3) by the inclusion
σ(u,P)−HP ∈∂j(P)
(3.7)
cf. [13, 23, 24]. Here, j is the dissipation functional with j(Q) := σy(Q : Q)1/2 and
σy > 0 is the yield stress in uni-axial tension. The equivalent variational inequality
is to ﬁnd W ∈K := {Z = (v,P) ∈W := V × Q | vn ≤g on ΓC} so that
a(W,Z−W)+Ψ(Z)−Ψ(W) ≥ℓ(Z−W)
(3.8)
for all Z ∈K, where we set V := {v ∈(H1(Ω))2 | v = 0 on ΓD} and
a((u,P),(v,Q)) := (σ(u,Q),ε(v)−Q)0 + (HP,Q)0,
Ψ(v,Q) :=

Ω j(Q)dx+

ΓC
μf |vt|ds,
ℓ(v,Q) := (f,v)0 + (t0,v)0,ΓN.
The formulation (3.8) is again equivalent to a minimization problem, which enables
us to resolve the functionalΨ by Lagrange multipliers . The stationary conditions of
the resulting saddle-point problem leads to the following mixed formulation : Find
(W,λ p,λn,λt) ∈W ×Λp ×Λn ×Λt such that
a(W,Z) = ℓ(Z)−(λ p,χ(Z))0 −⟨λn,γn(Z)⟩−(λt,γt(Z))0,ΓC,
(μp −λ p,χ(W))0 + ⟨μn −λn,γn(W)−g⟩+ (μt −λt,γt(W))0,ΓC ≤0
(3.9)
for all (Z,μp,μn,μt) ∈W ×Λp ×Λn ×Λt, where χ(v,Q) := σyQ, βn(v,Q) := vn,
βt(v,Q) := vt and
Λp := {μ ∈Q | μ : μ ≤1},
Λn := {μ ∈H−1/2(ΓC) | ∀v ∈H1/2
+ (ΓC) : ⟨μ,v⟩≥0},
Λt := {μ ∈L2(ΓC) | |μ| ≤1},

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
61
with H1/2
+ (ΓC) := {v ∈H1/2(ΓC) | v ≥0} and ⟨μ,v⟩denotes the usual dual pairing
of μ and v. We obtain a mixed discretization scheme by exchanging the space W
with the ﬁnite dimensional space Wh := Vh × Qh where Vh is the space of continu-
ous, piece-wise bilinear ﬁnite elements and Qh is the space of piecewise constant
ﬁnite elements on a quadrilateral mesh Th. Furthermore, we replace Λp, Λn, and
Λt by sets Λp,h, Λn,H, and Λt,H, which are constructed on the basis of piecewise
constant ﬁnite elements. The solution of the discrete mixed scheme is denoted by
(Wh,λp,h,λn,H,λt,H). The indeces h and H indicate mesh-sizes of the ﬁnite element
discretizations. To construct the set Λp,h we apply the mesh, which is already used
to deﬁne Wh since the resulting inclusion Λp,h ⊂Qh guarantees the unique existence
of the discrete Lagrange multiplier λp,h of the plastic variable. To ensure the unique
existence of the Lagrange multipliers λn,H and λt,H we have to make sure that a
discrete inf-sup condition is fulﬁlled. This can be done, for instance, by choosing
a coarser mesh-size H ≥h deﬁning their ﬁnite element discretizations, for details
see [38]. To include multiple yield surfaces we have to add some further plastic-
strain variables and dissipation functionals, which can again be resolved by extra
Lagrange multipliers into order to include them in the proposed mixed scheme. The
structure of the mixed formulation (3.9) remains the same. We refer to [16, 17, 40]
for more details.
In many standard discretization approaches for elasto-plasticity, the non-linearity
j is resolved by regularization, which allows for the application of Newton’s
method, cf. [17, 16]. A mixed discretization scheme, as discussed in this section,
results in a ﬁnite dimensional saddle-point problem, which can be solved, for in-
stance, by methods of quadratic programming or by simple Uzawa-type algorithms,
see [40, 23].
The main goal of our investigations is to derive a posteriori error estimates for
the proposed mixed scheme. For this purpose, we combine error estimates for mixed
schemes developed for problems in elasto-plasticity, on the one hand, and for contact
problems with friction, on the other hand. It is shown in [40] that the error of the
purely elasto-plastic problem without contact can be estimated by
∥W−Wh∥+ ∥λ p −λ p,h∥0 ≲ηp := η + ∥dev(σ(Wh)−HPh)−σyλ p,h∥0
where
η :=

∑
T∈T
h2
KRK + ∑
E∈E 0∪E
hERE
1/2
is the usual residual type estimator with the residuals
RT := ∥f + divσ(Wh)∥0,K,
RE :=
	
∥[σn(Wh)]∥0,E,
E ∈E ◦
h
∥g −σn(Wh)∥0,E,
E ∈E N
h .
To include contact with friction we have to add some additional terms accounting for
the geometrical and complimentary conditions as well as the frictional conditions,
cf. [36]. We then obtain

62
M. Andres et al.
∥W−Wh∥+ ∥λ p −λ p,h∥0 + ∥λn −λn,H∥−1/2,ΓC + ∥λt −λt,H∥0,ΓC
≲ηp + ∥(g −γn(Wh))−∥1/2,ΓC + |(λn,H,(g −γn(Wh))−)0,ΓC|
+ |Ψ(Wh,0)−(λt,H,γt(Wh)|
where (f)−:= −max{0,−f(x)} denotes the negative part of a function f. The term
∥dev(σ(Wh)−HPh)−σyλ p,h∥0 results from the use of quadrilaterals. It vanishes, if
dev(Wh) ⊂Qh holds. This is the case, if piece-wise linear ﬁnite elements on triangles
are applied. In this case, the estimates for purely elasto-plastic problems without
contact are similar to those for standard schemes, cf. [9, 15, 33].
In a numerical experiment, we apply the a posteriori error estimates within an
adaptive scheme, where we use the ﬁxed-fraction strategy, as described in Section
3.2. We set Ω := [0m,1m]2 and the material parameters E := 2,500N/m2, ν := 0.25,
ϑ := 500N/m2, σy := 10N/m2 and μf := 0.5. Furthermore, we deﬁne H := ϑI
(a) After 3 adaptive iteration steps
(b) After 5 adaptive iteration steps
(c) After 7 adaptive iteration steps
Fig. 3.5 Meshes created during the adaptive reﬁnement process.

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
63
(a) Plastic strain p
(b) Plastic stress λ p
Fig. 3.6 (a) the norm of the plastic strain, (b) norm of the Lagrange multiplier
where I, is the identity tensor. The outer forces are set to zero and the obstacle
function is given as φ(x) := (x−1/2)2 +0.98. Figure 3.5 shows meshes created by
successive adaptive reﬁnements on an initial mesh with 256 elements. We observe
reﬁnements towards the contact area on the upper part of the boundary and the lower
corners, where Dirichlet conditions change to Neumann conditions. In Figure 3.6,
the resulting plastic strain and the Lagrange multiplier for it are shown.
3.4
Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Dynamic Contact
Problems
In Sections 3.2 and 3.3, adaptive ﬁnite element methods for static contact problems
are presented. Here, we focus on dynamic contact problems, where inertial effects
are considered. When neglecting frictional effects, the strong problem formulation
is an extension of the static one given in (3.3) and reads
ρ ¨u−divσ(u) = f
in I × Ω,
u(0) = u0; ˙u(0) = v0
in Ω,
u = 0
on ΓD,
σ(u)·n = 0
on ΓN,
un ≤g; σn ≤0; (un −g)σn = 0
on ΓC,
(3.10)
with the initial displacement u0 and the initial velocity v0. The weak problem for-
mulation is
(ρ ¨u,v −u)+ (σ(u),ε(v −u)) ≥(f,v −u)
(3.11)
where the variational inequality has to hold for all v in the test space V and all t ∈I.
Two discretization approaches are commonly used: The ﬁrst one combines a ﬁ-
nite difference method in time with a ﬁnite element method in space, see [18, 27].

64
M. Andres et al.
An alternative is given by space-time ﬁnite element methods [6, 29]. The temporal
discretization has to be carried out carefully because it is difﬁcult to ensure energy
conservation and numerical stability.
For both approaches, we derive a posteriori error estimates and start our descrip-
tion with the ﬁnite difference/ ﬁnite element approach. There, Rothes method is
used, i. e. the temporal direction is discretized ﬁrst. We obtain a sequence of spa-
tial continuous but temporally discrete problems after the time discretization. The
structure of these problems is similar to static contact problems. Consequently, the
same techniques are used for the spatial discretization and for a posteriori error es-
timation. We modify the estimators given in [37] and apply them to the dynamic
problems. They lead to an estimate, which can be evaluated easily and fast. How-
ever the error is only estimated in the energy norm and no temporal effects are taken
into account. The detailed derivation is found in [5, 7, 8]. Currently, we are extend-
ing this approach by goal-oriented error estimators, which are originally designed
for static contact problems (see [39]).
The second approach relies on a space-time Galerkin discretization of the dy-
namic contact problems. We estimate the error in a user-deﬁned error-functional J,
for instance the von Mises equivalent stress in a certain region. By utilizing a so-
called dual problem, which represents the inﬂuence of a space-time point on the
error J(u)−J(uh), the a posteriori error estimate is derived. It consists of the primal
and the dual residual weighted by the approximation error of the dual and the primal
problem, respectively, as well as a term representing the error in the contact stresses
weighted by the dual solution. We obtain information about the spatial and the tem-
poral distribution of the error. However, a discrete solution of the dual problem has
to be calculated, i. e. a linear wave is additionally solved. More details are presented
in [29].
The a posteriori error estimates provide information about the spatial and, in the
dual-weighted residual (DWR) approach, temporal distribution of the discretization
error. To make use of this characteristic we have to localize the estimates, i. e. a
value is assigned to each single mesh cell. Two different techniques can be applied:
Integration by parts, see, e. g., [1], and ﬁltering [10]. By considering hyperbolic
problems, some technical additional steps are carried out to obtain appropriate re-
ﬁnement indicators, see [29]. For instance, a special treatment of the hanging de-
grees of freedom is necessary.
Once the spatial and temporal error distribution is known, we utilize adaptive
reﬁnement strategies, which select the mesh cells for reﬁnement. A well-known
strategy is the ﬁxed fraction strategy (see Section 3.2). Apart from this one, we
employ the more complex optimal mesh strategy [34], which optimizes the error
over the effort.
Employing a dynamic mesh approach, i. e. the meshes change between the time
steps, special attention has to be paid to the additional errors due to the mesh
changes. The data transfer has to be carried out in the appropriate way prescribed
by the space-time bilinear form. Typically, we have to calculate L2-projections. Fur-
thermore, the meshes of two time steps have to be connected closely. To ensure this,
we employ a mesh regularization strategy [29].

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
65
Fig. 3.7 Schematic view of the bar and the rigid foundation
Finally, we present a numerical example from [29]. A 2D Signorini problem is
considered. The basic domain Ω = [0m,0.05m]× [0m,0.2m], a bar, is depicted in
Figure 3.7, the time interval is I = [0s,1s]. We set the body force f = (0.5,0)⊤N/m2
and assume homogeneous initial conditions. Furthermore, a linear elastic material
law with modulus of elasticity E = 10N/m2 and Poisson ratio ν = 0.33 is used. We
choose the density ρ = 10kg/m2. The distance between the elastic body and the
rigid foundation is g = 0.005m. We are interested in the temporal mean value of the
von Mises equivalent stress σv(u) in a sub-domain B := [0m,0.05m]2 of Ω, i.e.
J(u) =
 T
0

B σv(u(x))dxdt,
σv :=

σ11(u)2 + σ22(u)2 + 3σ12(u)2. (3.12)
 0.001
 0.0015
 0.002
 0.0025
 0.003
 0.0035
 0.004
 0.0045
 0.005
 0.0055
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
eta
t
k
Fig. 3.8 Temporal mesh for η
In the next paragraphs, we will compare the results of the special contact estimator
η and the DWR estimator for the unconstrained problem ηe as well as different
adaptive methods. We use a ﬁxed spatial mesh with 4,096 cells and perform ﬁve
adaptive reﬁnement iterations to compare the temporal meshes. The temporal mesh
based on η is depicted in Figure 3.8. It uses larger time steps for small t and smaller
time steps for large t.
For the discussion of the spatial meshes, we choose a uniform decomposition of
the time interval I with M = 400 time steps. The spatial mesh created in the constant
mesh approach based on η is presented in Figure 3.9. The left end of the contact
zone and the left corners of Ω are well-resolved. In the left corners, we observe
stress singularities due to the geometry and the change of the boundary conditions.

66
M. Andres et al.
Fig. 3.9 Adaptive mesh resulting from the constant mesh approach
(a) m = 1
(b) m = 100
(c) m = 200
(d) m = 300
(e) m = 400
Fig. 3.10
Meshes created during the adaptive reﬁnement process in the dynamic mesh
approach
 0
 1000
 2000
 3000
 4000
 5000
 6000
 7000
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 0.7
 0.8
 0.9
 1
eta
t
Nm
Fig. 3.11 Number of mesh elements in the single time steps
In Figure 3.10, the adaptive meshes created in the dynamic mesh approach are
depicted. For m < 200, we mainly observe additional reﬁnements in the left corners,
where the stress singularities occur. In the 200th time-step, the left boundary of the
contact zone and B are well-resolved. The additional reﬁnements are more and more
concentrated in B for m > 200. In Figure 3.11, we can see that the number of mesh
cells increases for t > 0.4. It attains its maximum for t ≈0.7 and then decreases.
In Figure 3.12, the convergence behavior for different reﬁnement techniques is
compared. More detailed information about the dynamic mesh approach based on
η is presented in Table 3.1, where

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
67
 1e-04
 0.001
 0.01
 0.1
 10000
 100000
 1e+06
 1e+07
 1e+08
 1e+09
CM eta
CM eta_e
DM eta
DM eta_e
Uniform
M
∑
m=1
Nm
J(w)−J(wkh)
J(w)
Fig. 3.12 Convergence in the output functional J with respect to the total number of mesh
cells for different reﬁnement techniques
Erel := |J(u)−J(uh)|
|J(u)|
,
Ieff = J(u)−J(uh)
η
,
Ie
eff :== J(u)−J(uh)
ηe
.
The results in Table 3.1 substantiate the accuracy of the a posteriori error estimate.
From Figure 3.12, we deduce that the adaptive methods based on ηe as well as the
dynamic mesh approach based on η are very efﬁcient. They lead to comparable re-
sults. However, the constant mesh approach based on η is less effective. The results
nearly correspond to the results based on uniform reﬁnement.
Table 3.1 Quantitative results of the error estimator
M
M
∑
n=1
NM
Erel
Ieff
Ie
eff
50
12800
3.725·10−2 2.692 2.708
96
42912
1.700·10−2 3.119 3.132
182 176552 6.339·10−3 2.294 2.300
352 725908 3.351·10−3 2.532 2.536
678 4177824 5.664·10−4 1.049 1.050
3.5
Parameter Identiﬁcation and Inverse Problems
3.5.1
Basic Considerations
We will now turn to the second objective of this chapter, namely mathematical meth-
ods for the parametrization and optimization of simulation models. The starting
point for every simulation is an abstract model of the technical process under inves-
tigation. Such models typically depend on certain system and process parameters,
e.g. material constants in force law, stiffness and damping parameters for machine

68
M. Andres et al.
structures, feed rates and depth of cut. In real-life situations some of these parame-
ters are not known precisely or are acceptable only in a small range of manufacturing
conditions.
This general framework of parameter identiﬁcation can be used for different tasks
such as
• model calibration (parametrization),
• determining optimal structure and process parameters for achieving a desired
result (optimal control),
• determining the causes, if a desired result is not achieved with a given parameter
setting (process monitoring and correction).
In addition, the mathematical formulation of the solution process typically adds
some artiﬁcial parameters, such as step sizes or regularization parameters for sta-
bilizing the numerical solvers. Hence, one needs to calibrate the system by deter-
mining optimal values for those parameters. This becomes a challenging task, if
those parameters cannot be measured directly. Hence, they have to be estimated
from indirect measurements, e. g. the determination of damping parameters from
vibration measurements of a mechanical structure. This is the typical task of in-
verse problems: determining an unknown parameter from indirect measurements.
The forward mapping, which relates the parameters to the measurements, is typ-
ically called parameter-to-state mapping, which needs to be inverted to solve the
inverse problems.
There is a large variety of mathematical methods for the determination of such
parameters, if they are scalar. However, the development of mathematically justi-
ﬁed numerical schemes for the identiﬁcation of distributed parameters (functions,
such as spatially varying material constants or time-dependent process parameters)
is the subject of ongoing research. The technical difﬁculty in determining these pa-
rameters increases even more, if the parameter-to-state mapping is ill-posed, which
means that different and diverging parameter settings give - within the available
measurement precision - rise to the same data. In mathematical terms, the inverse
problem needs a regularization (stabilization).
In order to describe one of the most successful regularization schemes (the so-
called Tikhonov-regularization) let us introduce a formal notation of the inverse
problem. We denote the searched parameters by p, where we assume that p = p(t,x)
is a function depending on time and/or location. We assume that p has ﬁnite energy,
i. e.
 p2(s)ds < ∞.
Let us assume, that we cannot determine p, e. g. the unbalances of a rotating
system, directly. Hence, we have to rely on indirect measurements such as vibra-
tion measurements, g, at some sensor locations. The relation between p and g is
determined by a model or operator A, which describes the manufacturing process
as well as the measurement device. This model allows us to simulate artiﬁcial mea-
surements for different parameter settings p1. Again, in general, g = g(t,x) is a
distributed parameter, i. e. a function of time and/or location. We formally write
A(p) = g. However, measurement devices typically have limited precision and we

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
69
assume that only imprecise and noisy measurement data gδ are available, which
fulﬁll
g −gδ ≤δ. Here, δ denotes the measurement precision.
In its abstract form, we face the task of determining a set of parameters p such
that
A(p) ∼gδ .
(3.13)
Let us emphasize that for ill-posed problems it does not make sense to request
A(p) = gδ, which would lead to highly oscillating solutions with inﬁnite energy.
Instead, we stabilize the inversion by determining p as the minimizing solution of
min
A(p)−gδ
2
+ αΦ(p),
(3.14)
where Φ(p) is called the regularization, term which controls the energy of p and at
the same time models some a priori information on the optimal parameter setting.
The classical setting
Φ(p) =

p(s)2 ds
(3.15)
leads to parameters of minimal energy. This type of least squares approach has been
investigated since the early 1960’s. However, only recently, so-called sparsity reg-
ularization schemes have been introduced: there, one is not interested in restrict-
ing the energy of the parameter p but one aims at determining parameters, which
are“well-localized”. For an illustration of this concept, let us consider a cutting pro-
cess. One might want to determine the optimal, time-varying feed rate of the cutting
tool in order to obtain a pre-deﬁned surface g. In addition, the model A allows us to
simulate the resulting surface g for given feed rate f. Based on experience, a feed
rate f0 is suggested, which, however, leads to a sub-optimal result. The searched for
parameter, in this case, is the change of the feed rate, e. g. fopt = f + p and we want
to determine p such that A(f + p) ∼g. Enforcing the side condition, one prefers for
the modiﬁcation of the feed rate f over a minimal time span, leads to a modiﬁed
Tikhonov-functional. Solutions of this type are obtained with penalty terms of the
form
Φ(p) =

|p(s)|ds.
(3.16)
This minor change in the formulation of the minimization procedure has a tremen-
dous impact on the structure of the minimizer as well as on the complexity of the nu-
merical schemes needed for approximating the minimizers: the classical L2-penalty
term (3.15) allows to use Hilbert space techniques leading to least square approx-
imations, which have been well-developed for decades. In contrast, sparsity pro-
moting L1-penalty terms (3.16) require optimization techniques, which were ﬁrst
analyzed in 2004 by [19].
3.5.2
A Prototypical Inverse Problem in Ultra Precision
Machining
The problem of computing optimal balancing weights for rotating systems is of par-
ticular interest in the high precision cutting of surfaces in optical quality. In this

70
M. Andres et al.
preliminary section, we have developed a mathematical procedure for computing
balancing weights for the rotating spindle of an ultraprecise cutting machine, see
Figure 3.13. This leads to a linear inverse problem. In Section 15.4 we have in-
cluded a model of the machine-process interaction. This is based on modeling the
cutting forces, which are determined from the parameters of the cutting process as
well as from the rotational unbalances of an imperfect spindle. On the other hand,
the cutting forces excite forces on the spindle, which in turn can be interpreted as
a non-stationary unbalance of the spindle. The determination of optimal process
parameters as well as the determination of optimal balancing procedures leads to
non-linear inverse problems. The remainder of this section is a summary of our re-
sults presented in [12] and [28].
granite board
granite plate
main spindle
tool holder
workpiece holder
z-axis
x-axis
spindle casing
Fig. 3.13 Ultraprecision turning lathe [11]
3.5.2.1
Mathematical Model for Determining Balancing Weights
In order to apply the regularization techniques described in the previous section, we
need to determine the operator A and the data g related to the problem of computing
balancing weights.
The starting point for our approach is the basic vibration equation of the structure
mechanics
M¨u(t)+ D˙u(t)+ Su(t) = p(t),
(3.17)
in order to determine the vibrations u of the structure. To derive the system matrices
we use the Finite Element discretization of the machine structure. Figure 3.14 shows
the division of the machine into the main parts: spindle rotor, spindle casing, rotor
part of the motor and motor casing. This discretization method will be explained in
detail in Section 15.4.

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
71
The matrix M denotes the mass matrix, S the stiffness matrix and D the damp-
ing matrix of the system. The vibrations u of each node of the discretization are
collected in the vector u and the corresponding loads in vector p. Each node has 6
degrees of freedom: the displacements u, v and w in each space direction, the tor-
sion angle βz and the cross section slopes βx and βy. Since no information about the
damping properties is available the damping is neglected in a ﬁrst attempt, i. e. we
consider the equation
M¨u(t)+ Su(t) = p(t),
(3.18)
granite base
En
Engine
motor
Clateral
Caxial
C
C
Ctorsion
engine
casing
casing
C
spindle 
rotor
casing
engine
C
coupling
spindle
z
y
x
Fig. 3.14 Modeled parts of the turning lathe [12]
3.5.2.2
Solution of the Vibration Equation in Presence of Unbalances
If we only consider unbalances in our cutting machine and ignore unbalances in-
duced by the process forces, the right hand side p = punb(t) of Equation (3.18) has
harmonic entries depending on the angular velocity ω. In practice, the revolution
speed n in rpm is given, therefore we have ω = 2π
60 n. An unbalance is modeled as
a mass Δm displaced from the shaft by a vector r = rei·φ. Here, φ is the angle to a
given zero mark. If the displaced mass rotates with angular velocity ω, it induces a
harmonic centrifugal force (or load)
punb(t) = ω2p0eiωt,
with
p0 := Δmrei·φ.
We assume that the induced vibration is also harmonic with the same frequency ω,
i. e., u(t) = u0eiωt, with a complex and time independent amplitude u0. By inserting
this into (3.18) we get a (time-independent) expression for the vibration amplitude
of the vibration u0,
u0 = (−ω2M+ S)−1p0.
(3.19)
Therefore, u is determined via the solution u0 of (3.19).

72
M. Andres et al.
3.5.2.3
Balancing
We will now discuss the inverse problem of balancing a rotating system. As men-
tioned in the last section, the mounting of a workpiece onto the spindle often results
in an unbalanced system. This unbalance can be projected onto the two balancing
planes. Reconstructing this projected unbalance distribution allows us to determine
the necessary balancing weights, which have to be mounted in the balancer rings.
The reconstruction is carried out with the help of the above given model. To this
end, the workpiece has to be added to the model, i. e., we have to include an element
in the rotating part of the spindle. Balancing then means computing the balancing
weights as well as their positions from measurements of the vibration.
In order to determine the balancing weights from vibration measurements we
have formulated the problem as an operator equation
A(p) = u.
(3.20)
Here, p denotes the unbalance distribution we are looking for and u the vibrations
induced by this unbalance distribution measured at positions, where sensors are
mounted. The measurements for u are obtained from an idle run of the machine,
hence we have no forces from the cutting process and punb and u are harmonic and
related via their absolute values or amplitudes p0 and u0 by (3.19):
u0 = Ap0,
A = (−ω2M+ S)−1.
As explained in Subsection 3.5.1, the operator A is usually not continuously invert-
ible, which means that for given noisy data uδ with a data error of δ ≥∥u0 −uδ∥2
the function pδ
0 = A−1(uδ
0) might be an arbitrary bad approximation of the true
unbalance distribution p. The computation of pδ
0 can be stabilized by minimizing
(3.14), i. e. by solving,
pδ
0,α = min
p0
Ap0 −uδ
0

2
2 + α Φ(p0)

(3.21)
instead. The penalty term Φ(p) acts as a stabilizer and prevents large values of
Φ(p). Typical choices of Φ are, e. g.
Φ(p0) = ∥p0∥p :=

∑
i
|pi
0|p
1/p
, 0 < p ≤2.
(3.22)
Problems, which are not continuously invertible, are called ill-posed and require
regularization [21]. The functional (3.21) is well-known as Tikhonov-functionaland
forms a regularization method [31, 32]. The parameter α is called the regularization
parameter. It has to be chosen according to the amount of noise in the data and
assures the convergence of pδ
0,α to p0 as δ →0. A popular rule for the choice of α
is Morozov’s discrepancy principle, [35, 30].

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
73
In order to ﬁnd the underlying unbalance distribution projected onto the bal-
ancers, we have minimized the functional (3.21) with Φ(p) = ∥p∥2
2. For a numeri-
cal simulation, we place a speciﬁed unbalance at the node of the workpiece and use
our model to compute the related vibrations of the platform. We then consider the
inverse task of determining the unbalance (mass, location, phase) from the vibration
data.
In order to simulate a real-life situation it was assumed that the data can only
be obtained at two sensor positions. To simulate measurement errors we disturbed
the data at the sensor positions with noise (20 −30%). The sensors are ﬁxed in
y-direction on the spindle casing above the two balancers. We then reconstructed
the unbalance projected onto the balancing planes by minimizing (3.21), i. e., we
reconstructed an unbalance distribution, which produces approximately the same
vibrations at the sensors as the original unbalance created by the workpiece but is
located at the two balancer positions. As an example for an unbalance created by
a workpiece, we set 50 gmm at an angle of 30◦to the zero mark at the workpiece
node in the model. The corresponding amplitudes of the vibrations for a frequency
range of [5,··· ,50] Hz ’measured’ at the ﬁrst sensor are plotted in Figure 3.15 (line
without markers). The vibrations were disturbed with a noise level of 26 %, i. e.
(∥u−uδ∥)/∥u∥= 0.26. In the balancing planes, we reconstructed unbalances of 26
gmm in the ﬁrst and 26.5 gmm in the second plane, both with a position of 30◦.
The balancing masses at the balancers can be placed on a radius r = 41.5 mm, thus
the according masses are determined as 0.63 g in the ﬁrst plane and 0.64 g in the
second, both having to be placed under an angle of 210◦, see Figure 3.16. As shown
in Figure 3.15 (line with star markers), the setting of those balancing masses reduces
the vibration amplitude signiﬁcantly.
Fig. 3.15 Vibration amplitude for a workpiece unbalance of 50 gmm with 30◦angle before
and after balancing [12]

74
M. Andres et al.
Fig. 3.16 Balancing masses and angles for a workpiece unbalance of 50 gmm with 30◦,
balancing radius 41.5 mm. [12]
3.6
Conclusions and Outlook
The potential of adaptive methods in reducing the problem complexity has been
proven over the last years. We considered the application of adaptive methods for
the dual-dual formulation of a frictional contact problem, which leads to a faster
convergence of the algorithm. First, the two-fold saddle-point structure of the for-
mulation involves several Lagrange multipliers, some of them requiring a different
meshsize. For this reason, even the coarsest discretization exhibits a large number of
degrees of freedom. Therefore, a uniform mesh reﬁnement strategy can only be ap-
plied few times which may result in an unsatisfactory accuracy of the solution in the
contact zone. Second, the nested Uzawa-algorithm is very sensitive to the number
of unknowns. Hence, applying adaptive methods decreases the convergence time of
the algorithm.
Furthermore, we stated an a posteriori estimate for the discretization of the mixed
formulation of elasto-plasticity with linear kinematic hardening and contact. The es-
timate holds for lower order ﬁnite element discretizations based on triangles, quadri-
laterals and hexahedrons. Moreover, we have illustrated the application of adaptive
algorithms to frictional contact problems in elasto-plasticity.
Adaptive methods lead to effective discretizations applied to dynamic contact
problems; and the underlying a posteriori error estimates based on the DWR method
estimate the discretization error accurately. However, the implementation of such
methods is very complex and should be improved, e. g. by using parallelized algo-
rithms in the evaluation of the a posteriori estimates. A further reduction of comput-
ing time and memory requirement will enhance the applicability of these techniques
to real-world engineering problems. Furthermore, the a posteriori error estimates
and adaptive methods are extended to frictional and even more complex thermal
coupled contact problems.

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
75
The second part of this chapter was devoted to parameter identiﬁcation and in-
verse problems. The balancing of a rotating system is a prototypical example for
the use of inverse problem theory in industrial applications. The expensive multiple
step process of ﬁnding the best balancing weights and their positions can be reduced
to one computation using only one set of vibration measurements. We are paying
for this reduction of costs with the necessity of creating a mathematical model of
the rotating machinery, which relates unbalance distributions in the system to the
resulting vibrations. On the other hand, once such a model is created it can be used
repeatedly, e. g., in ultra precision machining, for every new machining process with
an unbalance-situation originating from the mounting of a new workpiece.
References
1. Ainsworth, M., Oden, J.T.: A Posteriori Error Estimation in Finite Element Analysis.
John Wiley & Sons, New York (2000)
2. Andres, M.: Dual-dual formulations formulations for frictional contact problems in me-
chanics. Ph.D. thesis, Institute of Applied Mathematics, Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover
(2011)
3. Arnold, D.N., Brezzi, F., Douglas Jr., J.: PEERS: a new mixed ﬁnite element for plane
elasticity. Japan J. Appl. Math. 1(2), 347–367 (1984),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF03167064, doi:10.1007/BF03167064
4. Bangerth, W., Rannacher, R.: Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Differential Equa-
tions. Birkh¨auser, Basel (2003)
5. Biermann, D., Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A., Scheidler, A.V., Schr¨oder, A.,
Weinert, K.: Space adaptive ﬁnite element methods for dynamic Signorini problems in
the simulation of the NC-shape grinding process. In: Proceedings of the 1st CIRP Inter-
national Conference on Process Machine Interactions (PMI), pp. 309–316 (2008)
6. Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A., Weinert, K.: Finite elements in space and time for
dynamic contact problems. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng. 76, 1632–1644 (2008)
7. Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Schr¨oder, A.: Space adaptive ﬁnite element methods for dy-
namic obstacle problems. ETNA, Electron. Trans. Numer. Anal. 32, 162–172 (2008)
8. Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Schr¨oder, A.: Space adaptive ﬁnite element methods for dy-
namic signorini problems. Comput. Mech. 44(4), 481–491 (2009)
9. Bostan, V., Han, W., Reddy, B.D.: A posteriori error estimation and adaptive solution
of elliptic variational inequalities of the second kind. Appl. Numer. Math. 52(1), 13–38
(2005), doi:10.1016/j.apnum.2004.06.012
10. Braack, M., Ern, A.: A posteriori control of modeling errors and discretisation errors.
Multiscale Model. Simul. 1(2), 221–238 (2003)
11. Brandt, C., Krause, A., Brinksmeier, E., Maaß, P.: Force modelling in diamond machin-
ing with regard to the surface generation process. In: Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference and Exhibition on Laser Metrology, Machine Tool, CMM and Robotic Per-
formance, LAMDAMAP 2009, London, June 30-July 2, pp. 377–386 (2009)
12. Brandt, C., Niebsch, J., Ramlau, R., Maass, P.: Modeling the inﬂuence of unbalances for
ultra-precision cutting processes. Zeitschrift f¨ur Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik
(2011) (in press)
13. Carstensen, C.: Numerical analysis of the primal problem of elastoplasticity with hard-
ening. Numer. Math. 82(4), 577–597 (1999), doi:10.1007/s002110050431

76
M. Andres et al.
14. Carstensen, C., Dolzmann, G.: A posteriori error estimates for mixed FEM in elasticity.
Numer. Math. 81(2), 187–209 (1998),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s002110050389,
doi:10.1007/s002110050389
15. Carstensen, C., Klose, R., Orlando, A.: Reliable and efﬁcient equilibrated a posteriori
error ﬁnite element error control in elastoplasticity and elastoviscoplasticity with hard-
ening. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Engrg. 195(19-22), 2574–2598 (2006)
16. Carstensen, C., Valdman, J., Brokate, M.: A quasi-static boundary value problem in
multi-surface elastoplasticity: part 1 - analysis. Math. Methods Appl. Sci. 27, 1697–1710
(2004)
17. Carstensen, C., Valdman, J., Brokate, M.: A quasi-static boundary value problem in
multi-surface elastoplasticity: part 2 - numerical solution. Math. Methods Appl. Sci. 28,
881–901 (2005)
18. Czekanski, A., El-Abbasi, N., Meguid, S.A., Refaat, M.H.: On the elastodynamic solu-
tion of frictional contact problems using variational inequalities. Int. J. Numer. Meth.
Engng. 50, 611–627 (2001)
19. Daubechies, I., Defrise, M., De Mol, C.: An iterative thresholding algorithm for linear
inverse problems with a sparsity constraint. Communications in Pure and Applied Math-
ematics 57(11), 1413–1457 (2004)
20. Ekeland, I., T´emam, R.: Convex analysis and variational problems. Classics in Ap-
plied Mathematics, vol. 28, english edn. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(SIAM), Philadelphia (1999); Translated from the French
21. Engl, H.W., Hanke, M., Neubauer, A.: Regularization of Inverse Problems. Mathematics
and its Applications, vol. 375. Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, Dordrecht (2000)
22. Glowinski, R., Lions, J.-L., Tr´emoli`eres, R.: Numerical analysis of variational inequali-
ties. Studies in Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 8. North-Holland Publishing Co.,
Amsterdam (1981); Translated from the French
23. Han, W.: Finite element analysis of a holonomic elastic-plastic problem. Numer.
Math. 60(4), 493–508 (1992), doi:10.1007/BF01385733
24. Han, W., Reddy, D.: Plasticity. Springer (1999)
25. Hlav´aˇcek, I., Haslinger, J., Neˇcas, J., Lov´ıˇsek, J.: Solution of variational inequalities in
mechanics. Applied Mathematical Sciences, vol. 66. Springer, New York (1988); Trans-
lated from the Slovak by J. Jarn´ık
26. Ito, K., Kunisch, K.: Lagrange multiplier approach to variational problems and appli-
cations. Advances in Design and Control, vol. 15. Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia (2008)
27. Laursen, T.A.: Computational Contact and Impact Mechanics. Springer, Heidelberg
(2002)
28. Niebsch, J., Ramlau, R., Brandt, C.: On the interaction of unbalances and surface quality
in ultra-precision cutting machinery. In: SIRM 2011, Darmstadt, Germany (2011)
29. Rademacher, A.: Adaptive ﬁnite element methods for nonlinear hyperbolic problems of
second order. Ph.D. thesis, Technische Universit¨at Dortmund, Published in Verlag Dr.
Hut, M¨unchen (2009)
30. Ramlau, R.: Morozov’s discrepancy principle for tikhonov regularization of nonlinear
operators. Numer. Funct. Anal. and Optimization 23, 147–172 (2002)
31. Ramlau, R.: A steepest descent algorithm for the global minimization of the tikhonov-
functional. Inverse Problems 18(2), 381–405 (2002),
http://stacks.iop.org/0266-5611/19/i=2/a=312
32. Ramlau, R.: Tigra - an iterative algorithm for regularizing nonlinear ill-posed problems.
Inverse Problems 19(2), 433–467 (2003),
http://stacks.iop.org/0266-5611/19/i=2/a=312

3
Adaptive Finite Elements and Mathematical Optimization Methods
77
33. Rannacher, R., Suttmeier, F.-T.: A posteriori error estimation and mesh adaptation for
ﬁnite element models in elasto-plasticity. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 176(1-4),
333–361 (1999)
34. Richter, T.: Parral multigrid method for adaptive ﬁnite elements with application to 3d
ﬂow problems. Ph.D. thesis, Ruprecht-Karls-Universit¨at Heidelberg (2005)
35. Scherzer, O.: The use of Morozov’s discrepancy priciple for Tikhonov regularization for
solving nonlinear ill-posed problems. Computing 51, 45–60 (1993)
36. Schr¨oder, A.: A posteriori Error Estimation in Mixed Finite Element Methods for Sig-
norini’s Problem. In: Numerical Mathematics and Advanced Applications. Proceedings
of ENUMATH 2009, pp. 801–808 (2010)
37. Schr¨oder, A.: Fehlerkontrollierte adaptive h- und hp-Finite-Elemente-Methoden f¨ur Kon-
taktprobleme mit Anwendungen in der Fertigungstechnik. Ph.D. thesis, Universit¨at Dort-
mund (2005)
38. Schr¨oder, A.: Mixed Finite Element Methods of Higher-Order for Model Contact Prob-
lems (2009); Humboldt Universitt zu Berlin, Institute of Mathematics, Preprint 09-16
39. Schr¨oder, A., Rademacher, A.: Goal-oriented error control in adaptive mixed FEM for
Signorinis problem. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 200(1-
4), 345–355 (2011)
40. Schr¨oder, A., Wiedemann, S.: Erro restimates in elastoplasticity using a mixed method.
Applied Numerical Mathematics 61, 1031–1045 (2011)
41. Sokolnikoff, I.S.: Mathematical theory of elasticity, 2nd edn. McGraw-Hill Book Com-
pany, Inc., New York (1956)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part II 
Grinding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 81–100. 
springerlink.com                                             © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 4  
High-Performance Surface Grinding 
J.C. Aurich, A. Bouabid, P. Steinmann, and B. Kirsch 
Abstract. This chapter presents experimental as well as modelling and simulation 
approaches to investigate a high-performance surface grinding process. The com-
plex material removal mechanisms generate transient cutting forces that cover a 
wide range of excitation frequencies. The generated cutting forces impact the 
grinding machine and lead to deformations, which depend on the machine’s me-
chanical properties. In general, these deformations have an influence on the cut-
ting forces. Deformations lead to a change of the depth of cut and, therefore, the 
cutting forces change. Thus, there are three aspects of great importance: the 
process, the machine and the process machine interaction. Advances in investigat-
ing the process are covered first. Afterwards, a new approach to model the ma-
chine, its deformation behavior and the way the machine interacts with the process 
will be described. 
4.1   Introduction 
In contrast to machining processes with defined cutting edges, grinding is affected 
by a large number of cutting edges. These cutting edges are single grains, whose 
number, geometry and relative position to the workpiece are not known. Although 
the depth of cut in high-performance surface grinding is in the range of millime-
ters, the depth of cut of the single grains is in the sub-micrometer range. For this 
reason, process machine interactions (PMI) in the range of micrometers have great 
influence on the single grains and hence on the complete process [1; 2; 3]. 
To approximate these PMI, a process model was coupled with a machine model. 
The process model, a kinematic-geometrical simulation of surface grinding 
(KSIM), is able to deliver undeformed chip parameters of each single grain in the 
contact zone and a high-frequency signal of the grinding force for each point of the 
time discretization. Based on the simulated grinding force, the machine model, a fi-
nite element model for spinning motions (SFEM), simulates PMI of the modeled 
machine structure in terms of the resulting displacements of the grinding wheel.  
Experimental and numerical studies will be presented. The experimental inves-
tigations have been carried out to gain an enhanced understanding of the influence 
of PMI on the process and the process results.  
The numerical studies include the determination of undeformed chip parame-
ters and a detailed description of the machine model. After presenting different 
coupling strategies of KSIM and SFEM, the result of a combined simulation will 
be described. 

82 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
4.2   Experimental Investigation of Process Machine Interactions 
in Grinding 
Experimental setup 
The surface-up grinding experiments were executed on a high performance grinding 
machine with high stiffness. Two series of tests were carried out. In the first series, a 
resin bonded CBN (cubic boron nitride) grinding wheel (B181) with a diameter of 
Ø 400 mm and a width of 12 mm was used. The second series of tests was aiming at 
higher loads of the machine system to achieve higher displacements, corresponding 
to stronger PMI. To achieve these higher loads, i. e. higher grinding forces, specific 
material removal rates higher than those of the first series were necessary. Therefore, 
another grinding wheel had to be used. This grinding wheel was an electro-plated 
CBN grinding wheel (B251) with a diameter of Ø 400 mm and a width of 24 mm. 
The workpiece material used for both series of tests was a heat-treated steel AISI 
4140H (42CrMo4V, DIN EN 10132-3, 55 ± 2 HRC) with dimensions of 
125 mm x 50 mm x 10 mm. 
Common measurement techniques were applied using a dynamometer for  
measuring normal and tangential forces and non-contact hall effect probe to meas-
ure the effective spindle power. In addition, the displacements of the grinding 
wheel relative to the headstock were measured (to examine the process machine 
interactions). The application of optical measurement systems was not possible 
due to the high amount of cooling lubricant, which was used during the experi-
ments. Also, tactile sensors could not be used because of the high rotational 
speeds. For this reason, the displacements were measured using eddy-current sen-
sors. They provide high-resolution signals and can be used in wet environments. 
In the first series of tests using the resin bonded grinding wheel, the measuring 
surface used for the sensors was a high-precision shoulder on the grinding wheel. 
In the second series of tests using the electroplated grinding wheel, the flange of 
the grinding wheel was used as measuring surface.  
First series of tests – resin-bonded grinding wheel 
The parameters used in the first series of tests are listed in Tab. 4.1. The focus of 
the experiments was the examination of PMI based on the measured displace-
ments of the grinding wheel. Therefore, the influence of grinding wheel speed, 
feed rate and depth of cut was evaluated.  
The average values of the normal grinding forces during stationary grinding 
ranged from Fn = 300 – 1,100 N, the tangential grinding forces ranged from 
Ft = 50 - 300 N. The displacements in normal and tangential direction reached 7 
and 1 µm respectively. However, the displacements in tangential direction could 
not be reliably measured because of the small absolute values. 
 
 
 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
83
 
Table 4.1 Grinding parameters for first series of tests 
grinding wheel 
diameter 400 mm; resin-bonded; B181 V240 (DIN ISO 6106) 
grinding parameters 
grinding wheel speed: 
depth of cut: 
feed rate: 
maximum specific material removal rate:  
60 - 100 m/s 
0.25 - 1 mm 
600 – 4,800 mm/min 
20 mm³/mm s 
lubricant 
cooling 300 l/min at 12 bar; wheel cleaning 100 l/min at 25 bar 
 
The relative dynamic stiffness during the stationary grinding process can be 
calculated based on the measured normal grinding forces and displacements . The 
calculated relative dynamic stiffness varies from 120 - 200 N/mm (Fig. 4.1).  
Variations of the wheel speed and the depth of cut do not influence the relative 
dynamic stiffness. The main influence on the relative dynamic stiffness in normal 
direction was exerted by the feed rate. Different feed rates result in different ma-
chine loading times. Feed rates of 1,200 mm/min or less reveal a relative dynamic 
stiffness of 120 - 160 N/µm. Feed rates of 2,400 mm/min or higher (grinding pass 
< 3 s) reveal an almost constant relative dynamic stiffness of approximately 
200 N/µm. It seems that the inertia of the traveling column of the grinding ma-
chine of more than 10 tons influences the measured displacements due to the short 
time periods of loading. 
 
Fig. 4.1 Relative dynamic stiffness from the first series of tests 
Second series of tests – electro-plated grinding wheel 
As mentioned above, the electro-plated bonding of the grinding wheel used for the 
second series of tests allows much higher loads than the resin bonding. The maxi-
mum specific material removal rate investigated was 87.5 mm³/mms (Tab. 4.2). 
 
 
 

84 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
Table 4.2 Grinding parameters for second series of tests 
grinding wheel 
diameter 400 mm; electro-plated; B251; 0.2 carat/cm²  
grinding parameters 
grinding wheel speed: 
depth of cut: 
feed rate: 
maximum specific material removal rate:  
63 - 100 m/s 
0.25 - 2 mm 
1,000 – 6,000 mm/min 
87.5 mm³/mms 
lubricant 
cooling 420 l/min at 12 bar; wheel cleaning 110 l/min at 25 bar 
 
Compared to the investigations with the resin bonded grinding wheel the spe-
cific material removal rate was significantly increased. However, the measured 
normal and tangential grinding forces were smaller than the forces reached with 
the resin-bonding wheel (Fn = 140 - 780 N and Ft = 30 - 260 N). The resulting 
maximum measured displacements in normal direction were smaller (4 µm), too.  
Similar to the first series of tests, the relative dynamic stiffness during the sta-
tionary grinding process was calculated based on the measured normal grinding 
forces and displacements. The relative dynamic stiffness ranged between 
110 N/µm and 210 N/µm (see Fig. 4.2). The same correlations for the relative dy-
namic stiffness as for the resin-bonded grinding wheel were observed. Variations 
of wheel speed and depth of cut showed minor influence whereas the feed rate had 
a strong influence. 
 
Fig. 4.2 Relative dynamic stiffness from the second series of tests 
In this second series of tests, the quality of the ground workpieces was eva-
luated. The surfaces were classified into three categories: 
• 
no grinding marks 
• 
grinding marks 
• 
grinding marks and burn 
According to these categories, the whole parameter range can be mapped into ac-
ceptable process results (no grinding marks) and inacceptable process results 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
85
 
(grinding marks or grinding marks and burn). The classification of the ground sur-
face was carried out visually since measurement with tactile sensors was not suit-
able. Fig. 4.3 shows the results of the mapped parameters. 
 
Fig. 4.3 Quality of the ground surface 
Similar to the relative dynamic stiffness, the feed rate is the dominating factor 
for the occurrence of grinding marks and burn. This can be seen when comparing 
different feed rates at constant material removal rates (e. g. 50 mm³/mms at 
63 m/s): At a feed rate of 2,000 mm/min there are no grinding marks or burn. 
However, at 3,000 mm/min grinding marks occurred. At 4,000 mm/min (and 
6000 mm/min) grinding marks as well as burn were detected. The occurrence of 
grinding marks can be attributed to the higher feeding path per wheel revolution at 
higher feed rates and the resulting higher chip thicknesses. The observed burn was 
caused by less cooling lubricant volumes per time unit when applying higher feed 
rates. Less grinding marks and burn occurred at higher wheel speeds. This results 
from the better cooling lubricant supply at higher wheel speeds and to the smaller 
feeding path per wheel revolution.  
Despite the correlation of the influence of feed rate on the relative dynamic 
stiffness and on the workpiece quality no direct correlation between these two pa-
rameters could be found. Higher relative dynamic stiffness does not necessarily 
result in higher or lower workpiece quality. When taking, for example, the feed 
rate 5,000 mm/min at grinding wheel speed 100 m/s the relative dynamic stiffness 
is approximately constant for all applied depths of cut. In contrast, the workpiece 
quality ranges from no grinding marks to grinding marks and burn. 
4.3   Modeling and Simulation 
4.3.1   Process Model  
In the following, the process model used is presented. Therefore, the concept of 
the model is described and some simulation results are shown. 

86 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
The process model used is based on a kinematic-geometrical simulation 
(KSIM) of surface and cylindrical grinding developed by Warnecke and Zitt [4, 5] 
and enhanced in further works [6, 7, 8]. The concept of the KSIM is based on the 
observed micro and macroscopic cause-and-effect chain in grinding. KSIM was 
developed and programmed in Fortran language as an offline tool for analyzing, 
dimensioning and optimizing grinding processes. In contrast to empirical process 
models, which correlate process inputs and process outputs mathematically, the 
KSIM simulates the grinding process as a penetration between the enveloping  
profile of the grinding wheel and the workpiece. Therefore, the micro and macro-
geometry of the grinding wheel and the workpiece as well as the process kinemat-
ics have to be modeled. 
To gain realistic simulation results the grinding wheel topography has to be 
modeled precisely. For this reason (in addition to the reproduction of the macro 
geometry), there is a special focus on the micro geometry of the grinding wheel. 
To model the topography in KSIM a “synthetic” generation of the grinding wheel 
was chosen instead of digitalizing the topography. This has the advantage that the 
modeling of the topography is not limited to the quality of the measuring system 
and to the available grinding wheels. Instead, the topography is generated based 
on microscopically-identified characteristic values. 
The modeling of the micro-geometry in KSIM accounts for the stochastically-
affected nature of grinding wheels. The geometrically-undefined shape as well as 
the unspecified number and distribution of the single abrasive grains are consi-
dered in KSIM. In modern high-performance, grinding tools are used, which con-
sist of a metal body and diamond or cubic boron nitride (CBN) abrasive grains for 
the most part. Those tools use metallic, ceramic or resin bonding. Most modeling 
concepts of diamond or CBN grains use abstract descriptions via simple geome-
trical bodies [1]. With this method, the morphology of real grains is only roughly 
approximated. The modeling of the grains in KSIM is based on complex basic 
geometries (ellipsoid, tetrahedron, cuboid and octahedron) according to the possi-
ble crystal morphologies of CBN and diamond. These basic geometry models are 
modified under statistic variations to gain more realistic grain models. Different 
grain sizes can be regarded by the statistic distribution of the long and short grain 
axis lAI and lAK. This detailed geometrical mapping of the grinding wheel topology 
in KSIM also enabled wear and dressing to be taken into account.  
The KSIM simulates the grinding process by overlapping the modeled grinding 
wheel and a geometrically-modeled workpiece. The overlapping between grinding 
wheel and workpiece is given by the process kinematic, which can be calculated 
from the motion of the machine axis by a coordinate transformation. This coordi-
nate transformation enables even complex process kinematics to be simulated 
based on the process type and machine setup. 
The output parameters of the simulation are the experimentally not measurable 
undeformed chip thickness (hcu), chip length (lcu), chip width (bcu) and chip cross 
section (Acu) of every single grain. In the simulation, ideal cutting is assumed, 
which means that ploughing of material does not occur and each grain removes 
the whole material volume encountered. The superposition of every single grain 
contact enables the examination of the resulting macro and micro-geometry of the 
workpiece. Based on the simulated chip parameters a specific grinding force can 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
87
 
be calculated depending on the process type and the workpiece material. The chip 
cross section and the specific grinding force are used to calculate the forces of 
each single grain based on a simplified approach of Kienzle. The Kienzle ap-
proach can be used to calculate cutting forces, e. g. for turning or milling 
processes. The simplified approach is based on a specific cutting force kc,sim (an 
experimentally-determined parameter), the undeformed chip thickness and the 
width of the undeformed chip. The total process force can then be calculated by 
cumulating the forces from each kinematic grain (i. e. each grain that removes ma-
terial) (Fig. 4.4). 
 
Fig. 4.4 Flow chart of the kinematic simulation 
For the simulations to be carried out the modeled grinding wheel with the di-
mension of Ø 400 x 3 mm² was used. By using a smaller grinding wheel width 
than the wheel used in the experiments the calculation time of the kinematic simu-
lation could be reduced (without reducing the simulation quality [9]). 
Based on the applied manufacturing process (electroplating) a grain protrusion 
height of 35 % of the nominal grain size of 251 µm was used to model the grind-
ing wheel. This means that about 163 µm of the grain height were embedded in 
the bonding, resulting in an average grain protrusion height of 88 µm. Because of 
the statistic nature of the modeling process the grain size distribution leads to sig-
nificant deviations of the average grain protrusion height. This results in grains 
with high protrusion heights that remove the whole material, resulting in chip 
thicknesses of 10 to 15 µm. Those grains would wear very fast under real grinding 
conditions. This rapid wear would lead to a stationary grinding process characte-
rized by a high number of kinematic grains distributing the material removal 
process over many grains with less chip thickness. Since in KSIM only one wheel 
revolution is simulated with no wear a numerical dressing process was imple-
mented in KSIM to model grinding wheels in a stationary wear state [8]. Within 
this numerical dressing process, the grain protrusion height of every single grain is 
ideally cut down to a specified limit (dressing height, see Fig. 4.5) to fit real grind-
ing conditions, for the simulations in this study 90 µm.  

88 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
 
Fig. 4.5 Numerical dressing process 
The simulated process parameters were chosen corresponding to those of the 
experimental investigations, which have been carried out. These parameters are 
listed in Tab. 4.3. 
Table 4.3 Model specifications and process parameter for kinematic simulation 
modeled grinding 
wheel 
diameter 400 mm; width 3 mm; B251; 1,200 grains/cm² 
process parameter 
for kinematic simu-
lation 
grinding wheel speed: 
depth of cut: 
feed rate: 
maximum specific material removal rate:     
63 - 100 m/s 
0.5 - 1 mm 
1,000 – 5,000 mm/min 
83.33 mm³/mms 
 
In each kinematic simulation, two grinding wheel revolutions are simulated. 
The first grinding wheel revolution is simulated with an ideally even workpiece. 
After this revolution, the contact zone is prepared, i. e. a ground surface is gener-
ated. The second grinding wheel revolution is then operated in this ground surface. 
This is comparable to a real grinding process where the grains always penetrate a 
ground surface in the contact zone. The following simulation results have been ob-
tained from the second revolution (Fig. 4.6): 
• 
mean value of the average chip thickness of all kinematic grains (hcu,med) 
and 
• 
number of momentarily active grains within the contact zone (N’mom). 
 
Generally, an increase of either the feed rate or the depth of cut results in higher 
specific material removal rates. This means that a higher material volume has to 
be ground in the same time, resulting in a higher chip thickness and a higher num-
ber of momentarily active grains. The results show a progressive increase for the 
chip thickness and a degressive increase of the number of active grains with  
increasing feed rate. The increase of active grains is limited due to the constant 
contact length at a constant depth of cut, which limits the maximum number of 
available grains for the material removal process. For this reason, the chip thick-
ness shows a progressive increase because it has to compensate the degressive in-
crease of active grains with increasing material removal rates. 
 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
89
 
 
Fig. 4.6 Simulation results  
A comparison of the average chip thickness and the number of active grains for 
different grinding wheel speeds reveals higher values for lower grinding wheel 
speeds. At higher grinding wheel speeds, less material has to be removed within 
each grinding wheel revolution. Thus, the chip thickness and the number of active 
grains decrease. 
4.3.2   Machine Model 
The modeling of the machine has been carried out by means of the finite element 
method on the base of the so-called Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) ap-
proach. The system to be modelled consists of a grinding wheel, which rotates 
with a constant angular velocity (Fig. 4.7). The notations used are briefly ex-
plained in the following. 

90 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
 
Fig. 4.7 Model of the grinding wheel. For the machine model there are two important radi-
uses: the inner radius Ri which the wheel is fixed at, and the expanded radius R* that serves 
as reference to determine the wheel’s deformation 
The grinding wheel has an inner radius Ri, which is assumed to remain constant 
throughout the simulation since the grinding wheel is fixed to the spindle. Due to 
the centrifugal forces caused by the angular velocity ω the outer radius Ro expands 
to the radius R* by the radial expansion u*. 
Starting-up processes enabling the grinding wheel to accelerate from the idle 
state up to the velocity ω do not have to be considered. It will be assumed that at 
the time t = 0 the grinding wheel already rotates with the velocity ω and thus has 
the outer radius R*. The depth of cut, which the grinding wheel is initially plung-
ing into the workpiece with, is denoted by δ0. The cutting force resulting from δ0 
is denoted by F0. Due to this force, which is assumed to only radially act at one 
point of the wheel’s circumference, the grinding wheel deforms in radial direction 
by the amount u, defined relatively to the expanded radius R*. In tangential direc-
tion, the force application point is retained by defining an additional bearing. The 
deformation u is taken to be positive, if the outer radius R* increases. The depth of 
cut, which results when the machine’s deformation is taken into account, is simply 
given by δ = δ0 + u. According to this nomenclature one can distinguish initial 
values (δ0 and F0(δ0)), which are set up at the beginning of the process, and effec-
tive values (δ and F(δ)), which result during the cutting process, for both the depth 
of cut and the cutting force.  
The machine model can now be used either independently or in conjunction 
with a process model to run both uncoupled and coupled simulations respectively. 
Simulation results are presented in a later section. 
4.3.3   Coupling Strategies 
The basic concept of the coupling strategies is an exchange of the simulation re-
sults between the machine (SFEM) and process (KSIM) model. That means that 
the output data of one model is used as input data for the other model and vice 
ω = const. 
Grinding Wheel 
R*
Workpiece 
F0(t)
Ri
Ro
u*
u
δ 
δ0
 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
91
 
versa. The coupling algorithm is based on general modeling strategies for coupled 
problems, i. e. Neumann and Dirichlet boundary conditions are applied. In the fol-
lowing, four coupling strategies are presented. Strategies 2 and 4 are closely re-
lated to each other. 
Coupling Strategy 1 - data exchange and iteration until convergence after 
multiple time steps (each wheel revolution) 
The process model (KSIM), as presented in chapter 4.3.1, provides simulation re-
sults after every grinding wheel revolution. For this reason, data exchange of 
process and machine model is carried out after each grinding wheel revolution. 
The resolution of the simulated grinding force signal depends on the grinding 
wheel speed and the wheel diameter. Also, one grinding wheel revolution consists 
of a number of time steps (here 1,000), comparable to the number of data points 
for one revolution in real measurements. When modeling, for example, the grind-
ing wheel presented in 4.3.1 (Ø 400 mm, grinding wheel speed 100 m/s) the simu-
lated grinding force signal for one wheel revolution has a resolution of 80 kHz. 
The coupled simulation starts with the generation of a force signal by the 
process model. For this force signal an ideal grinding machine is assumed, i. e. no 
machine deformations are considered. This force signal is used as input data for 
the machine model. The machine model generates displacements of the grinding 
wheel for one wheel revolution based on the input force signal. After resetting the 
workpiece topography (to simulate the same grinding wheel revolution as before) 
the process model is restarted based on the generated displacements by the process 
model. In doing so, the penetration of the grinding wheel and the workpiece is 
modified, which results in a different grinding force signal. This altered force sig-
nal again serves as input for the machine model and so forth. This iteration is re-
peated until “convergence” occurs, i. e. the simulated force and / or displacement 
signals (average values) of two consecutive iteration steps show minor deviations 
(Fig. 4.8).  
 
Fig. 4.8 Coupling strategy 1 - data exchange after each wheel revolution 
Coupling Strategy 2 - data exchange and iteration until convergence for each 
time step 
The principle of coupling strategy 2 is similar to that of coupling strategy 1. The 
difference is that the data exchange between the process and machine model 
(grinding force and displacement) is conducted after each time step within one 
grinding wheel revolution instead of the complete revolution (Fig. 4.9). 

92 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
 
Fig. 4.9 Coupling strategy 2 - data exchange and convergence for each time step 
In other words, coupling strategy 1 is applied for each single time step until con-
vergence is reached. When convergence of force and / or displacement is achieved 
for the current time step the iteration cycle will be started again for the next time 
step. When using 1,000 time steps for one wheel revolution coupling strategy 2 con-
sists of 1,000 iteration cycles, each with numerous iteration steps. This results in 
very large simulation times so that a simplification of each iteration cycle represents 
an interesting alternative solution, as will be discussed in coupling strategy 4.  
The main advantage of coupling strategy 2 is the possibility to simulate only a 
part of one grinding wheel revolution. That means computing time can be saved, if 
less than one wheel revolution is needed. 
Coupling Strategy 3 - asynchronous data exchange for each time step without 
iteration 
In coupling strategy 3, no iteration cycles are used. As in coupling strategy 2, the 
force signal at time step tn is used as an input for the machine model. The calcu-
lated displacement then serves as input for the process model, however, at time 
step tn+1 (Fig. 4.10).  
 
Fig. 4.10 Coupling strategy 3 - asynchronous data exchange for each time step 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
93
 
Coupling Strategy 4 - data exchange and iteration until convergence for each 
time step based on an empirical cutting force model 
As already mentioned, this coupling strategy corresponds to coupling strategy 2 
and represents coupling in a strong form. That means that a converged coupled so-
lution is achieved at every time step. The coupling iterations are, however, carried 
out based on the assumption that the process force depends linearly on the cutting 
depth, i. e. 
(
)
0
0
0
δ
δ
⋅
= c
F
                                                  (4.1) 
where c denotes the “process stiffness”. This assumption has been undertaken 
based on the linear relation between the chip cross section and the specific grind-
ing force, to be found in the Kienzle approach, for example, and furthermore 
enables a considerable acceleration of the coupled simulation. 
Eq. (4.1) is only valid for an ideally stiff grinding wheel, which the cutting 
depth is constant for throughout the whole process. For a real deformable grinding 
wheel, however, the grinding force is not a function of the cutting depth set up but 
of the actual (or effective) one. It will be assumed that the initial depth of cut δ0 
leads to a wheel deformation u, which simply has to be added to δ0. By multiply-
ing the sum [δ0 + u] by the process stiffness c an adjusted force value is then  
obtained and can be subsequently used to calculate the deformation again. This 
coupling procedure can be written as: 
 
(δ0  F0  u0) 
 
(δ1  F1  u1) 
 … 
(δconv.  Fconv.  uconv.) 
uncoupled solution 
 
1. coupling 
iteration 
 
convergence iteration 
(coupled solution) 
 
In summary, the models of the process, the machine and the process machine 
interactions presented above constitute a complete simulation procedure, which 
can now be used to run coupled simulations. 
4.3.4   Coupling Results 
The simulation results are summarized in Figs. 4.11 to 4.13. Of high interest for 
the following discussion are differences between the coupled and the non-coupled 
simulation. 
A typical force signal generated by KSIM for one wheel revolution is given in 
Fig. 4.11a. A fast Fourier transform of the force signal shows a dominating contri-
bution of frequencies of up to 5 kHz (Fig. 4.11b). Beyond this frequency, the 
grinding grits excite the machine at almost all frequencies. 
The KSIM and SFEM models were coupled using coupling strategy 1. In 
SFEM, only static terms were activated just in order to check the convergence be-
havior of the coupled process machine system. Fig. 4.11c shows how the mean 
values over one grinding wheel revolution for the force and the displacement con-
verge after about 6 iterations to 910 N and 6.2 µm respectively. These values are 

94 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
smaller than the values gained after the first iteration (1,050 N and 7.2 µm), i. e. 
smaller than the values corresponding to the uncoupled solution. 
Coupling strategy 1 is well suited for the case of quasi-static loading. In simu-
lating a high-performance grinding process it has been observed that the high 
loading and deformation rates lead to an abrupt change of the state of single grits 
from contact to non-contact. This effect led to excessive fluctuations in the simu-
lated force and deformation values causing the coupled simulation to diverge (de-
spite the reasonable average values). For this reason, coupling strategy 1 is not 
suitable for coupled simulations involving vigorous dynamics.   
In order to investigate dynamic properties of the coupled process machine sys-
tem a coupling strategy, which guarantees a strong coupling has to be used, i. e. 
either strategy 2 or 4. The first one comprises more modeling details, the last is 
more economic in terms of simulation times. In addition, the fast Fourier trans-
form of the force signal simulated in KSIM suggests carrying out the coupled 
simulation within a wide range of loading frequencies. In the following, the force 
signal provided by KSIM is substituted by a set of harmonic depths of cut with 
different frequencies ranging from 0 to 20 kHz. This set results in a set of harmon-
ic loads, which are now able to excite the grinding wheel at different frequencies. 
The process machine interaction is then simulated using coupling strategy 4. The 
corresponding simulation model is based on the parameters listed in Tab. 4.4. All 
of them represent parameters commonly encountered in real grinding processes. 
For the process stiffness c a high value is used in order to emphasize the effect of 
coupling. 
Table 4.4 Parameters for the coupled simulation, grouped into machine, process and coupl-
ing parameters 
Machine model: 
Inner radius Ri 
: 
63.5 mm 
Outer radius Ro 
: 
200 mm 
Elastic modulus E 
: 
210 GPa 
Poisson ratio ν 
: 
0.3 
Material density ρ 
: 
7.85 g/ccm 
Boundary conditions 
: 
– No displacement at the inner boundary. 
– No tangential displacement at the point the 
load is acting on. 
Initial (setup) load F0(t) 
: 
Results readily form the product [c ⋅ δ0(t)]. 
 
 
 
Process model: 
Angular velocity ω 
: 
200 rad/s, i. e. roughly about 2,000 rpm. 
Depth of cut δ0(t) 
: 
Harmonic function with a fixed mean value of 5 
µm, a fixed amplitude of 1 µm and variable fre-
quencies ranging from 0 to 20 kHz. 
Coupling  model: 
Process stiffness c 
: 
200 N/µm 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
95
 
The time-dependent force and deformation signals are exploited in the follow-
ing by means of their frequency and amplitude. Since the amplitude of a time de-
pendent signal is generally not constant with respect to time the amplitude mean 
value over the whole signal is used. 
The frequency spectrum of the grinding wheel can be obtained by varying the 
excitation frequencies and simulating the resulting mean deformation amplitude 
for each frequency. Also, the amplitude spectrum can be normalized by the de-
formation amplitude, which results when the grinding wheel is loaded by a quasi-
static force. A normalized representation enables different simulation models to be 
compared to each other. 
Fig. 4.12a shows how coupling shifts the eigenfrequencies gained from an un-
coupled simulation to higher values. Note that the frequency spectrum obtained from 
a coupled simulation can no longer be considered as a property of the grinding 
wheel but of the whole system consisting of grinding wheel, process and interaction. 
To answer the question as to why the eigenfrequencies increase when coupling 
is included one considers the applied force and the resulting deformation in time 
domain, Fig. 4.12b,c. All forces shown are normalized by dividing them by the 
same value, namely by the amplitude of the initial load F0(t), so that the initial and 
the effective force can be readily compared to each other with regard to both am-
plitude and frequency. However, all deformations are normalized by dividing 
them by their maximum value within the considered time interval. This has the 
advantage that, in normalized form, forces and deformations can be represented in 
the same diagram. A comparison of the frequencies is also possible. However, the 
deformation amplitudes resulting from different simulations cannot be readily 
compared to each other since deformations are not normalized by the same entity. 
Also, only some special loading frequencies will be presented here: 
• 
the loading frequency of f0 = 12.8 kHz, which corresponds to an eigen-
frequency of the uncoupled process machine system and 
• 
the loading frequency of f0 = 13.3 kHz, which corresponds to an eigen-
frequency of the coupled process machine system. 
f0 = 12.8 kHz 
Although this loading frequency corresponds to an eigenfrequency of the grinding 
wheel as given in Fig. 4.12a there is no significant increase of the deformation 
amplitude throughout the coupled simulation. Fig. 4.12d shows that through cou-
pling the effective force signal acquires smaller amplitudes than the initial one be-
cause a deformed grinding wheel generates a smaller depth of cut than an unde-
formed one. In the first excitation cycle, the maximum amplitude of the force 
effectively acting at the grinding wheel is only about 18 % of the initial force. An-
other more important aspect is the fact that through coupling the force signal ac-
quires a higher frequency. This is the reason why the shifting effect observed in 
Fig. 4.12a occurs in direction of higher and not smaller frequencies. Fig. 4.12b 
shows that the force, which is effectively applied, and the resulting deformation 
oscillate with different frequencies. Under this circumstance, the deformation am-
plitude remained almost constant over the whole loading history. So, for reso-
nance, effective force and deformation must first synchronize. This happens at the 
frequency of 13.3 kHz. 

96 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
 
Fig. 4.11 Results of the coupled simulation based on coupling strategy 1. (a) Force signal 
simulated by KSIM. (b) FFT-transform of the force signal. (c) Convergence behavior of the 
coupled simulation. 
 
 
 
Frequency in kHz
Normal Force in kN 
Time in ms
Deformation in µm 
Mean normal force
Mean grinding wheel deformation 
1.6 
1.4 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
0                 2.5              5.0               7.5              10.0            12.5 
1.2 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0 
   2  4  6  8  10  12  14  16  18  20  22  24  26  28  30  32  34  38 
0 
-2 
-4 
-6 
-8 
-10 
-12 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Iteration
0.025 
0.02 
0.015 
0.01 
0.005 
0 
b 
a 
c 
Amplitude in kN 
Force in kN 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
97
 
 
Fig. 4.12 Results of the coupled simulation based on coupling strategy 4. (a) Frequency 
spectrum. (b)-(c) Effective force and displacement in time domain for special loading fre-
quencies. (d) Influence of coupling on the loading frequency. (e) Influence of coupling on 
the variation of the effective force over time. 
0,1
1
10
100
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
Normalized 
Force /Displacement 
Loading Frequency: 12.8 kHz 
Normalized Force 
Mean Deformation Amplitude 
log | A / A(static,non-coupled) | 
Loading Frequency in kHz 
Non-coupled
Radial Deformation 
Effective Force
Initial Force 
Effective Force 
1.0 
0.5 
0 
-0.5 
-1.0 
1.0 
0.5 
0 
-0.5 
-1.0 
0 
 Time 
in 
ms   
0 1
12.8 kHz 
Non-coupled 
Force 
Time 
Coupled
13.3 kHz 
d 
4 
2 
0 
-2 
-4 
10             Time in ms         10.25 
e 
b 
c 
a 
10               Time in ms           10.25 
Coupled

98 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
f0 = 13.3 kHz 
As shown in Fig. 4.12c, effective force and resulting deformation oscillate for this 
loading frequency (after some loading cycles) with the same frequency. Only 
through their synchronisation can the coupled process machine system get into 
resonance. 
Another important difference between the coupled and uncoupled system is that 
force and deformation are inversely influenced by each other. In the case of cou-
pling, the deformation patterns resulting from a harmonic load, a beat for example, 
is mirrored into the force pattern and can thus also be retrieved there (Fig. 4.12e). 
This is not the case for an uncoupled simulation. 
In Fig. 4.13, the eigenmodes of the grinding wheel are presented. They are just 
briefly described in the following. At the first eigenfrequency, the grinding wheel 
is oscillating in vertical direction and thus behaves approximately like a rigid 
body. The second eigenform represents an alternating dilation and contraction in 
horizontal and vertical directions. In the third eigenmode, the grinding wheel takes 
a triangular form. In the forth one, the outer wheel boundary expands and con-
tracts uniformly. Finally, polygonal wheel forms result at higher eigenfrequencies. 
 
 
Fig. 4.13 Eigenmodes of the spinning grinding wheel (ω = 200 rad/s). The contour plots 
represent the field of the radial deformation. Positive values mean an increase in the ex-
tended radius of the outer wheel R* due to deformation. 
4.4   Conclusion 
Extensive experimental research was conducted to examine PMI during grinding. 
In doing so, displacements of the grinding wheel were measured and the resulting 
relative dynamic stiffness was mapped for a large parameter field. High stiffness 
was identified for high feed rates for different grinding wheels. The examination 
of the workpiece quality revealed grinding marks and burn when applying high 
@ 5.2 kHz 
@ 8.4 kHz 
@ 12.8 kHz 
@ 15.2 kHz 
@ 11.2 kHz 

4   High-Performance Surface Grinding 
99
 
feed rates. The experiments conducted enhance the understanding of the cause-
and-effect chain in grinding and the influence of PMI on the process and the proc-
ess result. 
Also, a complete simulation procedure enabling the modelling of the process, 
the machine and their interaction was discussed in detail. There are differences be-
tween results gained from uncoupled and coupled simulations, which can be 
summarized as follows:  
In the uncoupled process machine system: 
• 
Loading frequencies, which correspond to eigenfrequencies of the ma-
chine, lead to a critical (non-stable) process. 
• 
The grinding force results in a machine deformation that, however, has no 
inverse influence. 
• 
The knowledge of the frequency spectrum of the machine provides in-
formation about critical loading frequencies, which are not allowed, if the 
process has to be kept stable.  
In contrast, simulations of the coupled process machine system revealed that: 
• 
Coupling is more complex than just scaling the amplitude and the fre-
quency of the initial load. 
• 
A loading frequency, which corresponds to an eigenfrequency of the ma-
chine, does not necessarily lead to a critical process. 
• 
Vice versa, a loading frequency, which lies outside the eigenfrequencies, 
can be critical. 
The last three aspects suggest that the knowledge of the natural frequencies of the 
machine does not generally suffice to judge, whether a harmonic load is critical or 
not. This again underlines the importance of simulation techniques in general and 
of coupled simulations in particular.  
Concerning simulation techniques one can say that there are quite efficient 
simulation techniques to simulate the deformation behavior of the grinding wheel 
due to transient process forces. This is primarily enabled by the use of the ALE-
approach instead of the conventional Lagrangian one so that the kinematically less 
relevant rigid body motion is a priori omitted. This also enables the application of 
the force at a fixed point without contact-searching steps. 
There is still need to bring simulation and experimental techniques closer to-
gether. Providing confident information about the real workpiece surfaces is still 
not reliably possible. Also, real-time simulations of high-performance grinding 
processes are currently not available. 
The physical phenomena taking place during PMI are quite complex and not 
always accessible for measuring setups so that efficient simulation techniques are 
of great importance to investigate the grinding process. Although the simulation 
techniques presented in this chapter do not completely fit experimental results 
they can still be considered as an important step in understanding the phenomena 
involved in the PMI. 

100 
J.C. Aurich et al.
 
References 
[1] Brinksmeier, E., Aurich, J.C., Govekar, E., Heinzel, C., Hofmeister, H.-W., Klocke, F., 
Peters, J., Rentsch, R., Stephenson, D.J., Uhlmann, E., Weinert, K., Wittmann, M.: 
Advances in Modelling and Simulation of Grinding Processes. CIRP Annals - Manu-
facturing Technology 55(2), 667–696 (2006) 
[2] Aurich, J.C., Biermann, D., Blum, H., Brecher, C., Carstensen, C., Denkena, B., 
Klocke, F., Kröger, M., Steinmann, P., Weinert, K.: Modelling and Simulation of 
Process - Machine Interaction in Grinding. Production Engineering 3(1), 111–120 
(2008) 
[3] Herzenstiel, P., Bouabid, A., Steinmann, P., Aurich, J.C: Experimental Investigation 
and Computational Simulation of Process-Machine Interactions during High-
Performance Surface Grinding. In: Proceedings of 1st International Conference on 
Process-Machine Interaction, PZH Hannover, pp. 267–278 (2008) 
[4] Warnecke, G., Zitt, U.: Kinematic Simulation for Analyzing and Predicting High-
Performance Grinding Processes. CIRP Annals – Manufacturing Technology 47(1), 
265–270 (1998) 
[5] Zitt, U.: Modellierung und Simulation von Hochleistungsschleifprozessen. Disserta-
tion, TU Kaiserslautern (1999) 
[6] Braun, O.: Konzept zur Gestaltung und Anwendung definiert gesetzter Hochleis-
tungsschleifscheiben. Dissertation, TU Kaiserslautern (2008) 
[7] Aurich, J.C., Herzenstiel, P., Sudermann, H., Magg, T.: High-performance dry grind-
ing using a grinding wheel with a defined grain pattern. CIRP Annals – Manufacturing 
Technology 57(1), 357–362 (2008) 
[8] Herzenstiel, P., Aurich, J.C.: Numerical and Experimental Investigations of a Grinding 
Wheel with a Defined Grain Pattern. In: CIRP Conference on Modeling of Machining 
Operations, vol. 12, pp. 567–574 (2009) 
[9] Aurich, J.C., Herzenstiel, P., Kirsch, B., Steffes, M.: Experimental and Numerical Stu-
dies of a Surface Grinding Process. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Confe-
rence on Process Machine Interaction (PMI) Session G1 (2010) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 101–119. 
springerlink.com                                               © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 5 
Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum  
and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner 
Abstract. The complex interaction of process forces and machine structure affects 
the quality of ground workpieces, especially in highly-productive machining  
processes, if machines are operated at their limits. In speed-stroke grinding, the 
highly-dynamic process forces are caused by high workpiece velocities and high 
acceleration of the machine table. These forces are influenced by the process pa-
rameters, the material properties, the coolant application and the grinding tool 
specification. The paper describes the approach to simulate the process machine 
interaction in speed-stroke grinding by a coupled model. The machine is modeled 
by a multi-body simulation, which can depict the static and dynamic behavior of 
the machine for every working position. This machine model is coupled with an 
analytical-empirical force model, which predicts the process forces regarding the 
process parameters, the coolant application and the workpiece material. The ma-
chine control system is implemented in the model as well. The ability to model a 
speed stroke grinding process, including the machine, the control system and the 
process itself can be used to predict and improve the workpiece quality regarding 
the measurement accuracy minimizing time and cost intensive experiments. 
5.1   Introduction 
In many cases, grinding is the only economical process to machine parts. Materials, 
which are especially difficult to machine, are ground to achieve high productivity 
and meet the requirements in terms of surface qualities. This paper focuses on 
speed-stroke grinding. Speed-stroke grinding is defined as a surface grinding 
process with high table speeds. The table speed of most of the conventional grind-
ing machines is limited to 30 m/min. Pendulum grinding with table speeds higher 
than 50 m/min is defined as speed-stroke grinding [1]. In speed-stroke grinding the 
chip formation mechanisms change to bigger chips causing lower specific grinding 
energies at high table speeds. The resulting lower heat transfer to the workpiece can 
be used to improve the workpiece quality or the productivity of grinding processes. 
Speed-stroke grinding can be applied for machining highly heat-resistant materials 
and ceramics as well as hardened steel [2, 3, 4]. 
High table speeds result in short contact times between the grinding wheel and 
the workpiece. Short run-in and run-out phases lead to high gradients of process 
forces. The values of these forces are influenced by the complex interaction  

102 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
between the process parameters, coolant application and the mechanics of chip 
formation specific to the behavior of different workpiece materials. The material 
removal in grinding is realized by an amount of single grinding grits with an unde-
fined shape. Several grinding grits are in contact with the workpiece surface at the 
same time, realizing material removal. Hence, it is a complex challenge to predict 
the forces occurring in the grinding process, their influence on the excitement of 
the machine structure and, thus, the workpiece quality. 
In the following, an approach is shown, where the machine is modeled by a 
flexible multi-body simulation and the occurring forces by an analytical-empirical 
force model. These two models are coupled to comprehend the process-machine 
system. As an input for the simulation model and to validate the simulation results 
experimental investigations have to be conducted. The results of the analysis of 
the process and the machine behavior were used to set up the simulation model. 
Afterwards, experimental investigations of certain influences on the machine be-
havior and process forces resulted in a more detailed and more exact model of the 
whole process and lead to a potential of optimization for industrial pendulum and 
speed-stroke grinding processes. 
5.2   Experimental Investigation 
To realize a solid data base as an input for modeling the machine properties and 
the occurring process forces and vibrations have to be analyzed. The machine  
behavior is examined by a modal analysis of the used speed-stroke grinding ma-
chine. The influence of different materials, process parameters and coolant appli-
cation on the process forces were examined by multiple grinding experiments with 
different setups, as described below. 
5.2.1   Experimental Setup 
For the experimental investigations a BLOHM PROFIMAT 408 HTS speed stroke 
grinding machine was used. In comparison to conventional surface grinding ma-
chines this machine is equipped with linear drives for the machine table move-
ment. Thus, the workpiece velocity can reach up to vw = 200 m/min. The table is 
driven with a maximum acceleration of aw = 50 m/s2. Because of the high table 
speeds and acceleration, especially at the reversal of the machine table, an impulse 
decoupling with spring-dampening elements and an eddy current brake is mounted 
beneath the machine table to reduce the impact on the structure and the process. 
The machine and the 3D CAD model of the machine interior are shown in 
Fig. 5.1. For the experiments, a precision height adjustment for coolant application 
was designed and mounted to the headstock. This allows a repeatable adjustment 
of different nozzles regarding the nozzle angle, axial position and height of the 
coolant application. Hence, it is possible to conduct experiments with defined coo-
lant application parameters. For the experiments, the dynamic forces during pen-
dulum and speed-stroke grinding processes were measured by a multi-component 
force dynamometer. 

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
103
 
 
Fig. 5.1 CAD drawing of machine interior with precision nozzle height adjustment 
The static and dynamic behavior of the machine was examined by an experi-
mental modal analysis of the machine tool. A hydraulic actor unit was mounted to 
the machine. This actor unit applied dynamic loads with different frequencies to 
the grinding wheel. A piezo-electric sensor unit measured the response of the ma-
chine structure to the dynamic loads. This procedure was repeated with different 
sensor and actor positions in x, y and z direction so that the cross relations be-
tween the excitations could be measured. More information about modal analysis 
can be found in Section 1.2 of this book. The data was used to parameterize the 
machine model. Thus, a comparison between the modeled and the real machine 
behavior can be carried out. 
5.2.2   Experimental Results 
In the following, the results of the experiments are shown. At first, the measured 
machine behavior is described. The results of the grinding experiments and the 
evaluation of occurring grinding forces are shown below. 
Modal analysis of machine behavior 
As a basis for the research of the interaction of the machine and the grinding 
process the static and dynamic machine behavior needs to be determined. The fre-
quency response function of the used machine is shown exemplarily in Fig. 5.2. 
The static and dynamic load is induced in y-direction as well as the measured def-
lection. Variations of the tool centre point in y-direction are causing deviations in 
dimension of the ground workpiece as they are influencing the depth of cut instan-
taneously. The system was preloaded with a force of 1,000 N. Measurements 
show that the static elasticity of the machine is 0.03 µm/N. The first three eigen-
frequencies are at 38, 58 and 78 Hz with maximum amplitude higher than the stat-
ic flexibility. A modal analysis was conducted to identify the eigenmodes of the 
system. The results and the comparison with the modeled machine behavior are 
shown in the chapter Modeling and Simulation. 
 
 
 
Grinding wheel
Workpiece
Needle nozzle
Height adjustment
Height scale
Angle and position
adjustment
Machine table
Multi component
force dynamometer
x
y
z
Grinding wheel
Workpiece
Needle nozzle
Height adjustment
Height scale
Angle and position
adjustment
Machine table
Multi component
force dynamometer
x
y
z

104 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
 
 
Fig. 5.2 Frequency response function (Gyy) of test machine, preload 1,000 N 
Process forces 
In the experiments, the dynamic forces during pendulum and speed stroke grind-
ing processes are measured by a multi-component force dynamometer and record-
ed on a PC. The measurement of specific normal and tangential forces and the 
acoustic emission (AE) signal during two passes of the grinding wheel is shown in 
Fig. 5.3. It was recorded in the middle of a speed-stroke process at a ground vo-
lume of V’w = 500 mm3/mm. The AE-signal is important for the analysis of the 
data. Every time the grinding wheel gets in contact with the workpiece a peak in 
the AE-signal can be detected. Thus, the exact time frame from the first to the last 
contact of the grinding wheel with the workpiece can be specified.  
To explain different effects the measurement is separated into nine phases. At 
the beginning of Phase 1 the workpiece is on the left side of the machine and acce-
lerates towards the grinding wheel. Because of the moment of inertia the specific 
tangential forces show a characteristic peak during the acceleration. At the begin-
ning of Phase 2 the workpiece is engaged by the grinding wheel. With a work-
piece velocity of vw = 80 m/min and a depth of cut ae = 15 µm the run-in time is 
very short. It takes less than 2 ms from the first contact of the grinding wheel until 
the maximum depth of cut is reached. However, the normal force needs a certain 
time to reach its stationary level at the end of phase 2. 
 
 
Frequency [Hz]
FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
Synthesized FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Frequency [Hz]
10-1
10-2
10-3
Elasticity Gyy [µm/N]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Phase φ
180°
-180°
measured frequency response function
modeled frequency response function
0°
0
Synthesized FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
0
100
1. eigenfrequency 38 Hz
2. eigenfrequency 58 Hz
3. eigenfrequency 78 Hz
Frequency [Hz]
FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
Synthesized FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Frequency [Hz]
10-1
10-2
10-3
Elasticity Gyy [µm/N]
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Phase φ
180°
-180°
measured frequency response function
modeled frequency response function
0°
0
Synthesized FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
Synthesized FRF w m:2abs:+X/w m:Piezo:+X
0
100
1. eigenfrequency 38 Hz
2. eigenfrequency 58 Hz
3. eigenfrequency 78 Hz

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
105
 
 
 
Fig. 5.3 Force and acoustic emission signals during speed-stroke grinding 
Responsible for this effect is the coolant. With the shown machine setup the 
coolant nozzle is on the right side of the grinding wheel. If the workpiece is  
approaching from the left side, the main coolant flow is not able to get into the 
contact zone. The coolant jet hits the workpiece from the right side. Until the 
workpiece moves further the coolant jet builds up a hydro-dynamic pressure in 
and in front of the contact zone, as described in [6, 7]. Depending on flow rate, 
coolant speed, nozzle angle, nozzle position and process parameters the coolant 
adds a significant value to the normal force [8]. Besides that, the hydrodynamic 
coolant pressure influences the dampening behavior of the system [9]. 
During phase 3 the process is nearly stationary. At the end of this phase, the 
normal forces drop rapidly because of the disengagement of the grinding wheel. 
After this, the coolant forces drop with a time delay in phase 4. As the gap  
 
Specific
norm al force / 
F‘n / N/mm
AE-Signal
% (scaled)
Specific
tangential force 
F‘t / N/mm
46,7
46,8
46,9
47
47,1
47,2
47,3
47,4
Time / s
40
20
0
-20
-40
60
50
40
20
30
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
5
7
9
4
6
8
vw
vs
1
vw
vs
vw
vs
3
vw
vs
5
7
Grinding wheel: 10B 181 V (ceramic bond)
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms
Coolant: Emulsion (4%)
vs
= 80 m/s
Needle nozzle, 8° nozzle angle, 110 l/min 
vw
= 80 m/min
Workpiece material: 100Cr6 (700 HV)
ae
= 15 µm
Table acceleration
2
Coolant phase + up grinding
3 Up grinding
1
Run in
Run out
4
5 Table deceleration – Change table direction – Table acceleration
6 Coolant phase
Coolant phase
7
Down grinding
8
Run in
Coolant phase + down grinding
Table deceleration
Run out
9
Specific
norm al force / 
F‘n / N/mm
AE-Signal
% (scaled)
Specific
tangential force 
F‘t / N/mm
46,7
46,8
46,9
47
47,1
47,2
47,3
47,4
Time / s
40
20
0
-20
-40
60
50
40
20
30
10
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
5
7
9
4
6
8
vw
vs
vw
vs
vw
vs
1
vw
vs
vw
vs
vw
vs
vw
vs
3
vw
vs
vw
vs
5
7
Grinding wheel: 10B 181 V (ceramic bond)
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms
Coolant: Emulsion (4%)
vs
= 80 m/s
Needle nozzle, 8° nozzle angle, 110 l/min 
vw
= 80 m/min
Workpiece material: 100Cr6 (700 HV)
ae
= 15 µm
Table acceleration
2
Coolant phase + up grinding
3 Up grinding
1
Run in
Run out
4
5 Table deceleration – Change table direction – Table acceleration
6 Coolant phase
Coolant phase
7
Down grinding
8
Run in
Coolant phase + down grinding
Table deceleration
Run out
9

106 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
between the workpiece and the grinding wheel gets wider while the workpiece 
moves apart the measured normal force decreases. In phase 5, the workpiece table 
decelerates, changes its direction and accelerates in the opposite direction, which 
can be seen in the tangential force progression. Phase 5 shows that the level of 
acoustic emission is lower than in phase 1 and 9 even though the grinding wheel is 
not in contact with the workpiece. The reason for this phenomenon is that the coo-
lant jet hits the workpiece from the side during phase 1 and 9. When the grinding 
wheel is at the right side of the grinding wheel there is no coolant splashing 
against the workpiece. 
Phase 6 is characterized by an increase of normal forces while the workpiece is 
not in contact with the grinding wheel yet. This is related to the dynamic coolant 
forces, which build up because of the narrowing gap between the workpiece  
and the grinding wheel. The run-in takes place at the beginning of phase 7. Before 
the workpiece runs out of contact the forces drop as a result of the deflected  
coolant jet. 
The described effects show the complexity of forces occurring during the grinding 
process. To model the forces the main influences have to be taken into consideration. 
In order to quantify the effects of process parameters workpiece material and coolant 
application numerous systematic experiments have been conducted. 
The measured force signal contains a lot of information about the process and 
the influences mentioned above. To separate the effect of the chip formation from 
the coolant induced forces the data has to be analyzed as shown in Fig. 5.4. On the 
upper left, measured specific normal forces plotted against the grinding wheel cir-
cumferential speed vs up and down grinding are shown. The forces drop with 
higher rotation speed of the grinding wheel from above 30 N/mm to 20 N/mm. 
The coolant forces were measured after every fifth stroke of the process by 
conducting one stroke without a depth of cut ae. The results are shown exemplarily 
in Fig. 5.4 on the upper right. The coolant induced forces increase up to a certain 
point – here 80 m/s – before they begin to decrease at higher circumferential 
speeds. For conventional processes a similar trend was described by Heinzel [10]. 
Higher grinding wheel circumferential speeds lead to a higher flow rate through 
the contact zone. Hence, less coolant ponds in front of the contact zone and the 
pressure in this area drops. As a result, the specific coolant normal forces de-
crease. 
If the specific coolant normal forces F’nKSS are subtracted from the measured 
specific grinding normal forces F’n, the specific cutting normal forces F’c,n can be 
identified. This is necessary to evaluate the separate effects and to simplify  
the modeling of the occurring forces in grinding as every effect can be examined 
separately. 

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
107
 
 
Fig. 5.4 Evaluation of cutting and coolant-induced forces 
Besides the hydrodynamic pressure, which builds up in and in front of the con-
tact zone, additional coolant forces can be induced due to the ground geometry. 
An example is shown in Fig. 5.5. Narrow gaps between parts of the grinding 
wheel, which are not in contact with the workpiece, and the workpiece lead to ad-
ditional hydro-dynamic forces. The smaller the gap, the higher these forces. If 
such workpiece geometries are ground, the additional coolant forces need to be 
considered. 
In addition to the forces, the coolant has an influence on the dampening beha-
vior of the whole process machine system. To evaluate these effects the following 
experimental setup was used. A workpiece made up of the two different materials 
is ground. On one side, the workpiece consists of hardened 100Cr6 and on the 
other side of Ureol, an easy to machine and homogenous modeling material. This 
workpiece was ground with high table speed. The machining of the modeling 
workpiece material creates very small forces compared to the bearing steel. 
 
 
 
 
Specific coolant normal 
force F‘n KSS / N/mm 
Grinding wheel circumferential 
speed vs / m/s
Specific grinding normal
force F‘n / N/mm
0
10
20
30
0
60
100
140
Grinding wheel circumferential 
speed  vs / m/s
Grinding wheel circumferential
speed  vs / m/s
Specific cutting  normal
force F‘c, n / N/mm
Material: 
100 Cr 6 (AISI 52100)
Grinding wheel:
CBN 10B 181 V
Coolant application:
Oil
Needle nozzle, 11°
Flow rate: 62 l/min
Grinding parameters:
vw
=
120 m/min
ae
=
10 μm
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms
Up-grinding
Down-grinding
40
20 40
80
120
0
60
100
140
20 40
80
120
0
10
20
30
40
0
60
100
140
20 40
80
120
0
10
20
30
40

108 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
 
 
Fig. 5.5 Additional coolant forces by means of workpiece geometry 
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 5.6. As a result, the forces drop rapidly 
at the junction of the two materials. If no coolant is used, a deviation of the profile 
height can be measured on the surface of the soft material. When using coolant the 
deviation is much smaller due to dampening and pre-load effects of the fluid in 
and in front of the contact zone. Although several experiments with this setup 
were accomplished quantitative statements about the dampening behavior could 
not been derived yet as the collected data scatters in a big range. As a conse-
quence, the experimental setup and measurement need to be improved. 
 
Fig. 5.6 Influences of coolant dampening and pre-load effects 
Workpiece
Total depth of 
cut
Grinding wheel
b
Gap between grinding
wheel and workpiece
Contact area
Additional coolant 
forces
FC
Workpiece
Total depth of 
cut
Grinding wheel
b
Gap between grinding
wheel and workpiece
Contact area
Additional coolant 
forces
FC
Without coolant
Grinding wheel: 10B 181 V
Q‘w =
20 mm3/mms
Coolant: Emulsion (4%)
vs
=
90 m/s
Needle nozzle, 8° nozzle angle, 110 l/min 
vw =
120 m/min
Workpiece material: 100Cr6 (700 HV)
ae =
10 µm
Distance / mm
With coolant
100
75
50
25
0
00
25
-25
Height of 
Profile / µm
Distance / mm
100
75
50
25
0
0
0
25
-25
Profile / µm
Height of 
Profile / µm
100Cr6
Easy to machine 
modeling material
(Ureol)
Without coolant
Grinding wheel: 10B 181 V
Q‘w =
20 mm3/mms
Coolant: Emulsion (4%)
vs
=
90 m/s
Needle nozzle, 8° nozzle angle, 110 l/min 
vw =
120 m/min
Workpiece material: 100Cr6 (700 HV)
ae =
10 µm
Distance / mm
With coolant
100
75
50
25
0
00
25
-25
Height of 
Profile / µm
Distance / mm
100
75
50
25
0
0
0
25
-25
Profile / µm
Height of 
Profile / µm
100Cr6
Easy to machine 
modeling material
(Ureol)

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
109
 
Another important influence on the occurring forces is the workpiece material. 
Experiments have been conducted with the aim of evaluating the process forces 
grinding different materials with speed-stroke grinding parameters. As an exam-
ple, the specific normal forces depending on the hardness of the material and the 
table speed are shown in Fig. 5.7. Smaller chip thicknesses at low table speeds 
lead to more friction and forming processes in chip formation compared to higher 
table speeds. Thus, the specific grinding forces are lower at high table speeds [11]. 
The effect of the material hardness on the specific normal forces decreases with 
higher table speeds. For certain groups of workpiece materials, this kind of model-
ing is sufficient. However, there are different effects on the grinding forces regard-
ing different workpiece materials. As shown in the figure, the specific normal 
forces are higher while grinding the ductile and tough nickel-based alloy Inco-
nel 718 at different table speeds compared to 100Cr6. Hence, a force model needs 
to be adapted to different workpiece material properties. Composition and struc-
ture of the workpiece material are the main influences on the grindability of work-
piece materials. Furthermore, the workpiece temperature has an influence on the 
machinability. The necessary force to form a chip decreases at higher temperatures 
but as the energy flow to the workpiece is comparatively low in speed-stroke 
grinding this effect is neglected in the following model. 
 
Fig. 5.7 Specific cutting normal forces grinding different materials 
The material removal in grinding results from various contacts between the 
grinding wheel and the workpiece. In addition, the grinding grits have irregular 
shapes and they move on a certain path around the centre of the grinding wheel. 
Because of this, some of the grits just plow through the workpiece surface, some 
grits form chips and some are not in contact with the workpiece surface. A large 
Specific cutting normal
force F‘c,n / N/mm
Hardness / HV
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
200
400
600
800
vw = 120 m/min
vw = 80 m/min
vw = 50 m/min
vw = 20 m/min
100Cr6
Inconel 718
Material: 
100 Cr 6 (AISI 52100)
and Inconel 718
Grinding wheel:
CBN 10B 181 VP
Coolant application:
Emulsion 4 %
Needle nozzle (11°) + 
clearing nozzle
Flow rate: 110 l/min
Grinding parameters:
vs
=
120 m/s
ae
=
60, 24, 25, 10 µm
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms
Specific cutting normal
force F‘c,n / N/mm
Hardness / HV
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
200
400
600
800
vw = 120 m/min
vw = 80 m/min
vw = 50 m/min
vw = 20 m/min
100Cr6
Inconel 718
Material: 
100 Cr 6 (AISI 52100)
and Inconel 718
Grinding wheel:
CBN 10B 181 VP
Coolant application:
Emulsion 4 %
Needle nozzle (11°) + 
clearing nozzle
Flow rate: 110 l/min
Grinding parameters:
vs
=
120 m/s
ae
=
60, 24, 25, 10 µm
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms

110 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
amount of the energy is transferred into elastic and plastic deformation of the 
workpiece material. Hence, the grinding wheel properties, depending on influ-
ences like grit size, bond type or dressing conditions, influence the occurring 
forces significantly. Different grinding wheels were tested and need to be imple-
mented in the modeling as well, as shown in the following chapter. 
5.3   Modeling and Simulation 
To model the complex interaction between the machine and the process with the 
highly dynamic forces shown in the chapter above an approach with a coupled 
model is used. The model is implemented in Matlab Simulink and calculates the 
forces and deviations in discrete time steps. The first part of the model is the ma-
chine, which is represented by a moveable multi-body simulation (MBS). The oc-
curring grinding forces are predicted by an analytical-empirical process model. 
These forces are calculated and transferred to the machine model. Due to the elas-
ticity of the machine these forces lead to a deviation of the tool centre point  
and thus to a deviation of the ground workpiece shape. These deviations are  
transferred to the force model, where the forces for the following time step are 
calculated. The model operates in discrete time steps, which are arbitrary in the 
simulation. Another important part of the model is the simulation of the machine 
control system as the response time of the control system can lead to deviations in 
speed-stroke grinding processes as well. The principle of the coupled simulation is 
shown in Fig. 5.8. Coupled simulations permit the usage of different simulation 
environments with data exchange by means of a suitable interface. Proper inter-
faces have to be designed [12]. Another advantage of coupled models is the possi-
bility to adapt each of the models separately so that changes and improvements 
can be carried out more easily. 
 
Fig. 5.8 Coupled process – machine – control simulation 
Simulation of the grinding process
s(t), v(t)
Simulation of the control system
F(t)
s(t)
Position control
DBS
F(t), M(t) 
Process
Quality
Process stability
MBS
+
Machine tool
-
DBS

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
111
 
For the designed model the simulation of the process forces and the control sys-
tem is implemented into Matlab Simulink. In the following, the machine and the 
process model are described in more detail. 
Machine model 
For the design of a MBS model of a machine the following steps have to be con-
ducted. The procedure of the development of a MBS machine model is shown in 
Fig. 5.9. 
 
Fig. 5.9 Procedure for the development of a multi body machine model 
Based on CAD data of the machine the relevant parts need to be abstracted. 
Small bore holes and small radii are removed because they have no significant in-
fluence on the stiffness or the mass of the system. As a result, the FE-meshing of 
the finite element model (FE-model), which is performed afterwards, is less com-
plex. Next, guiding systems, spindle bearings and screw connections are approx-
imated by simple spring elements. Afterwards, a comparison between the  
measured machine behavior and the simulated machine is conducted to evaluate 
the required stiffness of the joints. Furthermore, the relevant eigenmodes and ei-
genfrequencies can be depicted. Fig. 5.10 shows the 2nd eigenmode of the machine 
system at 58 Hz exemplarily. 
For the MBS-model the FE structure parts have to be converted into flexible 
bodies. A flexible body allows the description of its flexible properties at defined 
force transmission points. The calculation of the forces at these knots and the elas-
tic deformation of the parts is implemented in MSC.Adams and calculated by a 
developed sub-routine for every position of the spindle and the machine table in 
the machine. The special aspect about the developed MBS-model is the possibility 
of realizing a movement of certain parts. This allows the simulation of movements 
of the spindle and the machine table like in the real machine. More detailed infor-
mation about the machine model and the subroutines can be found in [13, 14]. 
1. CAD-model
2. FE-model
Abstraction and 
meshing of machine
components
Modelling of 
moving parts
Comparison with
experiments
3. Moveable flexible
MBS-model
1. CAD-model
2. FE-model
Abstraction and 
meshing of machine
components
Modelling of 
moving parts
Comparison with
experiments
3. Moveable flexible
MBS-model

112 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
 
Fig. 5.10 Comparison between measured and simulated eigenmode and eigenfrequency 
Moveable MBS-models have the advantage of representing the machine beha-
vior for every position of the machine components. However, the design of a mo-
veable MBS-model of a machine is very time consuming and a lot of knowledge 
about the machine structure and the stiffness of the joints is necessary. 
Process model 
The task of the process model is to calculate the occurring forces during the grind-
ing process, regarding the position of the grinding wheel, the grinding parameters 
and other boundary conditions. Many grinding force models have been developed 
over the last decades. Usually, a technological study of grinding processes results 
in the development of a model, which is valid for a closely limited field with given 
boundary conditions, as grinding is a very complex process of material removal 
[15]. Many models to predict the grinding forces are presented in [15, 16, 17]. 
Most of these models consider the kinematic of the grinding process and an empir-
ical additive, which represents the influences of the grinding wheel and the work-
piece material. 
For the prediction of the grinding forces during speed-stroke grinding an 
adapted grinding force model was developed. The schematic representation of the 
model is shown in Fig. 5.11. Depending on the workpiece position the current ma-
terial removal is calculated by using a chip longitudinal section Al, which 
represents the intersection of the grinding wheel and the workpiece during one 
time step of the simulation. This longitudinal section Al is multiplied by an expe-
rimental investigated force-ratio factor, which is dependent on the process  
 
2nd Eigenmode
Eigenmode of original machine
Eigenfrequency: 58 Hz
Eigenfrequency: 57,4 Hz
Eigenmode simulation model
Rotary motion of the spindle an torsion in Y-direction of the Y-Slide
2nd Eigenmode
Eigenmode of original machine
Eigenfrequency: 58 Hz
Eigenfrequency: 57,4 Hz
Eigenmode simulation model
Rotary motion of the spindle an torsion in Y-direction of the Y-Slide

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
113
 
parameters, the material properties and the grinding wheel specification, to get the  
cutting forces. Simultaneously, the coolant forces are calculated. These forces are 
dependent on the workpiece position and the process parameters as well, which 
was shown before. Additionally, coolant application parameters like nozzle angle, 
nozzle type and coolant flow rate are considered [18]. The coolant forces and the 
cutting forces are summarized to the total process forces. 
 
 
Fig. 5.11 Schematic representation of the force model 
In the following, the single modeling steps are described in more detail. 
Fig. 5.12 shows the calculation of the chip longitudinal section during the run-in 
phase. In position I, the grinding wheel first gets into contact with the workpiece. 
During the run-in phase the contact length increases and thus the material removal 
per time step also increases. This increasing material removal is proportional to 
the area, which is bordered by the contact length between two time steps. Towards 
time step III the maximum depth of cut is reached and the chip longitudinal sec-
tion does not change in case of an even workpiece surface. Grooves in the work-
pieces can also be represented by the model. 
Material properties
Process parameters
and tool properties
Coolant parameters
Coolant forces
vKSS
Nozzle
α
KSS
Q
F [N]
Total process forces
vw
vs
Cutting forces
Chip longitudinal
section Al
vw
Workpiece position
c
l
c
k
A
F
⋅
=
kc
vs
Material properties
Process parameters
and tool properties
Coolant parameters
Coolant forces
vKSS
Nozzle
α
KSS
Q
F [N]
Total process forces
F [N]
Total process forces
vw
vs
vw
vs
Cutting forces
Chip longitudinal
section Al
vw
Workpiece position
c
l
c
k
A
F
⋅
=
kc
vs
kc
vs

114 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
 
Fig. 5.12 Chip longitudinal section during run-in of the grinding wheel 
With constant time steps Δt the change of the longitudinal chip section can be 
described by geometrical values. For a constant workpiece velocity vw the longi-
tudinal chip section can be described as a function of the position x according to 
equation 1 during the run-in phase. 
li
g
max
l,
2
2
g
max
l,
In
-
Run
l,
A
x
l
A
2
x
l
A
(x)
A
Δ
±
⋅
+
−
=
                                  
(1) 
Al,max is the maximum chip longitudinal section, which is reached after the run-in 
of the grinding wheel at the maximum depth of cut ae. ΔAli is the deviation of the 
chip longitudinal section Ali due to an uneven surface or the geometry. At the run-
out, the chip longitudinal section is calculated with the following equation: 
li
max
l,
g
max
l,
2
2
g
max
l,
Out
-
Run
l,
A
A
x
l
A
2
x
l
A
(x)
A
Δ
±
+
⋅
−
=
                         
(2) 
If the workpiece has no deviations at the surface, the chip longitudinal section 
stays constant. Fig. 5.13 shows the cutting force characteristic of one stroke during 
grinding. In speed-stroke grinding, the run-in and run-out phases are in the range 
of milliseconds. If the table speed is 120 m/min at a depth of cut of 10 µm, these 
phases take 0.935 ms, for example. If there are deviations in the surface, an addi-
tional ΔAli needs to be added for the calculation. 
 
 
Fig. 5.13 Characteristics of total chip longitudinal section during one stroke 
Workpiece
lg
Δt
Al
Grinding wheel
t0
Al:
lg:
t1
t2
ae,0
ae,1
ae,2
vw
x
Position:                 I             II                 III
Chip longitudinal section
Contact length
ΔAl2
ΔAl1
ΔAl3
ΔAli:
Ideal surface
Surface with
deviations
Deviation of Chip longitudinal section
Workpiece
lg
Δt
Al
Grinding wheel
t0
Al:
lg:
t1
t2
ae,0
ae,1
ae,2
vw
x
Position:                 I             II                 III
Chip longitudinal section
Contact length
ΔAl2
ΔAl1
ΔAl3
ΔAli:
Ideal surface
Surface with
deviations
Deviation of Chip longitudinal section
Grinding wheel position x
chip longitudinal
section / Al
Overrun
0
Al,max
Al,Run-in
Al,Run-out
Grinding wheel position x
chip longitudinal
section / Al
Overrun
0
Al,max
Al,Run-in
Al,Run-out

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
115
 
By modeling the chip longitudinal section it is possible to calculate the intersec-
tion between the grinding wheel and the workpiece for surface grinding processes 
[19]. This is equivalent to the actual material removal, taking the depth of cut and 
the workpiece velocity vw into account. Uneven workpiece surfaces lead to a 
changing material removal, which is also considered in the model. In unfavorable 
cases, the change of the material removal rate in one stroke can lead to chatter ef-
fects. This could be provoked neither during the grinding experiments nor in the 
simulation. This result corresponds to the modal analysis shown in chapter 2 as 
there are no distinct weaknesses of the machine regarding chatter effects.  
To predict the forces, which affect the machine structure quantitatively, the 
modeling focuses on the process parameters, the workpiece material and the  
coolant as these influences were emphasized as the significant influences in speed-
stroke grinding. First, the forces, which depend on the process parameters, are  
calculated. The calculation of the forces is carried out by multiplying the chip lon-
gitudinal section with the determined force ratio factors kc (Equation 3). The chip 
longitudinal section is dependent on the deph of cut ae, the workpiece velocity vw 
and the chosen time step Δt, as explained above. The influences on the force ratio 
factor kc are the grinding tool, the material properties, e. g. the hardness and the 
sort of material, and the grinding wheel circumferential speed vs. 
)
,
,
(
)
,
,
(
Tool
Material
v
k
t
v
a
A
F
s
c
w
e
l
i
⋅
Δ
=
                               (3) 
 
Fig. 5.14 Adaption of force ratio factor kc 
Adaption of kc
Specific force ratio
adaption / %
Hardness / HV
0
200
400
600
800
vw = 120 m/min
vw = 80 m/min
vw = 50 m/min
vw = 20 m/min
100Cr6
Inconel 718
Specific force ratio factor
k‘c, n / 103 N/mm3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80 100 120
10B 181 V 
B181 LHV 
B251 V 
1
2
1
2
Define grinding wheel
specification and 
circumferential speed vs
Grinding wheel circumferential
speed vs / m/s
Determine specific
force ratio factor 
100
300
0
3
3
4
Set workpiece material
and material properties
4
Determine adaption
factor
233 %
200
Adaption of kc
Specific force ratio
adaption / %
Hardness / HV
0
200
400
600
800
vw = 120 m/min
vw = 80 m/min
vw = 50 m/min
vw = 20 m/min
vw = 120 m/min
vw = 80 m/min
vw = 50 m/min
vw = 20 m/min
100Cr6
Inconel 718
Specific force ratio factor
k‘c, n / 103 N/mm3
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
20
40
60
80 100 120
10B 181 V 
B181 LHV 
B251 V 
1
2
1
2
Define grinding wheel
specification and 
circumferential speed vs
Grinding wheel circumferential
speed vs / m/s
Determine specific
force ratio factor 
100
300
0
3
3
4
Set workpiece material
and material properties
4
Determine adaption
factor
233 %
233 %
200

116 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
As the different influences are taken into account the kc factor has to be adapted. 
An example for the functionality of the model is shown in the following. Fig. 5.14 
illustrates the calculation of the adapted force ratio factors. Different grinding 
wheel specifications lead to specific force ratio factors kc at different circumferen-
tial speeds vs. The data was generated in several experiments for different grinding 
wheels. In the example in Fig. 5.14, a grinding wheel with a grit size of 181 µm is 
used. 
The first diagram at the top of the Figure shows the determination of the specif-
ic force-ratio factor for a vitrified, bonded CBN wheel with a grit size of 181 µm 
at a circumferential speed of 120 m/s. The specific force-ratio factor is 
59,000 N/mm3, assuming defined standard conditions. These standard conditions 
are hardened and tempered 100Cr6 as the workpiece material and a combined 
needle nozzle with a clearing nozzle with a total coolant flow rate of 110 l/min. 
After the “standard” force-ratio factor kc has been calculated it needs to be adapted 
by the influences mentioned above. In the example in Fig. 5.14, the nickel base al-
loy Inconel 718 is chosen. As mentioned above, the material, which is difficult to 
machine, leads to higher cutting forces. Thus, the force-ratio factor is adapted. In 
this case, the forces are higher by a factor of 2.33. This leads to a total specific 
force-ratio factor kc,tot of 137,470 N/mm3. 
The coolant application affects the forces in two ways. On the one hand, the 
coolant application has an influence on the chip formation, which leads to varying 
forces. This is also considered by an adaption of the force ratio factor kc. On the 
other hand the hydrodynamic pressure adds a value to the total forces. The simula-
tion program calculates these forces depending on the actual coolant conditions. 
The coolant forces are calculated in the model by using the workpiece position as 
the input factor as well. In combination with the process parameters and the coo-
lant application, parameters like coolant flow rate and nozzle angle, the occurring 
forces can be predicted similar to the cutting forces. These are the most important 
parameter adjustments for the coolant supply [20].  
In a last step, the total process forces for the current time step are summarized. 
Then the value is transferred to the machine model, which calculates the static and 
dynamic displacement of the grinding wheel. With the displacement, the cycle 
starts again with the calculation of the forces for the next time step. Hence, it is 
possible to record the tool path and the resulting surface. 
A comparison between a measured and simulated surface is shown in Fig. 5.15. 
The measurement shows the characteristic super-elevation at the beginning. The 
fast-run in of the grinding wheel results in a rapid raise of the process forces. On 
this side of the workpiece, the system is pre-loaded by the hydrodynamic coolant 
forces. Accordingly, the profile height on the left side is higher at this side com-
pared to the right. After a short period of vibration the workpiece is quite even. 
The peak in the middle of the measurement of the real surface is used as a refer-
ence as the measurement length of the used surface measurement device is less 
than 100 mm. On the right side of the workpiece the profile height drops. This is 
related to the decreasing coolant force at the right side of the workpiece, as de-
scribed above. The height of this step varies depending on the process parameters 
and coolant application. 

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
117
 
 
Fig. 5.15 Measured and simulated workpiece surface after speed-stroke grinding 
5.4   Optimization 
The approach to model the interaction between the speed-stroke grinding process 
and the machine structure, as shown in this paper, can be used to improve produc-
tion processes. Furthermore, it builds the foundation for further research for the 
understanding of the grinding process, especially speed-stroke grinding. 
It was shown that the coupled simulation allows the prediction of the shape of 
the speed-stroke ground workpiece, taking the process parameters, the coolant ap-
plication and the workpiece material into account. If the process result can be pre-
dicted without conducting time and cost-consuming experiments, a faster start of 
production can be realized. With the knowledge of the maximum deviation of the 
workpiece measurements the process time can be optimized. The roughing process 
leads to a certain surface. The grinding minimum allowance for the finishing 
strokes can be determined and, thus, the minimum cycle time can be depicted. 
The developed coupled simulation can be adapted for other grinding processes. 
On the one hand, the grinding force model needs to be adapted for different grind-
ing processes. In particular, the calculation of the current material removal rate 
needs to be adapted to other kinematics. On the other hand, a new machine model 
has to be built up for other machines. Depending on the process reduced machine 
models with less build-up effort may be sufficient. The advantage of flexible mul-
ti-body simulations is the ability to simulate the machine behavior in every posi-
tion of the machine slides, the modeling effort, however, is very high, which is 
shown above. In a lot of surface grinding processes the spindle moves within a li-
mited area in the machin only. As a consequence, the simulation of the machine 
by means of a multi-mass spring system can be sufficient. This system can be es-
tablished in a substantially shorter time frame. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
30
20
0
-10
Length [mm]
Profile height [µm]
10
Material: 
100 Cr 6 (AISI 52100)
Grinding wheel:
CBN 10B 181 V
Coolant application:
Emulsion 4 %
Needle nozzle, 11°
Flow rate: 62 l/min
Grinding parameters:
vs
=
120 m/s
ae
=
10 µm
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms
Measured surface
Simulated surface
Measurement
reference
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
30
20
0
-10
Length [mm]
Profile height [µm]
10
Material: 
100 Cr 6 (AISI 52100)
Grinding wheel:
CBN 10B 181 V
Coolant application:
Emulsion 4 %
Needle nozzle, 11°
Flow rate: 62 l/min
Grinding parameters:
vs
=
120 m/s
ae
=
10 µm
Q‘w = 20 mm3/mms
Measured surface
Simulated surface
Measurement
reference

118 
M. Weiß, F. Klocke, and H. Wegner
 
Another way to use the results of this work is to already evaluate the behavior 
of machines in the design phase. Based on the CAD data the machine can be mod-
eled and the process behavior as well as the process result can be estimated with-
out building and testing the new machine. Structural weaknesses and illegitimate 
process parameters can be determined, specific to the grinding processes.  
5.5   Conclusion and Outlook 
In speed-stroke grinding, the highly dynamic process forces cause deviations of the 
machine structure. In this paper, the development of a coupled process-machine 
model has been presented. An approach for modeling the process forces depending 
on process parameters, material properties and coolant application parameters has 
been described. The different effects, which influence the occurring process forces, 
have been analyzed separately in various experiments. Coupled with the MBS-
model of the machine and the control system model the simulation is able to predict 
the workpiece quality in terms of measurement and form deviations.  
In addition, the presented results have revealed potential fields of research in 
modeling the speed-stroke grinding process. In this project, only simple workpiece 
geometries were analyzed. Theoretically, the prediction of more complex geome-
tries is possible. Another important issue is the influence of different coolant ap-
plications on the dampening behavior of the process machine system. From the 
conducted experiments, no distinct statement regarding this influence can be 
made.  
A major goal of modeling production processes must be the evaluation of 
process results without time and cost-consuming experiments. At the moment, 
these experiments are still necessary to parameterize the developed models. The 
approaches developed in the priority program 1180 can be used as a basis for fur-
ther research to understand the complex grinding process. 
References 
[1] Duscha, M., Klocke, F., D’Enremont, A., Linke, B., Wegner, H.: Investigation of 
Temperatures and residual stresses in speed-stroke grinding via Fea Simulation and 
practical tests. In: Proceedings in Manufacturing Systems, vol. 5(3), pp. 143–148 
(2010) 
[2] Zeppenfeld, 
C.: 
Schnellhubschleifen 
von 
gamma-Titanaluminiden. 
Gamma-
Titanaluminiden. RWTH Aachen University, Aachen (2005) 
[3] Nachmani, Z.: Randzonenbeeinflussung beim Schnellhubschleifen. Dissertation, 
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen (2008) 
[4] Uhlmann, E., Sammler, C.: Schnellhubschleifen von Hochleistungswerkstoffen. Jahr-
buch Schleifen, Honen, Läppen und Polieren, vol. 64, pp. 155–168. Vulkan-Verlag, 
Essen (2010) 
[5] Weck, M.: Dynamisches Maschinenverhalten bei der Zerspanung mit undefinierter 
Schneide. Werkzeugmaschinen 5 – Messtechnische Untersuchung und Beurteilung, 
pp. 326–362. Springer, Berlin (2001) 

5   Process Machine Interaction in Pendulum and Speed-Stroke Grinding 
119
 
[6] Beck, T.: Kühlschmierstoffeinsatz beim Schleifen mit CBN. Dissertation, RWTH 
Aachen University, Aachen (2002) 
[7] Wittmann, M.: Bedarfsgerechte Kühlschmierung beim Schleifen. Dissertation, Uni-
versity of Bremen, Bremen (2007) 
[8] Brinksmeier, E., Heinzel, C., Wittmann, M.: Friction, Cooling and Lubrication in 
Grinding. Annals of the CIRP, Keynote Paper 48(2), 581–598 (1999) 
[9] Marksoud, T.M.A., Mokbel, A.: Suppression of chatter in grinding using high-
viscosity coolants. Proceedings of the Institution of Mecanical Engineers, Part B 
(Journal of Engineering Manufacture) 216, 113–123 (2002) 
[10] Heinzel, C.: Methoden zur Untersuchung und Optimierung der Kühlschmierung beim 
Schleifen. Dissertation, University of Bremen, Bremen (1999) 
[11] Klocke, F.: Process Design. Manufacturing Processes 2 – Grinding, Honing, Lapping, 
pp. 251–287. Springer, Berlin (2009) 
[12] Esser, M., Brecher, C., Witt, S.: Interaction of manufacturing process and machine 
tool. Annals of the CIRP, Keynote Paper 58, 588–607 (2009) 
[13] Hoffmann, F.: Optimierung der dynamsichen Bahngenauigkeit von Werkzeugma-
schinen mit der Mehrkörpersimulation. Dissertation, RWTH Aachern University, Aa-
chen (2008) 
[14] Klocke, F., Brecher, C., Sitte, B., Weiß, M.: Analyse der dynamischen Wechselwir-
kungen bei Pendel- und Schnellhubschleifprozessen. Jahrbuch Schleifen, Honen, 
Läppen und Polieren 64, 53–65 (2010) 
[15] Tönshoff, H.K., Peters, J., Inasaki, I., Paul, T.: Modelling and Simulation of Grinding 
Processes. Annals of the CIRP, Keynote Paper 41(2), 677–688 (1992) 
[16] Brinksmeier, E., et al.: Advances in Modeling and Simulation of Grinding Processes. 
Annals of the CIRP, Keynote Paper 55(2), 667–696 (2006) 
[17] Aurich, J.C., Biermann, D., Blum, H., Brecher, C., Carstensen, C., Denkena, B., 
Klocke, F., Kröger, M., Steinmann, P., Weinert, K.: Modelling and simulation of 
process: machine interaction in grinding. In: Production Engineering – Research and 
Development, vol. 3(1), pp. 111–120. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
[18] Weiß, M., Klocke, F., Wegner, H.: Influence of coolant and workpiece material prop-
erties on dynamic grinding forces in speed stroke grinding. In: Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Process Machine Interaction, Vancouver, G4 (2010) 
[19] Klocke, F., Duscha, M., Hoffmann, F., Wegner, H., Zeppenfeld, C.: Machine – 
Grinding Wheel –Workpiece Interaction in Speed-Stroke Grinding. In: Proceedings 
of the 1st International Conference on Process Machine Interaction, Hannover, pp. 
259–266 (2008) 
[20] Wittmann, M., Heinzel, C., Brinksmeier, E.: Evaluating the Efficiency of Coolant 
Supply Systems in Grinding. In: Production Engineering – Research and Develop-
ment, Braunschweig, vol. XI(2), pp. 39–42 (2004) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 121–141. 
springerlink.com                                               © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 6 
Simulation of Process Machine Interaction  
in NC-Shape Grinding 
D. Biermann, H. Blum, A. Rademacher,  
A.V. Scheidler, and K. Weinert 
Abstract. The study focuses on the NC-shape grinding process when using toroid 
grinding wheels and its simulation. First, the experimental investigation with re-
spect to the machine structure and its dynamic behavior, the process forces as well 
as the temperature distribution in the workpiece and the grinding wheel are dis-
cussed. That forms the basis for the modeling and simulation of the NC-shape 
grinding process. The simulation consists of a geometric-kinematical simulation 
coupled with a finite element simulation. To validate the simulation, comparisons 
between the quantities measured and the corresponding calculated values are car-
ried out. Subsequently to this validation the transferability of the simulation to 
other grinding processes is studied. Furthermore, the simulation is utilized to op-
timize grinding processes, especially with respect to the NC data. 
6.1   Introduction 
Grinding processes are mainly used as surface finishing processes. The chip re-
moval is usually carried out by rotating grinding wheels with bonded abrasive 
grains. The process is characterized by high cutting speeds and various contacts 
between the workpiece and the single grains. Grinding is usually the last step in 
the production chain of a workpiece and, accordingly, this phase plays a very im-
portant role. On account of this, defects caused by the grinding process would be 
associated with high costs and must be avoided. 
A toroid grinding wheel can be flexibly used for NC-shape grinding. Based on 
the semi-circular profile of the grinding wheel and a line-by-line movement it is 
possible to machine geometrically-complex surfaces. The different parameters re-
lated to NC-shape grinding with a toroid grinding wheel are demonstrated in 
Fig. 6.1. The feed motion in the NC-shape grinding process is controlled by NC-
data, which provides excellent possibilities for grinding free-formed workpiece 
surfaces. The use of CNC-technology and an adapted path control allows the 
grinding of planes as well as profiles and complex shapes. The contact area be-
tween grinding wheel and workpiece varies during engagement along the tool 
paths. In the case of complex engagement, the contact area is not measurable 
without additional software tools. The shape grinding process is determined by the 
shape of the tool, the kinematic conditions of the cut, the chip removal and the 
surface produced [1]. 

122 
D. Biermann et al.
 
 
 
Fig. 6.1 Different parameters of NC-shape grinding with a toroid grinding wheel [2] 
The interaction between grinding wheel, workpiece and machine tool in an NC-
shape grinding process using a toroid grinding wheel is examined in the present 
experiments. The research presented in this paper describes the process behavior 
of the shape grinding process. The description of the interaction between grinding 
wheel, workpiece and machine tool in a NC-shape grinding process requires vari-
ous simulation models and corresponding experiments. 
In addition to obtaining a basic understanding of the process and its simulation, 
the application of the simulation and its transferability to other processes are the 
focus of the current research. Here, application means that the simulation results 
are used to optimize the NC-shape grinding process. One approach we mainly 
work on this purpose is the modification of the NC-data in such a way that grind-
ing errors are reduced or eliminated. First results related to path planning are pre-
sented in this chapter, where the depth of cut is increased to compensate for the 
deflection of the grinding machine. It is considerably more difficult to reduce the 
effect on the workpiece caused by oscillations, which result from the dynamic be-
havior of the machine, because restrictions relating to the machine tool control of 
the grinding machine have to be taken into account. With respect to the practical 
application of the simulation, the transferability of this simulation approach to dif-
ferent grinding machines and other grinding processes is of decisive importance. 
The simulation is applied to other grinding wheels than the toroid one and the 
workpiece material varied. Thereby, the parameters in the simulation model are 
identified and it becomes obvious which parameters have to be adjusted. Further-
more, the dependency of the model's parameters on the modifications is described. 
In the next section, we will discuss the experimental basis of the simulation and 
describe the experiments relating to the dynamic behavior of the machine as well 
as to measurements of force and temperature. The topic of Section 6.3 is the simu-
lation approach and a detailed description of single constituent parts of the simula-
tion. Furthermore, the determination of the model's parameters using numerical 
methods is explained. Section 6.4 focuses on the validation of the simulation re-
sults. The application of the simulation to path planning and the transferability of 
the simulation to other grinding processes are examined in Section 6.5. Finally, we 
will draw some conclusions and provide an outlook on further developments. 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
123
 
6.2   Experimental Results 
The accuracy and the dynamic behavior of the structure of the machine were in-
vestigated in order to model and simulate the shape-grinding process in its com-
plexity. In shape grinding, material removal occurs along the tool paths, which 
vary in height. Thus, there is no engagement of the tool in the direction of feed 
motion. Hereby, in the process, complex and no longer trivially measurable con-
tact surfaces between the tool and the workpiece can occur. In addition, the accu-
racy of the test machine used must be fundamentally taken into account in order to 
be able to represent these contact surfaces in a way that corresponds realistically 
to the process. Static, dynamic and thermal deformations as well as machine in-
duced errors can lead to variances, which cannot be accounted for solely by ex-
amining the tool, the contour of the workpiece and the programmed movement in 
relation to each other. Furthermore, the machine must be suitable for the execution 
of the programmed target motions. In this section, the measurement of the static 
and dynamic machine tool behavior and the effects of this behavior on the surfac-
es of the workpiece, the generated temperatures and the forces are to be discussed. 
6.2.1   Measurement of the Static and Dynamic Machine Tool 
Behavior 
The results of the experiments, which were conducted to measure the reactivity of 
the traversing axes and the static as well as dynamic behavior of the machine 
structure, will now be presented. First, the positioning accuracy of the machine 
will be discussed and followed by the description of the dynamic properties of the 
machine and their effects on the surface of the workpiece. 
Examination of the Positioning Accuracy 
The positioning accuracy was determined using a laser interferometer. In this way, 
the absolute positioning error was determined. It appears that the positioning accu-
racy measured for the z and the y axes for a workpiece width of bmax = 20 mm and 
a maximum profile height of hmax = 10 mm lies within the area of tolerance of 
measurement precision. Slip occurs because of the belt drive of the x axis so that a 
positioning can be realized only in one direction. Accordingly, the experiments 
were conducted using down-grinding since small forces occur in this process [2]. 
The contours of the workpiece resulted from line-by-line traversing movements 
of the toroid grinding wheel. A large number of grinding strokes with varying 
amounts of material removal results from the process kinematics until the desired 
workpiece contour is realized. The process is characterized by a high degree of 
flexibility. The test machine is designed for a fast workpiece velocity of 
vw, max = 35 m/min in its function as a surface and profile grinding machine. The 
vertical traversing axis is however limited to traversing speeds of vf,y = 4 m/min. 
The traversing speed must be constant. When interpolating the x and the y axes 
the traversing velocity must conform to the slower speed. The interpolation of the 
machine axes takes place linearly between the sampling points provided by the 
NC program. Because of this, discontinuous transitions between the path segments 
result, which lead to a significant faceting of the workpiece surface. Experiments 

124 
D. Biermann et al.
 
to determine the maximum traversing speed when the distance between the NC-
data points is Δ = 0.5 mm have shown that the machine reaches a maximum work-
piece velocity of vw = 2238 mm/min because the drive dynamics of the machine 
using this NC-data points is limited. This has to be taken into account during the 
shape grinding processes [2]. 
Dynamic Behavior of the Machine Structure 
During the grinding process, forces are generated by the contact of the grinding 
wheel with the workpiece, which directly affect workpiece quality or have an ef-
fect on the machine parts lying in the distribution of force. The grinding machine 
system can thereby be induced to vibrate. Such a coupled system is determined by 
mutual interaction between the machine structure and the process. The dynamic 
behavior of the system is investigated in order to reach a better understanding of 
the cause of the waviness and to be able to represent this in a simulation. For this 
purpose, a modal analysis is conducted. The grinding machine is converted into a 
simplified substitute model in order to determine the modal parameters. The subs-
titute structure is brought close into line with the grinding machine by using a total 
of 106 nodes. The substitute system is understood to be dynamically linear, i. e. 
we proceed on the assumption that a proportionality exists between excitation and 
response. The linearity of the system is the pre-condition for ascertaining the fre-
quency response function [2]. 
Several modes arise from the modal analysis of the grinding machine, three of 
which are largely identical with the frequencies found by measuring the flexibility 
at the spindle. The related eigenfrequency forms are presented in Fig. 6.2. Basical-
ly, no significant relative displacements between the workpiece and the tool could 
be seen at eigenmodes having a frequency of f < 50 Hz so that an influence on the 
process and thus on the quality of the workpiece can be excluded here [2]. 
 
Fig. 6.2 Eigenmodes of the grinding machine investigated as determined by the modal 
analysis along with a representation of the extreme position of deflection [2] 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
125
 
Two eigenmodes play an important role when dynamic forces in a vertical di-
rection affect the machine. Engaging the grinding wheel with the workpiece caus-
es a waviness with an eigenfrequency of f = 60.2 Hz. A strong vertical oscillation 
of the spindle tower can be seen at this frequency, so the grinding spindle with its 
tower oscillates along the y axis. The second eigenmode has an effect in the ver-
tical direction at an eigenfrequency of f = 143 Hz and represents its effect through 
a vertical oscillation of the spindle. The spindle executes a horizontal oscillating 
movement parallel to the machine table at an eigenfrequency of f = 84.6 Hz [2]. 
6.2.2   Force Measurement 
The process forces are to be determined in order to develop a force model in the 
simulation. These forces increase with increasing depth of cut ae and increasing 
workpiece velocity vw. An example of the mean values of the radial forces for var-
ious workpiece velocities vw and depths of cut ae are shown in Fig. 6.3 [2]. 
 
Fig. 6.3 Forces at various depths of cut ae and workpiece velocities vw 
Determining the Friction in the System 
The friction coefficient is calculated by using Coulomb's Law to describe friction. 
This law is simply an estimation because only a global force during the grinding 
process can be measured. The friction coefficient calculated is nearly constant for 
a grinding path in the quasi-stationary area. This coefficient, of course, behaves 
differently depending on the engagement conditions during run-in and run-out. 
This is presented for two conditions of engagement in Fig. 6.4. The coefficient  
of friction also changes when the workpiece velocity vw and the depth of cut are 
varied. 

126 
D. Biermann et al.
 
 
Fig. 6.4 Friction coefficients determined for different process parameters along the grinding 
path 
6.2.3   Temperature Measurement 
Sect. 1.3.3 showed that temperatures have a considerable effect on the quality of 
the workpiece. An important influence on temperature development is the coolant 
supply to the contact area, which is optimized, as described in [3], for NC-shape 
grinding using toroid grinding wheels. It has been shown that shoe nozzles are 
best suited for this process because under constant machining parameters the least 
workpiece damage in terms of grinding burn and cracks on the surface has been 
found [3]. 
The process temperatures were measured using thermocouples and a thermo-
graphic camera in order to determine the influence of heat development during 
NC-shape grinding. When measuring with thermocouples, it was seen in [4-7] that 
the experimental results here, regarding the dependency of the temperature on the 
parameters workpiece velocity vw, depth of cut ae, and the distance between the 
thermocouple and the surface Δx, are comparable to the main results in case of the 
toroid grinding wheel. The temperature increases with increasing workpiece ve-
locity and depth of cut and with the decreasing distance between the thermocouple 
and the surface. An example is shown in Fig. 6.5 [8]. 
The temperatures measured using the thermographic camera during face grind-
ing are comparable to those found when using the thermocouple measurement 
technique. For the same distance to the contact area and equivalent process para-
meters both methods yield similar temperature values. Thus, the thermographic 
camera technique can be used when machining other surface contours with com-
plex and varying contact areas. It must be taken into account that only free-form, 
two-dimensional surfaces can be machined because the camera can measure only 
temperatures close to the workpiece surface. Since convex surfaces are produced 
during the course of the experiments we conducted, one can get an idea of temper-
ature development when the contact area between grinding wheel and workpiece  
 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
127
 
 
Fig. 6.5 Dependency of temperature on the distance between the thermocouple and the con-
tact area [8] 
is constantly changing. Temperature development at the contact area of these convex 
surfaces is similar to the development of the process force along the grinding path. 
The temperature increases with an enlargement of the contact area (Fig. 6.6) [8]. 
 
Fig. 6.6 Temperature development over workpiece length during shape grinding 
6.3   Modeling and Simulation 
For modeling the numerically controlled (NC) shape grinding process a holistic 
approach is chosen. Consequently the reciprocal effects between structure and 
process are considered. In line with the present state of research, simulation of the 

128 
D. Biermann et al.
 
process is conducted by linking two simulation tools. The geometric-kinematical 
simulation describes the contact area Awgk between the grinding wheel and the 
workpiece under idealized conditions. A finite element simulation takes the dy-
namics of the process into account.  
The complete simulation consists of three parts: the geometric-kinematical si-
mulation, the finite element simulation and the removal predictor. The interaction 
of these three parts is illustrated in Fig. 6.7 and described in this section. The 
geometry, the material properties and the NC-data are the main inputs of the simu-
lation. The surface of the workpiece after the grinding process is the main output. 
It is mainly determined by the actual depth of cut ae,act. The displacement of the 
grinding wheel and the process forces are additional results.  
The global simulation is controlled by the geometric-kinematical simulation. 
Consequently, the global temporal discretization is implemented here. At the mo-
ment, equal time steps are used for the geometric-kinematical simulation and for 
the finite element simulation. Later on, it may become necessary to use smaller 
time steps for the finite element simulation in order to increase the accuracy. 
 
Fig. 6.7 The simulation cycle in a time step 
After the initialization of the different simulations, consisting mainly of the 
reading of the geometric data and the usual finite element preparations, time step-
ping starts. The simulation cycle displayed in Fig. 6.7 is passed through in each 
time step. It starts with the geometric-kinematical simulation. First, some prepara-
tion steps are necessary. The new position of the workpiece in relation to  
 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
129
 
the grinding wheel is determined by the NC-data. The resulting process force  
Fres in the current time step is calculated from the geometric-kinematical data.  
To calculate this force an empirical grinding force model is used, which is only 
able to predict a resulting process force. No local or microscopic effects are taken 
into account. 
The data for the part of the workpiece surface which might be in contact with 
the grinding wheel is passed on from the geometric-kinematical simulation to the 
finite element simulation. This information is used to describe the contact con-
straints of the dynamic Signorini problem in the current time step. Then, the dis-
crete problem is solved and the normal contact stress at that time is determined. 
The resulting accumulated contact force Fcon is calculated from the normal contact 
stress and this value is returned to the removal predictor. The most important parts 
of the grinding machine, the grinding wheel and the spindle, are taken into ac-
count in the finite element simulation. The stiffness of the other parts of the ma-
chine is modeled by elastic bearings. 
The finite element simulation is able to calculate the accumulated contact force 
Fcon. Thereby, the contact area is represented in detail. Fcon depends directly on the 
actual depth of cut ae,act. So it is expected that a good approximation of ae,act has 
been found, if Fcon and Fres agree. The predicted global process force Fres is stored 
in the removal predictor. 
Two steps are performed in the removal predictor. First, it tests whether the ac-
cumulated contact force Fcon and the predicted process force Fres match. If that is 
the case, the cycle is left and the next time step is started. Otherwise, a corrected 
value for the actual depth of cut ae,act is predicted and passed on to the geometric-
kinematical simulation. Here, the surface of the workpiece is modified according-
ly, and the cycle restarts. See [9] for more details. 
6.3.1   Geometric-Kinematical Simulation 
To simulate the grinding processes, various models presently exist, as described in 
[5]. A geometric-kinematical simulation has been developed for NC-shape grind-
ing. The geometric-kinematical simulation aims to determine the contact situation 
and is based on a dexel model, which represents the varying shape of the work-
piece, while the grinding wheel is represented as a solid torus. A dexel model has 
been described in [10]. The material removal and the contact area of the grinding 
wheel and the workpiece are evaluated by the instantaneous intersection of these 
models. Therefore, the NC-data of the tool path generated by a CAD/CAM-
program can be used as input for the simulation [9, 11-13]. Fig. 6.8 shows model 
elements of the geometric-kinematical simulation. 
 
 
 
 

130 
D. Biermann et al.
 
 
 
Fig. 6.8 Model elements of the geometric-kinematical simulation [2] 
Force model 
An empirical process force model was implemented in the geometric-kinematical 
simulation based on a series of experiments. A specific force model for the NC-
shape grinding process based on the contact area of the geometric-kinematical  
simulation was developed. This empirical force model is examined under ideal 
conditions with deformation, vibration and temperature not being taken into  
account [3]. 
The process forces increase with an accumulating workpiece velocity in an ex-
ponential way. This behavior is analogous to the behavior of the cutting forces 
with defined cutting edges. Therefore, it is possible to determine a force model for 
the grinding process, which is based on the Kienzle equation [14], usually em-
ployed for other cutting processes. 
The process forces of the NC-shape grinding are calculated fairly exactly for 
the geometric-kinematical simulation by the process force model. On average, the 
results differ by 6 % from those of the measurements. Greater deviations only ap-
pear for large contact areas. By implementing the process force model into the 
geometric-kinematical simulation the process forces, the contact area and the 
workpiece shape can be calculated and used as the basis for the finite element si-
mulation [3]. 
6.3.2   Finite Element Simulation 
The most relevant parts of the machine, the grinding wheel and the spindle, form 
the domain of the finite element model. Since their deformation is small during  
the grinding process a linear elastic material law is used. In addition, contact  
constraints have to be included in the model because the displacements of the 
grinding wheel are restricted by the workpiece. The dynamic behavior of the ma-
chine has to be taken into account, too. The friction between grinding wheel and 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
131
 
workpiece is described by Coulomb’s law. Therefore, an appropriate model is giv-
en by a dynamic Signorini problem. 
Besides the dynamics, thermal effects are also considered. Thus, a thermo-
mechanical contact problem has to be solved, where the heat distribution and the 
displacement are unknown and coupled. The heat distribution is described by the 
heat equation. On the one hand, the displacement and the heat are interrelated by 
the thermo-elastic material law. On the other hand, heat is generated by the fric-
tional contact between workpiece and grinding wheel. Mixed boundary conditions 
are used to model the heat transfer to the coolant. The mathematical formulation 
of this problem can be found in [15, 16]. 
The discretization of the dynamic Signorini problem can be carried out either 
by finite difference schemes such as the Newmark method in time and finite ele-
ments in space [16] or by finite elements in space and time [17, 18]. Both methods 
are implemented in the finite element library SOFAR [19], which is the platform 
used for the calculations described here. The discretization of the heat equation is 
described in [15, 16]. 
Precise knowledge of the workpiece surface is essential for the simulation. The 
workpiece surface is discretized by the nailblock model of the geometric-
kinematical simulation. The finite element simulation has to evaluate this descrip-
tion of the surface at many different points. The nails lying in the possible contact 
area are taken into account in the finite element simulation. Since the coordinates 
of the nodes of the finite element mesh and of the nails are not identical, the eval-
uation has to be carried out via interpolation. Furthermore, a finite element mesh 
of the workpiece has to be constructed in every time step in order to calculate the 
heat, see [15]. 
Two approaches seem to be appropriate for calculating the normal and tangen-
tial contact stress. The first one is to calculate the normal and tangential contact 
stress based on the displacement u in a post-processing step. The second possibili-
ty is to rewrite the variational inequality as a mixed problem. Here, the normal and 
tangential contact stress is only the Lagrangian multiplier in the mixed problem. 
Thus, it is calculated in combination with the displacements during the solution 
process. The second formulation is preferred because a better accuracy is 
achieved. The tangential contact stress is the value essential for calculating the 
heat generated, which is proportional to the product of tangential stress and tan-
gential velocity. 
In Fig. 6.9, the finite element model and a drawing of the spindle and the grind-
ing wheel are displayed. In the finite element model, the geometry has been 
slightly simplified and is discretized by hexahedral elements. The material is li-
near elastic in the whole domain. However, the material parameters vary. The 
areas where the different material parameters apply are indicated in the finite ele-
ment model found in Fig. 6.9. The first region consists of the spindle and the car-
rier of the grinding wheel. The second one contains the grinding layer. The third 
region relates to the bearings. The material parameters of the bearings are used to 
model the stiffness of the rest of the grinding machine. This approach is explained 
in [20]. 

132 
D. Biermann et al.
 
 
Fig. 6.9 Drawing and finite element model of the spindle and the grinding wheel 
The algorithm for solving the discrete problems is complex. An extensive pres-
entation of this theme can be found in [16]. It includes an outer fix-point algo-
rithm, where a quadratic program with nonlinear constraints has to be solved in 
each iteration. Therefore, a sequential quadratic programming (SQP) method is 
applied. The rotation of the grinding wheel complicates the calculation. An arbi-
trary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) approach is used to take the rotational effects in-
to account. This is also described in [16]. 
To discretize the thermo-elastic problem of the workpiece two points have to be 
considered. The first one is that the basic domain changes during the calculation 
due to the material removal. Consequently, the initial data of a new time step must 
be interpolated on the new mesh. The second point is directly related to this. A 
new finite element mesh has to be constructed in each time step. This is carried 
out by meshing the dexel model of the workpiece stored in the geometric-
kinematical simulation. 
The finite element simulation is complex and therefore time consuming. A 
posteriori error estimates have been derived and adaptive finite element methods 
have been developed to achieve a given accuracy at minimal numerical costs. Two 
different approaches are considered: In the first one, the error is estimated in the 
global energy norm [21-23]. This approach is easy to implement and leads to good 
meshes but the error is not measured in the relevant physical quantities. This dis-
advantage has been overcome by dual-weighted residual (DWR) based error esti-
mators, see [18, 24]. More details can be found in Section 3.4. 
6.3.3   Coupling 
The target depth of cut ae,tar is given by the NC-data. The machine, however, is not 
able to realize this depth of cut. Instead, an actual depth of cut ae,act is measured, 
which is smaller than the target depth of cut. The geometric-kinematical simula-
tion is only able to simulate the target depth of cut. It is combined with the finite 
element simulation to obtain a better approximation of ae,act. 
The process force Fres is predicted by the geometric-kinematical simulation and 
the contact force Fcon is calculated by the finite element simulation. A good ap-
proximation of the actual depth of cut is found, if the contact force and the pre-
dicted process force are equal. The problem is to find such an approximation of 
the actual depth of cut. The solution algorithm is described in this section. 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
133
 
The accumulated contact force Fcon is calculated from the actual normal contact 
stress by integration. The contact force Fcon is a function of the actual depth of cut. 
We minimize the deviation between Fres and Fcon measured in the 2-norm squared 
as dependent on the actual depth of cut by using the golden cut algorithm. The op-
timal point is then the actual depth of cut sought. For an alternative approach and 
more details, see [9]. 
6.3.4   Parametrization 
Many of the model parameters, the frictional resistance coefficient and the heat 
distribution factors, for instance, cannot directly be determined by experiments. 
However, they must be accurately defined to ensure precise simulation results. 
Numerical parameter identification techniques are used to calculate the model pa-
rameters and to overcome the difficulties related to direct measurement. 
Based on an experimental design, several suitably chosen experiments are car-
ried out. Some quantities, which can be determined with small measurement error 
and calculated by the simulation, are measured. The experiments are reproduced 
numerically in the simulation, where some initial guesses, e. g. from literature, are 
used for the parameters. The difference between the simulation results and the 
measured results is calculated in an appropriate norm. Then, optimization algo-
rithms are applied to minimize the deviation, where the parameters are the optimi-
zation variables. The optimal solution then gives the parameters sought. 
This technique has been used to determine the damping parameters and the 
stiffness of the bearings. The experiments are described in [2] and the parameter 
identification in [20]. For the determination of the parameters connected to the 
model of the thermal effects, see [8, 15]. 
6.4   Simulation Results 
During the past few years, a complex simulation has been created. It has been 
tested and validated step by step, i. e. every part was independently considered. 
Three major results are discussed here. The first one is the validation of the re-
moval model. To this end, an actually ground workpiece surface was compared 
with the surface predicted by the simulation. The results of the frictional model are 
substantiated by the comparison of the measured tangential forces during an actual 
grinding process and the accumulated tangential stresses in the simulation. The 
third aspect relates to the simulation of thermal effects. The temperatures calcu-
lated for some chosen points of the workpiece were checked against the tempera-
tures measured by thermocouples at the same points. 
6.4.1   Validation of the Removal 
The simulation presented here is tested by means of a simple grinding process. 
The cutting speed was set at vw = 50 m/s and the workpiece velocity was 
vf = 30 m/min. Thus, the grinding wheel rotated with n = 85 s-1. The target depth 

134 
D. Biermann et al.
 
of cut was set at ae = 40 µm. A non-water-based coolant was used. The process 
kinematics was down-grinding. 
The simulation was carried out as described above. The termination tolerance 
was set at tol = 10 N. This seems to lead to a rough approximation. Experience 
with the simulation, however, has shown that a smaller tolerance changes the val-
ues of the actual depth of cut by only about ae,act = 0.001 µm. Thus, the tolerance 
is accurate enough in relation to the other model errors. Three to four passes of the 
simulation cycle are needed to reach the given prescribed tolerance. 
In Fig. 6.10, a cut through the workpiece is displayed. The measured result is 
also provided for comparison. Temperature effects are neglected in this calcula-
tion. One can easily see that the results are good for the quasi-stationary process 
phase. However, to get an accurate result during the run-in damping has to be con-
sidered in the simulation. For more details, see [2]. 
 
Fig. 6.10 The simulated and the actual workpiece surface 
6.4.2   Validation of the Frictional Model 
To validate the frictional model the accumulated tangential forces are calculated in 
the simulation and compared to the tangential forces actually measured. In 
Fig. 6.11, the measured forces and the simulated forces with a constant frictional 
coefficient and a time-dependent one are shown. In the quasi-stationary area, both 
approaches lead to good results. However, during the run-in and the run-out the 
results using the time-dependent frictional coefficient are more accurate. 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
135
 
 
Fig. 6.11 Comparison of the tangential forces using the force model and the FEM based on 
the frictional model 
6.4.3   Validation of the Temperature Results 
In this section, the temperatures measured in an experiment are compared with the 
results of the corresponding simulation. A workpiece made of X210Cr12 is used. 
The width is 19.7 mm, the length 80 mm and the height 22.3 mm. The depth of cut 
is ae of 1 mm. The material removal is carried out line-by-line, where the width of 
cut ap is 0.1 mm. The cutting speed vc is set at 50 m/s and the workpiece velocity 
vw at 1,500 mm/min. The temperature of the coolant is 26°C and therefore 
θs = 26 °C is used in the simulation. 
In Fig. 6.12, the temperature measured by a thermocouple is compared to the 
temperature calculated by the simulation at the same point. There, several passes 
of the grinding wheel are examined. It is obvious that the time interval between 
the different temperature peaks has been correctly calculated by the simulation. 
Furthermore, the deviation of the calculated temperature from the measured one is 
small. However, sometimes the simulated maximum temperature is larger than the 
measured one and sometimes it is smaller. The overall development was predicted 
correctly. 
Only one pass is depicted in Fig. 6.13. There, we see that the qualitative trend 
of the curve for the temperatures measured is reproduced by the one simulated. 
The temperature decay was not predicted accurately, the temperature decay is too 
slow in the simulation. However, the final, resulting temperature is correct. 

136 
D. Biermann et al.
 
 
Fig. 6.12 Comparison of measured and simulated temperature results 
 
Fig. 6.13 Comparison of measurement and simulation results for one pass 
6.5   Application of Simulation 
In order to achieve an overall view of the simulation and the prediction of the NC 
data it is necessary, on the one hand, to transfer the simulation to other grinding 
processes and materials and, on the other hand, to integrate tool path planning into 
the simulation. In the following sections, the present state of path planning and the 
first experimental results using other grinding wheel contours will be discussed 
6.5.1   Path Planning  
The simulation described here was developed in order to produce, in future, an in-
tact workpiece surface and a workpiece with a high degree of dimensional accura-
cy. For this purpose, path planning is integrated into the simulation. In the first 
step, the mean spindle displacement, when flute grinding, is examined. When pro-
ducing the flutes, the depth of cut, which does not change over the grinding path, 
is adjusted as long as it takes for the mean actual depth of cut to reach the target 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
137
 
depth of cut along the grinding path. It can be seen that the simulation with path 
planning over a grinding path having constant engagement conditions attains the 
mean target cut of depth (Fig. 6.14). The positioning of the workpiece in the  
machine has to be examined and the traverse velocities of the different axes taken 
into account when path planning in order to integrate the path planning into  
the simulation for the changing engagement conditions and to realize the path 
planning for every time step. 
 
Fig. 6.14 Flute grinding with and without path planning 
6.5.2   Transferability to Other Processes 
The simulation must be transferable to other grinding wheels and materials so that 
a holistic simulation can be produced. First, the different grinding processes are 
realized on the basis of different grinding wheel contours. In addition to a toroid 
grinding wheel, a cylindrical and a profile grinding wheel are used. These grinding 
wheels must be integrated into the simulation and analyzed to see whether the si-
mulation is suitable. In order to calibrate the simulation force measurement must 
be undertaken once more to produce a force model and temperature measurements 
have to be made for the different grinding wheels. The different engagement con-
ditions for the grinding wheels in the geometric-kinematical simulation are shown 
in Fig. 6.15. 
 
Fig. 6.15 Engagement conditions using different grinding wheels in the geometric-
kinematical simulation 

138 
D. Biermann et al.
 
The forces for different process parameters are measured. Based on the mean 
value of the forces measured, the force coefficients at every workpiece speed for 
all grinding wheel contours could be determined. The simulated forces are in good 
agreement with the measured forces when flat surfaces are produced using cylin-
drical grinding wheels as well as when slanted surfaces are produced using a pro-
file grinding wheel. Comparing the forces, it becomes obvious that there is a great 
variance in the forces in the area of the quickly-changing contact surfaces when 
concave surfaces are produced. Here, only small depths of cut can be achieved us-
ing cylindrical and profile grinding wheels (Fig. 6.16). Therefore, it is impossible 
to predict the forces in the simulation. The development of forces along the sur-
face contours can be simulated using toroid grinding wheels because, due to the 
relatively large depth of cut, the contact surfaces are not so greatly changed as 
they would be for the depths of cut used with cylindrical and profile grinding 
wheels. 
 
Fig. 6.16 Comparison of the measured and simulated forces along a grinding path using a 
cylindrical grinding wheel for a concave workpiece 
One can see that when the temperature in the process is measured the tempera-
tures behave as described in literature and in Sect. 6.2.3 when using both grinding 
wheel contours. An example is shown in Fig. 6.17. 
A further analysis of the grinding processes is now in progress. On the one 
hand, the temperatures measured using the different grinding wheel contours are 
being compared with the temperatures calculated in the finite element simulation. 
On the other hand, other workpieces are being investigated. 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
139
 
 
Fig. 6.17 Dependency of temperature on the distance between the thermocouple and the 
contact area using a profile grinding wheel 
6.6   Conclusion and Outlook 
In this chapter, the experimental basis of the empirical models for NC-shape 
grinding process are presented, the models themselves and also the numerical me-
thods for calculating approximate solutions have been described. The results of 
three validation experiments presented here have shown that our method for simu-
lating the NC shape grinding process is an appropriate one. In particular, the iden-
tification of model parameters using numerical methods leads to the achievement 
of acceptable results. Furthermore, first results concerning path planning show that 
the simulation approach is applicable for optimizing the process. The demonstrat-
ed transferability of the simulation approach to other grinding processes reveals 
the flexibility of this approach. 
The application of the simulation presented here for optimizing grinding 
processes will be extended. As an example, complex automatic modifications of 
the NC data should be mentioned. One aim is to damp out oscillations in the ma-
chine structure but the restrictions of the grinding machine, which influence a rea-
lization of the NC data turn this into a difficult task. For this purpose, a lot of si-
mulation runs are needed, where the accuracy requirements vary strongly from a 
rough approximation of the removal to a precise prediction of the temperature dis-
tribution. Consequently, a wide range of simulation options has to be provided  
and the computing time minimized. It is planned to employ adaptive finite  
element methods and modern high performance computing techniques to meet 
these demands. 
Considering the practical usage of this simulation outside academic research, 
the key issue is the transferability of the approach to other grinding machines, oth-
er workpieces and other grinding processes. The results presented here concerning 
this topic will be extended by conducting further experiments, which will mainly 
concentrate on new workpiece materials. 

140 
D. Biermann et al.
 
References 
[1] DIN EN 8589-11. Schleifen mit rotierendem Werkzeug - Einordnung, Unterteilung, 
Begriffe. Beuth Verlag (2003) 
[2] Jansen, T.: Entwicklung einer Simulation für den NC-Formschleifprozess mit To-
russchleifscheiben. Dissertation, Technische Universität Dortmund. Vulkan Verlag, 
Essen (2007) 
[3] Biermann, D., Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A., Scheidler, A., Weinert, K.: Ex-
perimental analyses to develop models for NC-shape grinding with a toroid grinding 
wheel. In: Denkena, B. (ed.) The 1st International Conference on Process Machine In-
teractions, Hannover, Germany, pp. 279–287, 3.9–4.9 (2008) 
[4] Brecher, C., Esser, M., Witt, S.: Interaction of manufacturing process and machine 
tool. CIRP Annals 58(2), 588–607 (2009) 
[5] Brinksmeier, E., Aurich, J.C., Govekar, E., Heinzel, C., Hoffmeister, H.-W., Peters, 
J., Rentsch, R., Stephenson, D.J., Uhlmann, E., Weinert, K., Wittmann, M.: Advances 
in modelling and simulation of grinding processes. CIRP Annals 55(2), 667–696 
(2006) 
[6] Klocke, F.: Manufacturing Processes 2: Grinding, Honing, Lapping. Springer, Berlin 
(2009) 
[7] Tönshoff, H.K., Peters, J., Inasaki, I., Paul, T.: Modelling and simulation of grinding 
processes. CIRP Annals 41(2), 677–688 (1992) 
[8] Biermann, D., Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Scheidler, A.V.: Simulation of thermal ef-
fects in NC-shape grinding of free formed surfaces using toroid grinding wheels. Part 
I: Experimental results. In: Proceedings of the CIRP 2nd International Conference 
Process Machine Interactions, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 10.6–11.6 (2010); digital 
published 
[9] Weinert, K., Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A.: Simulation based optimization of 
the NC-shape grinding prozess with toroid grinding wheels. Production Engineering – 
Research and Development 1(3), 245–252 (2007) 
[10] Stautner, M.: Simulation und Optimierung der mehrachsigen Fräsbearbeitung. Tech-
nische Universität Dortmund. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (2006) 
[11] Aurich, J.C., Biermann, D., Blum, H., Brecher, C., Carstensen, C., Denkena, B., 
Klocke, F., Kröger, M., Steinmann, P., Weinert, K.: Modelling and simulation of 
process machine interaction in grinding. Production Engineering – Research and De-
velopment 3(1), 111–120 (2009) 
[12] Biermann, D., Mohn, T.: A geometric-kinematical approach for the simulation of 
complex grinding processes. In: CIRP International Conference on Intelligent Com-
putation in Manufacturing Engineering, Innovation and Cognitive Production Tech-
nology and Systems, Naples, Italy (2008) 
[13] Weinert, K., Blum, H., Jansen, T., Mohn, T., Rademacher, A.: Angepasste Simula-
tionstechnik zur Analyse NC-gesteuerter Formschleifprozesse. ZWF, Zeitschrift für 
wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 101(7/8), 422–425 (2006) 
[14] Kienzle, O.: Einfluss der Wärmebehandlung von Stählen auf die Hauptschnittkraft 
beim Drehen. Stahl und Eisen 74, 530–551 (1954) 
[15] Biermann, D., Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Scheidler, A.V.: Simulation of thermal ef-
fects in NC-shape grinding of free formed surfaces using toroid grinding wheels. Part 
II: Modeling and FE-discretization. In: Proceedings of the CIRP 2nd International 
Conference Process Machine Interactions, Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp. 10.6–11.6 
(2010); digital published 

6   Simulation of Process Machine Interaction in NC-Shape Grinding 
141
 
[16] Blum, H., Kleemann, H., Rademacher, A., Schröder, A.: On solving frictional contact 
problems part II: Dynamic case. Ergebnisberichte Angewandte Mathematik 377, 
Technische Universität Dortmund (2008) 
[17] Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A., Weinert, K.: Finite elements in space and time 
for dynamic contact problems. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering 76, 1632–1644 (2008) 
[18] Rademacher, A.: Adaptive Finite Element Methods for Nonlinear Hyperbolic Prob-
lems of Second Order. Dissertation Technische Universität Dortmund. Verlag Dr. 
Hut, München (2009) 
[19] Blum, H., Kleemann, H., Rademacher, A., Schröder, A., Wiedemann, S.: SOFAR: 
Scientific object oriented finite element library for application and research. Technic-
al report, Technische Universität Dortmund (2002),  
http://www.mathematik.uni-dortmund.de/lsx/research/ 
software/sofar/index.html 
[20] Biermann, D., Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Schäckelhoff, M., Scheidler, A.V., Wei-
nert, K.: Bestimmung der Materialparameter des Spindel-Schleifscheiben-Systems 
mittels numerischer Parameteridentifikation. Ergebnisberichte Angewandte Mathe-
matik 376T, Technische Universität Dortmund (2008) 
[21] Biermann, D., Blum, H., Jansen, T., Rademacher, A., Scheidler, A.V., Schröder, A., 
Weinert, K.: Space adaptive finite element methods for dynamic Signorini problems 
in the simulation of the NC-shape grinding process. In: Denkena, B. (ed.) 1st Interna-
tional Conference on Process Machine Interactions, Hannover, Germany, pp. 309–
316, 3.9.–4.9 (2008) 
[22] Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Schröder, A.: Space adaptive finite element methods for 
dynamic Signorini problems. Electronic Transactions on Numerical Analysis 32, 
162–172 (2008) 
[23] Blum, H., Rademacher, A., Schröder, A.: Space adaptive finite element methods for 
dynamic Signorini problems. Computational Mechanics 44(4), 481–491 (2009) 
[24] Rademacher, A., Schröder, A.: Goal-oriented error control in adaptive mixed FEM 
for Signorini’s problem. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing 200(1-4), 345–355 (2011) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 143–176. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 7 
Modeling of Process Machine Interactions  
in Tool Grinding 
M. Deichmueller, B. Denkena, K. M. de Payrebrune,  
M. Kröger, S. Wiedemann, A. Schröder, and C. Carstensen 
Abstract. A systematic modeling approach to predict and manipulate the static 
and dynamic process machine interactions in tool grinding is described. The mod-
eling approach is verified by experimental investigations gained by means of an 
industrial tool grinding machine and separate test stands. It combines models of 
the static and dynamic behavior of the grinding machine and its components with 
a microscopic grinding process model. Material removal algorithms are applied to 
cope with the changing shape and changing mechanical properties of the work-
piece during grinding. The interaction model has been applied in the process  
planning phase to optimize tool paths and process parameters in order to reduce 
resulting shape errors in ground tools.  
7.1   Introduction 
High performance cutting tools play an important role in modern manufacturing. 
Within the production of an aircraft, for example, high-quality parts have to be 
manufactured containing up to several thousand holes with low tolerances. Parts 
produced for the car industry are also mostly high quality parts. In order to meet 
the high quality requirements, even for high lot sizes, cutting tools made of 
tungsten carbide are used, which is a very hard and strong material. In addition, a 
high effort is spent on machine tests within the process ramp-up phase with the in-
tention of ensuring a fast and stable process. The worldwide market for cutting 
tools has a volume of about 13 billion € [1], which also shows the significance of 
the industry. 
Due to the hardness of tungsten carbide cutting tools are manufactured by 
grinding processes. As summarized in part I of this book, many research projects 
have focused on understanding and controlling grinding processes [2]. In recent 
years, the focus of research was widened to investigate the influence of the grind-
ing machine to the grinding process, i.e. the process machine interaction. In the 
grinding of cylindrical cutting tools like drills or end-mills, the workpiece plays an 
important role regarding the process machine interactions. The relatively low 
stiffness of the workpiece – which also changes considerably during grinding – 
leads to static deflections and vibrations and therefore to geometry errors on the 
ground tool. In order to understand and predict the process machine interaction in 

144 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
tool grinding it is essential to model both the generation of forces and the genera-
tion of deflections. 
In the future, the process machine interaction should be considered in the plan-
ning phase of tool grinding processes to allow the fabrication of high quality tools 
with low tolerances and without extensive prototype grinding. Within an interdis-
ciplinary research project of production engineers, mechanical engineers and ma-
thematicians, the authors developed a multi-scale simulation approach, which 
represents the process-machine interactions in tool grinding in the microscopic 
and the macroscopic scale. 
Tungsten carbide tools are produced using deep grinding processes. Within one 
production step, the flutes are ground, which can be up to several millimeters 
deep, see Figure 7.1.  
 
Fig. 7.1 Experimental setup for tool grinding 
The occurring process forces lead to large deformations of the workpiece. 
Therefore, it is modeled by an elastic beam model with changing moments of  
inertia. In addition, the mechanical properties and dynamic transfer behavior of 
workpiece clamping, grinding wheel-spindle-system and machine structure are 
considered in the boundary conditions. Another significant issue is the exact mod-
eling of the occurring grinding forces. The stress distribution and, with this, the 
grinding forces are dependent on the present process parameters, such as grinding 
velocity, infeed and the shape of the contact area between grinding wheel and 
workpiece. The challenge in predicting the grinding forces in tool grinding is that 
process parameters, such as contact length or depth of cut, are not constant within 
the contact area and change during grinding.  
7.2   Modeling Approach 
The modeling approach, which is presented in this paper, has been developed in 
an interdisciplinary collaboration of the Institute of Production Engineering and 
Machines Tools (IFW, Leibniz Universität Hannover), the Institute for Machine 
Elements, Design and Manufacturing (IMKF, TU Bergakademie Freiberg) and the 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
145
 
Department of Mathematics (IfM, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin). It combines a 
kinematic-based discrete material removal simulation with a detailed analysis of 
the current contact area. With this, the current macroscopic shape of workpiece 
and contact area can be computed considering local contact lengths and cutting 
depths. Based on the contact analysis, a 3D finite element model for single and 
multi-grain scratches is parameterized, which allows the calculation of the stress 
distribution during the microscopic grain engagements. The microscopic grinding 
force model is also the basis for the dynamic interaction model, which has been 
developed to predict instable grinding conditions and consider the effect of ma-
chine and workpiece vibrations on the resulting grinding process. The modeling 
approach is consequently validated by experimental data gained by means of an 
industrial tool grinding machine and with tool grinding tests. The interrelation of 
the macroscopically and microscopically-based models is illustrated in Figure 7.2. 
 
Fig. 7.2 Modeling concept for the simulation of the process machine interactions in tool 
grinding, interfaces and responsible research institutes 
7.3   Modeling of the Machine Structure 
Tool grinding machines are flexible machines with a high degree of freedom and 
normally five machine axes. For experimental analysis of the process machine in-
teractions in tool grinding, a Walter Helitronic Power 5-axis tool grinding machine 

146 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
is used. Via two axes, the spindle and grinding wheel can be positioned axially in 
y and z-direction, whereas the position of the machine table can be defined  
over one axial (x-direction) and two rotation axes (A and C), as illustrated in  
Figure 7.3.  
During the grinding process, forces occur, which deform the machine structure. 
Since this has an effect on the quality of the produced workpiece, analyses were 
carried out to characterize the deformation of the clamping of workpiece and 
grinding wheel and the machine structure.  
 
Fig. 7.3 Axis configuration of the used 5-axis CNC tool grinding machine (Walter Helitron-
ic Power) 
7.3.1   Workpiece Clamping 
The workpiece is fixed on the machine table via a jaw chuck. During the manufac-
turing process, the workpiece rotates around its center line and moves towards the 
grinding wheel to realize a helical flute. Thereby, the out-of-roundness and the de-
formation of the clamping have an impact on the final geometry. Both effects can 
be measured by tactile sensors during grinding tests. Therefore, an additional mea-
suring pin is added on the workpiece rod.  
At the beginning of the grinding tests, the workpiece rotates 5 times before the 
grinding wheel gets in contact. During grinding, the deformations in y and z-
direction of the workpiece are measured at the cylindrical pin at the tip of the 
workpiece, as shown in Figure 7.4. Additionally, the corresponding process forces 
in y-direction are displayed as well, see also [3].  
In the first 30 seconds, the out-of-roundness of about 37 µm is noticeable in 
this case. Comparing the amplitude of the sine waves with the largest deformation 
of the workpiece of 315 µm, the deviation in form and position by the out-of-
roundness amounts to 12 % and cannot be neglected. In the workpiece model, the 
out-of-roundness is thereby realized by an eccentric pre-positioning of the work-
piece, which 100 mm long with a diameter of 10 mm. 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
147
 
 
Fig. 7.4. Measurement of workpiece deformation, process forces and out-of-roundness of 
the workpiece tip  
7.3.2   Machine Table  
In a separate test, the elasticity of the machine table is analyzed. To measure the 
deformation of the clamping and the workpiece table a constant force F = 100 N is 
loaded onto the workpiece and the deformation is measured at several positions. 
The comparison of the measured data and the analytical solution for the static 
bending of the workpiece rod with ideal stiff boundary conditions results in a li-
near difference, which can be assigned to the deformation of the machine  
structure. From Figure 7.5 it can be seen that the calculated difference between 
measured and calculated deflection curve of a workpiece (10 mm diameter, 100 
mm length) amounts to Δy = 11.8 µm and the tilt to Δφ = 1.1 10-³ degrees at the 
support.  

148 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
Fig. 7.5 Measured deformation of workpiece and machine table for a constant load of 
F = 100 N 
Since the stiffness of the clamping support has an influence on the total dis-
placement of the workpiece, the elasticity of the machine table is implemented in-
to the workpiece model. Therefore, two spring elements are considered in the 
model with a distance of 40 mm within the clamping, see also [4, 5].  
7.3.3   Grinding Wheel Clamping 
The elasticity of the spindle is measured in the same way as the deformation of the 
machine table, see Figure 7.5. A constant force is loaded on the spindle and the 
deformation is measured at different points. The stiffness of the spindle is detected 
to cSpindle = 11.8 N/µm, which is in the same range of the stiffness of the clamping 
and about 30 times higher than the stiffness of the workpiece with an elasticity of 
about cWorkpiece = 0.4 N/µm measured at the tip of the workpiece. The deformation 
of the spindle influences the contact conditions during the grinding process, there-
fore the elasticity has to be considered in the model, especially for modeling the 
dynamic movement of the spindle during grinding. 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
149
 
7.3.4   Grinding Wheel 
To manufacture super-hard cutting materials like high speed steels or tungsten 
carbide, grinding wheels with diamond or CBN-grains are used. The abrasive 
grains are placed in a bonding, where additives are implemented to improve the 
heat conductivity or to enlarge the chip space for better chip removal and coolant 
supply. Before grinding, the grinding wheel has to be trued and sharpened. With 
the truing process, the macroscopic shape of the grinding wheel is defined. During 
sharpening, the bond is set back until sharp grains appear on the surface of the 
grinding wheel and sufficient chip space is created. This conditioning process is 
necessary because the grinding wheel wears over time meaning that the abrasive 
grains blunts or break out and the shape of the wheel changes.  
 
Fig. 7.6 Measured surface and Fast Fourier analysis of a grinding wheel topography with 
graining D91 

150 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
The contact between grinding wheel and workpiece is characterized by thou-
sands of stochastically microscopic grain engagements. These grain contacts dy-
namically excite the system, which can cause chatter or lifting and has a negative 
effect on the quality of the ground surface. The corrugation of the grinding wheel 
surface and the excitation frequency are mainly dependent on the rotation speed 
2πn. Therefore, the shape of a nominally cylindrical grinding wheel is measured 
by a laser sensor and analyzed. The measured data are shown in Figure 7.6. It is 
obvious that the grinding wheel surface is wavy with different frequencies, as 
shown by the Fourier transformation. The fundamental oscillation is due to an out-
of-roundness of the wheel with the basic frequency n of the rotation speed whe-
reas the harmonics are based on additional waves. The high-frequency noise cor-
responds to the abrasive grains. Since the size of the grains, which overlap over 
the bonding, is nearly normally distributed, as references and analysis have shown, 
it can be described mathematically, [6]. To represent the high-frequency excitation 
of the workpiece in the dynamic simulation the grinding wheel is modeled by a 
combination of sine waves for the out-of-roundness and the periodic waves, and 
additionally by a normal distribution for the grains. The amplitudes are taken from 
measurements, see also [3]. 
7.3.5   Workpiece Model 
The workpiece is considered to be one part of the whole structure which interacts 
with the tool grinding process. The modeling approach for the workpiece consists 
of two parts. The first part is responsible for modeling the current macroscopic 
shape of the workpiece. The workpiece geometry and material removal are discre-
tized using a so-called dexel model. The second part describes the static and dy-
namic deflection of the workpiece deformation. Here, the Euler beam equation 
and a finite element approach with beam elements, respectively, are applied. Both 
parts of the workpiece model are described in detail below. 
7.3.5.1   Dexel Model 
In 1986, van Hook introduced “dexels” or “depth elements” as a discretization 
method for workpieces [7]. Since then, dexels have been applied by several au-
thors for the simulation of manufacturing processes, e. g. [8, 9]. The workpiece is 
discretized by a regular grid of dexels, which have a constant distance in two di-
rections and varying lengths in the third direction. The accuracy of the model is 
high in dexel direction and relatively low perpendicular to it. The use of three in-
dependent dexel grids overcomes the problem of different model accuracy in the 
coordinate directions. Figure 7.7 shows the discretization of the workpiece with 
dexel grids in all three coordinate directions. A dexel Di,j can be identified by the 
position i,j in the particular dexel grid. Undercuts can be simulated by adding a 
dexel segment Di,j,d to the current dexel. 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
151
 
 
Fig. 7.7 Workpiece discretization with dexels 
The cylindrical grinding wheel is approximated as a non-rotating polyhedron in 
the easiest case. The movement of the grinding wheel is determined by a  
NC-program, which can be interpreted by the simulation system. During one si-
mulation step, the grinding wheel moves from one position to the next in a step-
wise linear movement. The trace of the grinding wheel is called the sweep  
volume. In each simulation step, the intersection of sweep volume and workpiece 
is calculated. In case of an intersection, the specific dexels are shortened, divided 
or removed [10].  
7.3.5.2   Static Deformation 
In each simulation step, the current workpiece’s cross sections are analyzed for 
calculating the geometrical moments of inertia Iyy, Izz and Iyz at discrete positions xi 
along the workpiece axis x. For example, the geometrical moment of inertia Izz can 
be calculated with 
3
b
h
D
2
D
I
y
b
h
zzD
D
D
D
12
⋅
=
+
⋅
⋅
, 
I
I
zz
zzD
= Σ
 
(1) 
as displayed in Figure 7.8. 

152 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
Fig.7.8 Calculation of geometrical moments of inertia 
The static oblique bending of the workpiece is calculated by integrating the li-
near beam equations 
yz
y
yy
z
2
yy zz
yz
I
(x)M (x)
I M (x)
v''(x)
E(I I
I
)
−
+
=
−
, 
zz
y
yz
z
2
yy zz
yz
I (x)M (x)
I M (x)
w ''(x)
E(I I
I
)
−
+
=
−
 
(2) 
in every simulation step, where v is the deformation in y-direction and w in  
z-direction. The material (tungsten carbide) is assumed to be isotropic and homo-
geneous, with Young’s modulus E being 590,000 N/mm². In addition to the geo-
metrical moments of inertia I(x), the bending moments M are a function of  
position x and time t. To determine M(x) a grinding force model is applied, which 
is described in Section 7.4.2. In case the clamping is assumed to be rigid, the 
boundary conditions are v(0) = w(0) = 0 and v’(0) = w’(0) = 0 or otherwise de-
pendent on the stiffness of the support. After calculating the bending lines v(x) and 
w(x) the deformation at position xi is assigned to all dexels of dexel layer i.  
7.3.5.3   Dynamic Deformation 
The dynamic workpiece deflection is highly dependent on the momentary geome-
try, stiffness and forces loaded on the workpiece. Mathematical and experimental 
investigations have shown the dependencies of the eigenfrequencies on the length 
 
 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
153
 
 of the ground flute and depth of cut ae.. In Figure 7.9, the first eigenfrequency of 
a workpiece with longitudinal flutes is shown exemplarily. The variation of the  
workpiece characteristics is visible. A finite beam element approach is used as 
workpiece discretization, according to the dexel model, to represent the changing 
properties, compare [11].  
 
Fig.7.9 Simulated workpiece frequency characteristics depending on the geometry for lon-
gitudinal ground flutes 
Each beam element has six degrees of freedom to represent bending and torsion 
of the workpiece axis. The properties are assumed to be constant within one ele-
ment but can change over time. The equation of motion can be written as 
,
+
+
=


Mq
Dq
Kq
f  
(3) 
 

154 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
with the mass matrix M, the damping matrix D, the stiffness matrix K, the vector 
of the generalized coordinates q and the vector of forces and moments f. Because 
the system of coupled equations has the size of 6n× 6n, with n the number of  
elements, it is very large and takes long to solve. By means of a modal reduction, 
the system can be reduced and the equations become linearly independent, which 
simplifies the solving process. The modal transformation of the system in the 
modal space is carried out by a transformation matrix 
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ




Φ = q ,q ,...,qn
1
2
 with 
ˆ iq the eigenvectors of the system. Via the substitution of the node displacements  
=
mod
q
Φq
 
(4) 
and the multiplication with the transformation matrix from the left side the equa-
tion of motion can be written in modal space as 
T
T
T
T
mod
mod
mod
mod
mod
mod
mod
+
+
=
+
+
=




Φ MΦq
Φ DΦq
Φ KΦq
Φ f
q
q
q
f


  
(5) 
By using special eigenvectors the modal mass matrix  is equal to the identity 
matrix; 
and 
the 
modal 
stiffness 
matrix 
has 
a 
diagonal 
shape 
2
2
2
1
2
{
,
,...,
}
=
n
diag ω
ω
ω

 with the eigenvalues as entries. Depending on the num-
ber of considered eigenvectors, the size of the system is reduced in modal space; 
however the information about the neglected modes is also lost.  
The reduction of Equation (5) to a system of first order with the substitution 
1
mod
=
z
q
and 
2
mod
= 
z
q
is 
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
( ).
−
−
−








=
+ 







−
−












=
+

mod
d
dt
t
0
0
E
z
z
z
z
f
z
z
f






, 
(6) 
The solution of the dynamic deformation of the excited system is a combination of 
a homogeneous and a particular solution. To apply the method of variation of con-
stants to Equation (6) a general solution is given by  
(
0
0
)
( )
( )
.
−
=
+
t
t
t
t
e
t
e
d
τ
τ
τ
z
z
( ) 


f
 
(7) 
To calculate the momentarily dynamic deformation the solution is determined 
step-wise. This means that the solution for time z(ti+Δt) is determined depending 
on the last solved step z(ti), the step size Δt and the momentary excitation of f(ti).  
It is assumed that the momentary excitation f(ti) is constant within the small step  
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
155
 
size Δt. The matrix depends on the geometry of the workpiece and has been 
recalculated frequently.  
After solving Equation (7) in modal space, the solution of the deformation has 
to be retransformed into the physical space by Equation (4).  
7.4   Tool Grinding Process Model 
In addition to the detailed mathematical description of the relevant parts of the 
machine structure in Section 7.2, a model describing the tool grinding process it-
self is needed to predict the process machine interaction. Tool grinding is charac-
terized by contact conditions between grinding wheel and workpiece, which are 
more complex than in conventional surface grinding. During the grinding of the 
helical flutes, the workpiece is fed into the grinding wheel with a helical move-
ment. The shape of the grinding wheel in combination with the relative movement 
of workpiece and grinding wheel generates the shape of the flute. The contact area 
has a complex shape with a variation of contact lengths and cutting depths. The 
basis for the grinding force modeling is a detailed geometrical analysis of the con-
tact area, which is described in the following. 
7.4.1   Model-Based Contact Area Analysis 
To build a grinding process model, which can calculate the three dimensional dis-
tribution of the grinding stresses and the resulting load in tool grinding, a geome-
trical analysis of the contact area is necessary. The analysis is based on the dexel 
model described in 7.3.5.1, where each dexel represents one fraction of the total 
workpiece volume. In each simulation step, dexels intersecting with the grinding 
wheel are shortened or removed. A big change in dexel length represents a high 
material removal rate and vice versa. By dividing the removed volume VD of each 
dexel i by the simulation time step size Δt, the distribution of the material removal 
rate Qwa in the contact area can be determined.  
Qwa(i) = VD(i) / Δt. 
(8) 
Figure 7.10 a) exemplarily shows the occurring external material removal rates 
Qwa for a flute grinding process. 
As described in [12], the external material removal rate Qwa(i) is used to deter-
mine the equivalent chip thickness heq for each volume element, see Figure 7.10 
b). For the calculation, a constant cutting speed vc is assumed, which is reasonable 
due to the cylindrical shape of the grinding wheel. With the presented procedure, 
it is possible to determine equivalent grinding parameters like heq and Qwa for 
every dexel cut during one simulation step. It can be applied for changing contact 
geometries and an arbitrary grinding wheel movement. The contact area analysis 
is the basis for the application of grinding force models, which are described in the 
following section.  
 

156 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
Fig. 7.10 a) Calculated material removal rate Qwa(i) [mm³/s] and b) calculated equivalent 
chip thickness heq [µm] for a tool grinding process (vft = 30 mm/min, d = 10 mm, 
R = 62.0 mm) 
7.4.2   Grinding Force Model 
Two approaches for calculating the grinding forces are shown. Both use the 
equivalent grinding parameters as input data. The microscopic finite element ap-
proach calculates the stress resulting from a single grain – workpiece contact. The 
second approach determines the grinding force distribution empirically.  
7.4.2.1   Microscopic Force Model 
Within the tool grinding process, the interaction of grains and workpiece on a mi-
croscopic scale result in forces observable on a macroscopic scale. These forces 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
157
 
are measured under the machine table, see Figure 7.3, but experiments suggest 
that the stresses vary throughout the contact zone. In order to include this varia-
tion, a process force model has to account the locally different contact conditions. 
The contact zone is discretized into small sub-domains by the dexel model (see 
7.2.5.1). The range of parameters for the engagement of single grains can be cal-
culated using the geometrical analysis explained in 7.3.1. and [12]. This analysis 
also provides a method for the combination of the microscopic stresses stored in a 
database (see Figure 7.2) to the stress distribution within the contact zone. Here, 
the approach is to model the contact of grains and workpiece on a microscopic 
scale for the different parameters of those sub-domains. This is carried out by 
coupling variational inequalities describing the elasto-plastic behavior of the 
workpiece and its contact with abrasive grains. Linear kinematic hardening is as-
sumed for the workpiece on microscopic scale denoted by Ω. This domain is fixed 
on the free boundary ΓD; and the contact boundary is denoted by ΓC. For the case 
of notation, only one time-step of the quasi-static problem with initial values set to 
zero is considered here (for further details see [13]). The primal problem of elasto-
plasticity with linear kinematic hardening including contact is to find a displace-
ment field u and a plastic strain P such that 
div
( , )
in ,
f
σ
−
=
Ω
u P
 
( , )
( )
σ
ε
=
−
u P
u
P

, 
0 on 
,
D
=
Γ
u
 
0
( ,
)
on 
,
n
N
t
σ
=
Γ
u P
 
;
0; (
)
0 on 
,
n
n
n
C
g
g
σ
σ
≤
≤
−
=
Γ
u
u
 
( , )
( ).
j
σ
−
∈∂
u P
P
P

 
 
(9) 
Here, 
1/2
( ) :
(
:
)
,
y
j
σ
Ω
= 
Q
Q Q
 is the non-differentiable part of the minimum plas-
tic work function with the yield stress σy > 0 in uni-axial tension, σ denotes the 
stress, is the elasticity tensor and is the tensor describing the hardening. For 
simplicity, the surface traction t0 and the outer volume force ƒ are assumed to be 
zero from here on. M : N := MijNij denotes the usual scalar product of M and N. 
The part of the boundary ΓN is assumed to be disjoint with ΓD and ΓC. 
Since the unique analytic solution W := (u, P) for this partial differential equa-
tion and inclusion is generally unknown, a numerical approximation has to be 
computed. For this purpose, the mathematical problem shown in (9) is reformu-
lated as a variational inequality; and then it is equivalently written as a saddle-
point problem introducing Lagrange multipliers. Moreover, the spaces, where the 
solution is searched, are replaced by discrete ones. This results in the problem to 
find Wh, λC,H, λp,h such that 
,
,
(
,
)
·
:
0
Γ
Ω
+
+
=


C
h
h
C H
h
y
h p
h
a
λ
σ λ
W Z
v n
Q
 
,
,
,
,
(
)
·
(
) :
0
C
C H
C H
h
y
p h
p h
h
μ
λ
σ
μ
λ
Γ
Ω
−
+
−
≤


u n
Q
 
(10) 
 

158 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
for all 
,
,
,
,
(
,
,
)
h
C H
p h
h
C H
p h
W
μ
μ
∈
× Λ
× Λ
Z
. Here,  
(
,
) :
( ( )
):( ( )
)
:
,
a
ε
ε
Ω
=
−
−
+

W Z
u
P
v
Q
P
Q


 
 
where n is the outer unit normal. It can be shown that the mathematical problem 
shown in (10) has a unique solution (Wh, λC,H, λp,h). λC,H is the approximation of 
the normal stress on the contact boundary, whereas  λp,h is the approximation of 
the plastic stress, cf. [14,15]. The finite dimensional space Wh is constructed on 
hexahedral meshes. In order to ensure the uniqueness of λC,H, the discretization of 
ΓC is carried out with a mesh-size H > h, see [16]. An error estimator presented in 
Chapter 3 and [17] and an adaptive refinement algorithm allowing possible multi-
level hanging nodes, cf. [18,19], are used in order to improve the accuracy of the 
discrete solution for a fixed number of degrees of freedom. 
Another numerical approximation approach is the regularization of the varia-
tional problem obtained from Problem (9), which results in an energy minimization 
problem over 
 of the smooth functional 
1
( ):
( , )
( )
2 a
jδ
=
+
Z
Z Z
Z

 
(11) 
where
2 1/2
( ):
(
:
)
y
jδ
σ
δ
Ω
=
+

Z
Q Q
, and δ the regularization parameter. In order to 
use the Newton-Raphson method on the whole space V instead of K, the penalty 
functional 
2
1
( ) :
( ·
)
2
C
g +
Γ
Ψ
=
−

v
v n

 
(12) 
is introduced. Here, ρ is the penalty parameter and (ƒ)+ := max(0,ƒ) denotes the 
positive part of a real valued function ƒ. The functional Ψ is added to the energy 
functional ; and the finite element space Wh is used to compute a discrete ap-
proximation of Wρ,δ. The main drawback of this approach is its dependence on δ 
and ρ, cf. [20, 21]. The normal component of the microscopic contact forces Fmicro 
is computed from the Lagrange multiplier λc via  
micro
.
C
C
F
Γ
= 
λ
 
(13) 
If the regularized energy functional and the Newton-Raphson method are used, the 
stress must be computed from u with Hooke’s law and the normal stress is inte-
grated over the contact boundary. Once parameterized, the computed values are 
stored in the database and missing entries have to be interpolated or newly com-
puted. This parameterization of the microscopic force model is carried out via the 
measurement of single grain scratches. Figure 7.11 shows the deformation com-
puted by the finite element approach with regularization after a single grain 
scratch. The maximum infeed was set to 5 µm; and the grain moved on a circle 
with a diameter of 150 mm. The red color indicates areas where the plowing effect 
occurs, i.e. material piles up next to the scratch line. However, the resultant cutting 
depth is lower than the nominal depth of cut due to the elastic deflection of tool 
and workpiece. 
1
3
0
: {
(
)
( )· ( )
( ) on 
}
C
K
H
x
x
g x
=
∈
Ω
≤
Γ
v
v
n

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
159
 
 
Fig. 7.11 Resulting cutting depth of a simulated scratch test 
Here, the results of main interest are the forces occurring during scratching. 
Figure 7.12 shows the computed forces for different parameter configurations. The 
change in the module of elasticity has the biggest influence on the forces.  
This reduction of the module of elasticity could be interpreted as damage to the 
material. This damage is likely to occur during the scratching itself (for an exam-
ple of brittle material, see [22]) or could be introduced by the pre-treatment of the 
workpiece. 
 
Fig. 7.12 Force during scratch test calculated with microscopic Finite Element simulation 
A possible approach to explain macroscopic damage phenomena is based on 
small cracks on the microscopic level [23]. Both discretizations of the elasto-
plastic material law introduced above can be extended to allow fissures. There-
fore, the faces between hexahedra in the finite element mesh can be doubled and 
disconnected. In Figure 7.13, a small crack was introduced based on previously 
computed stresses. This allows the simulation of crack growth along faces.  

160 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
 
Fig. 7.13 Strain calculation by a Finite Element simulation with a priori crack 
7.4.2.2   Empirical Force Model 
To parameterize an empirical grinding force model, flat grinding experiments us-
ing a cylindrical grinding wheel and a rectangular workpiece have been carried out 
on a Walter Helitronic Power tool grinding machine. The workpiece has been 
tightly fixed to the machine table in order to minimize deformation for correct cor-
relation between grinding depth and force, compare Figure 7.14.  
 
Fig. 7.14 Experimental setup to determine the influence of ae on grinding forces 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
161
 
A Kistler three-component dynamometer has been used to measure the grinding 
forces for different depths of cut and feed speeds. As described in [24], the result-
ing forces for different depths of cut had to be related to geometrical parameters, 
which can be evaluated both in the experiment, as described above, and in the 3D 
dexel simulation. The factor heq/dlg has been found to suit this requirement well. It 
relates the equivalent chip thickness heq to the local contact length dlg for each 
segment of the contact area. This dimensionless value replaces the factors feed 
speed, cutting speed and grinding wheel diameter, which are commonly used in 
grinding force models [25]. Figure 7.15 shows the relationship between the me-
chanical stresses and heq/dlg. 
 
Fig. 7.15 Relationship between mechanical stresses σn (solid line, ♦) and σt (dashed line,●) 
and heq/dlg for a tool grinding process (vft = 15 - 50 mm/min, ae = 0.01 - 1mm, vc = 18 m/s) 
The calculated stresses are fitted to a polynomial equation applying the least 
squares method.  
2
eq
eq
5
9
n
lg
lg
h
h
N
1.56 10
9.92 10
d
d
mm²






σ =
⋅
⋅
+
⋅
⋅











 
2
eq
eq
5
9
t
lg
lg
h
h
N
0.63 10
3.43 10
d
d
mm²






σ =
⋅
⋅
+
⋅
⋅











 
(14) 
This relationship is applicable for the parameter range shown in Figure 7.15. The 
grinding force model has been implemented into the simulation system to visual-
ize the occurring stresses in tool grinding. Figure 7.16 shows the distribution of 
the normal stresses in the contact area. It can be seen that the highest pressure acts 
at the area with high equivalent chip thickness heq, cp. Figure 7.10 b). 
 
 

162 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
 
Fig. 7.16 Calculated distribution of normal stress σn [N/mm²] for a tool grinding process  
(vft = 30 mm/min, d = 10 mm, R = 62.0 mm) 
7.4.3   Temperature in Contact Area 
A main task in modeling of grinding processes is the determination of the generated 
heat and its distribution into workpiece, grinding wheel, coolant, chips and envi-
ronment. Most approaches consider a 2D moving heat source model according to 
Carslaw and Jaeger with a constant heat flux density throughout the contact area. 
Applying this heat source model to a workpiece model using linear heat conduction 
theory and assuming an adiabatic fixturing and an isotropic material model, it is 
possible to calculate the transient temperature distribution inside the workpiece. 
However, these approaches are limited to grinding processes with constant en-
gagement along the grinding wheel axis and relatively large workpieces where 
losses to the environment can be neglected. To determine the heat flux density, one 
has to know the generated heat and the area of contact. The heat flux into the work-
piece is dependent on the temperature acting in the contact area. Therefore, it is a 
common task in research on grinding processes to determine the temperature in the 
contact area, which is difficult, since the contact area is not easily accessible by 
optical temperature measurement equipment like infrared cameras. Also, a high ef-
fort is needed to prepare the workpieces when using thermocouples being posi-
tioned in different positions inside the workpiece. With this indirect measurement 
method the temperature in the contact area is calculated by extrapolating the tem-
peratures in different positions inside the workpiece with defined distance to the 
contact area. 
In tool grinding, where the workpieces are relatively small and the ground 
flutes have a special concave shape it is not feasible to position the thermocouples 
in a defined position inside the workpiece. The authors chose a measurement se-
tup, where temperature sensor and electronics are inside the grinding wheel, with 
the advantage that the temperature in the contact area can be measured directly 
with a measuring range of 150°C – 600°C, see Figure 7.17. 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
163
 
 
Fig. 7.17 a) Grinding Wheel made by FOS Messtechnik GmbH equipped with a tempera-
ture sensor b) electronics inside the grinding wheel with detector, batteries and wireless 
equipment for sending the data to external receiver during grinding 
Figure 7.18 shows measurement results using the sensor integrated grinding 
wheel. A flute with a helical angle of 30° was ground into a tungsten carbide 
workpiece with a diameter of 16 mm. It can be seen, that the temperature signal 
(black line) rises to its maximum level of about 210°C when the grinding wheel is 
entering the workpiece. The time delay of the temperature signal is due to the fact 
that the measurement range of the temperature sensor starts at about 150°C. The 
explanation for the higher signal level at the beginning of the measurement is that 
the sensor is calibrated for the temperature of tungsten carbide. At the beginning, 
there is no contact between grinding wheel and the tungsten carbide workpiece 
and the signal is not valid. The process forces, which are measured in machine 
tool coordinates (see Figure 7.3), and the measured temperature show similar cha-
racteristics: during the constant engagement conditions both, process forces and 
temperatures stay constant. This characteristic implies that the process is thermo-
mechanically stable with constant heat flows due to the flood supply of coolant.  
 
Fig. 7.18 Process forces and temperatures measured with the sensor integrated grinding 
wheel (vf = 25 mm/min, vc = 18 m/s, workpiece diameter d = 16 mm) 

164 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
With the help of the sensor integrated grinding wheel it is possible to analyze 
the influence of the coolant supply on the grinding process. Figure 7.19 shows the 
variation of the coolant jet velocity and the resulting temperature in the contact 
and the ratio µ between tangential force Ft and normal force Fn. It can be seen, 
that the lowest temperature and friction occurs when the coolant jet velocity is 
equal to the cutting speed vc. 
 
 
Fig. 7.19 Influence of velocity of coolant on temperature and grinding force ratio (process: 
vft = 30 mm/min, vc = 18 m/s, workpiece diameter: 16 mm, helix angle: 30°, coolant: min-
eral oil) 
7.5   Planning and Optimization of Tool Paths 
With the presented models of machine structure, workpiece and tool grinding 
process it is possible to calculate forces based on a material removal simulation 
and a contact area analysis. For a prediction of the deflections occurring in tool 
grinding it is necessary to couple both process model and structure model. Since a 
deflection directly affects the contact conditions and therefore the acting grinding 
forces, a coupling of process and structure model using an iterative algorithm is 
required. The algorithm determines the deformation of workpiece and machine 
structure during grinding at a static equilibrium of the grinding force and the 
spring-back force of the workpiece until the residuum between the deformations 
calculated in the last step and in the current step is smaller than a predefined value 
ε. Then the material is removed, the actual geometry is defined and the following 
calculation step is carried out. 
Using the prescribed simulation method, a method has been developed to adapt 
existing tool paths for reducing the effects of process machine interactions in tool 
grinding. The procedure is described in Figure 7.20. Based on a simulation of the 
grinding process using the original tool path, the workpiece deflection is calculated. 
The workpiece deflection is then added to the tool path which means that the grind-
ing wheel cuts more material than before. The simulation and optimization is  
repeated until the calculated workpiece cross sections are equal to the ideal cross 
section which is determined by a simulation run with an ideally stiff workpiece.  

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
165
 
 
Fig. 7.20 Method for optimizing tool paths in tool grinding 
7.6   Application and Results 
7.6.1   Simulation of Static Effects  
The empirical grinding force model (compare Section 7.4.2.2) has been coupled 
with the elastic workpiece model described in Section 7.3.5.2 to predict the grind-
ing forces in tool grinding considering the deflection of the workpiece. Figure 7.21 
shows a comparison of simulated and measured grinding forces for the parameters 
listed in the caption. The following effects are visible in the Figure: 1) The mean 
value of the measured grinding forces matches the simulated forces very well  
for the first flute, 2) The phases, where the grinding wheel enters and exits the  
 
 
Fig. 7.21 Calculated (black lines) and measured grinding forces (oscillating lines) for the 
grinding of two flutes of a tungsten carbide tool. (Grinding wheel: Q-Flute-2 D54 C75, 
R = 62 mm, Workpiece: Tungsten Carbide, L = 100 mm, d = 10 mm, Process: Down 
Grinding, vft = 30 mm/min, vc = 18m/s) 

166 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
Fig. 7.22 Comparison of simulated cross-section using dexel-model and real cross-section 
(photograph made with digital microscope); detail shows part of the contour with highest 
deviation 
workpiece, are predicted precisely by the simulation model, 3) The grinding forces 
slightly rise during full-contact phase, both in simulation and measurement. This 
effect is caused by the increasing stiffness of the workpiece when approaching the 
workpiece clamping and the resulting higher actual depth of cut at the end of each 
flute. 4) When grinding the second flute the simulated magnitude of Fy does not 
exactly match the measured values. 
 
 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
167
 
Apart from the grinding forces, the resulting cross-section of the workpiece has 
been simulated and compared with measurements. A Keyence optical microscope 
was used to create a high resolution picture of the cross-section of the workpiece 
tip, where the maximum shape error occurs. As can be seen in Figure 7.22, the dif-
ference between simulation and measurement is relatively low, which verifies the 
high accuracy of the developed and implemented static process machine interac-
tion model. However, the cross-section resulting from grinding a flexible work-
piece is different from the ideal cross-section, which can be simulated using a ri-
gid workpiece, compare Figure 7.30. 
7.6.2   Simulation of Dynamic Effects 
The dynamic behavior of the workpiece and grinding wheel fixation as well as the 
grinding wheel topography have a wide influence on the process forces and the 
workpiece geometry. Due to the long computing time the dynamic effects are ana-
lyzed on geometrically simpler experiments, where a longitudinal flute is ground. 
The workpiece has a diameter of 10 mm and a cantilevering length of 100 mm. 
For the experiments and the simulation the adjusted depth of cut is 1 mm, the feed 
speed is 100 mm/min and the cutting speed is set to 18 m/s. A flute of 30 mm 
length is simulated with the introduced grinding process model; and the forces and 
workpiece geometry are calculated.  
7.6.2.1   Influence of the Grinding Wheel Topography 
The wavy wheel surface causes fluctuations in the process forces due to varying 
contact conditions. In Figure 7.23, calculated process forces with an ideal round 
grinding wheel and with a grinding wheel including an out-of-roundness of 
24 µm, a harmonic wave of 10th order with an amplitude of 1 µm and stochastical-
ly distributed grains of about 0.6 µm are shown. For the simulations, the dynamic 
module from Section 7.3.5.3 is included. Additionally, the measured force signals 
are also illustrated. 
In the first few seconds, the contact length between grinding wheel and work-
piece increases as well as the mean value and the amplitude of the process forces 
until the contact length gets quasi-constant. Comparing the mean values it is visi-
ble that the calculation with ideal round grinding wheel fits the measured data well 
for the y-direction, whereas for the x-direction the forces are overestimated. The 
calculation with the wavy grinding wheel shows a smoother change between run-
ning-in period and constant interval, similar to the measurements. For the y-
direction the forces are underestimated by about 10 N, whereas in x-direction the 
simulation is in accordance with the measured data. 
When comparing the amplitudes of calculated and measured forces, the high 
fluctuation at the beginning of the experiments is not expressed by the simulation. 
This is due to ideal initial conditions for the simulation. During the experiments,  
 
 

168 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
Fig. 7.23 Calculated process forces Fx and Fy with an ideal round and a wavy grinding 
wheel compared with measured data 
influences of the coolant, for example, are also included in the measured force 
signal, which causes larger amplitudes at the beginning of the process. For the  
normal forces in y-direction, the increasing measured force amplitudes are also not 
represented by the simulation but quasi-constant amplitudes are reached. This cha-
racteristic can also be related to the coolant, which has a higher influence in nor-
mal direction than in tangential direction. The accuracy could be increased by 
means of additional analyses about the influence of coolant. 
 
 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
169
 
The consideration of the time histories of measured forces and the resulting 
time-varying coefficient of friction show significant periodic fluctuations, which 
depend on grinding wheel rotation, amplitude of the process parameters, feed, cut-
ting speed and feed rate. Worth mentioning is the measured phase shift between 
the normal and tangential load, which is found in the measurements vary in severi-
ty and comparative measurements with other materials and fixations. As an exam-
ple, the relationship between the local friction coefficient and the acting normal 
force FN is displayed for different depths of cut in Figure 7.24. 
 
Fig. 7.24 Consideration of the timing behavior of the friction coefficient as a function of the 
normal force and the depth of cut 
7.6.2.2   Influence of the Dynamic Effects on Workpiece Geometry 
When comparing the results of the workpiece geometry by including the dynamic 
behavior of workpiece and grinding wheel, a difference in the geometry to the 
ideal surface is visible, as shown in Figure 7.25.  
This difference has its maximum at the tip of the workpiece, when the forces 
cause the largest bending and decrease towards the clamping. When comparing 
the surface with single measured data points, the calculated geometry error is un-
derestimated but shows qualitatively the same shape. The difference can be ex-
plained by the influence of the coolant, which is not represented in the simulation. 
By considering an additionally measured coolant-force component of about 10 N, 
as discussed in Section 7.6.2.1, the bending of the workpiece increases and the 
geometry error gives a better approximation of the measured data points. 

170 
 
Fig. 7.25 Calculated workpi
out coolant consideration 
7.6.3   Simulation Stu
The presented computatio
simulation system CutS, w
is a universal framework 
removal and for the determ
ufacturing processes. It is
piece and grinding wheel
to the NC-control of CutS
to one specific workpiece
ble to use CutS for simu
processes.  
M. Deichmueller et a
 
iece geometry predicted by the dynamic module with and wit
udies 
on models have been implemented as a plugin into th
which has been developed at the IFW Hannover [8]. Cut
for the simulation of machine movements and materi
mination of technological process characteristics of man
s possible to change the shapes and dimensions of work
 and to use different tool paths by loading NC-program
S. Since the developed calculation models are not boun
e geometry or process parameter combination, it is poss
ulation studies to gain more knowledge on tool grindin
al.
th-
he 
tS 
ial 
n-
k-
ms 
nd 
si-
ng 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
171
 
In order to determine suitable parameters such as dexel grid distance or simula-
tion time step, simulation studies on the influence of these parameters on the simu-
lation accuracy have been performed. Figure 7.26 shows the influence of the dexel 
grid distance on the resulting cross-section area of the workpiece, measured along 
the fluted part of the workpiece (mean value and min-max-bar). The higher the 
number of dexels used for simulation, the lower is the grid distance and the better 
is the simulation accuracy. It is noticeable that the mean value of the cross-section 
area is nearly the same for all grid distances but there is a variation for larger grid 
distances which can be up to 5 times the grid distance. The dexel grid distance 
should be chosen smaller than 0.1 mm for achieving high quality simulation  
results.  
 
Fig. 7.26 Influence of dexel grid distance on simulation accuracy for calculating the work-
piece cross section of a ground two-flute twist drill (10 mm diameter, 30 ° helix angle) 
Another important simulation parameter is the simulation time step, which is 
the period of time represented by one simulation step. A lower simulation time 
step leads to better results and longer computation times. Figure 7.27 displays the 
influence of the time step on the simulation accuracy, described by the resulting 
cross section area. For large time steps, the simulation accuracy is very low, which 
is caused by the errors of the linear interpolation of the tool movement. For small 
time steps the interpolation error is negligible, because the difference between two 
tool positions is low and its movement can be linearized. Summarizing the results 
from Figure 7.27, a simulation time step of 0.5 seconds or lower should be ap-
plied, the lower the better. 
 

172 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
 
Fig. 7.27 Influence of simulation time step on simulation accuracy for calculating the 
workpiece cross section of a ground two-flute twist drill (dexel grid distance: 0.1 mm) 
Another application of the simulation system is the analysis of technological re-
lationships in tool grinding processes. Figure 7.28 exemplarily shows the influ-
ence of the feed velocity vft on the resulting process forces for grinding a two-flute 
tungsten carbide twist drill with 10 mm diameter. In the analyzed parameter limits, 
the process forces show a non-linear dependency on the feed velocity which re-
flects the relationship of the process force model as shown in Figure 7.15. 
 
Fig. 7.28 Influence of feed velocity on calculated process forces accuracy for calculating 
the workpiece cross section of a ground two-flute twist drill (simulation time step: 0.5 s, 
dexel grid distance: 0.1 mm, for process parameters, see Figure 7.21) 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
173
 
7.6.4   Optimization 
The main objective of the research on process machine interaction is to understand 
the occurring effects during grinding and to predict process characteristics and 
process outcome. With this knowledge, it is possible to optimize grinding 
processes already in the process planning phase. In this case, the developed mod-
els have been used to adapt the path of the grinding wheel to reduce the shape er-
rors in the ground workpiece.  
The optimization procedure starts with a simulation of the static workpiece def-
lection using the simulation model described in Section 7.6.1. During the simula-
tion, the workpiece deflection is computed at the point, where the grinding wheel 
exits the contact area. At that point, the final flute profile is generated. Therefore, 
it is a good position to evaluate resulting shape error. A characteristic deformation 
profile for a two-flute tool is shown in Figure 7.29. It can be seen that the deflec-
tion constantly rises during the entrance phase of the grinding wheel and then de-
creases quadratically during full engagement due to the increasing stiffness of the 
workpiece near the clamping. The deflection v in y-direction of the second flute is 
significantly higher because of the reduced stiffness of the workpiece after grind-
ing the first flute. 
 
Fig. 7.29 Calculated workpiece deflection (u,v,w) in (x,y,z)-direction at current position of 
grinding wheel 
The next step is the segmentation of the calculated workpiece deformation into 
line elements. These elements are then translated into NC commands, which 
change the movements of the grinding wheel. With the new NC-program, the si-
mulation of the deformation is repeated until the desired shape of the workpiece is 
achieved. In this research, two optimization criteria are used to evaluate the cur-
rent shape of the workpiece. The first criterion is the difference of the core radius 
of simulated and ideal cross-section. The second criterion is the dexel-wise com-
parison of the shape of a simulated ideal cross-section.  

174 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
When the current NC-program leads to a workpiece shape fulfilling the quality 
criteria, the optimization procedure is stopped. As an exemplary result, Figure 7.30 
compares the cross-sections at the tip of a workpiece for two different simulation 
runs with the ideal cross-section. The first cross section (left) has been simulated 
using the original NC-program. A relatively large deviation of the resulting work-
piece shape from the ideal workpiece shape is visible with a maximum deviation of 
160 µm, which corresponds to the deflection presented in Figure 7.29.  
 
Fig. 7.30 Comparison of resulting workpiece cross-sections with uncompensated NC-
program (left) and compensated tool path (right) 
The cross-section on the right of Figure 7.30 has been computed using an 
adapted NC-program, which was the result of one optimization loop. It can be 
seen that the error has been reduced significantly with a maximum deviation of 35 
µm. The results indicate that the presented optimization procedure is able to im-
prove the workpiece quality in tool grinding, considering the existing process ma-
chine interactions. 
7.7   Conclusion and Outlook 
An interdisciplinary modeling approach to predict the process machine interaction 
in tool grinding has been presented. Models for the grinding process and the me-
chanical behavior of workpiece and machine have been developed and coupled 
with each other. A simulation of the process kinematics has been combined with a 

7   Modeling of Process Machine Interactions in Tool Grinding 
175
 
dexel-based material removal simulation to compute the varying workpiece shape 
during the grinding of cutting tools. It has been possible to calculate the grinding 
forces and the static and dynamic deflections occurring during tool grinding. For 
the first time, it has been possible to calculate the stress distribution in the com-
plex contact area. For this purpose, an empirical grinding force model was devel-
oped, which connects the acting stress with the equivalent depth of cut heq divided 
by the local contact length dlg. A finite element approach to calculate the stress 
due to the microscopic grain engagement shows a high influence of the Young’s 
modulus and the damage criteria. Based on the geometry-dependent mechanical 
properties of the workpiece and the simulated contact forces, the quasi-static and 
time-variant deflections can be predicted. The presented approaches have been va-
lidated by comparing measured and simulated workpiece geometry after grinding. 
In addition, the developed simulation methods have been used to optimize the path 
of the grinding wheel for a reduction of geometry errors of the ground tool. Since 
the modeling approach is designed modularly it can be extended continuously in 
the future, e. g. to include other grinding wheels or workpiece materials. 
References 
[1] European Cutting Tool Association: Zerspanungswerkzeuge: Marktvolumen welt-
weit, Fertigung Sonderausgabe – Werkzeuge 12, 7 (2010) 
[2] Aurich, J.C., Biermann, D., Blum, H., Brecher, C., Carstensen, C., Denkena, B., 
Klocke, F., Kröger, M., Steinmann, P., Weinert, K.: Modelling and Simulation of 
Process - Machine Interaction in Grinding Production Engineering, vol. 3, pp. 111–
120 (2008) 
[3] de Payrebrune, K., Kröger, M., Deichmueller, M., Denkena, B.: Investigation on the 
Dynamics of Tool Grinding, Machine Dynamics Problems, vol. 33, pp. 92–104 
(2009) 
[4] Popp, K., Kröger, M., Deichmueller, M., Denkena, B.: Analysis of the Machine 
Structure and Dynamic Response of a Tool Grinding Machine. In: 1st International 
Conference on Process Machine Interactions, pp. 299–307 (2008) 
[5] Popp, K., Kröger, M., Deichmueller, M., Denkena, B.: On Contact Modeling of 
Workpiece and Grinding Wheel with Nonlinear Elements. In: 7th EUROMECH Solid 
Mechanics Conference, pp. 281–282 (2009) 
[6] Chang, H.-C., Wang, J.-J.J.: A stochastic Grinding Force Model considering Random 
Grit Distribution. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 48, 1335–
1344 (2008) 
[7] van Hook, T.: Real-Time Shaded NC Milling Display ACM SIGGRAPH Computer 
Graphics, vol. 20, pp. 15–20 (1986) 
[8] Denkena, B., Böß, V.: Technological NC Simulation for Grinding and Cutting 
Processes Using CutS. In: 12th CIRP Conference on Modelling of Machining Opera-
tions, vol. II, pp. 563–566 (2009) 
[9] Biermann, D., Mohn, T.: A Geometric-Kinematical Approach for the Simulation of 
Complex Grinding Processes. In: 6th CIRP International Conference on ICME (2008) 
[10] Denkena, B., Tracht, K., Yu, J.-H.: Advanced NC-Simulation based on the Dexelmo-
del and the HRMC-Algorithm Production, Engineering, vol. XIII(1), pp. 91–94 
(2006) 

176 
M. Deichmueller et al.
 
[11] de Payrebrune, K., Kröger, M.: Modal Reduction of Dynamics of Tool Grinding. In: 
2nd International Conference on Process Machine Interactions (2010) 
[12] Denkena, B., Deichmueller, M., Kröger, M., Popp, K.M., Carstensen, C., Schroeder, 
A., Wiedemann, S.: Geometrical Analysis of the Complex Contact Area for Modeling 
the local Distribution of Process Forces in Tool Grinding. In: 1st International Confe-
rence on Process Machine Interactions, pp. 289–298 (2008) 
[13] Han, W., Reddy, D.: Plasticity. Springer (1999) 
[14] Brokate, M., Carstensen, C., Valdman, J.: A Quasi-Static Boundary Value Problem in 
Multi-Surface Elastoplasticity. I: Analysis, Math. Methods Appl. Sci. 27(14), 1697–
1710 (2004) 
[15] Schröder, A., Wiedemann, S.: Error Estimates in Elastoplasticity using a Mixed Me-
thod, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Mathematics, Preprint 11-01 (2011) 
[16] Schröder, A.: Mixed Finite Element Methods of Higher-Order for Model Contact 
Problems. Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Mathematics, Preprint 09-16, 
submitted to SINUM (2009) 
[17] Schröder, A., Wiedemann, S.: Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Institute of Mathemat-
ics, Preprint 11-02 (2011) 
[18] Schröder, A.: Constraints coefficients in hp-FEM. Numerical Mathematics and Ad-
vanced Applications, 183–190 (2008) 
[19] Schröder, A.: Constrained approximation in hp-FEM: Unsymmetric subdivisions and 
multilevel hanging nodes. LNCSE, vol. 1(76), pp. 317–325 (2009) 
[20] Han, W., Reddy, D.: On the Finite Element Method for Mixed Variational Inequali-
ties arising in Elastoplastiity. SINUM 32(6), 1778–1807 (1995) 
[21] Brokate, M., Carstensen, C., Valdman, J.: A quasi-static Boundary Value Problem in 
Multi-Surface Elastoplasticity. II: Numerical Solution, Math. Methods Appl. 
Sci. 28(8), 881–901 (2005) 
[22] Wang, C.Y., Clausen, R.: Marble Cutting with Single Point Cutting Tool and Di-
amond Segments. Machine Tools & Manufacture 42, 1045–1054 (2002) 
[23] Lemaitre, J., Desmorat, R.: Engineering Damage Mechanics. Springer (2005) 
[24] Deichmueller, M., Denkena, B., de Payrebrune, K.M., Kröger, M., Wiedemann, S., 
Schroeder, A., Carstensen, C.: Determination of Static and Dynamic Deflections in 
Tool Grinding using a Dexel-Based Material Removal Simulation. In: 2nd CIRP In-
ternational Conference on Process Machine Interactions (2010) 
[25] Tönshoff, H., Peters, J., Inasaki, I., Paul, T.: Modelling and Simulation of Grinding 
Processes. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 41, 677–688 (1992) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part III 
Cutting 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 179–201. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 8 
HPC - Stability Simulation 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser 
Abstract. The prediction of stable process parameters to maximize the productivi-
ty of milling machines has been an important field of research for a long time. In 
the past, simulation tools allowing an assessment of the process stability have 
been created. Nevertheless, the accuracy of predictions by simulation is not yet 
high enough to make efficient use of stability simulation in production planning. 
In this context, the article presents developments in the field of modeling the dy-
namic machine and process behavior for process machine interaction simulation in 
the field of high performance cutting processes (HPC). On the process side, a 
complex force model, which takes into account the effects of a phase shift be-
tween force generation and chip thickness variation, is introduced. Also, an analy-
sis of fast-rotating main spindle systems has been carried out, which considers 
variations in the dynamic compliance behavior at the tool center point (TCP) due 
to rotor dynamic effects and variation of the bearing rigidity. With the PrimeCut 
software package, a calculation program is presented, which includes the state of 
the art and new developments in the field of stability simulation. 
8.1   Introduction 
For a long time, the technologies of High Performance Cutting have contributed to 
the fact that material removal rates in milling processes have greatly increased due 
to new cutting materials and tool geometries [14]. The machine technology has al-
so been adapted to the requirements [1], [7]. Lightweight design coupled with a 
high degree of rigidity permits high acceleration values and feed rates in the main 
axes. Main spindle systems have also been subject to further development and  
today offer rotating speeds and torques permitting highly-efficient machining  
operations. 
However, the productivity of machine tools is often limited, not by the installed 
drive performance but by the regenerative vibrations, the so-called chatter [4], 
[12]. In such cases, the machining process becomes instable due to the force com-
pliance interaction between the machine tool structure and the cutting process [3], 
[6]. Under such extreme operating conditions, the result is occasionally an escalat-
ing shortening of the durability of individual machine components and breakage 
of tools. In addition, instable processed workpieces are rejected due to surface 
damage. 

180 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
In this field, the simulation of stability charts offers a cost and time-efficient 
possibility of parameterizing machining processes with regard to their stability be-
havior or to use the process stability as an assessment criteria in the analysis and 
design of machine systems [5], [11]. Today, there are numerous simulation possi-
bilities for predicting optimized process parameters, whose limited quality of re-
sults, however, prevents a sensible application to the planning of production. The 
same applies to computer-aided evaluation of stable machining performance in the 
design phase of machine systems [16]. 
The aim of the work accomplished in the priority program SPP 1180 “HPC sta-
bility simulation” and described in this article is the improvement of the accuracy 
of simulated stability charts to determine process-optimized working parameters. 
For this purpose, the sub-systems machine tool structure and cutting process  
as well as their simulative depiction in the stability simulation regarding their in-
fluences on errors on the simulation results are determined first. Based on a sys-
tematic analysis, the potential for improvement is shown and implemented in the 
modeling of the sub-systems. Besides the individual consideration of the machine 
structure and machining process, their coupling and the method of stability simu-
lation concerning potential influences of errors are also analyzed. Here, the influ-
ences on simulation accuracy due to pre-determined simulation parameters are 
analyzed as well as the program structure of the simulation models used in the 
WZL regarding calculation time-efficiency and usability.  
The knowledge obtained by the work carried out is summarized in the newly-
developed PrimeCut simulation software. Besides efficiently computing a stability 
analysis of machining processes, the software allows for a calculation of surface 
structures of processed workpieces. 
8.2   Dynamic Compliance Behavior of Rotating Main Spindle 
Systems 
The dynamic compliance behavior of the machine structure is one of the two es-
sential input parameters of stability simulation. For modeling a machine system, 
not only the compliance behavior of structural components must be acquired but 
also all machine components in the force flow between the tool and the workpiece. 
As a key component in the HPC processing, particular attention has to be paid to 
the dynamic compliance behavior of the system comprising the main spindle and 
tool. At these fast-rotating spindle-bearing systems, various influences cause a 
compliance behavior, which changes with the speed of revolution. In general, 
these rotation-speed-dependent effects can be divided into two classes. In the one 
class, the heat generation in the spindle bearings as well as in the drive unit causes 
changes in the mechanical properties of the rotating systems. Both changes of the 
axial bearing pre-load as well as the radial bearing rigidity due to thermal expan-
sion can be identified as the main cause. The second class consists of rotor-
dynamic effects and the effect of the centrifugal force influence on fast-rotating 
spindle systems. The influence of the centrifugal force has a similar effect as the 
thermal expansion in widening the inner ring of the bearing and changing the  

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
181
 
position of the rolling element. This effect causes a change in the radial and axial 
bearing rigidity. The influences of thermal expansion and centrifugal force in 
spindle bearings were investigated on individual test rigs [8] in the works and their 
significance was shown in the work of [17]. 
Apart from the influence of similar spindle components, there is a change in the 
compliance behavior of main spindle systems under revolution due to rotor-
dynamic effects at the spindle shaft itself (Fig. 8.1). Gyroscopic and centrifugal 
forces influence the natural frequency and compliance amplitudes of the dynamic 
behavior at the TCP. Dynamic process loads and the resulting bending of the spin-
dle shaft cause additional balancing influences. The spindle shaft with its slim 
structure does not resemble the idealized Laval runner, yet follows the rules of ro-
tor-dynamics.  
 
Impressed 
displacement
Resultant 
displacement
Reference: Mode shape of spindle nose
Standstill without
gyroscopic effect
Rotation with
gyroscopic effect
ω
Rotating  
mass
Axis of gyroscope
Axis of balance point
Static unbalance
Dynamic unbalance
Rotor
Axis of 
gyroscope
ω
Gyroscopic effect
Centrifugal effect
Static and dynamic unbalance
Mass
Centrifugal 
force
 
Fig. 8.1 Rotor-dynamics of the spindle shaft and the tool [11] 
For slim rotors, the resonance frequency is reduced due to the occurring gyros-
copic force. In a resonance case, the TCP conducts an elliptical movement in the 
same direction of rotation as that of the tool. For external excitation of the rotating 
spindle shaft, for instance due to dynamic process loads or imbalances because of 
the bending of the shaft, a deflection in the direction opposite to the rotation is su-
per-imposed. Decisive for the simulative modeling of stability behavior is the ac-
tual dynamic compliance of the main spindle under the influence of rotation. For 
this reason, the focus of the work being carried out is on the metrological determi-
nation of this behavior.  
8.2.1   Test Rig  for Measuring Rotating Spindle Systems 
In the following, a test rig for measurements on rotating spindle systems is  
presented, whose dynamic compliance behavior is metrological evaluated in prep-
aration of the measurements on real main spindle systems (Fig. 8.2). The mea-
surement at the whole system consisting of spindle and bearing now permits the  
 
 

182 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
 
High speed spindle in open construction without 
peripheral components 
Belt drive gear and claw clutch
nmax = 24.000 1/min 
Belt drive gear
Loose bearing 
with ball lining
Fixed 
bearing
TCP
Claw clutch
Spindle shaft
0
100
200
300
0
10000
20000
30000
Spindle speed [1/min]
Rigidity [N/µm] 
axial
radial
Bearing rigidity (simulation)
Spindle bearing arrangement
Concept: double-O-bearing
Single bearing: 4 * FAG 
XC7014E.T.P4S.WKL
Loose bearing function: ball lining
Total preload: 1200 N 
Rigidity of preload: 573 N/mm
High speed spindle in open construction without 
peripheral components 
Belt drive gear and claw clutch
nmax = 24.000 1/min 
Belt drive gear
Loose bearing 
with ball lining
Fixed 
bearing
TCP
Claw clutch
Spindle shaft
0
100
200
300
0
10000
20000
30000
Spindle speed [1/min]
Rigidity [N/µm] 
axial
radial
Bearing rigidity (simulation)
Spindle bearing arrangement
Concept: double-O-bearing
Single bearing: 4 * FAG 
XC7014E.T.P4S.WKL
Loose bearing function: ball lining
Total preload: 1200 N 
Rigidity of preload: 573 N/mm
 
Fig. 8.2 Test rig for the assessment of a rotating system [11] 
 
possibility of investigating the theoretical background of rotor-dynamic effects 
and their influence on the mode shapes of rotating main spindle systems. 
The test rig follows the design of a machine spindle with external drive and 
preloaded bearing concept. The dimensions of the spindle shaft as well as the ar-
rangement of the bearings correspond to the dimensions of modern motor spindles 
with HSK-63 tool interface. Compared to the conventional spindle housing, the 
bearings are positioned on two separated bearing blocks mounted on a rigid base 
plate. 
For measuring the compliance behavior at the TCP or the modal analysis of the 
rotating spindle shaft, the auxiliary spindle test rig is equipped with the measuring 
and excitation technology shown in Fig. 8.3. Using a self-designed impulse exciter 
the system is excited in a frequency spectrum up to approximately 4,500 Hz. The 
induction of an impulse-shaped force with this shock pendulum represents a pos-
sibility of inducing a homogenous force into the rotating system, which is easy to 
carry out. The impulse force progression is measured by means of a piezo-electric 
force element, which is integrated into the tip of the impulse exciter. Only contact-
less displacement sensors can be used for measuring the deflection response on ro-
tating spindles. Here, an eddy current sensor provides sufficient resolution quality. 
However, the deflection responses measured at the excited system contain er-
rors derived from the non-circularity or out-of-balance of the spindle shaft. It is 
not possible to filter out these measuring errors, which are dependent on the speed 
of rotation, because an effective filtering would also impair frequencies relevant 
for the measurements. However, the deflection signal can be determined from the 
measurement signal by means of a software-side subtraction procedure in time 
domain. For this purpose, the displayed measurement signals are divided into two 
sections of equal length. 
 
 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
183
 
 
Ball lining
Fixed bearing 
support
Rigidity flange
Machine base out of 
rectangle profiles welded
and compound filled with
concrete 
Mounting plate
Loose bearing 
support
Impulse exciter
(shock pendulum)
Eddy current sensor
Clutch 
Belt guard
Bearing 
temperature control
Spindle shaft
 
Fig. 8.3 Modal analysis of the test rig spindle under rotation [11] 
The first section of the signal comprises the duration of the impulse excitation 
and the decay of the deflection response. The second section serves as a reference 
and contains only parts of the interference signal. The signal parts are aligned with 
each other by means of a Best-Fit process and the interference signal is eliminated 
by means of subtraction. 
Fig. 8.4 shows the metrological acquired dynamic compliance behavior at TCP 
for various speeds of revolution. Also shown here are the measurements at rest 
and for 1,000 1/min in order to determine variation of the compliance behavior be-
tween still-standing spindle systems and systems with a very slow revolution 
speed. Thermal effects as well as centrifugal force, out-of-balance and gyroscopic 
effects exert no influence at low spindle speeds of 1,000 1/min. However, the 
load-bearing lubrication film, which forms in the bearing under rotation, influ-
ences the damping properties of the bearing and thus the dynamic compliance be-
havior of the overall system. Thus, the measurement shows a slight change in the 
resonance peaks to higher damping and less compliance. 
In Fig. 8.5, the frequency ranges of the dominant mode shapes, here the shaft 
bending of first, second and third order, are depicted. These mode shapes can 
cause instabilities in the milling process but change their respective characteristics 
in form and value of the amplitude superposition in dependence of the spindle 
speed. All three mode shapes change in different ways at higher speeds of revolu-
tion. The bending vibration of the first order at 1,000 Hz reduces its amplitude to 
approximately 40 % and splits into two mode shapes. A clean differentiation of 
the two resulting peaks in the modal analysis is not possible. At 24,000 1/min, a 
new mode shape arises at approximately 800 Hz, which can also be identified in 
the modal analysis as a bending vibration of first order.  
 
 

184 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
 
<
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
-180
-90
0
90
180
0
1000
2000
frequency [Hz]
4000
Compliance [µm/N]
Phase [°]
Spindle speed
0
1000 1/min
15.000 1/min
24.000 1/min
First order 
bending vibration
Second order 
bending vibration
Third order 
bending vibration
 
Fig. 8.4 Dynamic behaviour of the test rig-spindle [11] 
In the frequency range of the bending of the second order, at around 2200 Hz, 
the amplitude rises and the phase response becomes flatter when the spindle speed 
increases. The third dominant mode shape at 2,500 Hz shows a behavior resulting 
from a significant influence on the gyroscopic forces. The resonance peak splits 
into two peaks. A creation of a second resonance peak can also be clearly recog-
nized in the phase response. Fig. 8.5 shows the evaluation of the modal analysis 
for the mode shapes of third order. For low spindle speeds, a definite oscillation of 
the spindle tip in the direction of the excitation force can be seen in the results of 
the modal analyses (second figure from the left). The mode shape changes at high-
er spindle speeds. A circular movement of the TCP occurs from the linear bending 
vibration. This circular movement in the respective low-resonance frequency is in  
 
3552
24.000
3531
15.000
f [Hz]
n [min-1]
3552
24.000
3531
15.000
f [Hz]
n [min-1]
3424
24.000
3458
15.000
f [Hz]
n [min-1]
3424
24.000
3458
15.000
f [Hz]
n [min-1]
3497
1.000
3515
0
f [Hz]
n [min-1]
3497
1.000
3515
0
f [Hz]
n [min-1]
Fx
dx
dy
Measurement in six 
levels
Detection of two 
directions
n
n
Mode shapes of third order bending vibration
 
Fig. 8.5 Verification of the splitting of resonance peaks [11] 
 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
185
 
the same direction as the rotation of the spindle and for the respective higher fre-
quency opposed to the spindle rotation (third and fourth figures from the left). The 
behavior then corresponds to those of the gyroscopic effect expected for strong 
angular deviation of the shaft. 
8.2.2   Simulation of Real HPC Motor Spindles 
The investigations at the auxiliary spindle test rig show that the compliance beha-
vior of the main spindle system including the tool must not be ignored for the 
modeling of the dynamic machine behavior in the HPC stability simulation. For 
this purpose, the auxiliary spindle test rig has been modeled with WZL’s own 
software NewSpilad on a trial basis. Centrifugal and gyroscopic forces are also in-
cluded in the calculation. The speed-dependent rigidity of the spindle bearings is 
determined by means of the WinLager calculation program and taken into account 
in NewSpilad for the calculation of the overall spindle behavior. 
Fig. 8.6 shows the comparison of metrological and simulative determined com-
pliance behavior of the spindle-bearing system. The comparison clearly shows that 
the simulation does not depict the effects of the spindle rotation with sufficient ac-
curacy. The reason for this is the insufficient depiction of the bearing behavior 
caused by linearizing errors at the working point and by ignoring the bearing tip-
ping in the bending vibrations of the shaft. 
Due to the limited depiction quality the currently available simulation systems 
have not been able to model the dynamic compliance behavior of main spindles in 
the stability simulation with high accuracy. In order to improve the quality of the 
results of stability simulation the metrological determined compliance behavior of 
real main spindle systems considering the influence of the rotation speed is used. 
 
0
1000
3000
2000
4000
Compliance [µm/N]
0
6
12
18
24
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
0
1000
3000
2000
4000
Frequency [Hz]
Spindle speed [1000/min]
0
6
12
18
24
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Compliance [µm/N]
Frequency [Hz]
Standstill n = 0
n = 24.000 1/min
Measurement
Simulation
Simulation results: 
spindle speed vs. compliance amplitude
Compliance [µm/N]
Measurement
Simulation
 
Fig. 8.6 Compliance simulation of the spindle test rig [11] 

186 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
For measuring the compliance behavior on original main spindle systems the 
same measurement setup is used as applied to the auxiliary spindle test rig. How-
ever, this method is not suitable for the measurement at the original milling tools 
because the cutting edges and chip spaces of the mill permit neither contact excita-
tion nor an exact measurement of the deflection. For this purpose, the milling tools 
are replaced by cylindrical carbide rods, so-called dummy tools, and mounted into 
the spindle system to be investigated. For depicting the real compliance behavior, 
the dummies have the same moment of inertia as the original tools (Fig. 8.7 left). 
Comparable measurements between the original and dummy tool with the spindle 
at rest provide very good approximations of compliance behavior. 
 
Dummy- and original- tool
cemented carbide in tool holder
D = 20 mm, Lges = 163 mm
15 mm
20 mm
A = 176 mm2
Ix/y = 2485 mm4
A = 148 mm2
Ix/y = 1189/2918 mm4
Fexc
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
-180
-90
0
0
1000
2000
4000
Compliance [µm/N]
Frequency [Hz]
Phase [°]
n = 0
n = 10.000 1/min
n = 20.000 1/min
n = 28.000 1/min
Dummy tool: D = 20 mm, Lges = 163 mm
Motor spindle: nmax = 28.000 1/min, Pmax = 18 kW
Fexc
 
Fig. 8.7 Compliance behavior of original and dummy tool [11] 
The measurement results for a dummy tool are shown exemplarily in Fig. 8.7 
for various spindle speeds. As for the auxiliary spindle test-rig, the measurement 
results show a significant change of dynamic behavior over the speed range. Be-
cause of the good comparability of the measuring results at the original and dum-
my tools, the measurement results determined on the dummy will be used for the 
stability calculations in the following. The simulation is taking into account the ef-
fects of spindle rotation and gyroscopic effects on the original main spindle sys-
tem. Fig. 8.8 shows the comparison between two simulated stability charts with 
and without taking into account the influence of the spindle speed as well as the 
cutting depth limit determined in machining tests. A shift of the stability maxi-
mum due to the consideration of spindle speed and an improvement of simulation 
results in comparison with the stability limit determined in the machining tests can 
be clearly identified. Clear improvement potential by taking into account rotation-
al speed-dependent compliance behavior is provided mainly in the region of high-
speed cutting of aluminum. Due to the rigid structure of the machine and the high 
rotation speed of the mill (stable region beyond the highest stability minimum), 
the dynamic behavior of the machine structure in the lower frequency range in 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
187
 
comparison with the dynamic behavior of the cutting tool and main spindle system 
is irrelevant for the occurrence of dynamic chatter vibrations. 
Apart from the depiction of the dynamic machine behavior, modeling of the 
dynamic process behavior presents the second important aspect of stability simula-
tion. Linear, exponential and mechanical force models have been the state of the 
art, [3], [20], for a long time but they ignore potential influences in the analytical 
description of the process forces. Some authors [15], [18] point out that a real ma-
thematical relationship between chip thickness and dynamic cutting force is not 
sufficient in all cases. 
 
Comparison
of measurement  
and simulation
Cutting tool: 
Mitsubishi
BXD 4000
D = 32 mm
2 cutting edges
Material:
aluminium 7010 
Process:
ae = 32 mm
fz = 0.18 mm / tooth
0
6
12
18
24
30
0
300
600
900
1200
1500
15000
18000
21000
27000
Spindle speed [1/min]
Cutting depth ap [mm] 
Chatter frequency fR [Hz]
Cutting tests
Stable cut
Chatter
Chatter frequency
Simulation with 
compliance at n = 0
Simulation with spindle 
speed dependent compliance
Power limit
 
Fig. 8.8 Stability chart in the machining of aluminium [11] 
8.3 Modeling of the Dynamic Process Behavior 
More detailed investigations show that the dynamic deflection of the cutting edge 
inducing a highly-dynamic chip thickness variation must be included in the mod-
eling of the machining process. Examples are the consideration of the process 
damping (effect of the contact between tool flank and workpiece surface) or the 
deduction of an effective direction-corrected cutting speed [2] [9], [13]. The use of 
a test-rig is necessary in order to be able to determine the influence of the cutting 
dynamics on the cutting forces for a large range of process parameters. The in-
fluencing dimensions of the dynamic process force creation defined in the test rig 
experiments are analyzed in further procedures to derive an analytical model with 
improved reproduction accuracy of the cutting force generation at the cutting 
edge. 

188 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
8.3.1   Test Rig Concept for Dynamic Cutting Force Measurement 
In addition to the metrological acquisition of the relevant process parameters, cut-
ting force and cutting depth modulation (dynamic chip thickness variation), the 
test-rig has to fulfill the requirement to induce defined oscillation movements be-
tween tool and workpiece into the cutting process after having defined frequency 
and amplitude. In addition, the process-relevant dimensions of cutting speed and 
feed motion for the test process must be definitely set and permitted by the struc-
ture of the test-rig. A continuous turning process is suitable for implementing the 
necessary requirements at the test-rig and the cutting force measurement as the 
cutting parameters can be constantly set independently of each other. In contrast, 
in the milling process the chip thickness varies over time and depends on the cut-
ting speed, feed motion and the number of cutting edges. The kinematic conditions 
of the turning process with a still-standing tool are also more suitable to induce de-
fined oscillations into the process than into a milling process with a rotating tool.  
Central component of the designed test-rig structure is the tool-holder shown in 
Fig. 8.9 (right). This transfers the oscillation movement created by a piezo-
actuator in the cutting edge girder, which targeted deflections of the cutting edge 
are introduced into the process by, orthogonally to the cutting speed. The use of a 
stacked piezo-actuator for the system excitation is a necessary requirement for a 
higher rigidity of the actuator system in the Z-direction, which is sensitive to the 
variation of the chip thickness with also simultaneous high excitation frequencies. 
Systems on an electric-hydraulic or electro-magnetic base provide either little fre-
quency bandwidth or an insufficient rigidity. Apart from the piezo-actuator used, 
the guidance of the tool-holder resp. the oscillation movement of the cutting edge 
represent the second relevant components for the capability of the test rig. Along 
the Z-axis, the guidance must be designed very flexibly to realize the deflection of 
the cutting edge, preferably free of power dissipation. At the same time, the cut-
ting forces in the remaining spatial directions should be dissipated by the greatest 
possible rigid support in the framework. For this purpose, the tool holder is sup-
ported with a flexure joint each at its front and rear side in the framework in the 
X-Y-level (Fig. 8.10). Flexure joints are selected in place of hydrostatic guidance 
systems or rolling element guidances for the implementation of the test-rig con-
cept because they are almost free of friction for mean deflections as well as having 
a high potential for geometrical and mass optimization of the moving components. 
Due to the achievable mass reduction, the amplitude as well as the oscillation fre-
quency can be positively influenced without increasing the performance of the 
piezo-actuator. In connection with the test-rig structure, the selected actuator sys-
tem achieves a frequency bandwidth of up to 2 kHz at a deflection of 40 μm. This 
corresponds to the requirements determined in pre-tests for depicting instable cut-
ting experiments in the HPC processing, which are typically characterized by chat-
ter vibrations in the range between 100 Hz and 2,000 Hz. 
Apart from the implementation of the guidance movement and force transmis-
sion, the tool holder serves as a carrier for the sensors for the metrological acquisi-
tion of the process. Three piezo sensors arranged on the same level between tool 
holder and cutting edge girder are used for the acquisition of the cutting forces in 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
189
 
the three spatial directions. The inertia forces of the tool holder and the cutting 
edge also acquired by the force sensors during the oscillation movement are ma-
thematically compensated by a down-streamed measuring program. 
 
vf
nSP
Overlaid     
oscillation  
movement:
A·sin(2πf·t)
Reference area for
eddy current sensor
Eddy current sensor
Cutting edge
Piezoelectric sensor
Work piece
Spindle position measurement 
with rotary encoder on the spindle
Flexure joint for
tool guidance
View A
x
z
y
x
z
y
View A
Reference body
(half section)
 
Fig. 8.9 Guide and workpiece concept for dynamic cutting tests [11] 
The relative compliance between workpiece and tool is acquired by means of 
the eddy current sensor integrated in the cutting edge holder for calculating the 
chip thickness modulation. For this purpose, the workpiece holder fixed to the 
HSK63 tool holder is equipped with a reference surface serving as a basic dimen-
sion for the eddy current sensor (Fig. 8.9, center). Use is made of ring cylinders of 
various test materials as test workpieces with the chip width of the cutting process 
being pre-defined by the width of the ring. Fig. 8.9 (left) schematically shows the 
engagement conditions as well as the positioning of the tool holder and the test 
workpiece during the testing process. To perform a measurement the workpiece is 
rotated by the main spindle of the milling machine according to the pre-defined 
cutting speed. The feed motion by the machine system in the process is carried out 
in the same direction as the dynamic cutter deflection along the Z-axis. For the du-
ration of the measurement, the ring surface is overcut again at each workpiece ro-
tation and machined in its whole width. 
Apart from the relative compliance between tool and workpiece, the surface 
contour of the workpiece, which was applied by the dynamic deflection of the cut-
ter in the previous overcutting, is also included in the calculation of the chip 
thickness modulation. For this purpose, the upper chip thickness modulation (chip 
thickness change from current tool deflection) and the lower chip thickness mod-
ulation (chip thickness change due to surface contour of the workpiece) are settled 
with the aid of the workpiece angle of rotation. The rotary encoder integrated in 
the machine system is read out for the acquisition of the rotation angle. 
After having obtained all measuring data it must be revised for systematic er-
rors. The signal processing used includes the filtering of aliasing effects and the 
compensation of amplitudes and phase errors by means of downstream measuring 

190 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
hardware for signal conditioning. Apart from this, the effects of the mechanical 
structure behavior and the inertia of the test-rig components have been taken into 
account. For this purpose, a suitable user interface in the LabView software envi-
ronment has been created for the operation of the test-rig as well as for data acqui-
sition and data evaluation. 
 
Flexure joints
Framework
Eddy current
sensor
Support for
piezo actuator
Piezo actuator
Baseboard
Force sensors
Cutting edge
x
z
y
x
z
y
Adapter
 
Fig. 8.10 Design of the overall test-rig for dynamic cutting tests [11] 
8.3.2   Modeling Approach of Dynamic Cutting Force 
The modeling approach of dynamic cutting forces developed within the scope of 
the project work provides the process response on an empirical base in the form of 
cutting and passive forces on an excitation by means of a harmonic chip thickness 
variation. For further depiction of the dynamic effects at the cutting edge, there is 
a differentiation of the influences of the inner and outer chip thickness modula-
tion. Furthermore, it seems to make sense to select a complex depiction level for 
the modeling. In this way, not only rigidity but also a damping with a phase shift 
of 90° can be allocated to the process with respect to the upper or lower chip 
thickness modulation. For instance, models according to these criteria are de-
scribed by van Brussel [19] and Werntze [21]. In a slightly altered form, the model 
is defined by the following equations. 
 
 
)t
sin(
xˆ
)t(
x
i
i
ω
⋅
=
 
(8.1) 
)
t
sin(
xˆ
)t(
x
i
o
ε
−
ω
⋅
=
 
(8.2) 
(
))
sin(
)
sin(
ˆ
)
sin(
ˆ
)
(
,
,
ε
ϕ
ω
ϕ
ω
ϕ
ω
−
+
+
+
=
+
⋅
′
=
′
co
co
ci
ci
i
Fc
c
dyn
c
dyn
t
R
t
R
x
t
F
t
F
 
(8.3) 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
191
 
(
))
sin(
)
sin(
ˆ
)
sin(
ˆ
)
(
,
,
ε
ϕ
ω
ϕ
ω
ϕ
ω
−
+
+
+
=
+
⋅
′
=
′
po
po
pi
pi
i
Fp
p
dyn
p
dyn
t
R
t
R
x
t
F
t
F
 
(8.4) 
 
The modeling approach is based on a complex dynamic force influence from the 
chip outer side as well as from the chip inner side, whose wave profiles are shifted 
against each other. Eq. 8.1, Eq. 8.2. xi and xo describe the compliance for the inner 
and outer sides of chip thickness modulation. xo is shifted backwards to xi in terms 
of time about the positive angle ε. All phase positions are referenced to the mod-
ulation of the inner chip thickness, thus to the current relative compliance between 
tool and workpiece. p with reference to the chip width are calculated. The interre-
lation between chip thickness modulation and the resulting dynamic cutting force 
F’dyn,c resp. passive force F’dyn are shown in Fig. 8.11. They apply for the equation 
of the cutting force (Eq. 8.3) and also for the calculation of the passive force (Eq. 
8.4) with different parameters. The resulting dynamic force is comprised of a part, 
which the outer chip thickness modulation is responsible for, and which is scaled 
in relation to this with Rjo and shifted about φjo in phase, as well as a correspon-
dingly scaled (Rji) and phase shift (φji) of the inner chip thickness modulation. The 
two dynamic force components are added to the total passive or cutting force re-
spectively. With that, the displacement of the cutting edge exclusively along a sin-
gle direction is possible. 
 
Xo(t)
F‘o(t)
F‘i(t)
Xi(t)
ε
φo
φi
Ri
Time
Cutting tool displacement
Reference force
Ro
Phase shift between 
inner and outer chip 
thickness modulation
Inner chip 
thickness modulation
Outer chip 
thickness modulation
 
Fig. 8.11 Dynamic force model in complex domain [11] 
With that, the dynamic displacement of the cutting edge exclusively along the 
modulation of both sides of chip thickness, the parameters for the inner and outer 
modulation cannot be determined directly from individual force and deflection 
measurements. Instead, the parameters are numerically calculated from the mea-
surement results of several cutting tests. For this purpose, cutting tests with the 

192 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
same process parameters but various phase angles ε are performed. The variation 
of the phase angles is set over a small change of rotation speed between the tests. 
The round and square symbols in Fig. 8.12 (left) represent the individual experi-
ments with different phase angles ε under otherwise identical conditions. 
Fig. 8.12 on the left side for the machining of steel material C45E shows the 
progression of the cutting forces referenced to the cutting width and cutting depth. 
The phase angle given is referenced to the modulation on the inner cutting side 
(xi). Because of this reference the phase angles of the cutting force are usually  
attributed to the region of the second and third quadrants, thus between -90°  
and -270°. It must be noted that the absolute value of the cutting force reaches its 
maximum approximately at a phase angle of ε = 180° and almost reaches a value 
of zero when the upper and lower chip thickness modulation are in phase (ε = 0°). 
However, the passive force hardly varies. Thus, it is mainly caused by the modula-
tion of the inner chip thickness. 
 
0
180
360
90
270
Amplitude [N/mm²]
Cutting force
Passive force
Real part [N/mm²]
Imaginary part [N/mm²]
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
0
-1500
1500
750
-750
3000
1000
2000
Phase angle ε [°]
0
-90
-360
-180
-270
Phase [°]
vc
= 200 m/min
foscillation = 840 Hz
Material: 
C45E
fU
= 0.1 mm/U 
doscillation= 20 µmp-p
Cutting tool:
Sandvik R245 E-PL 4030
Cutting force: Amplitude phase   Passive force: Amplitude phase
Chip shape: 
 
Fig. 8.12 Illustration and fitting of the dynamic cutting forces [11] 
The extended lines represent the prediction of the introduced force model, 
whose parameters have been calculated with the aid of the measuring values ac-
cording to a best-fit process. Thus, the equation system can only be uniquely 
solved with four scalable results for four unknown parameters, it can be deter-
mined that two arbitrarily selected measurement results (respectively amplitude 
and phase angle, that means four scalar values) are always sufficient to define the 
four model parameters, respectively for cutting and passive force. On the right 
side in Fig. 8.12, the same measuring values are presented in the complex plane. 
The shown curves illustrate the rotation of the force vectors from the outer mod-
ulation around the peak of the force vector of the inner modulation. Here, the 
small diameter of the passive force curve shows that the passive force is generally 
determined by the inner chip thickness modulation and has no linear dependency 
on the chip thickness. Conventional force models cannot represent this behavior. 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
193
 
The cutting force model introduced in the complex domain offers extended 
possibilities depicting the real process force behavior in a simulative manner and, 
as a result, to take into account numerous variables of process parameterization 
and dynamic machine behavior. Within the test-rig investigations, the relevance of 
individual influences on the progression of the process force has been investigated 
and parameterizations for the calculation of the process forces have been deter-
mined. As an example, the potential of the dynamic cutting force model in the de-
piction of the influence of clearance flank wear on the process force is shown. Fig. 
8.13 shows the resulting model parameters for the complex dynamic cutting force 
model. Accordingly, at 120 Hz the tool wear has no influence. However, the influ-
ence rises drastically at higher oscillation frequencies. Cutting and passive force 
coefficients of the inner chip thickness modulation increase strongly. The influ-
ence of the outer chip thickness modulation becomes less via the frequency. 
 
0
800
1600
2400
3200
4000
Amplitude coeff. [N/mm2]
-90
-45
0
45
90
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Wear mark width [mm]
Phase coefficients [°]
-45
0
45
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
Oscillation frequency
f = 120 Hz 
f = 600 Hz 
f = 1200 Hz
R
R
Rop
Rip
R
R
ϕ
ϕ
ϕoc
ϕic
ϕ
ϕ
ϕop
ϕip
Test parameters
vc = 200 m/min fU = 0.1 mm/U
Material: C45E tool: R245 M-PM
Roc
Ric
Wear mark width [mm]
Wear mark width [mm]
 
Fig. 8.13 Influence of flank wear on the cutting of steel [11] 
The phase shift of the passive force of the inner chip thickness modulation also 
changes. For higher frequencies, the process can be damped and stabilized by 
means of the effect of the time-shifted modulation of the inner and outer chip 
thickness. A visualization of the effects of the process damping is given in Fig. 
8.14. Here, simulation calculations for surface-overlapping between tool and 
workpiece are carried out for a planar cutting process at a wavelength of 1.7 mm 
and vibration amplitude of 0.05 µm. It is assumed that the collision between clear-
ance flank and workpiece surface causes additional forces, which lead to the ef-
fects shown in Fig. 8.13. This explains the positive phase shift of the passive force 
to the inner chip thickness modulation. The force precedes the chip thickness as 
there is already clearance flank contact with the inward movement of the cutter. 
Thus, the cutter is already subject to the maximum reactional force before reach-
ing the deepest point.  

194 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
 
0      0.4      0.8      1.2     1.6
Cutting path [mm]
Overlap area
[10-3 mm²]
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
α = 11°
0      0.4      0.8      1.2     1.6
Cutting path [mm]
Overlap area
[10-3 mm²]
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
α = 11°
α = 11°
0      0.4      0.8      1.2     1.6
Cutting path [mm]
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
α = 11°
R = 50µm
α = 11°
R = 50µm
0      0.4      0.8      1.2     1.6
Cutting path [mm]
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
α = 11°
Width of wear mark 
= 0,05mm
α = 11°
Width of wear mark 
= 0,05mm
Vibration
Vc
Vibration
Vc
Vibration
Vc
Vibration
Vc
Vibration
Vc
Vibration
Vc
 
Fig. 8.14 Flank face contact with a rounded and a worn tool [11] 
 
Comprehensive cutting experiments with steel and aluminum on different ma-
chine systems were carried out within the project of the SPP 1180 for the verifica-
tion of the complex extended cutting force model. Fig. 8.15 shows an example of a 
stability chart, which was identified on a vertical three-axes milling machine for 
processing C45E steel. For modeling the machine dynamics, frequency response 
functions measured with the machine at rest have been applied. The rotational beha-
vior of the spindle bearing system, as shown in the already presented auxiliary spin-
dle test-rig, has almost no influence on the dynamic compliance behavior in the low-
er range of rotation speeds and can therefore be ignored for the processing of steel. 
The newly-developed model with the defined C45E parameters is compared 
with the conventional linear process model within the scope of the process para-
meters recommended by the tool manufacturer. The comparison between the 
measured and simulated stability chart in Fig. 8.15 shows that in the regions with 
large deviations between the simulation results the complex extended process de-
piction leads to a clear improvement of the results.  
 
Comparison
of measurement  
and simulation
Cutting tool:
Sandvik
R390-32T16-11M
D = 32 mm
3 cutting edges
Material:
steel C45E 
Process: 
ae = 32 mm
fz = 0.12 mm / tooth
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
100
200
300
400
500
900
1100
1300
1700
Spindle speed [1/min]
Cutting tests
Stable cut
Chatter
Chatter frequency
Simulation with 
linear force model
Simulation with advanced
complex force model
Cutting depth ap [mm] 
Chatter frequency fR [Hz]
 
Fig. 8.15 Stability chart in the machining of steel [11] 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
195
 
The deviations of the cutting experiments in the region of low revolutions can 
thus be derived from different effects. At low cutting speeds, damping effects can 
become more effective as these are taken into account in the parameter identifica-
tion. Different friction effects in chip formation, which may be responsible for 
such deviations, are described by Dudzinski and Molinari [10]. In addition, espe-
cially for low cutting speeds, adhesion effects with particles of the workpiece ad-
hering to the tool also influence the dynamics of the cutting process and thus the 
stability limit. 
8.4   Method of Stability Simulation 
Apart from the accuracy of the modeling and the input parameterization, the me-
thod of stability simulation itself has an influence on the quality of the simulation 
results. The coupling of the modeling approaches described in the previous  
chapters for process and machine behavior in time domain is described in the fol-
lowing. For the simulative investigations described here, the dynamic compliance 
behavior of the machine structure is used as input parameter in form of a matrix of 
direct and cross-frequency response functions. In the multi-dimensional stability 
simulation, these frequency response functions (FRF) are taken into account by 
means of the projection of process forces into the Cartesian spatial directions of 
the machine system. However, these FRF cannot be processed by time-based si-
mulation algorithms and must therefore be treated as differential equations. The 
overall behavior of the machine structure is thus depicted as an accumulation of 
damped single-mass oscillators. All single-mass oscillators belonging to one direc-
tion are loaded with the same force in the simulation; the resulting deflections are 
added together. The measured or simulated dynamic behavior of machine tools 
can be described in this manner with a high degree of accuracy. 
The dynamic cutting rigidity is coupled with the dynamic machine compliance 
in the simulation model. Fig. 8.16 describes this coupling for a three-dimensional 
milling process and several cutting edges. The model is illustrated in a simplified 
manner concerning the consideration of the coordinate directions. Here, on the one 
hand, a planar milling process with feed motion of the milling cutter in the x-y-
level is assumed. On the other hand, the dynamic cross compliances of the FRF 
are ignored in the figure. The direction factors di,xd are set to zero while the respec-
tive cutting edge is not engaging into the workpiece. In this case, a force feedback 
does not occur at this cutting edge. If a cutting edge is in engagement, the generat-
ed profile xdi is used for the cutting force calculation at the corresponding cut. The 
profile xdi is delayed by the dead time Ti,i+1 between two cutting sequences and the 
profile of the chip outer side is passed to the next cutter i+1. The value of the dead 
times Ti,i+1 are the same for equally-divided cutters but can deviate from each oth-
er for a non-uniform pitch. Here, the cutting forces are determined over the linear 
dynamic cutting force coefficient kcb by multiplying the dynamic part of the chip  
 

196 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
thickness with kcb and the chip width b. The angle of the cutting force compared 
to the chip thickness change (ßorth) is included in the direction factor dF,Fj, which 
projects process forces from the coordinate system of the cutting edge to the ma-
chine coordinate system. 
On the right side of Fig. 8.16, the sub-model of the second cutting edge is 
shown in a sectional view. The lower part of the picture also displays the sub-
model of the same cutting edge but the model is extended such that the developed 
complex force model can be shown. Here, xd1 and xd2 serve as input dimensions. 
However, both are taken into account separately and multiplied with the force 
coefficient Rpq for calculating the dynamic cutting and passive force and shifted 
timewise by the phase angle φpq. The phase shift in the shown control loop is then 
also taken as a dead time element. The dead time necessary for the depiction of the 
phase shift is therefore dependent on the frequency of the respective active mode 
shape. 
 
GFx,x
GFy,y
-
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
dx,xd
dy,xd
b
kcb
T1,2
T1,2
T2,3
T2,3
Tn-1,n
Tn-1,n
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
dx,xd
dy,xd
b
kcb
-
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
dx,xd
dy,xd
b
kcb
-
Fx
Fy
xges
u1
xd2
yges
u2
un
xd1
xdn
Tn,1
Tn,1
With   di,xd = 0
if cutting edge i 
is not in contact
dFc,Fx
dFc,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
ϕic
Ric
-
xd2
xd1
ϕip
Rip
ϕoc
Roc
ϕop
Rop
-
Fic
Fip
Foc
Fop
Fc
dFp,Fx
dFp,Fy Fp
Fx
Fy
xges
yges
b
b
xd2
Cutting edge 2, complex force model
dFc,Fx
dFc,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
ϕic
Ric
-
xd2
xd1
ϕip
Rip
ϕoc
Roc
ϕop
Rop
-
Fic
Fip
Foc
Fop
Fc
dFp,Fx
dFp,Fy Fp
Fx
Fy
xges
yges
b
b
xd2
dFc,Fx
dFc,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
dx,xd
dy,xd
ϕic
Ric
-
xd2
xd1
ϕip
Rip
ϕoc
Roc
ϕop
Rop
-
Fic
Fip
Foc
Fop
Fc
dFp,Fx
dFp,Fy
dFp,Fx
dFp,Fy Fp
Fx
Fy
xges
yges
b
b
xd2
Cutting edge 2, complex force model
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
b
kcb
-
u2
xd2
xges
yges
Fx
Fy
xd1
xd2
Cutting edge 2
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dF,Fx
dF,Fy
dx,xd
dy,xd
dx,xd
dy,xd
b
kcb
-
u2
xd2
xges
yges
Fx
Fy
xd1
xd2
Cutting edge 2
Process model milling with n cutting edges
Essential enhancement for the complex force model
Depiction of one cutting edge
Assumption of a plane milling process
Neglecting the cross frequency response
Neglecting the nominal depth of cut
 
Fig. 8.16 Enhancement of the dynamic cutting force model [11] 
The resulting dynamic force parts are summarized into dynamic cutting and 
passive force. They are projected by means of cutting angle-dependent direction 
factors into the Cartesian directions x and y of the machine tool and act again on 
the structural compliance. The simulation structure was extended in order to set 
the correct dead time to depict the phase angle φpq for a resonance frequency and 
to take into account the identified influence of the frequency dependency on the 
dynamic process force progression. On the right, Fig. 8.17 shows that simulation 
loops must be created for the different mode shapes of the machine tool. Thus, an 
interpolation of the model parameters is carried out for each mode shape and the 
dead times for depicting the phase angle are calculated as well. 
 
 
 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
197
 
 
GFx,x,Mode_2
GFy,y,Mode_2
Fx
Fy
x1
y1
x2
y2
xm
ym
Fx1
Fy1
Fx2
Fy2
Fxm
Fym
Consideration of n cutting edges
Utilization of frequency dependent coefficients
Dynamical compliance
summarized in transfer function
Individual consideration of each mode shape for 
frequency dependent dynamical force coefficients
One transfer function per mode shape
Interpolation of the force coefficients 
regarding to thenatural frequencies
Summation of the dynamic forces
x
Cutting
edges
1- n
Fx
Fy
ges
yges
GFx,x
GFy,y
Fx
Fy
GFx,x,Mode_1
GFy,y,Mode_1
GFx,x,Mode_m
GFy,y,Mode_m
Cutting
edges
1- n
Cutting
edges
1- n
Cutting
edges
1- n
 
Fig. 8.17 Enhancement of frequency–dependent model parameters [11] 
8.5   Simulation of Processed Workpiece Surfaces 
Beyond the prediction of process stability with a high efficiency, the PrimeCut 
software environment developed by the WZL permits the calculation of machined 
workpiece surfaces. Apart from the industrial relevance for improving the surface 
topology of machined workpieces, the simulated surface structure presents the ba-
sis for the evaluation of the dynamic compliance behavior of machine tools after 
processing has taken place. The identification of the oscillation frequency of the 
machine structure is of particular interest. By means of suitable interpretation rou-
tines future conclusions are to be derived with regard to the dynamic weak points 
of the machine structure, which otherwise are only possible using frequency re-
sponse analysis. A first step towards this is the simulation of processed workpiece 
surfaces for known processes and the compliance behavior of the machine. For a 
simulative depiction of the surface structure of an instable processed workpiece 
the PrimeCut software tool uses the trajectory of the cutting edges of a milling 
tool, which is made up of the milling rotation and the feed motion as well as of the 
dynamic compliance of the TCP. 
Fig. 8.18 illustrates a simulated surface structure based on the stability simula-
tion shown as an example in Fig. 8.15. A profile cut of the surface was metrologi-
cally, tactilely depicted and also determined by means of simulation. Fig 8.18 
shows these profile cuts and also the results of a frequency analysis of the profiles. 
The frequency is calculated from the feed motion of the mill referenced to the wa-
velength of the profile marks. Basically, the machining process of the surface pro-
file can be depicted. Apart from the dominant frequency peak at 4 Hz, a second 
waviness at approximately 8 Hz is also correctly taken into account in the simula-
tion. However, the determined frequencies also show that the conclusion of a sur-
face profile to the basic oscillation frequency in milling due to the discontinuous 
cutter engagement is not trivial. 
 

198 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
 
Frequency [Hz]
0
2
4
6
0
5
10
20
Profile spectrum [µm]
Surface profile [µm]
32
34
36
40
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Groove length [mm]
Measurement
Simulation
Profile frequency referred
to feed rate
Comparison
of measurement  
and simulation
Cutting tool:
Sandvik
R390-32T16-11M
D = 32 mm
3 cutting edges
Material:
steel C45E 
Process:
n = 1200 1/min
ae = 32 mm
ap = 5.4 mm
fz = 0.12 mm / tooth
Chatter vibrations
at approx. 50 Hz
 
Fig. 8.18 Surface profile from instable machining of steel [11] 
Based on systematic cutting experiments under instable process conditions and 
the simulative verification, the influence of the oscillation frequency as well as the 
oscillation amplitude on the formation of the surface structure in the remaining 
time of the SPP 1180 are investigated and used to derive suitable conclusion pos-
sibilities. In this connection, Fig. 8.19 shows a test-rig structure, which can induce 
dynamic weak points with defined a oscillation frequency and oscillation ampli-
tude in a milling process. With electro-hydraulic excitation, a clamped test-
workpiece can be dynamically excited orthogonally to the feed motion of the  
milling tool. 
The adjustment range of the vibration frequency and relative displacement is 
sufficiently dimensioned with up to 300 Hz at an oscillation amplitude of 100 µm 
in order to derive the behavior of the dynamic structural oscillations of machine 
systems. The surface profiles generated on the test-workpieces (Fig. 8.19, right) 
are evaluated based on the knowledge of the dynamic compliance behavior and 
used as input for a simulative method reproducing the surface structure. The simu-
lation is carried out with the parameters rotation speed, number of cutting edges, 
feed motion and mill diameter known from the process. The parameter determined 
main frequency is varied in the model of the milling process. Simulation results 
and measuring results are compared with each other with respect to the characte-
ristic dimensions, for instance the FFT of the surface. An exact description of such 
a method is the subject of a current research work. 
 
 
 
 
 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
199
 
 
fz
n
fchatter
fz
n
Dynamometer
Disc springs
Inductive displacement sensor
Base plate
Hydraulic actuator
Work piece support
Flexure joints
Work piece
Spindle speed n = 700/min
Depth of cut
ap = 3 mm
Excitation freq. fr = 120 Hz
Spindle speed n = 900/min
Depth of cut
ap = 3 mm
Exciter freq.
fr = 120 Hz
 
Fig. 8.19 Test-rig for the emulation of dynamic weak points  
8.6   Conclusion 
Within the framework of the SPP 1180, the possibilities for the stability simula-
tion of High-Performance-Cutting (HPC) processes have been improved by inves-
tigating the input data for the parameterization of the simulation models and the 
methods of simulation itself. The depiction of the machine tool dynamics and of 
the dynamic behavior of the cutting processes has been extended. 
The dynamic behavior of the machine structure was emphasized to improve the 
stability simulation. The main effect identified in the HPC processing of alumi-
num alloy is the change of the dynamic behavior of spindle-bearing systems dur-
ing high rotation speeds. A measurement setup and the corresponding analysis 
software were developed to evaluate this effect. Besides, the rotation speed de-
pendent dynamic behavior could be investigated in detail by means of an auxiliary 
spindle test-rig comprising an accessible spindle shaft for modal analysis. The  
investigations have shown that substantial deviations from the behavior of the 
spindle at rest occur at higher spindle speeds. Although current tools for structural 
simulation can represent individual rotor-dynamic effects, they are not yet suitable 
for the identification of the structural behavior at high spindle speed. The possibil-
ities of the metrological determination created are thus necessary in order to carry 
out stability simulations for milling processes at high spindle speeds. 
Furthermore, investigations of the dynamic process behavior were presented. A 
test rig was developed and built up for direct metrological determination of the 
dynamic cutting rigidity. This permits the exact and independent variation of 
process and oscillation parameters for the orthogonal milling process. A large 
number of test-rig experiments with different cutting edges and workpiece mate-
rials were the basis for a presentation of the dependencies in the determination of 
dynamic milling forces. Especially cutting with rounded or blunt cutters has 

200 
C. Brecher, R. Hermes, and M. Esser
 
shown that the usual linear and real depiction of the dynamic cutting rigidity is not 
sufficient as input parameter for stability simulation. Much rather, a phase shift 
between force and chip thickness modulation in the cutting process, i.e. a complex 
linking of both dimensions, must be taken into account. A corresponding model 
has been presented and parameterized for several combinations of cutting edges 
and materials. The use of conventional models has shown to be sufficient for cut-
ting aluminum with sharp cutters and high cutting speeds. The depiction and 
processing of steel materials, however, must be carried out with the more complex 
models.  
Beyond the simulation of the process stability, the prediction of the surface pro-
file of instable machined workpieces can also be useful for the identification of re-
cursive weak points. An appropriate method should be derived for this purpose in 
the remaining project time of the SPP 1180. 
References 
[1] Abele, E., Munirathman, M., Tschannerl, M.: Hochgeschwindigkeitsbearbeitung 
(HSC) - technologische Leistungsfähigkeit und noch zu überwindende Hindernisse. 
In: Proceedings CIRP Int. Conference High Performance Cutting, Aachen (2004) 
[2] Altintas, Y., Eynian, M., Onozuka, H.: Identification of Dynamic Cutting Force Coef-
ficients and Chatter Stability with Process Damping. Annals of the CIRP, Jg.57, H.1, 
S.371–S.374 (2008) 
[3] Altintas, Y., Weck, M.: Chatter Stability of Metal Cutting and Grinding. Annals of 
the CIRP, Jg. 53, H.2, S.619–S.642 (2004) 
[4] Andrae, P.: Hochleistungszerspanung von Aluminiumknetlegierungen. Diss. Univer-
sität Hannover (2002) 
[5] Brecher, C., Esser, M., Paepenmüller, F.: Motor Spindles for HPC: Testing and Chat-
ter Simulation. In: Proceedings 2nd CIRP Int. Conference High Performance Cutting, 
Vancouver, Canada (2006) 
[6] Brecher, C., Esser, M., Witt, S.: Interaction of Manufacturing Process and Machine 
Tool. Annals of the CIRP, H. 58 (2009) 
[7] Brecher, C., Witt, S.: Static, Dynamic and Thermal Behaviour of Machine Tools with 
Regard to HPC. In: Proceedings CIRP Int. Conference High Performance Cutting, 
Aachen (2004) 
[8] Butz, F.: Gestaltung der Loslagerung von Werkzeugmaschinenspindeln. Shaker, Aa-
chen (2007) 
[9] Clancy, B.E., Shin, Y.C.: A Comprehensive Chatter Prediction Model for Face Turn-
ing Operation Including Tool Wear Effect. International Journal of Machine Tools 
and Manufacture Jg.42, S.1035–S.1044 (2002) 
[10] Dudzinski, D., Molinari, A.: Metal cutting and high speed machining. Kluwer, Bosten 
(2002) 
[11] Esser, M.:: Stabilitätssimulation für das HPC-Fräsen. Dissertation. Aachen. RWTH 
Aachen, Werkzeugmaschinenlabor, WZL (2010) 
[12] Großmann, K., Mühl, A., Löser, M.: Prognose von Stabilitätsgrenzen für das Fräsen. 
ZWF Jg.101, H.7/8, S.416–S.421 (2006) 
[13] Kals, H.J.J.: On the Calculation of Stability Charts on the Basis of the Damping and 
the Stiffness of the Cutting Process. Annals of the CIRP, S.297–S.303 (1971) 

8   HPC - Stability Simulation 
201
 
[14] Munirathnam, M., Kreis, M.: Das Gesamtpaket muss stimmen - Trendbericht: Sys-
temdenken bei der HSC / HPC - Zerspanung steigert die Produktivität. In: WB 
Werkstatt und Betrieb, H. Bd 139 Heft 6, pp. S.42–S.50 (2006) 
[15] Peters, J., von Vanherck, P., van Brussel, H.: Die Messung der dynamischen 
Schnittkraftkoeffizienten. In: Fertigung, H. Bd 3 Heft 2, pp. S.57–S.65 (1972) 
[16] Schulz, A.: Systeme zur Schwingungsdämpfung von Werkzeugmaschinen. In: VDI-
Fortschrittberichte, Jg. 651 pp. S.40–S.56 (2005) 
[17] Spachtholz, G.: Erweiterung des Leistungsbereiches von Spindellagern. Apprimus, 
Aachen (2008) 
[18] Tlusty, J.: Analysis of the State of Research in Cutting Dynamics. Annals of the 
CIRP, Jg. 27, H. 2, S.583–S.589 (1978) 
[19] van Brussel, H.: Dynamische Analyse van het Verspaningsproces. Katholieke Un-
iversiteit Leuven, Dissertation (1971) 
[20] Weck, M., Brecher, C.: Werkzeugmaschinen. Automatisierung von Maschinen und 
Anlagen, vol. 6. Springer, Auflage (2006) 
[21] Werntze, G.: Dynamische Schnittkraftkoeffizienten. Bestimmung mit Hilfe des Digi-
talrechners und Berücksichtigung im mathematischen Modell zur Stabilitätsanalyse. 
RWTH Aachen, Dissertation (1973) 
 

Chapter 9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
for the Identiﬁcation of Stable Milling Processes
D. H¨omberg, E. Uhlmann, O. Rott, and P. Rasper
Abstract. This chapter deals with a new mathematical model to characterize the
interaction between machine and workpiece in a milling process. The model consists
of a multi-body system representing the milling machine and a linear thermo-elastic
workpiece model. An extensive experimental analysis supported the development
of the governing model equations. A numerical solution strategy is outlined and
complemented by simulations of stable and unstable milling processes including
workpiece effects. The last part covers the development of a new algorithm for the
stability analysis of large milling systems.
9.1
Introduction
The interaction of process and structure is the main reason for the unwanted chat-
ter phenomena in milling. Hence, the determination of stable cutting conditions for
given structures and the design of more efﬁcient milling machines are important re-
search ﬁelds in production technology. Since the mathematical description of model
components like machine, workpiece and process is well understood by now, the
main challenge is to integrate them into a coupled model and to simulate the result-
ing system with tailored numerical algorithms to reproduce the stability limits and
the dynamical characteristics of the real system correctly.
Accordingly, the goal of the present project was the development of a coupled
model to study the dynamics of milling processes by means of time domain sim-
ulations. To cope with a necessarily long simulation time the machine structure is
treated as a multi-body system and the workpiece as a thermo-elastic body. Compre-
hensive experimental studies performed in close cooperation between engineers and
mathematicians provided the basis for the mathematical modeling, the identiﬁcation
of model parameters and the validation of the numerical results.
The main achievements of the present work are the consistent mathematical mod-
eling of a complex milling system including the mathematical analysis of the derived
equations [10], the numerical implementation of a time-domain simulation system
B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 203–224.
springerlink.com
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

204
D. H¨omberg et al.
and its experimental validation, experimental studies, which have revealed a tem-
perature dependency of the stability limits.
The chapter is organized as follows: In Section 9.2, we will present the differ-
ent experimental studies carried out during the modeling procedure, as well as the
parameter identiﬁcation and for the validation of the simulation results. Section 9.3
covers the derivation of the model equations, the development of numerical algo-
rithms and the presentation of simulation results. The last section is devoted to some
concluding remarks including the discussion of perspectives and further issues.
9.2
Experimental Analysis
9.2.1
General Setup
Machining tests were performed for experimental determination of process stabil-
ity behavior and cutting forces. Hence, a commonly used measurement setup for
milling experiments according to [12] was implemented to measure the speciﬁc cut-
ting forces and to analyze the process behavior.
The tests were performed on a ﬁve-axis machining center type MAP LPZ 500,
which features linear drives for the linear axes. Aluminum alloy AlZnMgCu1,5 (EN
AW-7075) blocks were machined for the general experiments using a one-edge end
mill cutter of High-Speed Steel (HSS) with a diameter of d = 8.0 mm and a side rake
angle of γf = 23◦. The size of the workpieces was 150×100×50 mm. The milling
tool was ﬁxed in a heat-shrinking tool holder with a HSK-A 63 mounting shank.
The workpiece was mounted on a 3-component-dynamometer type Kistler 9257A.
The dynamometer was connected to three charge ampliﬁers type Kistler 5011. For
the acquisition of the data, a measuring board from National Instruments with a
maximum sampling rate of 500 kHz and a resolution of 16 bit was applied. Figure
9.1 schematically displays the measurement setup.
PC with measuring 
board
3 charge amplifiers
machine table
end mill cutter
work piece
Fx
Fy
Fz
heat shrinking 
toolholder
dynamometer
Fig. 9.1 Experimental setup for machining tests

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
205
9.2.2
Experiments for Parameter Identiﬁcation
9.2.2.1
Measurement of Structural Dynamics
The identiﬁcation of unknown model parameters is essential for the prediction of
process stability. Therefore, the measurement of the dynamic behavior of the ma-
chine tool structure is necessary. With a similar approach as Faassen et al. [12],
the dynamic characteristics of the machine structure and cutting tool can be de-
duced from measured mobility-frequency-responsefunctions at the tool center point
(TCP). The tool was excited in x and y-direction of the machine tool coordinate sys-
tem using an impact hammer (Kistler 9722A500), while the machine tool was in an
idle state. The bandwidth was 5,000 Hz. The response measurement in y-direction
was realized with a laser vibrometer (Polytec OFV 303). Therefore, errors due to the
additional mass of an accelerometer near the TCP were avoided as stated in [11].
9.2.3
Experimental Stability Analysis
9.2.3.1
Machining Tests for the Analysis of Process Stability and Cutting
Forces
The considered process in the machining tests was peripheral end milling. Flutes
with full immersion of the cutter (ae = 8 mm) were machined into the work-
piece. During the process, the cutting force components Fx, Fy and Fz according
to the machine coordinate system were measured at the workpiece using the 3-
component-dynamometer. The spindle speed was varied between n = 15,800 rpm
and n = 19,800 rpm. A feed rate per tooth of fz = 0.2 mm was set for each spin-
dle speed. The cutting depths were gradually increased with 0.5 mm increments
starting at 0.5 mm until the cutting process became unstable. Based on the data cap-
tured during the cutting tests the process stability behavior could be analyzed by the
generation of stability charts. The process data corresponding to stable machining
processes was used to determine cutting coefﬁcients according to [23]. A sample
rate of 50 kHz was used for data acquisition.
9.2.3.2
Identiﬁcation of Unstable Milling Processes
A method to distinguish stable and unstable process states is necessary for the anal-
ysis of the stability behavior of cutting processes. The regenerative effect is the main
reason for stable cutting processes to become unstable. Varying cutting forces lead
to self-excited vibrations and an additional relative shift between tool and work-
piece. These displacements create a characteristic waviness on the workpiece sur-
face. Thus, every following cut results in a chip-thickness modulation, which is
ampliﬁed by the machine tool vibrations [3], [2], [28], [33]. The characterizing fre-
quencies of these self-excited vibrations are called chatter frequencies. The domi-
nant chatter frequencies are generally located close to the eigenfrequencies of the
considered machine tool structure. Chatter leads to a worse product quality because

206
D. H¨omberg et al.
of additional self-excited vibrations. Therefore, it is necessary to deﬁne a stability
criterion in order to identify unstable milling processes and maintain a good product
quality.
The described effect makes it possible to identify process instabilities by con-
siderating force signals in frequency domain. Other possibilities are the analysis of
vibration signals near the TCP, the resulting surface roughness, the occurrence of
chatter marks and noise measurements during the machining process [12]. In this
research work, the recorded cutting force signals were transformed into frequency
domain using Fast-Fourier-Transformation (FFT) according to [3], [13] and [19] in
order to identify the dominant frequencies and related amplitudes. Figure 9.2 shows
the spectrum of the force signals for a stable and and an unstable milling process.
Since a one-edge end mill cutter was used the spindle speed of n = 17200 rpm
corresponds to excitation frequencies, which are multiples of f = 287 Hz.
0
3000
750
60
15
Frequency f
Relative force amplitude FRel
30
Hz
Tool:
End Mill Cutter
z = 1; d = 8.0 mm
Work piece:
Aluminium Alloy
EN AW-7075
Process Parameters:
ae = 8.0 mm
fz = 0.2 mm
n = 17200 rpm
0
1500
Stable Process (ap = 1.5 mm)
Unstable Process (ap = 2.5 mm)
Excitation Frequencies
N
mm
Fig. 9.2 FFT of stable and unstable cutting processes
According to Sims [27], stable and unstable process states were determined by
the investigation of the ratio between the absolute value of the largest force am-
plitude, which can be allocated to the excitation frequency, and the largest force
amplitude of the occurring chatter frequency. If the ratio exceeds a value of 10 %,
the corresponding process is classiﬁed as unstable. In addition, the resulting surface
roughness, the occurrence of chatter marks and noise during the machining pro-
cess were also taken into account. A detailed description of the procedure is given
in [29].

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
207
9.2.3.3
Results of the Stability Analysis
The measured cutting force signals were analyzed using the illustrated method for
the identiﬁcation of unstable cutting processes in order to generate stability plots
and determine stability limits. Figure 9.3 shows the resulting stability plot.
15600
20000
16700
4
1
Spindle speed n
Cutting depth ap
mm
2
rpm
Tool:
End Mill Cutter
z = 1; d = 8.0 mm
Work piece:
Aluminium  Alloy
EN AW-7075; T = 25oC
Process Parameters:
ae = 8.0 mm;  fz = 0.2 mm
Calculated Stability Limit
Unstable Process
Stable Process
0
17800
Fig. 9.3 Stability plot for a feed-rate-per-tooth of fz = 0.2 mm
The variation of the stability limit is rather small in the analyzed range of spindle
speed. The maximum value is ap = 2 mm at spindle speeds around n = 17,000 rpm
and n = 19,400 rpm. For other spindle speeds, ap = 1.5 mm is the measured stability
limit.
The graph depicted in Figure 9.3 has been computed using the standard stabil-
ity prediction method proposed by Altintas et al. (see e.g. [2] or [1]). A mobility-
frequency-response function measured by means of hammer excitation and cutting
force coefﬁcients determined from cutting force measurements under stable cutting
conditions have been provided as input data.
9.2.3.4
Possible Sources of Measurement Errors in the Process Analysis
The large gap between the predicted and the measured stability limits can probably
be explained with difﬁculties in the measurement of the frequency-responsefunction
at the tool center point. Beyond that, the dynamometer which has been mounted be-
tween machine table and workpiece, might also affect the dynamical characteristics
of the structure. Both effects have been analyzed in [22]. The frequency-response
function of the work piece changes signiﬁcantly, if the workpiece is not directly
mounted on the machine table but on the dynamometer. However, in both cases,
the average value of the measured workpiece frequency-response function is about

208
D. H¨omberg et al.
two orders of magnitude smaller than the corresponding value at the tool center
point [22]. Consequently, the effect of the dynamometer has been assumed to be
negligible.
However, recent results of machining tests have shown that the dynamic behavior
of the dynamometer-workpiece combination seems to have a much larger impact on
process behavior as expected. Although the amplitudes of the response functions
are very small, current experimental process analysis has shown that the shifting
of eigenfrequencies by use of a dynamometer seems to play a major role for the
stability behavior. Alternatively, the work piece accelerations during the machining
tests could be monitored to detect unstable processes. By deﬁning a new stability
criterion this method would allow to remove the dynamometer and thus reﬁne the
chatter detection.
9.2.4
Workpiece Effects in Milling
9.2.4.1
Experimental Setup and Measurement Procedure
The dynamic process behavior is mainly inﬂuenced by the spindle and cutting tool of
the machine tool system. Apart from that major inﬂuence, the geometry of the work-
piece also has an impact on the process [5], [8]. The effect of different workpiece
geometries on process stability was analyzed with an almost equal measurement
setup and experimental procedure as before (see Section 9.2.1 and 9.2.2).
In this case, a more ﬂexible T-shaped workpiece compared to the blocks with a
size of 150 × 100 × 50 mm in the machining tests before was analyzed. The size
of the vertical bar was changed to obtain numerous and different geometries. The
width of the bar was varied between t1 = 10 mm and t2 = 20 mm and the height
between h1 = 50 mm and h2 = 150 mm to realize different dynamic behavior of
the workpieces in terms of ﬂexibility. The T-shaped workpiece was mounted upside
down on the dynamometer so that the bar was in a vertical position. Flutes with
full immersion of the same end mill cutter were milled into the T-shaped workpiece
beginning at the top of the bar. Considering the stability plot above (Figure 9.3)
stable process states were analyzed using different workpiece geometries.
9.2.4.2
Analysis of the Inﬂuence of the Workpiece Geometry on Process
Stability
Machining test were carried out using different T-shaped workpieces. The ﬁgure
points out the huge impact of the workpiece geometry on process stability behavior.
With the use of the stability criterion described in Section 9.2.3.2, the considered
process state was classiﬁed as stable using the aluminum block as all relevant am-
plitudes in the frequency domain are related to the excitation with a frequency of
f = 267 Hz.

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
209
0
3000
750
20
5
Frequency f
Relative force amplitude FRel
10
Hz
Tool:
End Mill Cutter
z = 1; d = 8.0 mm
Work piece:
Aluminium Alloy
EN AW-7075
Process Parameters:
ae = 8.0 mm; ap = 1.0 mm
fz = 0.2 mm
n = 16000 rpm
Stable Process (block)
Stable Process (bar: h =60 mm; t = 10 mm)
Unstable Process (bar: h =140 mm; t = 10 mm)
Excitation Frequencies
0
1500
N
mm
Fig. 9.4 Comparison of stability behavior considering different geometries.
The variation of the workpiece geometry leads to a varying dynamic process
behavior. While the machining process remained stable for a bar with a height of
h = 60 mm the amplitudes of the vibrations became higher in the frequency domain.
When a bar with a height of h = 140 mm was machined the cutting process became
unstable. Here, dominant chatter frequencies arise in the frequency domain apart
from the excitation frequency of f = 267 Hz.
The results show the big impact of the workpiece geometry and thus the effect of
the workpiece dynamics on process stability. It shows that there is need to consider
workpiece dynamics in stability prediction. Thus, the stiffness and damping of the
workpiece have to be analyzed and linked to the dynamic behavior of the machine
tool structure for the calculation of stability plots.
9.2.5
Temperature Effects
9.2.5.1
Experimental Setup and Measurement Procedure
To analyze the temperature inﬂuence on process stability and cutting forces the
measurement setup in Figure 9.1 was adjusted by using workpieces with differ-
ent pre-heating conditions. The pre-heating of the workpiece was realized with a
heating plate by Horst GmbH with three heating cartridges and a heater power of
P = 300 W. Thus, temperatures of to T = 200 ◦C were achieved. The plate was
triggered by a temperature regulator device type HT MC1.
The workpiece was warmed-up to temperatures between TWP1 = 25 ◦C and
TWP2 = 100 ◦C, positioned upside down, by means of the described heating plate
before the machining started. In order to ensure homogeneous heating conditions

210
D. H¨omberg et al.
during the machining tests thermocouples type K were ﬁxed on the sides of the
workpiece to control the local work piece temperature. In addition, the temperature
was monitored using a thermal imaging camera type Infratronics IR600. Due to this
approach it was possible to execute cutting tests with deﬁned and homogeneous
heating conditions (ΔT = 1 K) of the workpiece.
9.2.5.2
Temperature Inﬂuence on Measurement Accuracy
The dynamometer is a piezo-electric sensor. For the analysis of thermal effects
on process stability and cutting forces a possible source for measurement er-
rors is the change in thermal conditions. In order to quantify these errors the
temperature-dependencyof the three-component-dynamometerand the inﬂuence on
the measurement results were analyzed. The dynamometer was gradually heated to
temperatures from TWP1 = 25 ◦C to TWP2 = 100 ◦C. Then, force measurements were
performed using deﬁned force signals. First, the dynamometer was loaded with de-
ﬁned masses in a static way; and the arising differences between the measured force
signals and normal forces were determined. In a second step, an impact hammer was
used excite of the dynamometer at different temperatures. The measured amplitudes
and lengths of the force impulse signals by the hammer were recorded and subse-
quently compared with the measured signals of the dynamometer. The warming of
the hammer can be neglected due to the temporally short contact between platform
and impact hammer.
Only a small measurement inaccuracy of the dynamometer of about 1 % for the
static case and 0.5 % for the dynamic case could be identiﬁed as a result of these
approaches. Hence, a thermal decoupling between dynamometer and workpiece for
the later experiments was not required. However, the variance was considered later
in the analysis.
9.2.5.3
Analysis of the Inﬂuence of Temperature on Speciﬁc Cutting Forces
Linear cutting force models relate the cutting cross-section given by ap and h to
the cutting forces via an empirical constant; the so-called speciﬁc cutting force
coefﬁcients. These coefﬁcients depend on cutting speed, workpiece material and
cutter geometry (see e. g. [1], [31]). Since the workpiece material properties, i. e.
especially the yield stress, and the contact conditions change with temperature, it
is expected that the cutting force coefﬁcients decrease for higher workpiece tem-
peratures. The effect of temperature on speciﬁc cutting forces has been analyzed
employing the measurement setup and experimental procedure presented in Section
9.2.1 and 9.2.2 in order to conﬁrm this assumption. As suggested in [1], the pro-
cess parameters (spindle speed n = 16,200 rpm, cutting depth ap = 1.5 mm and
feed-rate-per-tooth of fz = 0.2 mm) were been chosen such that the corresponding
process was stable (see Figure 9.3). The speciﬁc cutting force component Kc was
calculated as shown in [1] or [17]. Figure 9.5 shows the inﬂuence of different pre-
heating states of the workpiece between TWP1 = 25 ◦C and TWP2 = 100 ◦C on the
speciﬁc cutting force coefﬁcient Kc.

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
211
800
500
Specific cutting force Kc
N
mm2
600
Tool:
End Mill Cutter
z = 1; d = 8.0 mm
Work piece:
Aluminium Alloy
EN AW-7075
Process Parameters:
ap = 1.5 mm
ae = 8.0 mm
fz = 0.2 mm
25
100
50
400
Workpiece Temperature TWP
oC
Fig. 9.5 The dependency of the speciﬁc cutting force Kc on the preheating of the workpiece
A non-linear relationship between the workpiece temperature and the speciﬁc
cutting force coefﬁcient Kc can be observed. The speciﬁc cutting force decreases
with increasing workpiece temperature. The decay is about 16 % in a temperature
range of TWP1 = 25 ◦C to TWP2 = 50 ◦C. The decay is less important but still visible
for higher workpiece temperatures. Based on these observations a new cutting force
model has been developed, which incorporates the effect of the workpiece tempera-
ture on the speciﬁc cutting force. Since the diagram illustrated in Figure 9.5 exhibits
an exponential decay, a similar relation was chosen for the modiﬁed speciﬁc cutting
force (9.9) presented in Section 9.3.4.
9.2.5.4
Results of the Stability Analysis for Different Workpiece
Temperatures
Experimental stability plots for different pre-heating conditions of the workpiece
were created with use of the described measurement procedure and the illustrated
method for the identiﬁcation of unstable milling processes (see Figure 9.6).
Due to the pre-heating of the workpiece within the temperature range between
TWP1 = 25 ◦C to TWP2 = 100 ◦C, an increase of stability limits of at least Δap =
0.5 mm in the whole rpm-range with a maximum of Δap = 2.0 mm at n =
19,400 rpm can be determined. Only at spindle speeds between n = 17,800 rpm
and n = 18,400 rpm is there no rise in the stability limits. In conclusion, higher
work piece temperatures have a stabilizing effect on the process behavior.
Because of the pre-heating of the workpiece, higher temperatures occur in the
cutting zone, which leads to a softening of the workpiece material so that the part of
the cutting force related to plastic deformation decreases. Partially, the temperatures
can reach such high levels that melting of the machined aluminum can be observed.
The viscous interface between chip and tool improves the chip ﬂow, which results
in decreasing cutting forces [25], [4], [30], [14], which ﬁnally leads to increasing
stability limits.

212
D. H¨omberg et al.
15600
20000
16700
5
1
Spindle speed n
Cutting depth ap
mm
2
rpm
Tool:
End Mill Cutter
z = 1; d = 8.0 mm
Work piece:
Aluminium Alloy
EN AW-7075
T = 25…100 oC
Process Parameters:
ae = 8.0 mm;  fz = 0.2 mm
Stability limit  T = 100oC
Stability limit  T = 50oC
Stability limit  T = 25oC
0
17800
3
Fig. 9.6 Stability limits in dependency of the temperature
9.3
Coupled System and Simulations
9.3.1
Modeling Concept
The goal of the presented research project was the development of a complex sim-
ulation system involving the dynamical characteristics of workpiece and machine
structure to study the dynamics of milling processes by means of time-domain sim-
ulations. Unstable processes can be identiﬁed by analyzing either the evolution of
the uncut chip thickness or the simulated cutting force spectrum. In both cases, the
precision of the predicted stability limit increases with the length of the simulated
time interval. However, due to the presence of high characteristic frequencies the
time-step size is strictly limited, which ﬁnally leads to unacceptable computation
times, especially for models with many degrees of freedom. In view of these prob-
lems, modeling the machine structure as a multi-body system and the workpiece as
a thermo-elastic work body seemed to be the best trade-off between accuracy and
efﬁciency.
From a macroscopic point of view, the largest part of the workpiece behaves like
a thermo-elastic body. Plastic deformations usually occur only in regions close to the
cutting edges and can therefore be incorporated by employing an empirical cutting
force model. Due to these simpliﬁcations, the material removal cannot be simulated
directly and has to be approximated by a heuristic approach. For milling processes,
where the difference between exit and entry angle is smaller than the pitch angle
of the cutter, such an approach can be constructed by applying a method of steps.
In each step the workpiece reference domain is considered to be constant and the
system is solved until the cutting edge leaves the workpiece. Before the next cutting
edge starts cutting, we construct a new workpiece reference domain based on the

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
213
previously computed solution and pursue the simulation. Consequently, the model-
ing and the simulation process consists of two parts. While the ﬁrst part deals with
the phenomena occurring during one tooth period, the second part focuses on the
construction of a series of workpiece reference domains and thus on an implemen-
tation of the method of steps.
9.3.2
Multi-body System
The development procedure of a multi-body system representing a machine struc-
ture can be summarized as follows. The ﬁrst step, an experimental modal analysis,
provides the eigenfrequencies and the corresponding mode shapes. Next, consid-
ering the measured mode shapes, the rigid bodies for the model can be deﬁned.
Finally, after having implemented the mathematical model, the remaining free cou-
pling parameters have to be identiﬁed by comparing the experimentally and numer-
ically determined frequency-response functions for several points on the machine
structure using a least-squares approach. Based on the experimental data and addi-
tional FEM simulations a multi-body system has been developed, which matches
the measured frequency-response function. The ﬁnal model, which is composed of
cutter, tool holder, two spindle segments, headstock, x-slider and a frame moving in
y-direction with respect to the ﬁxed machine base, is illustrated in Figure 9.7.
The equation of motion describing the dynamics of the system can be summa-
rized by the following expression
M(t,q) ¨q = fI(t,q, ˙q)+ fE(t,q, ˙q,η)+ gE(t,q,F)
(9.1)
with gE representing the external forces and torques applied via joints on each body.
The parameter vector η contains the free coupling parameters, such as joint stiffness
or joint damping, while M denotes the state dependent mass matrix and fI represents
the inertia forces. The last term incorporates the cutting force vector F acting on the
cutter. The generalized coordinates q describe the relative motion between the rigid
bodies. Due to the presence of pre-deﬁned parameters, such as feed and spindle
rotation speed the time appears explicitly in the expressions for M, fI, fE and gE.
Since the system is organized in a tree-like structure an iterative algorithm (c.f. [7])
can be applied to evaluate the equations of motion during a time-domain simulation.
9.3.3
Thermo-elastic Workpiece Model
The largest part of the workpiece behaves like a thermoelastic body. Plastic defor-
mations usually occur only in regions close to the cutting edges. In the framework
of a macroscopic description, the cutting forces F and the heat produced during
the chip formation can be modeled by employing an empirical approach. A volume
force sm
E occurring on the right hand side represents the cutting forces acting on
the workpiece. Similarly, a distributed heat source se
E models the heat ﬂux into the
workpiece. Note that both functions sm
E and se
E depend on the cutting forces and thus

214
D. H¨omberg et al.
headstock
 
x-slider
upper
spindle
lower
spindle
toolholder
tool
y-slider
x
y
z
Fig. 9.7 Multi-body system representing the milling machine
on the solution of the coupled system. As shown in [15], the equations of thermo-
elasticity read
ρutt = div(σ)+ sm
E,
(9.2)
σ = λtr(ε)I + 2με −3KαΘI
with
K = (λ + 2
3μ),
(9.3)
ε = 1
2

∇u + (∇u)T
,
(9.4)
ρcvΘt = κΔΘ −3KαT0div(ut)+ se
E
(9.5)
where λ and μ are the Lam´e constants, ρ denotes the mass density, T0 the reference
temperature, cv the speciﬁc heat, κ the heat conductivity and α is the thermal expan-
sion coefﬁcient. The function u represents the deformation ﬁeld, I identity matrix
and tr(.) denotes the trace operator.
The heat equation has been formulated in terms of the deviation Θ from the
reference temperature T0. Thus, the actual temperature T is given by T = Θ + T0.
The workpiece is ﬁxed on a large and rigid machine table, a conﬁguration,which can
be approximated by imposing Dirichlet boundary conditions on the corresponding
part of the workpiece boundary, i.e.
u(t,x) = 0
for
x ∈ΓT,
(9.6)
Θ(t,x) = 0
for
x ∈ΓT.
(9.7)

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
215
9.3.4
Coupling and Material Removal Models
9.3.4.1
Coupling of Process and Structure Models during One Tooth Period
The cutting forces acting on cutter and workpiece can be described by empirical
models involving the uncut chip thickness, i. e.
ˆF = ap ˆK(Tce) h,
(9.8)
where ap denotes the depth of cut. The vector ˆK denotes an empirical parameter, the
so called speciﬁc cutting force, which is usually assumed to be constant or depend-
ing on the cutting speed. However, as shown in Section 9.2.5, the cutting forces
decrease due to higher workpiece temperatures. This effect has been incorporated
into the cutting force model by multiplying the constant speciﬁc cutting force vector
ˆK
std = [Kf ,Kc,Kp]T by an empirical function involving the work piece temperature
Tce at the cutting edge, i. e., we deﬁne
ˆK(Tce) = ˆK
std (cTce)−b ,
(9.9)
with further ﬁt parameters b and c. The uncut chip thickness h generally depends
on the current position of the cutting edge, the workpiece deformation and the
shape of the workpiece surface created by the preceding tooth. In the mathemati-
cal models delay terms are often used to incorporate the effect of the surface shape
(see [10]). However, to allow for a numerically stable and realistic coupling to the
workpiece, an alternative approach is pursued here. The workpiece surface shall
be constructed employing a real material removal model similar to the approaches
presented in [9], [32].
To derive a formula for the uncut chip thickness, we assume at ﬁrst that the work-
piece reference conﬁguration ΩR is given and show how the uncut chip thickness
can be derived from the current cutter position given by the solution of (9.1) and
the displacement ﬁeld corresponding to (9.2). Note that for presentation purposes
we consider only the special case that the cutter axis is parallel to the z-axis of the
workpiece reference frame. In the general case, additional transformations depend-
ing on the solution of (9.1) have to be applied to compute the vector components in
the reference frame of interest.
As illustrated in Figure 9.8, a point on the cutting edge can be characterized
by the vector rce = ˜rce(t,q,z) = rca + rae. Note that the dashed lines in Figure 9.8
represent the ideal tooth path without machine and workpiece deformations. The
current workpiece domain Ω(t) is given by the reference conﬁguration ΩR and the
displacement ﬁeld corresponding to (9.2), i.e. x = X + u(t,X) with x ∈Ω(t) and
X ∈ΩR. As shown in [10], [23] and indicated by the bar labeled ’h’ in Figure 9.8,
the uncut chip thickness is the distance between a point ’ce’ on the cutting edge and
the workpiece surface measured in the direction of rae. Mathematically, this can be
formulated as follows

216
D. H¨omberg et al.
h(t,q,z,Ω(t)) =
	
0
if rce /∈Ω(t),
max
h∗∈H h∗
otherwise,
(9.10)
with the set H being deﬁned as
H =

x ∈R+|

rce −x rae
∥rae∥

∈Ω(t)

.
(9.11)
Combining the expression for the uncut chip thickness with the empirical cutting
force model (9.8) divided by ap gives a force per unit length, which possibly assume
different values on each z-level, i.e.
ˆR = ˆK h(t,q,z,Ω(t)).
(9.12)
Since the components of the vector ˆR (see Figure 9.8) are given with respect to
the reference frame corresponding to the cutting edge, (9.12) has to be transformed
by means of an orthogonal transformation O(ϕ(z)) in the cutter reference frame to
compute the cutting force per unit length acting on the cutter, i. e.
˜R = O(ϕ(z)) ˆR = O(ϕ(z)) ˆK h(t,q,z,Ω(t)),
(9.13)
with ϕ(z) denoting the angle between rce and the x-axis of the cutter reference
frame. Integrating (9.13) along the cutter axis ﬁnally provides the resultant force
acting on the cutter.
y
x
z
cutter
axis
r
fz
ae
rca
rce
Ω(t)
h
cutting
edge
xc
yc
φ(z)
y
x
z
cutter
axis
fz
Ω(t)
h
A(t,z)
^Rc
^Rf
Δφ
Δφ
xc
yc
rae
Fig. 9.8 Uncut chip thickness (left) and deﬁnition of the volume force (right)
Similar to the resulting force on the cutter, the volume forces sm
E acting on the
right hand side of (9.2) also have to be calculated from the relative cutting force
given in (9.12). Applying a second orthogonal transformation Q(t,q), which de-
pends on the solution of (9.1) to (9.13) provides the components of the relative
cutting force in the workpiece reference frame, i. e.

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
217
R = Q(t,q) ˜R = Q(t,q)O(ϕ(z)) ˆK h(t,q,z,Ω(t)).
(9.14)
Since the presented model is a macroscopic approach, which cannot reproduce the
chip formation, the relative cutting forces have to be distributed over an area A(t,z)
located between cutting edge and workpiece surface. As illustrated in Figure 9.8,
for a given point on the cutting edge rae and a given level z the area A(t,z) is deﬁned
as the set of all points in Ω(t) enclosed by the disc-ring segment with label ’A(t,z)’.
The segment is deﬁned by the arcs through rae with radius D/2 and length ΔϕD
and through (1−h/∥rae∥)rae with radius D/2−h and length 2Δϕ(D/2−h). Thus,
the volume force reads
sm
E(t,x,y,z) =
	
0
if (x,y) /∈A(t,z),
R
A(t,z)
otherwise.
(9.15)
The heat conducted into the workpiece can be computed from the speciﬁc cutting
forces and the given cutting conditions (see [26]). If the shear angle appearing in the
corresponding expressions is estimated by an analytical formula as, for example,
proposed in [20], the total heat ﬂux into the workpiece denoted by H(h, ˆK) can be
written in explicit form. The corresponding term appearing on the right hand side
of (9.5) reads
se
E(t,x,y,z) =
	
0
if (x,y) /∈A(t,z),
H(h, ˆK)
A(t,z)
otherwise.
(9.16)
9.3.4.2
Material Removal Model
As mentioned before, the workpiece surface can be constructed by employing a
material removal model. The main idea is to construct a volume based on the cut-
ting edge path and workpiece deformations, which can be subtracted from a given
workpiece domain by means of Boolean operations (see e.g. [32]).
To this end, recall that during one tooth period each point on the cutting edge
follows a certain path depending on the motion of the cutter. In a subinterval, some
points of the cutting edge penetrate the deformed workpiece surface and the cutter
is cuts. Thus, a workpiece deformation can be associated to each point rce of the
cutting edge in the workpiece domain Ω(t), i. e.
rce = Xce + u(t,Xce),
Xce ∈ΩR.
(9.17)
With solution X∗
ce(t,rce) of the above equation and the cutting edge points we deﬁne
a new point y, which corresponds either to the cutting edge or to the new shape of
the reference domain, i. e.
y(t) =
	
rce
if rce /∈Ω(t),
X∗
ce(t,rce)
otherwise.
(9.18)

218
D. H¨omberg et al.
Monitoring these points y(t) ⊂R3 during a time interval, which encloses
the actual cutting period, gives a set of points describing an open surface in the
three-dimensional space. From such a surface, we construct a set Ωc ⊂R3, which
represents the points travelled by the cutting edge and incorporating the workpiece
deformations. The new workpiece reference domain Ω new
R
can be found by subtract-
ing the domain Ωc from the given workpiece reference domain ΩR, i.e.
Ω new
R
= ΩR \ Ωc.
(9.19)
The presented strategy leads to a series of workpiece domains, each incorporat-
ing the motion of the cutting edge and the corresponding workpiece deformations
during the preceding tooth path. Together with the expression for the uncut chip
thickness, the model leads to a non-linear system of coupled ordinary and partial
differential equations. The history of workpiece and cutter motion is stored in the
workpiece surface.
9.3.5
Numerical Algorithm, Implementation and Parameter
Identiﬁcation
The main solution algorithm is composed of two parts. While the ﬁrst part deals
with the solution of the coupled system on a constant reference domain, the second
part is focused towards the construction of a series of reference domains and the
corresponding initial conditions.
As shown in the previous sections, the process structure interaction leads to a
strong coupling of workpiece and machine model. In addition to the ﬁnite element
discretization of the workpiece equations, a tailored time-integration algorithm has
been developed for the coupled system guaranteeing a fully-implicit coupling of the
complete system. This strategy required a large programming effort. Since standard
ﬁnite element libraries do not allow the incorporation of multi-body systems, and
contrarily, the standard multi-body simulation packages do not provide any tools
to integrate coupled PDE-systems into the simulation environment, the numerical
implementation of both parts had to be developed in the framework of an in-house
library. The result is a powerful milling simulation system. Its main features are an
optimal resolution of the coupling effects by an efﬁcient implicit time-integration
scheme, and as a consequence of the material removal model, the spatial resolution
of the machined workpiece surface. An example for the generated workpiece sur-
face employing a Dexel model similar to [34] is illustrated in Figure 9.9 for a stable
process and in Figure 9.10 for an unstable process, respectively. In addition, the pre-
sented approach allows for the identiﬁcation of machine and workpiece parameters
by means of standard Gauss-Newton methods.
The identiﬁcation process was carried out in close cooperation between experi-
menters and mathematicians. Based on the standard experiments, i. e. measurement
of mobility-frequency response functions, cutting forces and temperatures, the ex-
perimental and the numerical methods have been successively adjusted in order to
ﬁnally provide a realistic milling model.

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
219
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
x 10−3
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
0.031
0.0315 0.032
0.0325 0.033
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
0.065
0.066
0.067
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
Fig. 9.9 Example for the material removal simulation, i. e. the evolution of the workpiece
shape, and the corresponding uncut chip thickness in case of a stable cut
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
x 10 −3
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
0.031
0.0315 0.032
0.0325 0.033
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
0.065
0.066
0.067
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
Fig. 9.10 Example for the material removal simulation, i. e. the evolution of the workpiece
shape, and the corresponding uncut chip thickness in case of an unstable cut
9.3.6
Simulations
The coupled model and the developed simulation algorithm provide a tool to inves-
tigate the characteristics of milling processes involving the dynamics of machine

220
D. H¨omberg et al.
and workpiece. Although the temperature effects presented in Section 9.2.5 can
be reproduced with the presented model, an illustration of the related phenomena
is beyond the scope of this work. Therefore, we focued on effects, which can be
simulated with an elastic workpiece model. Due to this restriction the workpiece
equations can be reduced to system (9.2)-(9.4) with a constant temperature, i.e.
Θ = 0. The damping effects in the workpiece were incorporated into the model
on the space discrete level, introducing a so-called Rayleigh damping term. Again,
the unknown damping parameters were determined by comparing simulated and
measured frequency-response functions. Recall that the vector of unknown param-
eters in (9.1) has been ﬁtted so that the multi-body system reproduces the measured
frequency-response functions at the tool centre point (TCP). Moreover, the cutting
force model employed in [22] to compute the stability limit illustrated in Figure
9.3 is similar to (9.8). Consequently, a system composed of the machine model and
a rigid workpiece almost has the same stability limits as the system analyzed to
compute the red line in Figure 9.3.
As observed in the experiments, a supple workpiece structure or the wrong choice
of cutting depth and spindle speed may destabilize the milling process. In order to
display these effects numerically we considered three examples.
In the ﬁrst simulation, the workpiece structure is rather stiff and the process
parameters have been chosen so that no chatter occurs (ap = 0.5 mm and n =
16,400 rpm, see Figure 9.3).
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
10
20
30
40
50
frequency / [Hz]
rel. force spectrum / [N / mm]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
Fig. 9.11 Relative cutting force spectrum and evolution of the uncut chip thickness corre-
sponding to a stable cut
Figure 9.11 illustrates the spectrum of the cutting force in x-direction divided
by ap and the evolution of the uncut chip thickness. Both diagrams indicate that the
process is stable. No chatter peaks arise in the force spectrum and the uncut chip
thickness converges to the stationary evolution.
For the second example, the spindle speed has been set to n = 17,800 rpm. In this
case, the process parameters correspond to unstable cutting conditions. Additional
chatter peaks occur in the relative force spectrum (spectrum of the cutting force in
x-direction divided by ap) depicted in Figure 9.12. According to the considerations

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
221
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
10
20
30
40
50
frequency / [Hz]
rel. force spectrum / [N / mm]
 
 
Simulation
Experiment
tooth passing freq.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
Fig. 9.12 Simulated and measured relative cutting force spectrum and evolution of the uncut
chip thickness corresponding to an unstable cut
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
frequency / [Hz]
rel. force spectrum / [N / mm]
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
time / [sec]
uncut chip thickness / [mm]
Fig. 9.13 Relative cutting force spectrum and evolution of the uncut chip thickness corre-
sponding to an unstable cut due to a supple workpiece
outlined in Section 9.2.4.2 and 9.2.3.2 the additional chatter peaks clearly indicate
that the corresponding process is unstable.
The evolution of the uncut chip thickness illustrated in Figure 9.12 conﬁrms this
result. In contrast to the evolution shown in Figure 9.11, the uncut chip thickness
does not converge to the stationary evolution but increases noticeably after a short
decay at the beginning and remains on a high level until the end of the simulation.
In the third example, the process parameters have been set to the same values as
in the ﬁrst simulation (ap = 0.5 mm and n = 16400 rpm). The stiff workpiece uti-
lized in the ﬁrst example has been replaced by a more supple structure. Especially
on top, the supple workpiece exhibits a high compliance, which can destabilize the
previously stable milling process.
Analyzing the evolution of the uncut chip thickness reveals that the process does
not converge to a stationary regime. Large workpiece oscillations lead to an increas-
ing uncut chip thickness and thus to increasing cutting forces. The additional chatter
peaks appearing in the relative force spectrum clearly indicate that the correspond-
ing process is unstable. In contrast to the second example, the highest chatter peak

222
D. H¨omberg et al.
is not located at 2,834 Hz at but at 408 Hz. Thus, the weak spot in the structure
leading to chatter vibrations is different in the two examples.
9.4
Conclusions
The goal of this chapter was the development of a complex milling model to in-
vestigate effects of machine and workpiece structure on the stability of milling pro-
cesses. The experimental analysis in Section 9.2 reveals that the stability limits can
be increased by pre-heating the workpiece. Moreover, it illustrates how milling pro-
cesses can become unstable due to a lack of workpiece stiffness. The experiments
conducted for the identiﬁcation of machine parameters display that the frequency-
response functions at the TCP strongly depend on the excitation method and vary
with the angular spindle position. The simulations in Section 9.3 clearly demonstrate
that the developed model is capable of reproducing the instability effects observed
in the experiments. For the ﬁrst time a new stability analysis method allows the
determination of stability limits of large DDE-systems with periodic coefﬁcients.
The results are promising and open up various directions for future research.
A challenging task would be to investigate the stability of milling processes with
respect to variations in the machine design.
Finally, from the application point of view, an efﬁcient numerical tool for the
systematic derivation of stability diagrams is most desirable. The developed stability
analysis tool is a ﬁrst step in this direction. The improvement of the numerics and the
exploitation of model reduction techniques to increase the efﬁciency of the method
will be subject to further research.
References
1. Altintas, Y.: Manufacturing Automation–Metal Cutting Mechanics, Machine Tool Vibra-
tions, and CNC Design. Cambridge University Press (2000)
2. Altintas, Y., Budak, E.: Analytical prediction of stability lobes in milling. Ann. of the
CIRP 44(1), 357–362 (1995)
3. Altintas, Y., Weck, M.: Chatter stability of metal cutting and grinding. Ann. of the
CIRP 53(2), 619–642 (2004)
4. Amin, A.K.M.N., Abdelgadir, M.: The Effect of Preheating of Work Material on Chatter
During End Milling of Medium Carbon Steel Performed on a Vertical Machining Center
(VMC). J. of Manuf. Sci. and Eng. 125, 674–680 (2003)
5. Budak, E.: Mechanics and dynamics of milling thin walled structures. Ph.D. Thesis,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada (1994)
6. Bueler, E.: Error Bounds for Approximate Eigenvalues of Periodic-Coefﬁcient Linear
Delay-Differential Equations. SIAM J. Numer. Anal. 45(6), 2510–2536 (2007)
7. Bremer, H., Pfeiffer, F.: Elastische Mehrk¨orpersysteme. B. G. Teubner, Stuttgart (1992)
8. Campa, F.J., L´opez de Lacalle, L.N., Lamikiz, A., S´anchez, J.A.: Selection of cutting
conditions for a stable milling of ﬂexible parts with bull-nose end mills. J. of Mater.
Proc. Technol. 191, 279–282 (2007)

9
Development of a Stability Prediction Tool
223
9. Campomanes, M.L., Altintas, J.: An improved Time Domain Simulation for Dy-
namic Milling at Small Radial Immersions. Transactions of the ASME (2003),
doi:10.1115/1.1580852
10. Chelminski, K., H¨omberg, D., Rott, O.: On a thermomechanical milling model. Nonlin-
ear Analysis Real World Applications 12, 615–632 (2010)
11. Ewins, D.J.: Modal Testing: Theory and Practice. Res. Stud. Press LTD. (1986)
12. Faassen, R.P.H., van de Wouw, N., Oosterling, J.A.J., Nijmeijer, H.: Prediction of regen-
erative chatter by modelling and analysis of high-speed milling. Int. J. of Mach. Tools &
Manuf. 43, 1437–1446 (2003)
13. Faassen, R.P.H.: Chatter Prediction and Control for High-Speed Milling - Modelling and
Experiments. Dissertation, TU Eindhoven, Netherlands (2007)
14. Gatto, A., Iuliano, L.: Chip Formation Analysis in High Speed Machining of a Nickel
Base Superalloy with Silicon Carbide Whisker-Reinforced Alumina. Int. J. of Mach.
Tools & Manuf. 34, 1147–1161 (1994)
15. Haupt, P.: Continuum Mechanics and Theory of Materials. Springer, Berlin (2000)
16. Hughes, T.J.R.: The ﬁnite element method. Dover Publications, New York (2000)
17. Insperger, T., St´ep´an, G.: Stability of the milling process. Period. Polytech. – Mech.
Eng. 44(1), 47–57 (2000)
18. Insperger, T., St´ep´an, G.: Updated semi-discretization method for periodic delay-
differential equations with discrete delay. Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 61(1), 117–141
(2004)
19. Insperger, T., Mann, B.P., Surmann, T., St´ep´an, G.: On the chatter frequencies of milling
processes with runout. Int. J. of Mach. Tools & Manuf. 48, 1081–1089 (2008)
20. Lee, E.H., Schafer, B.W.: The Theory of plasticity applied to a problem of machining.
Journal of Applied Mechanics 18, 405–413 (1951)
21. Mann, B., Insperger, T., Bayly, P.V., St´ep´an, G., Schmitz, T.L., Peters, D.A.: Effects of
Radial Immersion and Cutting Direction on Chatter Stability in End-Milling. In: N.N.
(ed.) Proceedings of the International Mechanical Engineering Conference and Exposi-
tion (IMECE), New Orleans, LA (2002)
22. Rasper, P., Rott, O., H¨omberg, D., Uhlmann, E.: Analysis of uncertainties in the stability
prediction for milling processes. In: Altintas, Y. (ed.) Proceedings, CIRP 2nd Interna-
tional Conference Process Machine Interactions (2010)
23. Rott, O., Rasper, P., H¨omberg, D., Uhlmann, E.: A milling model with thermal effects in-
cluding the dynamics of machine and work piece. In: Denkena, B. (ed.) Proceedings, 1st
International Conference on Process Machine Interactions, PZH Produktionstechnisches
Zentrum GmbH, Hannover-Garbsen (2008)
24. Rott, O., Jarlebring, E.: An iterative method for the multipliers of periodic delay-
differential equations and the analysis of a PDE milling model. In: Vyhlidal, T. (ed.)
Proceedings of the 9th IFAC Workshop on Time Delay Systems, Prague (2010)
25. Schulz, H.: Hochgeschwindigkeitsfr¨asen metallischer und nichtmetallischer Werkstoffe.
Carl Hanser Verlag, M¨unchen (1989)
26. Shaw, M.C.: Metal Cutting Principles. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2005)
27. Sims, N.D.: The self-excitation damping ratio: A chatter criterion for time-domain
milling simulations. J. of Manuf. Sci. and Eng., Trans. of the ASME 127(3), 433–445
(2005)
28. Uhlmann, E., Mense, C.: Analysis of the Milling Machine Operation Behaviour for Pro-
cess Stability and Machine Tool Optimisation. In: N.N. (ed.) Proceedings of 10th CIRP
Int. Workshop on Model. of Mach. Oper., Reggio Calabria, Italy (2007)
29. Uhlmann, E., Rasper, P.: Temperaturabh¨angiges Stabilit¨atsverhalten–Untersuchung des
Temperatureinﬂusses auf das Stabilit¨atsverhalten beim Umfangsstirnfr¨asen. In: wt Werk-
stattstechnik online, D¨usseldorf, Germany, vol. 7(8), pp. 464–469 (2009)

224
D. H¨omberg et al.
30. Venuvinod, P.K., Lau, W.S., Narasimha Reddy, P., Rubenstein, C.: On the Formation of a
Fluid Film at the Chip Tool Interface in Rotary Machining. Ann. of the CIRP 32, 59–64
(1982)
31. Weck, M., Teipel, K.: Dynamisches Verhalten spanender Werkzeugmaschinen. Springer,
Berlin (1977)
32. Weinert, K., Surmann, T.: Geometric Simulation of the Milling Process for Free Formed
Surfaces. In: Weinert, K. (ed.) Simulation Aided Ofﬂine Process Design and Optimiza-
tion in Manufacturing Sculptured Surfaces, Witten (2003)
33. Zatarain, M., Munoa, J., Peign´e, G., Insperger, T.: Analysis of the Inﬂuence of Mill Helix
Angle on Chatter Stability. Ann. of the CIRP 55(1) (2006)
34. Zeng, W., Peng, X., Leu, M.C., Zhang, W.: A Novel Contour Generation Algorithm
for Surface Reconstruction From Dexel Data. Journal of Computing and Information
Science in Engineering 7, 203–210 (2007)

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 225–244. 
springerlink.com                                               © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 10 
Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
K. Großmann and M. Löser 
Abstract. Chatter vibrations during machining lead to poor workpiece surfaces and 
increased tool wear. In the worst case, the tools and even the main spindle can be 
damaged. Nowadays, the surface regeneration is considered to be the main effect 
causing chatter instabilities. Regenerative chatter is initiated by repetitive tooth en-
gagement where the currently engaged tooth cuts the surface produced by the pre-
ceding tooth. In a stability lobe diagram (SLD), the stable and unstable areas are 
separated by the graph of a critical cutting parameter plotted against the spindle 
speed. Stability lobe diagrams can be used to optimize machining processes in 
terms of maximizing material removal rate under stable cutting conditions. These 
SLDs are computed by time domain simulations. However, this consumes a lot of 
computational time. Thus, several time efficient algorithms in discrete time as well 
as frequency domain have been developed in the last decades. This chapter scruti-
nizes under what conditions different algorithms in frequency domain can be  
applied. The processes are separated regarding cutting conditions and dynamic be-
havior so that the most time efficient algorithm can be chosen for each class. 
10.1   Introduction 
To predict the stability boundaries of cutting processes the interactions within the 
closed-loop of the coupled sub-systems machine and process is examined, 
Fig. 10.1. Regenerative chatter is caused by the repetitive engagement of a tooth 
into the surface cut by the preceding tooth. In Fig. 10.1, this is represented by the 
time delay T. 
Δh(t)
Δh(t,t-T)




y
x






y
x
F
F
ap
ΔFP
Fx,y_stat
( )
(
)
( )
(
)





ω
ω
ω
ω
j
G
j
G
j
G
j
G
yy
yx
xy
xx
T
+ -






Fy
Fx
a
a
[
]
a
a
y
x
kt, kr
Machine
Process
 
Fig. 10.1 Closed loop of the process-machine interactions [1] 

226 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
The figure shows an example where the process machine interactions in x-y-
plane are investigated and the z direction is neglected. The dynamic behavior of 
the machine is represented by the transfer function matrix G(jω), which contains 
the direct transfer functions and the cross transfer functions in x and y direction 
respectively. However, the process force is a function of chip thickness h. Thus, 
the deflections in x-y-plane have to be transformed into the direction of chip 
thickness h. This is conducted by means of so-called directional coefficients (ax, 
ay). With the dynamic chip thickness Δh the dynamic process forces ΔFp can be 
computed by applying an empirical cutting force model. Here, this is represented 
by the tangential coefficient kt and the radial coefficient kr. The process forces 
now have to be transformed into x-y-plane again to close the loop of the process 
machine interaction. 
One method to compute stability boundaries of this closed loop is to model and 
simulate the interactions in time domain. Modeling non-linearities in the time do-
main is much easier than in the frequency domain; at the same time, however, the 
computation time to calculate SLDs increases significantly. One reason for this is 
that a certain amount of “real time” has to be simulated to ensure the detection of 
unstable cutting using time signals.  
It is more time efficient to analyse the process machine interactions in fre-
quency domain. Analytical methods in frequency domain are the oldest algorithms 
to predict the stability boundaries and are based on the research works by Tlusty 
and Polacek as well as by Tobias and Fishwick [2, 3]. Algorithms in frequency 
domain apply stability criteria like the Nyquist criterion on the open loop transfer 
function of the process-machine interactions, [1, 4]. In milling operations, the di-
rectional coefficients shown in Fig. 10.1 are time-variant and vary periodically 
with the tooth-passing frequency. To apply the methods in frequency domain av-
erage directional coefficients are used. Since the average directional coefficients 
equal zeroth order Fourier coefficients this method is called zeroth order approxi-
mation (ZOA-method). 
Operations with highly intermittent cutting conditions, such as low immersion 
milling, show very strong time variance, which is assumed to affect the process 
stability. In these cases, the assumption of constant average directional coeffi-
cients may lead to incorrect predictions of stability boundaries. Various authors 
have presented computational time-efficient methods in discrete time domain to 
determine stability lobe diagrams for highly intermittent cutting operations. Bayly 
et al. have presented a time-finite element analysis [5], Insperger and Stepan have 
developed the semi-discretization method [6]. 
To take the time variant behavior of directional coefficients in frequency do-
main into account Budak and Altintas expanded their single frequency solution to 
the multi-frequency solution [7]. This was later on applied to low immersion mil-
ling by Merdol and Altintas [8]. 
Most of the studies that apply these advanced time efficient methods focus on 
the investigation of single influences (for example: single degree of freedom be-
havior, helix angle, low immersion milling). In this chapter, the complex influence 
of different effects is discussed for methods working in frequency domain. ZOA 
method and two slightly different methods based on the multi-frequency solution 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
227
 
are investigated. The applicability of these methods is scrutinized for a pattern of 
different cutting conditions and different characteristics of the dynamic machine 
behavior. The presented works were conducted within a project of the priority 
program SPP 1180. One goal of the project is to define classification numbers, 
which allow the selection of an appropriate algorithm before the computation of a 
stability lobe diagram. 
10.2   Computation of SLDs in Frequency Domain 
10.2.1   Directed Frequency Response Functions 
The open loop transfer function of the process machine interactions can be written 
as: 
(
)
)
i(
G
)
e
1(
a
j
G
g
T
j
p
0
ω
ω
ω
⋅
−
⋅
=
−
 
(10.1) 
with 
 
T 
delay 
Z
n
1
T
⋅
=
 
 
 
Z 
number of teeth 
 
 
n 
spindle speed 
 
 
ωT 
tooth passing frequency 
Z
n
2
T
⋅
⋅
= π
ω
 
Here, Gg(iw) is the directed frequency response function. The Nyquist criterion 
can be applied to this transfer function: 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
0
j
G
Im
unstable
1
boundary
stability
1
stable
1
j
G
Re
0
0
=



>
=
<
=
ω
ω
 
(10.2) 
Simply spoken, the Nyquist criterion checks if an input signal leaves the open loop 
without phase shift (imaginary part equals zero) and amplified (real part > 1). 
Since the output signal is equivalent to the input signal of the subsequent pass 
through of the loop the signal will be more and more amplified and the closed 
loop becomes unstable. 
In peripheral milling this criterion cannot be applied under any condition since 
the coordinates in the x-y-plane are coupled, Fig. 10.2. The simplest approach for 
the solution of this problem is by handling the interaction not in the machine coor-
dinates x and y but by investigating the transfer function at the direction of the 
chip thickness h. Therefore, the deflections are transformed into the direction of 
chip thickness and the chip thickness-dependent process forces are transformed 
back into the direction of the machine coordinates. The transformation is carried 
out by so-called directional coefficients [1]. 
Regarding regenerative chatter the static process forces and therefore the static 
chip thickness can be neglected, [4]. The static chip thickness is the chip thickness 
that would occur without relative displacements between workpiece and tool. The  
 

228 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
transformation
ϕ
ϕe
ϕ
hstat
ϕz
f z
workpiece
tool
Fy
Fx
Ft
Fr
Fr
Ft
Δx
Δy
Δh
Δh= sinϕ·Δx + cosϕ·Δy
Ft= Kt·ap·Δh
Fr= Kr·ap·Δh
Fx= -cosϕ·Ft - sinϕ·Fr
Fy=  sinϕ·Ft - cosϕ·Fr
 
Fig. 10.2 Cutting conditions in peripheral milling 
 
dynamic chip thickness Δh is the change of h caused by the present deflection and 
the deflection at the time of the preceding tooth engagement. 
[
]
[
]
( )
( )
(
) 









−
−
−




⋅
=




Δ
Δ
⋅
=
Δ
T
t
y
)
T
t(
x
t
y
t
x
cos
sin
y
x
cos
sin
h
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
 
(10.3) 
Taking into account that the deflections are the reaction of forces acting on the 
flexible machine structure this can be written in frequency domain. 
[
]
[
]




⋅




⋅
⋅
−
=
Δ




⋅




⋅
⋅
−
=
Δ
−
−
y
x
yy
yx
xy
xx
y
x
T
j
y
x
yy
yx
xy
xx
T
j
F
F
G
G
G
G
a
a
)
e
1(
h
F
F
G
G
G
G
cos
sin
)
e
1(
h
ω
ω
ϕ
ϕ
 
(10.4) 
The dynamic process forces are a function of dynamic chip thickness Δh: 
h
a
a
a
h
cos
k
sin
k
sin
k
cos
k
a
F
F
Fy
Fx
p
r
t
r
t
p
y
x
Δ
⋅




⋅
=
Δ
⋅




⋅
−
⋅
⋅
−
⋅
−
⋅
=




ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
 
(10.5)  
Equalizing the vector of process forces in (10.4) with (10.5) and taking the time-
delayed re-engagement of the subsequent tooth into account leads to the transfer 
function of the open loop where Gg denotes the directed frequency response 
function: 
[
]
(
)
(
)
g
p
yy
yy
xy
yx
yx
xy
xx
xx
p
0
yy
Fy
y
xy
Fy
x
yx
Fx
y
xx
Fx
x
p
0
Fy
Fx
yy
yx
xy
xx
y
x
j
p
0
G
D
a
G
a
G
a
G
a
G
a
D
a
G
a
a
G
a
a
G
a
a
G
a
a
D
a
a
a
G
G
G
G
a
a
)
e
1(
a
⋅
⋅
=
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
=
+
+
+
⋅
⋅
=




⋅




⋅
⋅
−
⋅
=
−
G
G
G
ωτ
 
(10.6) 
The directional coefficients depend on the immersion angle ϕ and are therefore 
time-dependent. So, to apply (10.6) in frequency domain average directional 
coefficients have to be used. Applying the Nyquist criterion and rearranging (10.6) 
gives the frequency-dependent critical depth of cut apcrit, [1] 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
229
 
))
j(
G
Re(
2
1
)
(
a
g
pcrit
ω
ω
⋅
−
=
 
(10.7) 
Since only positive cutting depths are relevant for cutting operations only frequen-
cies with negative real parts of the directed frequency are considered. Further-
more, the relation between chatter frequency and spindle speed can be derived 
from the Nyquist criterion: 
(
)
{
}
(
)
{
}





−
⋅
=
ω
ω
π
j
G
Im
j
G
Re
arctan
1
m
z
f
60
n
g
g
 
(10.8) 
With (10.7) and (10.8) the relation between cutting depth and spindle speed and, 
consequently, the stability lobe diagram (SLD) can be computed. For this purpose, 
the dynamic behaviour of the machine has to be assumed as constant within the 
observed range of spindle speed. 
(10.7) shows that only frequencies are relevant, whose real parts of the directed 
frequency response function are negative. For a multi-degree of freedom system 
(MDoF system) it is possible to divide the directed transfer function Gg into sec-
tions, which can be assigned to a specified mode respectively. For each of these 
sections a mode-dependent stability boundary can be computed. The total stability 
lobe diagram can now be determined by choosing the minimum of the mode-
dependent boundaries at every spindle speed. However, it has to mentioned that 
this is only valid, if the assumption of averaged directional coefficients can be 
made and if the directional coefficients are used to compute the directed transfer 
function Gg as shown in (10.6). The directed transfer function Gg takes the cou-
pling of x and y direction into account. Insperger and Stepan have shown that 
computing stability lobe diagrams for x and y direction separately by neglecting 
the geometrical coupling and superposing these SLDs will lead to an incorrect 
prediction of stability boundaries, [9]. 
10.2.2   Time Variant Behavior  
In milling operations, the directional coefficients are time-variant and vary period-
ically with the tooth passing frequency. Using average directional coefficients al-
lows a time-efficient computation of the process stability in the frequency domain, 
as shown in the section before. 
As mentioned in the introduction, several authors have introduced computa-
tional time-efficient algorithms in discrete time domain to take these effects into 
account. However, since this chapter deals with the computation of stability in 
frequency domain the following section focuses on an algorithm based on the mul-
ti-frequency solution presented by Altintas and Merdol [8]. 
Altintas and Merdol [8] utilize the fact that the directional coefficients are peri-
odic with tooth-passing frequency ωT. Because of this they can be expanded into a 
Fourier series.  

230 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 


−
∞
−∞
=
⋅
=
⋅
=
T
0
t
jr
xx
r,
xx
r
t
jr
r,
xx
xx
dt
e
)t(
a
T
1
a
,
e
a
)t(
a
T
T
ω
ω
 
(10.9) 
Taking into account that the relation between time and immersion angle ϕ is given 
by the tooth-passing frequency and that the directional coefficients are zero, if the 
teeth are not engaged, the Fourier coefficients can be written as [8]: 

−
⋅
=
ex
st
d
e
)
(
a
2
Z
a
jrZ
xx
r,
xx
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ ϕ
ϕ
π
 
(10.10) 
Where ϕst denotes the angle where the teeth engage the workpiece and ϕex denotes 
the angle where the teeth exit the workpiece. Since the Fourier coefficients of ze-
roth order are equivalent to the average directional coefficients the methods using 
average directional coefficients are called zeroth order approximation (ZOA). 
Fig. 10.3 depicts an example of absolute values of Fourier coefficients. 
 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
r= 0
r= 1
r= 2
r= 3
r= 4
Fourier coefficients of 
directional coefficients
up milling
dtool= 12 mm
λ= 0°
ae= 2 mm
number of teeth Z= 4
axx
ayy
a [10
8·N/m²]
 
Fig. 10.3 Example for Absolute Values of Fourier Coefficients 
By applying the Fourier series the process forces as a function of the change of 
the relative deflection between tool and work piece can be written as follows: 
)t(
e
a
)t(
r
r
T
h
h
r
t
jr
r
p
x
A
F
Δ
⋅







⋅
=

−
=
ω
 
(10.11) 
This relation in time domain can be transformed into frequency domain by using 
the Laplace transformation. The Laplace transforms are given by: 
( )
{
}
( )
(
)
{
} (
)
(
)
(
)
( )
{
}
(
)
(
)
T
t
jr
T
j
r
j
t
e
L
j
D
j
e
1
T
t
t
L
t
x
L
T
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
−
=
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
−
=
−
−
=
Δ
x
x
x
x
x
x
 
(10.12) 
Applying these Laplace transformed is slightly different to the approach intro-
duced in [8] but leads to the same results. 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
231
 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)








⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=








+
−
⋅
+
−
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
−








−
⋅
−
⋅
⋅
⋅
=








−
⋅
⋅
⋅
=




−
=
+
+
−
=
−
=
−
=
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
h
h
r
r
p
r
p
r
p
p
h
h
r
T
T
r
p
T
h
h
r
T
T
r
p
h
h
r
T
r
p
D
a
F
r
p
j
r
p
j
D
a
)
p
j(
r
j
r
j
D
a
)
j(
r
j
D
a
)
j(
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
F
G
A
F
x
A
F
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
 
(10.13) 
For a Fourier order hr=1 follows: 
















⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
+






⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
+






⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=






−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
2
2
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
p
1
0
1
D
a
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
G
A
F
F
F
(10.14) 
The right side of (10.14) shows forces F with indices of 
(
)1
h
r
r +
±
=
. Since the 
absolute values of Ar converge to zero for increasing order r the terms with indices 
of order greater than hr are set to be zero. It follows: 
h
h
p
0
in
h
h
h
p
out
h
1
0
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
0
p
1
0
1
D
a
D
a
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
D
a
F
G
A
G
F
G
A
F
F
F
F
G
G
G
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
F
F
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
=






⋅










⋅










⋅
⋅
=






−
−
−
−
−
 
(10.15) 
This leads to the transfer function of the open loop. Therein, the coordinates are 
coupled. To apply the Nyquist criterion the investigated system needs only one 
coordinate or – in the case of a multi variable system – the coordinates have to be 
decoupled. The coordinates can be decoupled by a modal transformation. The 
modal coordinates correspond to the eigenvalues of G0. The Nyquist criterion can 
now be applied to every one of the ζ·(2·r+1) eigenvalues. ζ is the number of the 
structural coordinates (ζ= 2 for a stability analysis in the x-y-plane), [8]. 
Since the depth of cut is a scalar value the transfer function can be scaled  
with ap. 

232 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
(
)
h
h
0
p
0
D
eig
a
1
G
A
G
G
⋅
⋅
=
⋅
=
 
(10.16) 
Fig. 10.4 shows an example of the real and imaginary parts of decoupled transfer 
functions. In this example, the dynamic behaviour has relevant eigenfrequencies of 
up to 5 kHz. Since the matrix of transfer functions contains the transfer functions at 
frequencies shifted by multiples of the tooth passing frequency at a specified fre-
quency, the superposition of transfer functions is periodic with tooth passing fre-
quency. So the stability analysis need not be carried out for the whole bandwidth of 
5 kHz but only for a frequency band of the tooth-passing frequency ft. 
 
-100
0
100
-100
-50
0
50
100
Im(G0) [m
-1]
Re(G0) [m
-1]
-100
0
100
Re(G0) [m
-1]
0
1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
-100
0
100
f [Hz]
Im(G0) [m
-1]
ft
 
Fig. 10.4 Decoupled and Scaled Transfer Functions of the Open Loop 
These sets of transfer functions have to be computed for every discrete spindle 
the stability boundary has to be determined at. The stability boundaries are given 
by the reciprocals of the real parts of the intersections between transfer function 
and real axis. In [10] Altintas et al. assert that “the most conservative and positive 
depth of cut must be considered as a final solution.” So, the critical depth of cut is 
given by: 
(
)
(
)max
0
crit
_
p
0
Im
Re
1
a
=
=
G
 
(10.17) 
Fig. 10.5 demonstrates the computation of the stability boundary for the example 
mentioned before. The relevant parts of the transfer functions are drawn as bold 
lines and the critical depth of cut is ap_crit= 11.2 mm. 
However, the assumption that the critical depth of cut is given by the most con-
servative real part, is not correct in every case. However, if all intersections with 
the real axis are analyzed, the algorithm can also be used, if multiple stability 
boundaries occur at a specified spindle speed. All algorithms in frequency domain  
 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
233
 
80
90
100
-10
-5
0
5
10
Im(G0) [m-1]
1/apcrit= 89.1 m-1
apcrit= 11.2 mm
Re(G0) [m
-1]
-100
0
100
-100
-50
0
50
100
Im(G0) [m-1]
Re(G0) [m
-1]
 
Fig. 10.5 Determination of Critical Depth of Cut 
 
 
apply the simplified Nyquist criterion shown in (10.2). The complete criterion 
analyzes not only the intersection of the transfer locus with the real axis. It says 
the process is stable, if the Nyquist point is encircled counter-clockwise at least 
once. An intersection with the real axis where the imaginary part changes from 
positive to negative values will not lead to an unstable process. 
Fig. 10.6 shows a simple example to demonstrate this. It depicts a section of a 
SLD for a one-dimensional process (only x-direction has been taken into account). 
The dynamic system has an SDoF behavior (m= 0.572 kg; d= 140 Ns/m; 
c= 2.2·107 N/m). The cutting force coefficients are kt= 3.6·109 N/m² and 
kr= 2.25·109 N/m². The figure compares the stability boundaries determined by 
time domain simulations with the boundaries determined by the multi-frequency 
solution. The figure also shows the transfer locus for a spindle speed of nspin-
dle= 10,600 rpm. Point I marks a counter-clockwise intersection and the process 
gets unstable at a depth of cut of apcrit= 7.3 mm. The clockwise intersection at 
point II compensates the instability and the process becomes stable again up to the 
depth of cut marked by point III. 
10.2.3   Cutting-Depth-Dependent Behavior 
Not only the radial immersion has an influence on the “smoothness” of the cutting 
forces. An increasing helix angle will cause forces that change less rapidly over 
time. Assuming the parameters of the process force model are unaffected by the 
helix angle, the average forces – i. e. the zeroth order Fourier coefficients - are al-
so independent from the helix angle. However, the higher order Fourier coeffi-
cients are influenced by the helix angle. This can be illustrated by the process 
forces. 
 
 
 

234 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
 
 
1
1.05
1.1
x 10
4
0
5
10
15
20
-400
-200
0
200
-500
0
500
Im(G0) [m-1]
Re(G0) [m-1]
0
50
100
150
-20
-10
0
10
20
Im(G0) [m-1]
Re(G0) [m-1]
I
II
III
I
II
III
nspindle= 10600 rpm
apcrit= 16.4 mm
process gets stable
process gets unstable
process gets unstable
apcrit= 12.4 mm
apcrit= 7.3 mm
frequency domain
time domain
increasing depth of cut
 
Fig. 10.6 Multiple Stability Boundaries at one Spindle Speed 
 
Fig. 10.7 shows simulated process forces Fy for different helix angles at axial 
cutting depths ap= 10 mm and ap= 20 mm but in both cases for the same radial 
depth of cut ae= 3mm. The figure also depicts the spectra of the process forces. 
For the straight fluted mill there is a sharp change of the forces when the cutting 
edge leaves the workpiece. The force at zero frequency (which equals the average 
force) is independent of the helix angle. The forces at the tooth-passing frequency 
and their harmonics decrease with increasing helix angle. The decreasing effect is 
more significant for the axial depth of cut of ap= 20 mm. 
The magnitudes of the process forces at tooth-passing frequency and their har-
monics correspond to the Fourier coefficients. Thus, for helicoidal mills the values 
of the Fourier coefficients depend on the axial depth of cut ap. In this case, the 
value of the Fourier coefficients is given by [11]: 
p
/
a
2
r
j
e
1
p
p
/
a
2
rj
r
*
r
p
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
−
⋅
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
⋅
−
π
π
A
A
 
(10.18) 
 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
235
 
 
average force
Fy(t) [N]
0
5
10
0
50
100
150
200
250
t [ms]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
20
40
60
80
100
f [Hz]
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
50
100
150
200
f [Hz]
0
5
10
0
100
200
300
400
500
t [ms]
Fy(t) [N]
Fy(f) [N]
Fy(f) [N]
average force
ap= 10 mm
ap= 20 mm
λ= 0
λ= 10°
λ= 20°
λ= 30°
 
Fig. 10.7 Process Forces and Spectra of Process Forces 
 
 
Ar represents the Fourier coefficients for the straight-fluted mill and p is the 
pitch of a tool with Z teeth. 
)
tan(
Z
d
p
Tool
λ
π
⋅
⋅
=
 
(10.19) 
With increasing axial depth of cut the values of the Fourier coefficients decrease. 
The Fourier coefficients differ for the different helix angles. The zeroth order 
coefficients are independent of the helix angle but the values of the higher order 
coefficient decrease with an increasing helix angle λ. 
Similar to (10.15), the open loop transfer function can be written as follows: 
h
h
*
p
0
D
a
G
A
G
⋅
⋅
⋅
=
 
(10.20) 
Decoupling the coordinates in (10.20) and applying the Nyquist criterion could 
still be carried out by computing the eigenvalues, as described in the chapter be-
fore. This can be achieved by computing the eigenvalues for the characteristic eq-
uation 
[
]
0
det
h
h
=
Λ
+
G
A
I
 
(10.21) 
with 
(
)
T
j
p
e
1
a
ω
−
=
Λ
, [8].  
 

236 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
However, if the decoupled system has to be computed for every ap, it is less 
time consuming to apply a different approach. For a multi-variable system the sta-
bility analysis can be carried out for the determinant of the matrix of open loop 
transfer functions minus identity matrix: 
I
G
G
−
=
0
0
det
 
(10.22) 
The behavior of the whole system is therefore summarized in a transfer function 
for a single coordinate. The open loop is stable, if the transfer function does not 
encircle the point {0, 0·i}. This way, the determination of stability boundaries is 
numerically easier, especially for a Fourier series expansion of higher order.  
Since the elements of matrix of Fourier coefficients 
h
*
A
 depend on the axial 
depth of cut the transfer function cannot be scaled with ap as described by (10.16). 
Thus, applying the Nyquist criterion only provides information, if a specified 
combination of spindle speed and axial depth of cut results in a stable process or 
not. A change of axial depth of cut ap leads to different transfer locuses and the 
stability boundary at a given spindle speed has to be determined iteratively. In  
the following sections, the above-described algorithm is called Multifreq_det  
algorithm. 
10.2.4   Summary 
In the previous three sections, different algorithms for the computation of stability 
lobe diagrams have been shown. The first and simplest one is the well-known ze-
roths order approximation (ZOA). The last two approaches are expanded versions 
of the multi-frequency solution presented by Merdol and Altintas. One of them 
uses the computation of eigenvalues to decouple the system of multiple “frequen-
cy coordinates” (Multifreq_eig) and the other one computes the determinants of 
the transfer matrices (Multifreq_det). Which algorithm is best suitable for the de-
termination of a SLD depends on the effects that have to be taken into account. 
However, the more complex the algorithm gets, the more computational time is 
needed. But even the algorithm for a depth-of-cut-dependent behavior is less time-
consuming than time domain simulations. In the following section, these algo-
rithms are applied to cutting operations with different process and machine  
behavior.  
10.3   Application 
10.3.1   Models of Process and Machine 
The following investigations use the example of an up-milling operation with cy-
lindrical end mills. Table 10.1 shows the parameters of this reference process as  
 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
237
 
well as the coefficients of the process force model. To describe the process forces 
a linear force model was used [12]. The parameters were conducted by means of 
cutting tests for aluminium AA7075 workpieces. 
 
 
Table 10.1 Parameters of the Reference Process 
 
Process 
Up-milling 
Tool 
Number of teeth 
Z= 4 
Tool diameter 
dTool= 12 mm 
Workpiece 
Material 
AlZn5,5MgCu (AA7075) 
Tangential force coefficient 
kt= 830 N/mm² 
Radial force coefficient 
kr= 225 N/mm² 
 
The dynamic behavior is represented by modal models. The parameters of these 
models have been identified from measured frequency response functions of dif-
ferent spindle tool systems. In all cases, cross compliances have been neglected. 
The frequency response functions are therefore computed as follows: 
0
G
G
c
d
j
m
1
G
c
d
j
m
1
G
yx
xy
n
1
m
m
,y
m
,y
2
m
,y
yy
n
1
m
m
,
x
m
,
x
2
m
,
x
xx
y
x
=
=
+
+
−
=
+
+
−
=


=
=
ω
ω
ω
ω
 
(10.23) 
with number of eigenmodes n, the modal parameters mass m, damping d and  
stiffness c. 
10.3.2   Rotational Symmetric SDoF System 
The single degree of freedom system is meant here as the single degree of freedom 
behavior in the x and y-directions respectively. Such a behavior with just one do-
minant eigenfrequency is typical for tools with a large length-to-diameter ratio. 
Fig. 10.8 shows the measured frequency response function of a carbide dummy 
tool with a ratio of l/d= 8. It shows a dominant eigenfrequency at 728 Hz. The re-
sponse functions are nearly the same for x and y- direction. The modal parameters 
identified from the measured data and used for the computation of stability lobe 
diagrams are shown in Table 10.2. 

238 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
400
600
800
1000
1200
0
1
2
3
f [Hz]
compliance [µm/N]
 
 
Gxx
Gyy
 
Fig. 10.8 Reference for a SDoF Behavior 
Table 10.2 Modal Parameters of the SDoF System 
 
 
Gxx 
Gyy 
Mass m [kg] 
0.922 
0.925 
Damping d [kg/s] 
69 
69 
Stiffness c [N/m] 
1.93·107 
1.95·107 
 
For the example of SDoF, several authors showed  systems that may occur at 
small radial immersion additional stability lobes. These additional stability lobes 
cannot be predicted by the ZOA-method. Zatarain et al. [11] investigated the in-
fluence of the helix angle on chatter stability by using the multi-frequency solution 
by Merdol and Altintas as well as the semi-discretization method by Insperger and 
Stepan. This work showed that for increasing helix angles the additional lobes 
transform into closed instability islands. The same behavior can be shown for this 
example here. 
 
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
 
 
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
Multifreq_eig
time domain
 
Fig 10.9 SLDs of the SDoF System, λ= 0°, ae= 0.5 mm  

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
239
 
Fig. 10.9 shows a comparison of SLDs computed by time domain simulation 
and by the Multifreq_eig algorithm. The time domain and the frequency domain 
solution are in good agreement and show the additional stability lobes. 
 
Multifreq_eig
λ= 0°
Multifreq_det
λ= 30°
ZOA
2.5
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
 
Fig. 10.10 SLDs of the SDoF System, ae= 0.5 mm 
With increasing helix angle, the additional stability lobes transform into unsta-
ble islands within the stable area. This can be shown with the multi-frequency so-
lution as well as by time domain simulations. Since the directional coefficients 
depend on depth of cut the Multifreq_det algorithm has to be used in the case of a 
helix angle λ= 30°. For a helix angle of λ= 0 the Multifreq_eig algorithm is used. 
For a helix angle of λ= 30° the ZOA algorithm shows nearly the same results as 
the multi-frequency solution, except the unstable islands, Fig. 10.10. 
 
Multifreq_eig
λ= 0°
Multifreq_det
λ= 30°
ZOA
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
 
Fig. 10.11 SLDs of the SDoF System ae= 3 mm 
For larger radial immersions the time variant behavior of the directional coeffi-
cients gains less impact on the stability boundaries. At a radial depth of cut of 
ae= 3 mm, no impact of the helix angle can be shown and the ZOA algorithm  
results in practically identical stability boundaries to the multi-frequency solution, 

240 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
Fig. 10.11. In this case, the fast ZOA method can be applied without loosing accu-
racy of the predicted stability boundaries. 
10.3.3   Rotational Symmetric MDoF System 
As shown in the example, in the previous chapter the dynamic behavior of spindle 
tool systems with long slender tools is dominated by the eigenmodes of the free pro-
jecting part of the tool. Tools with a lesser length-to-diameter ratio eigenmodes of 
the spindle and the spindle stock gain more impact on the dynamic behavior at the 
tool centre point (TCP). This results in the behavior of a multi-degree of freedom 
system (MDoF System) with several modes that may cause chatter instability. 
 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
f [Hz]
compliance [µm/N]
 
Fig. 10.12 Dynamic Behavior of the Rotational Symmetric MDoF System 
Fig. 10.12 depicts a frequency response function in y-direction measured at a 
tool with a length-to-diameter ratio of l/d=2.5. Assuming a rotational symmetric 
system, the frequency response function in x-direction is set to be equal to the re-
sponse function in y-direction. 
 
Multifreq_eig
λ= 0°
Multifreq_det
λ= 30°
ZOA
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
 
Fig. 10.13 SLDs of the Symmetric MDoF System, ae= 3 mm 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
241
 
The investigated SDoF system has no impact on the stability boundaries at a 
radial depth of cut of ae= 3 mm. This is different for the symmetric MDoF system. 
For the straight-fluted mill an impact on the stability can be seen around the spin-
dle speed of about 20,000 rpm. However, for a helix angle of λ= 30° the multi-
frequency solution is in good agreement with the stability boundaries obtained by 
the ZOA method, Fig 10.13. An increase of the radial depth of cut will minimize 
the impact of the time-variant directional coefficients even for the straight-fluted 
mill, Fig. 10.14. 
 
Multifreq_eig
λ= 0°
Multifreq_det
λ= 30°
ZOA
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
0
5
10
15
20
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
 
Fig. 10.14 SLDs of the Symmetric MDoF System, ae= 5 mm 
10.3.4   Non-rotational Symmetric MDoF System 
Usually spindle and milling tool are rotational symmetric systems. In most cases, 
however, the spindle stock is non-rotationally symmetric. Especially for tools with 
a small length-to-diameter ratio this may have an impact on the dynamic behavior 
at the tool centre point. In addition to Fig. 10.12, Fig. 10.15 shows the measured 
frequency response functions in x and y-direction. The response functions differ 
for the different directions. 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
f [Hz]
compliance [µm/N]
 
 
Gxx
Gyy
 
Fig. 10.15 Dynamic Behavior of the Non-Symmetric MDoF System 

242 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
Fig. 10.16 and Fig. 10.17 show a comparison of the SLDs computed by multi-
frequency solution and ZOA method for radial immersions ae= 3 mm and 
ae= 5 mm respectively. In both cases, the ZOA method provides acceptable results 
for a helix angle of λ= 30°. However, compared with the results for the symmetric 
system the zero helix angle also has an impact at higher radial immersions. 
 
Multifreq_eig
λ= 0°
Multifreq_det
λ= 30°
ZOA
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
5
10
15
20
25
30
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
 
Fig. 10.16 SLDs of the Non-Symmetric MDoF System, ae= 3 mm 
 
Multifreq_eig
λ= 0°
Multifreq_det
λ= 30°
ZOA
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
x 10
4
0
5
10
15
20
nspindle [rpm]
apcrit [mm]
 
Fig. 10.17 SLDs for the Non-Symmetric MDoF System, ae= 5 mm 
10.4   Conclusions 
The behavior of the mechanical system in combination with the process behavior 
has an impact on the stability. This means that the process and machine behavior 
determines which effects have to be taken into account for an accurate prediction 
of stability boundaries. 
In a case study - presented in this chapter - algorithms for the prediction of sta-
bility boundaries in frequency domain have been applied to different combinations 
of process and machine characteristics. A comparison with results in time domain 

10   Synthesis of Stability Lobe Diagrams 
243
 
has demonstrated that frequency domain algorithms are applicable, even if the sys-
tem shows a time-variant behavior. It has been demonstrated that in some cases a 
simplification can be made so that the time efficient zeroth order approximation is 
applicable. Table 10.3 shows a pattern of the computational methods for the inves-
tigated combinations of process and machine behavior. 
 
Table 10.3 Pattern of Applicable Frequency Domain Algorithms for the Investigated Ref-
erence Process 
 
 
Symmetric  
SDoF 
Symmetric  
MDoF 
Non-Symmetric 
MDoF 
Straight-fluted 
04
.0
d
/
a e
≈
 
Multifreq eig 
Multifreq eig 
Multifreq eig 
Helicoidal 
04
.0
d
/
a e
≈
 
Multifreq det 
Multifreq det 
Multifreq det 
Straight-fluted 
25
.0
d
/
a e
≈
 
ZOA 
Multifreq eig 
Multifreq eig 
Helicoidal 
25
.0
d
/
a e
≈
 
ZOA 
ZOA 
ZOA 
Straight-fluted 
4.0
d
/
a e
≈
 
ZOA 
ZOA 
Multifreq eig 
Helicoidal 
4.0
d
/
a e
≈
 
ZOA 
ZOA 
ZOA 
 
This pattern is valid for the investigated reference process. Ongoing works deal 
with the definition of classification numbers to expand this pattern for a general 
process and machine behavior. Some investigated issues that have to be quantified 
are, for example, the influence of tool diameter and cutting force coefficient as 
well as the quantification of the influence of the dynamic behavior, i. e. number of 
modes and dynamic stiffness. 
References 
[1] Weck, M., Brecher, C.: Werkzeugmaschinen Fertigungssysteme Bd.5 Messtechnische 
Untersuchung und Beurteilung, dynamische Stabilität. Springer, Heidelberg  
(2006) 

244 
K. Großmann and M. Löser
 
[2] Tlusty, J., Polacek, A.: Beispiele der Behandlung der selbsterregten Schwingungen 
der Werkzeugmaschinen, 3. Forschungs- und Konstruktionskolloquium Werkzeug-
maschinen und Betriebswissenschaft (3. FoKoMa). Vogel-Verlag, Coburg (1957) 
[3] Tobias, S.A., Fishwick, W.: A Theory of Regenerative Chatter. The Engineer, Lon-
don (1958) 
[4] Altintas, Y., Budak, E.: Analytical Prediction of Stability Lobes in Milling. Annals of 
the CIRP 44(1), 357–362 (1995) 
[5] Bayly, P.V., Halley, J.E., Mann, B.P., Davies, M.A.: Stability of Interrupted Cutting 
by Temporal Finite Element Analysis. Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engi-
neering 125, 220–225 (2003) 
[6] Insperger, T., Stepan, G.: Semi-discretization method for delayed systems. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 55, 503–518 (2002) 
[7] Budak, E., Altintas, Y.: Analytical Prediction of Chatter Stability in Milling. Part I: 
Modelling, Part II: Applications, Transactions of ASME, Journal of Dynamic Sys-
tems, Measurement and Control 120, 22–36 (1998) 
[8] Merdol, S.D., Altintas, Y.: Multi Frequency Solution of Chatter Stability for Low 
Immersion Milling. ASME Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering 126, 
459–466 (2004) 
[9] Insperger, T., Stepan, G.: Stability Transition between 1 and 2 Degree-of-Freedom 
Models of Milling. Periodica Polytechnica Mechanical Engineering 48(1), 27–39 
(2004) 
[10] Altintas, Y., Stepan, G., Merdol, D., Dombovari, Z.: Chatter stability of milling in 
frequency and discrete time domain. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and 
Technology 1, 35–44 (2008) 
[11] Zatarain, M., Munoa, J., Peigne, G., Insperger, T.: Analysis of the Influence of Mill 
Helix Angle on Chatter Stability. Annals of the CIRP 55(1), 365–368 (2006) 
[12] Altintas, Y.: Modeling Approaches and Software for Predicting the Performance of 
Milling Operations at MAL-UBC. Machining Science and Technology 4(4), 445–478 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 245–263. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 11  
Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure  
and Milling Process Interaction for Path 
Manipulation 
J. Bauer, M. Friedmann, T. Hemker, M. Pischan, C. Reinl,  
E. Abele, and O. von Stryk 
Abstract.  Industrial robots are used in a great variety of applications for hand-
ling, welding, assembling and milling operations. Especially for machining opera-
tions, industrial robots represent a cost-saving and flexible alternative compared to 
standard machine tools. Reduced pose and path accuracy, especially under process 
force load due to the high mechanical compliance, restrict the use of industrial ro-
bots for machining applications with high accuracy requirements. In this chapter, a 
method is presented to predict and compensate path deviation of robots resulting 
from process forces. A process force simulation based on a material removal cal-
culation is presented. Furthermore, a rigid multi-body dynamic system’s model of 
the robot is extended by joint elasticities and tilting effects, which are modeled by 
spring-damper-models at actuated and additional virtual axes. By coupling the re-
moval simulation with the robot model the interaction of the milling process with 
the robot structure can be analyzed by evaluating the path deviation and surface 
structure. With the knowledge of interaction along the milling path a general  
model-based path correction strategy is introduced to significantly improve accu-
racy in milling operations.  
11.1   Introduction 
Major fields of machining applications for industrial robots are automated pre-
machining, deburring and fettling of cast parts or trimming of carbon-fiber-
reinforced laminate. Due to its kinematic structure with 6 axes the robot can cover 
a large working space and is able to reach difficult workpiece positions so that it 
can be applied to perform complex machining operations. Therefore, compared to 
standard machine tools, industrial robots offer an economic and flexible machin-
ing alternative. However, industrial robots do not provide a high absolute and re-
peat accuracy. Current industrial robot systems reach a repeat accuracy of 0.06 
mm. Under process load, e. g. in milling operation, an additional deflection of the 
tool center point (TCP) occurs. Measured deflections of 0.25 mm under process 
loads of 100 N in earlier tests [1] have confirmed the expected compliance. There-
fore, when using an industrial robot for milling applications, inaccuracies of the 

246 
J. Bauer et al.
 
serial robot kinematic, the low structural stiffness and the effective process forces 
lead to path deviations. The results are unwanted trajectory deviations, which lead 
to errors in dimension and a reduced surface quality of the workpiece. These devi-
ations mainly consist of a static offset overlaid with a low frequency oscillation of 
the tool [2].   
In order to increase the milling accuracy with present process forces of the mil-
ling operation a model-based path manipulation module for robots is developed. 
This module consists of a robot and a milling force model to predict path errors in 
advance of a real milling operation. Additionally, the simulation module allows 
the investigation and analysis of the interaction of milling force and motion of the 
robot. Finally, the proposed strategy for modeling and simulation serves as the ba-
sis for an efficient offline correction of path deviations. 
Overall Objective 
The machining operation induces process forces, which act on the machine struc-
ture. The high compliance of the structure causes a deviation of the programmed 
path at the TCP. This path displacement causes a new cutting condition of the cut-
ter including a variation of the process force (cf. Fig. 11.1). Thus, milling robots 
are characterized by a close interaction of the cutting process with the mechanical 
robot structure. An early consideration of the interactions of the milling robot in 
the production process can reduce manufacturing failures as well as efforts to ma-
nually re-teach the robot’s path. 
 
 
Fig. 11.1. Model based tool path compensation 
 
The general aim is the development of a strategy to improve the accuracy in ro-
bot based milling operations by prediction and offline compensation of static and 
low frequency path deviations. Furthermore, the optimization of cutting parame-
ters and a prediction of milling properties (accuracy in dimension, surface struc-
ture) is in the focus.  
In order to simulate the milling force a standard cutting force model presented 
in [3] is implemented and adapted for industrial robots. The simulation of the  

11   Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
247
 
robot’s motion dynamics is based on the Newton-Euler-formulation. The model is 
based on a fine granular description of the kinematic structure and dynamical 
properties. It allows the introduction of arbitrary rotational axes to model elastic 
deformation. Additional properties are added to consider tilting of the axes and 
backlash of the gears.  
For both sub-models, different experimental investigations are conducted to de-
termine the model parameters describing the physical behavior of the robot and 
the machining process. Both models are initially tested independently and then 
coupled to simulate the machine process interaction. Two methods of model-based 
offline path compensation - based on ideal milling forces and deviation mirroring - 
are presented. Finally, robot milling experiments are carried out to proof the com-
pensation concepts. 
11.2   Robot and Milling Force Modeling 
In order to study the interaction of machine structure, i. e. the industrial robot and 
the removal process, a fine granular robot model and a milling force model are 
developed. 
11.2.1   Extended Robot Kinematic and Dynamics Modeling 
In this section, the modeling and simulation of the kinematic and dynamics of the 
robot's motion are discussed. Special interest is taken in the modeling of elastici-
ties of the robot, which have a high impact on the robot's motion, if the robot op-
erates under present process forces. The presented approach is based on a modular 
modeling methodology, which allows the integration of arbitrary axes of motion 
without the need to re-implement the equations of the robot dynamics. 
Modeling the Kinematical Structure 
As elastic motions of the robot may not only appear around the axes of the robots 
drives but also around additional axes, an extended kinematical model has been 
derived. In this section, the kinematic model is discussed using homogeneous 
transformations in a 4x4-matrix representation. 
For better readability, the abbreviations  
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
cos( )
sin( )
0
( , , ) :
,
( ;
) :
,
0
0
1
0
sin( )
( )
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
cos( )
0
sin( )
0
cos( )
sin( )
0
0
0
1
0
0
sin( )
cos( )
( ;
) :
,
(
0
0
;
) :
sin( )
0
( )
0
0
0
1
x
y
Trans x y z
Rot x
z
cos
Rot y
Rot z
cos
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α
α








−
=
=
















−




=
=


−






1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1












 
 
 
 

248 
J. Bauer et al.
 
are used to represent translations and rotations. In standard Denavit-Hartenberg-
notation (e. g. [4]), a rigid link with a revolute joint is described by  
 
,
( ;
)·
(0,0,
)·
(0,0,
)·
( ;
)
dh i
i
i
i
i
link
Rot z
Trans
d
Trans
a
Rot x
θ
α
=
 
with θi  being the current position of the joint and the constants di, ai and αi de-
scribing the relative position of the next joint. These joints, which are driven to 
move the robot, are referred to as actuated joints. It should be noted that this con-
vention does not contain information on the precise placement of the joint. As  
 
(0,0,
)·
( ;
)·
(0,0,
)
( ;
)·
(0,0,
)
i
i
i
i
i
i
Trans
p
Rot z
Trans
d
p
Rot z q
Trans
d
θ
−
=
 
 
is valid, joints can be anywhere on the z-axis of the previous link's coordinate 
frame. To allow for a precise placement of the joint the model is extended by the 
joint displacement pi, leading to  
 
,
(0,0,
)·
( ;
)·
(0,0,
)·
·
(0,0,
)·
( ;
).
wrep i
i
i
i
i
i
i
link
Trans
p
Rot z
Trans
d
p
Trans
a
Rot x
θ
α
=
−
 
 
This model is extended by two variable rotations around axes, orthogonal to the 
joint's axis, leading to the final extended kinematics model  
,
,
,
(0,0,
)·
( ;
)·
( ;
)·
( ;
)·
(0,0,
)·
·
(0,0,
)·
( ;
)
ext i
i
i
x i
y i
i
i
i
i
link
Trans
p
Rot z
Rot x
Rot y
Trans
d
p
Trans
a
Rot x
θ
θ
θ
α
=
−
 
with θx,i and θy,i being the rotation angles caused by elasticities around the addi-
tional axes. These additional revolute axes are referred to as virtual joints (cf. Fig. 
11.2). It should be noted that these virtual joints are optional. One or both virtual 
joints can be added to each link, if additional elasticities need to be modeled for 
this link. 
Additional Dynamics Properties 
Simulating the motion dynamics of the robot requires additional parameters for 
each link of the robot. Namely, these are the mass mi , the inertia tensor Ii and the 
center of mass comi for each link. In the implementation used for this work, the 
center of mass is described with respect to the coordinate frame defined by linkext,i. 
The inertia tensor is resolved at the center of mass in a coordinate frame using the 
same orientation as the frame defined by the link. 

11   Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
249
 
 
Fig. 11.2 Modeling of the robot with tilting at virtual axes 
Modeling the Drives and Elasticities 
Simulation of the robot's motion requires information 
of the torques acting in the joints (either real or vir-
tual) of the robot. As no information of the robot's 
drivetrain nor the control strategy of the motors are 
known, the assumption is made that each motor is at 
its desired position qi and moves with the desired rate
iq. The motors are coupled to the joints by means of 
a spring-damper-system with the spring stiffness Ki, 
the damping Di and si the backlash of the gear lead-
ing to the equation  
 
((
)
)
, if (
)
·(
)
· ((
)
)
, if (
)
0
, else
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
i
q
s
q
s
D
q
K
q
s
q
s
θ
θ
τ
θ
θ
θ
−
−
−
≥

=
−
+
+
−
−
≤−




for the torques in the actuated joints (cf. Fig. 11.3). Note that this convention also 
allows for elasticities and damping around the actuated axes, which may occur be-
cause of the gears used in the drivetrain. Torques acting on virtual joints are calcu-
lated in the same way with the exception that the desired position and rate always 
are zero and that there is no backlash,  
| ,
| ,
| ,
| ,
| ,
·
·
.
x y i
x y i
x y i
x y i
x y i
K
D
τ
θ
θ
=
+

 
s i
-s i
τi
qi
(    − θ )i
Fig. 11.3 Modeling of 
backlash 

250 
J. Bauer et al.
 
Forward Dynamics Simulation 
The dynamics of a robot's motion is described by 
  
,
( )·
( , )
( )
(
, )
+
+
=
+
xyz tool
M θ θ
C θ θ
G θ
τ
S F
θ


 
with 
1
,1
,1
,
(
,
,
,...,
,
,
)
n
T
x
y
n
x n
y
θ θ
θ
θ
θ
θ
=
θ
being the positions of all joints (actuated or 
virtual), 
1
,1
,1
,
(
,
,
,...,
,
,
)
n
T
x
y
n
x n
y
τ τ
τ
τ
τ
τ
=
τ
likewise being the torques in all joints 
and S being the torques caused by milling projected into the respective joints. 
Different ways exist to calculate the mass-matrix M, vector of coriolis forces C 
and gravitational forces G in this model. The modular approach chosen describing 
the robot's structure is well-suited for algorithms based on the Newton-Euler-
formulation of robot dynamics. Two widely used algorithms of this group are the 
Composite-Rigid-Body-Algorithm (CRBA, see [5]) and the Articulated-Body-
Algorithm (ABA, [6]). Both algorithms yield the same solution but differ in run-
time with the CRBA performing better than the ABA for systems with few joints.  
Implementation 
To allow the efficient simulation of the robot's motion dynamics an object-oriented 
framework has been developed using C++. Within this framework, the robot's 
structure is modeled as a chain of modeling entities consisting of the robot's base, 
variable and fixed rotations and rigid bodies (consisting of a fixed translation in 
combination with the body's mass, center of mass and inertia tensor). Additional 
modeling entities not used for this research include variable translations (to de-
scribe prismatic joints) and forks (to build tree-shaped structures beyond the kine-
matic chain). To allow for arbitrary structures these modeling entities can be  
combined in any order so that one is not limited to the structure described above. 
Similar approaches have been used successfully for the simulation of industrial ro-
bots [7], biomechanical systems [8] and autonomous mobile robots [9]. 
The framework provides methods to solve the robot's kinematics and dynamics 
equations, yielding solutions for the direct kinematics, the inverse dynamics and 
the forward dynamics. Currently, the forward dynamics is based on the CRBA and 
ABA to allow the selection of the better performing algorithm, depending on the 
complexity of the robot. 
Due to this modular description of the robot the structure of the simulated robot 
can be exchanged easily without the need to derive new equations of motion. 
Thus, it is possible to select (and re-select) the virtual joints required for a specific 
milling simulation, depending on the concrete robot. For the purpose of parameter 
estimation and trajectory optimization the framework also allows the calculation 
of derivatives of the simulated robot's motion with respect to any modeling para-
meters. 
This feature is based on the ADOL-C library [10] for automated derivation of 
C++-functions. Depending on the current use of the developed framework one can 
either use the special types provided by ADOL-C (if derivatives are required) or 
the standard floating-point types of the machine (no derivatives available, but  

11   Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
251
 
faster execution). By this feature, it is possible to use the same implementation of 
the model either for parameter estimation or for the simulation of the milling 
process as well as for the application of numerical optimal control methods [11], 
without changes in the source code.  
11.2.2   Process Force Calculation 
The calculation of milling forces is based on a material removal simulation that al-
so calculates complex cutter workpiece engagement conditions and therefore the 
chip geometry. Based on the chip geometry the milling forces are calculated using 
a standard model presented in [3]. While other methods for cutter workpiece en-
gagement simulations are introduced in [12, 13, 14, 15] the dexel representation 
used in this work enables an efficient computation of the engagement condition. 
Especially in applications of milling with industrial robots the accuracy of the 
dexel-based method is considered to be appropriate. In order to increase the calcu-
lation accuracy, [16] recommends the usage of a multi-dexel model for the repre-
sentation of the workpiece (cf. Fig. 11.4).  
 
 
Fig. 11.4 Dexel representation of a workpiece in three directions in space 
 
Thereby, the description of a single dexel is made by line equations,  
 
t
=
+
p
d
s  
Here, p is a point on the line, d is the line direction, t is the scaling factor and s the 
starting point in space. The workpiece is modeled using a multi-dexel representa-
tion compromising dexel directions in x, y and z.  The discretization of the work-
piece is defined by the dexel distances dx, dy and dz. In order to receive a  
sufficient accuracy of the force calculation the relation kd between the dexel  
discretization and the tool radius R is considered, 
 
0.05
d
dx
dy
dz
k
R
R
R
=
=
=
=
 . 
+
+
=

252 
J. Bauer et al.
 
During a simulated milling operation the tool moves through the workpiece in dis-
crete time steps ti. The incremental size of the time step is dt. 
 
2
.
tooth tooth
int
dt
dt
n
=
 
In every time step ti=1,…, nint the material removal is calculated, where
2
tooth tooth
dt
is the tooth-passing time calculated by 
 
2
60
·
tooth tooth
z
dt
N n
=
 
with the number of revolutions n and the number of teeth 
.
z
N
  
11.2.2.1   Calculation of the Chip Geometry 
The material removal simulation calculates a point cloud representing the outer 
volume of a single chip, which the discrete chip geometry is extracted from. The 
chip geometry is described by the angular discretized chip thickness h(φ,z) with 
the entry and exit angles φin, φout. As the chip thickness varies along the cutting 
edge the chip gets subdivided into discs of the height dz and in dφ in angular di-
rection (cf. Fig. 11.5). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11.5 Discretized chip geometry 
 
The chip thickness is calculated in three steps. In the first step, the set of points 
is subdivided into disks of the height dz. As a next step, inside each disc the max-
imum angular points are defined as restricting points by φin and φout (cf. Fig. 
11.6a). Due to the complex contact conditions and the complex chip geometries 
the entry and exit angles vary over the depth of cut ap. The cross-sectional geome-
try of each disk is calculated based on the cylindrical form of the cutter at the dis-
crete time of ti and ti-1. The area between the input angle φin and exit angle φout is 
discretized into multiple sub-areas with the angular distance dφ. The value of the 
discrete chip thickness h(φ,z) with respect to φ is calculated by a line intersection 
with the two cylinders in the final step (cf. Fig. 11.6b).   
h(φ,z)
dz
dφ
x
y
z
dz
ap
y
x
radial
z

11   Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
253
 
 
Fig. 11. 6 Calculation of the chip thickness h(φ,z) 
 
Adding all disc levels together, a chart of the chip thickness h(φ,z) is extracted, 
which forms the base of the force calculation. This is the most frequently per-
formed arithmetic operation during the removal simulation.  
11.2.2.2   Cutting Force Model 
For the prediction of the cutting forces a standard cutting force model based on 
Altintas [3] is implemented, where the time delay responsible for the chatter is 
neglected. According to the chip discretization the cutter is sectioned into discs of 
height dz (cf. Fig. 11.7). 
 
 
Fig. 11.7 Cutting force calculation 
 
In each disc e, Frta,j represents the force per tooth j in radial, tangential and axi-
al direction,  
 
(
)
, ,
·
·
,
·
j
dz h
z
dz
ϕ
=
+
rta j e
c
e
F
K
K
. 

254 
J. Bauer et al.
 
Depending on the angular position of the tooth j of a disc, the corresponding chip 
thickness hj(φ,z) is inserted. The cutting force coefficients Kc=[Krc, Ktc, Kac] and 
Ke=[Kre, Kte, Kae] need to be identified in advance.  
A transformation of Frta,j,e with T(φ) and the subsequent summation over all 
teeth Nz and discs Ne results in the process force Fxyz,tool, given in a non-rotating 
tool coordinate frame, 
 
,
, ,
1
1
( )·
.
e
z
N
N
e
j
ϕ
=
=
=
xyz tool
j
rta j e
F
T
F
 
The force Fxyz,tool acts at the TCP of the robot and thus represents the interface to 
the robot model. 
11.3   Analysis of the Mechanical Robot Structure 
In order to identify the mechanical model parameters of the robot several experi-
ments are performed including 
• 
 modal analysis, 
• 
 stiffness measurement within the working volume of the robot, 
• 
 stiffness measurement of the structural robot components. 
In the following sub-sections, the investigations are presented and the consequen-
tial model adaptations are implemented. 
11.3.1   Modal Analysis 
The modal analysis is used to determine eigenfrequencies, eigenforms and modal 
damping of the robot structure. The robot structure is excited by a hammer im-
pulse at a defined position. The response is recorded with a tri-axial acceleration 
sensor, which the transfer functions are derived from for all 109 measuring points. 
Figure 11.8 shows the robot structure and the measuring grid. 
 
Fig. 11.8 Modal analysis of the robot 

11   Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
255
 
Based on the transfer functions, the eigenforms, eigenfrequencies and modal 
damping is extracted. The robot KUKA KR 210 [17] has six dominant eigenfre-
quencies below 100 Hz. In Table 11.1, these frequencies are summarized and ex-
plained briefly.  
 
Table 11.1 Eigenfrequencies and eigenforms of the robot 
   
Eigenform 
Eigenfrequency 
[Hz] 
Modal Damping 
[%] 
Description 
1 
8.4 
6.37 
Oscillation about axis 1 
2 
11.1 
1.02 
Tilting  of axis 1 around y 
3 
16.9 
0.75 
Tilting  of axis 1 around y 
4 
20.6 
0.16 
Oscillation about axis 3 
5 
24.1 
0.11 
Oscillation about axis 2 and 3 plus 
deformation of fork (axis 5) 
6 
57.9 
0.64 
Tilting of  axis 1, 2 and 3 plus 
torsion of the whole structure 
11.3.2   Static Stiffness within Working Space 
Measuring of the static stiffness in the working space is performed in x, y, and z-
direction at nine positions within the relevant working area of the robot. Static 
forces Fx, Fy, and Fz are applied by a force measurement rod. Laser distance sen-
sors are mounted to an external measurement frame to capture the robot’s dis-
placements Δx, Δy and Δz (cf. Fig. 11.9). The static stiffness kxx, kyy, kzz is  
calculated by  
 
,
,
x
xx
y
yy
z
zz
F
k
x
F
k
y
F
k
z
=
Δ
=
Δ
=
Δ . 
 
Fig. 11.9 Test-rig of the stiffness measurement 
 

256 
J. Bauer et al.
 
While evaluating the stiffness at a single measuring point by 3 cycles of tensile 
and compressive force of 
[ 1500 , 1500] N
F ∈−
, the robot’s pose remains fixed. 
Figure 11.10 illustrates the robot’s compliance - calculated by hxx=(kxx)-1, 
hyy=(kyy)-1 and  hzz=(kzz)-1  - at each point of the measuring grid. A global trend in 
all directions towards a higher compliance is observed at those measuring points, 
which have a larger distance to the robot base.  
 
1
2
3
1
2
3
0
2
4
1
2
3
1
2
3
0
2
4
1
2
3
1
2
3
0
2
4
 
Fig. 11.10 Direct compliance within the working area (z = 900 mm) 
 
In a similar way, the rotational and tilting stiffness are experimentally meas-
ured. While the force load is applied in defined directions at the spindle the dis-
tance sensors measure the tilting and rotation at each axis sequentially. In Table 
11.2, the measured stiffnesses are summarized. 
 
Table 11.2 Rotational robot stiffness at axes 1 – 6 
 
 
Mech. Robot Component 
Rotational Stiffness [Nm/rad] 
Axis 1 
8,937e-6 
Axis 2 
6,343e-6 
Axis 3 
2,357e-5 
Axis 4 
7,804e-5 
Axis 5 
1,047e-4 
Axis 6 
2,052e-4 
11.3.3   Parameter Identification 
For a full parameterization of the robot model, mass, stiffness, and damping ma-
trices M, K and D need to be determined. The model adjustment is split into the 
static and the dynamic adaption. Within the static model adjustment the measured 
component stiffnesses (Sect. 11.3.2) are deployed in the robot model. The virtual 
robot is positioned at points p1 to p9 corresponding to the experiment and a static 
load is applied in the simulation. Hence, the deviations are simulated and the stiff-
ness of the full mechanical structure is determined. By adjusting the model’s  

11   Analysis of Industrial R
 
rotational and tilting stiff
ness, the model gets em
nesses within the working
 
 
Fig. 11.11 Comparison of sim
 
For the model dynamic
termined. The mass and t
tracted from the technical
derived from CAD-repre
tions (FRF) of the virtual
to the corresponding robo
are evaluated (cf. Fig. 11
ness model parameters ar
eigenfrequencies is adjust
measured FRFs.  
 
Fig. 11.12 Frequency respon
 
After updating the mod
a reasonable correlation t
in the frequency band of f
the resonance peaks corre
11.3.4   Simulation a
The validation of the proc
model. Figure 11.13 sho
3.1325 with a portal robo
with d = 10 mm. The milli
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
 
Messung
Simulation
obot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
25
fness values in order to compromise the measured stif
mpirical updated. The simulated and the measured stif
g area are compared in Figure 11.11.  
mulated and measured working area stiffness 
cs adaption, the mass and damping matrix have to be d
the location of the centers of mass for each link are ex
l documentation. The inertia tensors of all rigid links ar
sentations. By calculating the frequency response func
l robot compliance Hxx, Hyy, and Hzz and comparing them
ot’s FRF, the dynamical correlations of the robot mod
.12). In order to improve correlation, the mass and stif
re slightly adjusted. Finally, the peak height of selecte
ted by modifying the damping parameters to confirm th
nse function of the compliance H 
del parameters, the simulated robot compliance results i
to the measured compliance frequency response functio
f = 0 to 50 Hz. Especially the frequency and amplitude o
elate well.  
and Validation 
cess force model is carried out separately from the rob
ws results of machining a test workpiece of aluminum
ot. The used cutter is a two-fluted poly-crystalline cutt
ing parameters are n= 8000 rpm, vf = 50 mm/s, ap = 1 mm
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
 
Messung
Simulation
9
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
500
1000
1500
2000
 
Messung
Simulation
57
ff-
ff-
 
e-
x-
re 
c-
m 
del 
ff-
ed 
he 
 
in 
on 
of 
ot 
m 
ter 
m. 
9
 
n

258 
J. Bauer et al.
 
 
Fig. 11.13 Validation of the process force model 
 
The cutting forces are recorded by a Kistler force dynamometer during the ma-
chining operation. In order to calculate the mean cutting forces, the force signal is 
filtered by a low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of fcorner = 100 Hz. As the 
main eigenfrequencies of the robot structure are lower than 60 Hz (cf. Table 11.1) 
the consideration of frequency bands above 100 Hz are neglected for coupled ro-
bot milling simulations. The comparison of measured and simulated cutting forces 
Fx, Fy, Fz (Fig. 11.13) shows a sufficient congruence of an overall quadratic mean 
below 20 % of each force direction.  
11.4   Model-Based Compensation  
The two compensation strategies are characterized by a model-based approach us-
ing ideal milling forces (Sect. 11.4.1) and by geometrically mirroring the deviation 
path (Sect. 11.4.2). The aim is the offline correction of static and low-frequency 
deviations before the real milling process is started. Furthermore, this allows an 
improvement of machining parameters as well as estimations concerning dimen-
sional accuracy or surface quality. 
11.4.1   Compensation by Ideal Milling Forces  
The proposed model-based compensation strategy consists of three steps: (1) A 
simulation run assuming an idealized robot, (2) the computation of reference joint 
positions and (3) a transformation into compensating track points. 
Assuming a known ideal TCP trajectory, this idealized path is initially simu-
lated without considering that elasticities in the robot’s dynamics, i. e. real joint 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-100
0
100
Zeit [s]
 
 
Fxmea
Fxsim
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-100
0
100
Zeit [s]
 
 
Fymea
Fysim
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-400
-200
0
Zeit [s]
 
 
Fzmea
Fzsim

11   Analysis of Industrial R
 
positions, match the ideal 
tuated joints. Thus, a path
lated using the robots kin
process forces at the TCP
workpiece and an infinite
force signals contain sign
applied to get smooth traj
Using the recursive Ne
to compute idealized to
{
(
) |
1, ... ,
ideal
k
max
q
t
k
k
=
comp
ideal
q
q
=


, 
 
·( co
q
K
is solved for each tk as a
joint positions qcomp, which
As the robot input req
pensational joint position
ing the direct-kinematics 
of actuated and virtual joi
ing set points{
(
) |
comp
k
q
t
k
 
Fig. 11.14 Deviation, correct
 
The proposed model-b
simulation run with an id
tual solution of one linea
out in real-time. 
11.4.2   Compensatio
The second approach of p
tion of deviations caused 
The compensation strateg
obot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
25
 set values (
real
set
q
q
=
and
real
set
q
q
=


) for virtual and a
h through a sequence of points on the workpiece is simu
nematics. This generates corresponding trajectories of th
P. As the computation is based on a discretization of th
esimal stepsize Δt is deployed in an accurate simulatio
ificant noise components. Therefore, low-pass filtering 
ectories (cf. Fig. 11.14) for further use. 
ewton-Euler-method [4], the inverse dynamics is solve
orques τideal(tk) for a selection of ideal joint position
} . 
Then, 
with 
ideal
τ
and 
with 
the 
assumptio
)
·(
)
omp
ideal
comp
ideal
ideal
q
q
q
τ
−
+
−
=
D 

 
a linear equation system. This results in compensation
h includes virtual joints as well as the actuated ones. 
quires for certain positions pcomp(tk), the calculated com
s qcomp(tk) are transformed into base coordinates by solv
for each tk. Thus, the deviation according to the stiffne
ints is considered in the resulting sequence of compensa
1, ... ,
}
max
k
k
=
. 
 
tion and resulting path in simulation 
based strategy is computed very efficiently as only on
dealized, kinematic robot model is performed. The even
ar equation system per interpolation point can be carrie
on by Deviation Mirroring  
path compensation is based on a geometrical consider
by milling forces acting on the cutter (cf. Fig. 11.15(1.)
gy is applied in radial and axial direction of the cutte
59
c-
u-
he 
he 
n, 
is 
ed 
ns
on
nal 
m-
v-
ss 
at-
ne 
n-
ed 
a-
)). 
er. 

260 
J. Bauer et al.
 
Figure 11.15(2.) illustrates the idea of calculating a new NC-code, based on mir-
roring path points on the planned NC-path. Thus, when the milling operation is 
conducted with the modified NC-code, a coincidence of planned and the resulting 
TCP position is expected (cf. Fig. 11.15(3.)).  
 
 
Fig. 11.15 Concept of path compensation by mirroring the cutter position. 
  
To calculate a compensated path the machining operation is initially simulated 
using the original NC-code. Thus, corresponding deviations of the TCP become 
available and the offset values for selected points on the deviated path to corres-
ponding NC-path points are calculated. By mirroring these offsets at the planned, 
ideal NC-path the compensational path points are computed. In order to increase 
the overall path accuracy additional path points may be inserted into the original 
NC-path for compensation.  
11.4.3   Experimental Investigation 
During the experiment a milling path describing a 90-degree corner is machined. 
Within this test, static deviation and dipping in the corner are investigated. Based 
on the ideal milling path the simulation initially returns deviations of 0.35 mm in y 
and 0.06 mm in x-direction. The compensational NC-path is generated by mirror-
ing certain points on the ideal NC-path. The simulation with this compensational 
NC-path shows a significant reduction of the path deviation under present process 
force (cf. Fig. 11.16). 
To validate these results from simulation a low feed rate of 1.5 mm/s and a mil-
ling depth of ap = 0.5 mm is initially chosen for the experiments as a full slotting 
operation. This setting allows the neglecting of process forces and the manufactur-
ing of a workpiece without recognizable deviations.  Subsequently, a milling op-
eration with a feed rate of vf = 50 mm/s and ap = 1.5 mm is performed. Due to the 
process forces the TCP deflects and the resulting deviation at the workpiece is 
measured by a microscope relative to the previous reference operation. Deviations 
between 0.03 mm and 0.44 mm are measured on 7 positions along the path (cf. 
Fig. 11.17). In the corner, a large difference of 1.69 mm between the planned and 
the resulting path is measured due to path blending effects. The root mean square 
error of all seven measured points equals erms = 0.72mm.  
 

11   Analysis of Industrial R
 
Fig. 11.16 Simulation of path
 
The experimental mill
gram including the comp
within the strait path seg
now reduced to erms = 0.1
achieved because of the ro
 
Fig. 11.17 Test workpiece w
 
obot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
26
h deviation and robot program modification 
ling operation is repeated with the modified robot pro
pensating path points. The deviation is reduced primaril
ment. The root mean square error of erms = 0.72 mm 
5 mm. In the corner, only a moderate error reduction wa
obot’s internally-controlled path blending.  
without/with compensation 
61
 
o-
ly 
is 
as 
 

262 
J. Bauer et al.
 
In z-direction, the profile of the machined part with and without compensation 
is measured on a coordinate measuring machine. The compensated path is slightly 
closer to the supposed NC-path on the straight path segments. In the corner, the 
dipping of the cutting tool is reduced by ∆z = 0.029 mm (cf. Fig. 11.18).  
 
 
Fig. 11.18 Z-deviation of the machined workpiece 
 
The main reason for only achieving a moderate compensation in z-direction is 
related to the relatively low forces acting on the cutter in z-direction. While mean 
forces Fx,1 = -130 N, Fy,1 = 58 N in the first and Fx,2 = 108 N, Fy,2 = 59 N in the 
second straight path segment were observed, the z-force is only Fz,1 = 24 N and 
Fz,2 = 39 N. The simulated mean force in both segments is Fz = 35 N, which the 
compensation is calculated on. Thus, the path correction off-set based on the cal-
culated deviation is small compared to x and y- direction. Furthermore, the internal 
numerical control of the available KUKA robot additionally causes path errors, 
which cannot be described by the proposed robot model. This effect is even more 
dominant when only a small deviation appears due to the low force level.  
11.5   Conclusion 
Industrial robots are a cost-saving and flexible alternative for machining applica-
tions in a low-accuracy area. A reduced position and path accuracy, especially un-
der process force load due to the high mechanical compliance, restricts the use of 
industrial robots for further machining applications. 
The proposed strategy is built on a coupled simulation module consisting of a 
process force model and a robot model. This validated simulation enables the pre-
diction of a force-induced path deviation in robot milling operations. Experiments 
have shown that a milling error occurs as a summation of robot control-contouring 
error and the process force deviation of up to 0.44 mm. Depending on the control 
system and the level of cutting force, the presented approach compensates the er-
ror caused by process force deviation to a large extend. The influence of the con-
trol-contouring error on the overall path deviation is more dominant in the case of 
only small process forces. Since this control-contouring error could not be covered 
in the simulation by the so-far implemented robot model, the path correction  

11   Analysis of Industrial Robot Structure and Milling Process Interaction  
263
 
approach results in only moderate improvements for this case of small process 
forces. For further improvements, these effects of the robot’s internal path plan-
ning and control algorithms should be identified and implemented into model. 
However, in the case of dominant process forces the path compensation con-
cept is able to reduce the milling error significantly. 
Acknowledgments.   The authors thank Max Stelzer, who carried out very helpful proofs 
of concept in the first phase of the project. 
References 
[1] Abele, E., Bauer, J., Rothenbücher, S., Stelzer, M., Stryk, O.: Prediction of the Tool 
Displacement by Coupled Models of the Compliant Industrial Robot and the Milling 
Process. In: Conference on Process Machine Interaction, Hannover (2008) 
[2] Weigold, M.: Kompensation der Werkzeugabdrängung bei der spanenden Bearbei-
tung mit Industrierobotern. PhD Thesis TU Darmstadt (2008) ISBN 978-3-8322-
7178-7 
[3] Altintas, Y.: Manufacturing Automation: Metal Cutting Mechanics, Machine Tool 
Vibrations and CNC Design. Cambridge University Press (2000) 
[4] Craig, J.J.: Robotics. Addison-Wesley (1989) 
[5] Walker, M.W., Orin, D.E.: Efficient Dynamics Computer Simulation of Robotic Me-
chanisms. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement, and Control 104, 205–211 
(1982) 
[6] Featherstone, R.: Rigid Body Dynamics Algorithms. Springer (2008) 
[7] Höpler, R.: A unifying object-oriented methodology to consolidate multibody dynam-
ics computations in robot control, PhD Thesis TU Darmstadt (2004) 
[8] Stelzer, M.: Forward Dynamics Simulation and Optimization of Walking Robots and 
Humans, PhD Thesis TU Darmstadt (2007) 
[9] Friedmann, M.: Simulation of Autonomous Robot Teams with Adaptable Levels of 
Abstraction, PhD Thesis TU Darmstadt (2009) 
[10] Walther, A., Griewank, A.: ADOL-C: A Package for the Automatic Differentiation of 
Algorithms Written in C/C++. Version 2.1.12, Documentation,  
https://projects.coin-or.org/ADOL-C 
[11] von Stryk, O.: User’s Guide for DIRCOL (Version 2.1): a direct collocation method 
for the numerical solution of optimal control problems, TU Darmstadt (2000),  
http://www.sim.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de/sw/dircol 
[12] Rehling, 
S.: 
Technologische 
Erweiterung 
der 
Simulation 
von 
NC-
Fertigungsprozessen, PhD Thesis Universität Hannover (2009) 
[13] Surmann, T.: Geometrisch-physikalische Simulation der Prozessdynamik für das 
fünfachsige Fräsen von Freiformflächen, PhD Thesis TU Dortmund (2005) 
[14] Stautner, M.: Simulation und Optimierung der mehrachsigen Fräsbearbeitung, PhD 
Thesis TU Dortmund, München (2002) ISBN 3-8027-8732-3  
[15] Selle, J.: Technologiebasierte Fehlerkorrektur für das NC-Schlichtfräsen, PhD Thesis 
Universität Hannover (2005) 
[16] Weinert, K., Müller, H., Kreis, W., Surmann, T., Ayasse, J., Schüppstuhl, T., 
Kneupner, K.: Diskrete Werkstückmodellierung zur Simulation von Zerspanprozes-
sen. In: Zeitschrift für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb: ZWF, München, pp. 385–389 
(2002) ISSN 0932-0482 
[17] KUKA Roboter GmbH. Data sheet KR 210-2. Gersthofen - Germany (July 2009), 
http://www.kuka-robotics.com 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 265–284. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 12 
Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
E. Uhlmann, F. Mahr, Y. Shi, and U. von Wagner 
Abstract.   In this chapter, both analytical and experimental studies on the process 
stability of micro milling are presented. The investigations are carried out in order 
to improve a comprehensive model, which describes interactions of the dynamic 
cutting forces and the dynamic machine tool behavior including the end mill. Do-
minant chatter frequencies at different operating points are determined by analyz-
ing the process forces, acoustic signals as well as optical measurement signals. 
Results are documented and discussed by means of stability lobe diagrams. The 
findings are confirmed by analyses of the milled surfaces. Finally, some sugges-
tions for improving the parameter identification are given. 
12.1   Introduction 
Significant Process Machine Interactions (PMI) can be observed in micro milling, 
e. g. by comparing the surface roughness of the manufactured workpiece to the vi-
bration-response signals measured on the machine tool housing [18]. Alternating 
loads caused by interrupted cutting conditions interact with the flexible end mill 
and the machine tool structure. Deviations of the Tool Center Point (TCP) are the 
consequences. 
In this context, a precise modeling of the interacting elements such as the machine 
tool structure, the end mill as well as the cutting conditions is necessary for 
process simulation. Stability predictions containing this information help to im-
prove the machining of complex micro-structures. 
Based on the experimental modal analysis of the machine tool structure and the 
operational vibration analysis of the micro end mill a comprehensive spatial mul-
tiple degrees of freedom (MDOF) model is described in this chapter. It is com-
posed of oscillator chains and a flexible tool, which is modeled as a rotating  
Euler-Bernoulli beam using finite elements (FE). 
The equations of motion are derived with Hamilton’s principle including gy-
roscopic effects as a result of the rotational motion of the end mill. Besides, a  
self-excited part due to the internal material damping of the tool is included. The 
dynamic cutting forces, which occur during the process, are coupled to the MDOF 
model. Therefore, a geometrical milling force model is developed, which contains 
significant characteristics of micro cutting such as ploughing effects below the 
critical chip thickness. 

266 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
Experiments are carried out in order to verify the process stability behavior. 
The simulated and experimentally-determined stability lobe diagrams are then 
compared and analyzed in detail. 
12.2   Modeling and Stability Prediction 
Due to PMIs in micro milling it is not sufficient to model the end mill as a lumped 
mass for chatter prediction. Experimental modal analysis and operational vibration 
analysis are carried out in order to obtain the characteristics of the machine tool 
structure and the end mill. 
Figure 12.1 shows a series of modal analyses conducted on a 
WISSNER Gamma 303 HP 3-axis micro milling machine tool. In all experiments, 
an electro-dynamic shaker is used to generate noise signal as excitation, which is 
measured with a piezo-electric force transducer. The response signal is measured 
with a tri-axial accelerometer. 
 
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Hz
5000
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
N/m
3
x 10
-6
Frequency
Magnitude
 
 
xx|
|Hxx| (25°)
|Hyy|
Modal Analysis 1
Modal Analysis 2
reference points
shaker
mode shapes
spindle
 
Fig. 12.1 Experimental modal analysis of the machine tool structure at different reference 
points 
In modal analysis 1, the reference point is assigned to a location on the sliding 
carriage of the machine tool. The dominant mode shapes of the machine tool 
structure can be identified. However, the coherence at points on the tool shank is 
not sufficient. Therefore, the shaker and the accelerometer are mounted at the top 
of the tool shank to identify the frequency response functions (FRFs) at the tool 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
267
 
clamping. The measured FRFs in modal analysis 2 are shifted at different posi-
tions, where |Hxx| (25°) means a 25-degree rotation of the Spindle-Tool Holder-
Tool system (STT) from the initial measure position. All these phenomena indi-
cate that the spindle configuration significantly affects the modal results of the 
system at non-rotating state. Considering the measured mode shapes, the first 
three natural frequencies of the FRFs can be traced back to the sliding carriage of 
the machine tool. The fourth mode is supposed to be caused by the clamping con-
dition at the STT system. Considering the significant redundant mass effect of the 
accelerometer, the shaker and other unknown influences, the resonance frequency 
position and the damping factor of this mode are not reliable and not directly uti-
lizable. 
Due to the small dimensions of the micro end mill it is challenging to carry out 
a classical experimental modal analysis directly. Figure 12.2 shows an operational 
vibration analysis to study the resonance frequency of the tool. 
 
 
Fig. 12.2 Operational vibration analysis of the micro end mill with a shaker as excited base 
An end mill with a nominal diameter of 0.5 mm and a cantilever length of 
20 mm is clamped. The assembly is mounted on a large shaker, which produces 
noise signals as excitation. The excitation is measured with a tri-axial accelerome-
ter. Several points, including one on the clamp, are measured with a laser  
vibrometer along the tool shank and the tip. The FRF (defined as response veloci-
ty/excitation acceleration) at tip point 8 is illustrated in Figure 12.2 (right). The 
first deflection mode shape corresponds to the dominant resonance at about 
8.7 kHz. It should be noted that point 2 at the clamped end also exhibits a small 
transverse deflection, which means that the theoretical clamping point is located 
between points 1 and 2, and the effective cantilever length is more than 20 mm. 
This is caused by the imperfect clamping conditions of the simple assembly. 
However, it can be concluded that the first bending resonance frequency of the 
micro end mill with a cantilever length of 20 mm should be higher than 8.7 kHz 
[6, 8]. 
Compared to the models built with FRFs in the frequency domain the system 
models in the time domain are generally more complex. However, they also have 
advantages, e. g. there are more methods available for the modeling and an  

268 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
analytical stability analysis. The complex dynamics of the system such as the rota-
tion of the spindle-tool-system can be comprised. In this context, a spatial system 
model composed of oscillator chains and finite elements (FE) is utilized in order 
to incorporate both the machine tool modes and the flexible tool modes. Mean-
while, it also meets the requirements for process simulation and stability  
prediction. 
In order to identify the system’s parameters by an experimental modal analysis 
the model is firstly treated without rotational effects, i. e. regardless of the spindle 
speed and the according rotary inertia of the end mill. Subsequently, the rotational 
effects are taken into consideration within the formulation of the equations of mo-
tion for further application. 
12.2.1   System Model without Rotational Effects 
Without rotational effects, the equations of motion are decoupled in two orthogon-
al directions. Figure 12.3. shows the configuration of a simplified model, which 
describes the dynamic behavior at the tool clamping (see Fig.12.1. reference point 
2). The tool is modeled by an Euler-Bernoulli beam with finite elements. 
 
x1
x2
x3
x4
y1
y2
y3
y4
x
mx1
mx2
mx3
my1
my2
my3
k ,d , ... ,k ,d
y1 
y1
y4 
y4
k ,d , ... ,k ,d
x1  
x1 
x4 
x4
z
y
a)
q2
q3
q1
q6
q4
q7
q5
q8
jY
uZ
jZ
uY
s
L
Y
Z
X
b)
X
Y
Z
 
Fig. 12.3 a) Spatial system model; b) Finite element of the micro end mill 
The global reference frame (xyz) is inertially fixed on the milling plane. Rotat-
ing this frame by 90° about the y-axis defines the non-rotating reference frame 
(XYZ) to simplify the description of the element kinematics while considering the 
rotational effects. 
When using the time-dependent generalized coordinates 
 
qe=(q1, q2, q3, q4, q5, q6, q7, q8)T 
 
at the two nodes of the element, the translational displacements of the element 
 
ue=(uZ, uY) 
can be expressed as 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
269
 
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Z
Y
u
u
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
−
−



=








e
q ,                        (12.1) 
where the shape functions φ1 to φ4 can be found in [14]. 
For the Euler-Bernoulli beam the shear deformation is neglected. Thus, the ro-
tations (φY, φZ) and translations (uZ, uY) are related by 
,
Z
Y
u
s
ϕ
∂
= −∂
 
Y
Z
u
s
ϕ
∂
= ∂
.                                        (12.2) 
The system equations of motion can be derived using Hamilton’s principle 
1
1
0
0
(
)
0
t
t
t
t
T
U dt
Wdt
δ
δ
−
+
=


,                                       (12.3) 
where T and U are the kinetic and potential energy of the system respectively, δW 
is the virtual work of non-conservative forces and δ represents the variational  
operator. 
Because of the different geometries of the tool shank, the taper and the cutting 
edges at the tool tip, it is not accurate enough to model the micro end mills by a 
uniform beam. This can be demonstrated by the first three normalized bending 
mode shapes at different boundary conditions as shown in Figure 12.4. Note that 
the shank, tip lengths and diameters as well as the taper length considerably affect 
the natural frequencies and mode shapes of the tools [6]. In this case, a micro end 
mill with a cantilever length of 20 mm, a shank diameter of 3 mm, a nominal di-
ameter of 0.5 mm and the tip length of 1 mm is used as a demonstration. It can be 
seen that the first bending mode is dominated by the shank. For clamped-free and 
sliding-free conditions they are similar to a uniform beam. The second and third 
bending modes are dominated by the taper, especially the tip deflections. 
 
1st bending mode
2nd bending mode
3rd bending mode
1st bending mode
2nd bending mode
3rd bending mode
1st bending mode
2nd bending mode
3rd bending mode
clamped-free:
sliding-free:
free-free:
 
Fig. 12.4 Normalized mode shapes of the tool for different boundary conditions 
 
To combine the modes of the tool and the machine, the parameters (mass, stiff-
ness and damping) of the oscillator chains should be identified. Sub-structure 
coupling analysis is a useful method for this purpose. The detailed derivation of 
this method can be found in [12, 16]. Generally, the entire machine tool system is 
divided into two sub-structures: The complex machine tool structure including the 
upper part of the tool shank (FRFs can be measured by experimental modal  

270 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
analysis) and the rest of the tool including the difficult to measure tool tip (FRFs 
usually obtained using beam theories or FE software). The identification of the 
FRFs at the coupling is challenging due to the rotational degrees of freedom 
(DOF). There are several methods to experimentally measure rotational FRFs or 
analytically derive them from measured translational FRFs [5]. To simplify the 
modeling the following assumptions are made. 
For the analyzed micro milling machine tool, the clamping conditions be-
tween the end mill, the tool holder, and the spindle are perfect, i. e. sufficient 
clamping length and quasi-isotropic contacts. The rotational DOF can be neg-
lected and the beam can be coupled to the oscillators with a sliding-free boun-
dary condition. Since the measure point is approximately located at the contact 
position between the end mill and the tool holder, the effect of rotational DOF is 
supposed to be excluded. Moreover, a rigid coupling is adopted here, i. e. the 
rest of the end mill is coupled at the last oscillator without spring or damper 
elements (see Fig. 12.3). 
In order to identify the parameters of the oscillators the system model is sepa-
rately treated in the milling plane. In each direction, the parameters can be identi-
fied with the help of the measured and computed receptances using curve-fitting 
methods. A demonstration of two typical measurements in x and y-directions is 
shown in Figure 12.5. It should be mentioned that the identified oscillator parame-
ters need to be furthermore optimized for chatter prediction, since the resonance 
frequencies and the damping factors are unverified especially at the fourth peak, 
which can be traced back to the clamping conditions at the tool shank. 
 
0
1000
2000
3000
Hz
5000
0
0.5
1
N/m
2
x 10
-6
Frequency
Magnitude
 
 
measured |Hxx|
identified   |Hxx|
0
1000
2000
3000
Hz
5000
Frequency
 
measured |Hyy|
identified   |Hyy|
0
0.5
1
N/m
2
x 10
-6
 
 
Fig. 12.5 Identified and measured FRFs 
The mode shapes of the coupled system can be computed with the identified 
parameters of the machine tool modes. Figure 12.6 shows the fourth and fifth 
normalized mode shapes in y-direction. 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
271
 
Oscillator chain
in y-direction
4  mode shape
th
undeformed shape
undeformed shape
deformed shape
deformed shape
5  mode shape
th
 
Fig. 12.6 Normalized mode shapes of the coupled system in y-direction 
As seen, for this kind of system modeling the fourth mode is dominated by the 
oscillator chains including the tool as a rigid body. In contrast, the fifth mode in-
cludes a bending mode of the tool. Torsion, tension, compression effects and cor-
responding modes are not included here. 
12.2.2   System Model with Rotational Effects 
According to the oscillator chains configuration and the coordinate system selec-
tion, the rotational speed has no effect on the kinematics of the lumped mass. 
Thus, their equations are trivial and can be found in [17]. Here, attention has to be 
paid to the formulation of the finite element equations. 
To describe the kinematics of the beam elements, a rotating frame (x1y1z1) is at-
tached on the neutral fiber of the beam. The rotation matrix (direction cosine ma-
trix) between the fixed frame (XYZ) and the rotating frame (x1y1z1) is defined by 
introducing two intermediate frames as well as three successive rotations: 
1. φ2 about Y defining the frame (x2y2z2), 
2. φ3 about z2 defining the frame (x3y3z3), 
3. φ1 about x3 defining the frame (x1y1z1). 
It is assumed that a non-holonomic constrain 
X
⋅
= Ω
e
ω
e
                                             (12.4) 
holds, where ωe is the angular velocity vector of the beam elements with respect to 
the fixed frame, eX is the unit vector of coordinate X in the fixed frame, Ω is the 
constant spindle’s angular velocity. It should be pointed out that after linearization 
about small deformations, the rotations (φ2, φ3) can be substituted approximately 
by the rotations (φY, φZ) shown in Figure12.3 b). 
The total element’s kinetic energy is composed of translational and rotational 
parts and can be expressed as 
0
0
1
1
2
2
L
L
T
T
e
e
T
µ
ds
ds
=
+


e
e
e
e
e
v v
ω Θ ω
,                                (12.5) 

272 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
where μe is the mass per unit length of the finite element, the absolute veloci-
ty ve is the derivative of ue=(uZ, uY) with respect to time in the non-rotating frame 
and Θe is the mass moment of inertia of the element. While neglecting the shear 
and torsion deformations as well as the axial loads, the potential energy of the 
element can be expressed as 
0
1
2
L
T
e
e
U
EI
ds
′′
′′
= 
e
e
u
u
,                                      (12.6) 
where E is the Young’s modulus, Ie is the second moment of area of the element 
and  
ue˝=∂2ue/∂s2.                                                  (12.7) 
The internal viscous damping of the tool is assumed to be proportional to the ele-
ment bending stiffness EIe with an introduced damping factor di [19, 21]. By var-
iational calculation the linearized element’s equations of motion are 
(
)
(
)
i
i
d
d
+
−Ω
+
+
Ω
=
e
e
e
e
e
e
se
e
e
M q
K
G
q
K
K
q
f


,                   (12.8) 
where the element matrices are similar as stated in [14, 21]. It is noteworthy that a 
self-excited term arises due to the rotation and internal viscous damping of the 
tool, which differs from regenerative effects in cutting processes. 
The assembled system’s equations of motion consisting of the finite elements 
and oscillator’s equations of motion are accomplished with the compatibility con-
straints at the corresponding element nodes. In total, the comprehensive model has 
170 degrees of freedom (DOF). It should be noted that the system’s equations ex-
pressed in the fixed frame have a simple matrix form due to the non-rotating oscil-
lator chains. When they are transformed into the rotating frame, time-dependent 
terms (cosΩt and sinΩt) appear in the oscillator-related components [17]. 
12.2.4   Process Model for Micro Milling 
A complex geometrical model is implemented in order to calculate the dynamic 
cutting forces. Regarding the cutting process, one significant difference between 
macro and micro cutting is the influence of the cutting edge radius rβ. While in 
macro milling rβ is significantly smaller than the chip thickness h, in micro milling 
rβ is of the same order as h. Above the critical chip thickness hcr shear deformation 
is dominant. Below this value elastic deformation becomes dominant and the ef-
fect of ploughing occurs [11]. 
Geometrical correlations can be used to estimate the critical chip thickness, 
(1 cos
)
cr
m
h
rβ
=
⋅
−
Θ
                                          (12.9) 
where Θm is the critical angle, which can be determined from the negative effec-
tive rake angle γeff (γeff = π/2 – Θm). 
 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
273
 
Empirical investigations from several researchers report a strong dependency of 
the workpiece material to the ratio hcr/rβ as follows: 
• micro cutting of copper values of 0.1 to 0.2 can be found in [13], 
• aluminum and steel values of 0.25 and 0.38 are reported in [20]. 
• L’Vov [10] derived a neutral point of Θm = 45° independent from friction. In 
this case, with (12.8) hcr/rβ is 0.293.  
To predict the surface roughness the correlation 
2
2
2
4
2
z
kin
f
d
d
R


=
−
−



                                      (12.10) 
can be extended by the critical chip thickness as [3] 
2
2
1
4
2
2
cr
cr
z
th
z
h
d h
f
R
d
f


⋅
=
+
+


⋅


.                                       (12.11) 
Figure 12.7 shows the critical chip thickness and the theoretical surface roughness 
based on the above-mentioned theories. 
 
0
2
4
6
µm
10
0
0,5
1
µm
2
cutting edge radius rβ
critical chip thickness hcr
 
h /
cr r = 0.1 
β 
0.2 
0.293 
0.4 
0
2
4
6
µm
10
0
0,5
1
µm
2
cutting edge radius rβ
theoretical roughness Rth
 
 
h /
cr r = 0.1 
β 
0.2 
0.293 
0.4 
 
Fig. 12.7 Influence of the cutting edge radius r  on the critical chip thickness hcr (left) and 
on the theoretical surface roughness Rth (right) 
Since the geometrical estimation of the surface roughness already indicates sig-
nificant influence of the cutting edge radius, the cutting forces and the process sta-
bility are supposed to be affected as well [8]. Figure 12.8 shows a schematic view 
of the geometrical conditions at the cutting edge considering this point. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

274 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
 
effective
rake angle
γeff
h( )
ϕ
α
s
rβ
Chip
workpiece
cutting edge
M
hcr
78,78°
wedge angle β
y
x
end mill
h( )
ϕ
Δx + y
t-τ 
Δ
t-τ
Δx + y
t 
Δ
t
cutting
edge
workpiece
clearance
angle α
 
Fig. 12.8. Schematic view of the cutting force model 
The chip thickness (12.12) can be described by a function of the rota-
tion angle φ, which is divided into segments φ(z) in order to consider the helix an-
gle λ of the end mill. Furthermore, information about the trochoidal cutting edge 
trajectory, self-induced and separately induced vibrations resulting in deflections 
are also included. 
( )
sin( )
z
z
z
current
t
t
seperately induced
static
previous cut
dynamic
h
h
h
h
f
f
n N
x
y
x
y
τ
τ
δ
φ
φ
φ
−
−
=
⋅
+
⋅⋅
⋅
+ Δ
+ Δ
+
Δ + Δ






      (12.12) 
By multiplying (12.12) with a screen function g(φ) (1 or 0), as described in [4], the 
interrupted cutting conditions as they occur in milling can be set according to the 
cutting parameters. The volume below the critical chip thickness Vpl is also de-
rived geometrically to take the ploughing effect into consideration. 
(
)
(
) (
)
2
2
2
2
2
arcsin 2
2
2
cr
pl
cr
cr
r
r
h
d
V
r
r
r
h
r
h
r
β
β
β
β
β
β
β




−
−




=
⋅
−
−
−
⋅
−
⋅




⋅








     (12.13) 
The cutting forces in radial and tangential direction can now be calculated by 
(
) (
)
,
0
p
f
z a
r
r
p
p r
pl
z
ploughing
cutting
x
F
K
a
h
K
V
φ
=
=
=
⋅
⋅
+
⋅



                                   (12.14) 
(
) (
) (
)
,
0
1
p
f
z a
t
t
p
p t
pl
f
z
ploughing
friction
cutting
x
F
K
a
h
K
V
φ
μ
=
=
=
⋅
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
+




                            (12.15) 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
275
 
Ki and μf are specific constants which have to be determined through experiments 
or taken from appropriate literature. xf describes the non-linear behavior of the 
specific force constants according to different ranges of the feed per tooth fz [9]. 
In order to investigate the cutting edge effect experiments are carried out with 
different materials. The choice orients to commonly used materials in micro mil-
ling especially for the die and mold fabrication (e. g. powder metallurgic steel, 
AmpColoy). Figure 12.9 shows the specific force constants. 
 
200
0
50
100
µm
10
2
10
3
N/mm
2
10
5
depth of cut ap
specific force Kr
 
 
PM X 190 CrVMo 20 (52HRC)
AmpColoy944
Cu
PMMA
CuZn39Pb1
specific force Kt
0
50
100
µm
200
10
2
10
3
N/mm
2
10
5
depth of cut ap
 
 
5
0
50
100
µm
200
10
2
10
3
N/mm
2
10
depth of cut ap
specific force Ka
 
a
d
n
= d (full immersion cutting)
  = 1 mm (TiAlN coating)
  = 29.000 rpm
e
 
Fig. 12.9 Specific forces in radial, tangential and axial direction for different materials 
To analyze the complex PMIs in micro milling, brass (CuZn39Pb1) is selected 
to be the most appropriate material. The specific force constants only possess mi-
nor non-linearities in a large field of operating points and lower tool wear can be 
estimated compared to hardened steel. Nevertheless, the cutting forces are high 
enough to evoke chatter. 
At this point, the cutting forces can be calculated in radial and tangential direc-
tion. By applying the standard rotation matrix 
sin( )
cos( )
cos( )
sin( )
φ
φ
φ
φ
φ
−
−


Θ = −



                                        (12.16) 
the cutting forces can be written in x and y- direction and compared to the meas-
ured process forces. 
[
]
T
xy
r
t
F
F F
φ
= Θ
                                          (12.17) 

276 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
Figure 12.10 shows calculated cutting forces under variation of the helix angle 
(left) and the cutting edge radius (right). 
 
-4
-2
0
N
4
force in x-direction Fx
λ = 0°
λ = 10°
λ = 20°
λ = 30°
λ = 40°
r  =   1 µm
β
rβ =   5 µm
rβ = 10 µm
λ  = 30°
  = 1 µm
rβ
d
K
K
f
a
  = 1 mm
 = 2900 N/mm
 = 2900 N/mm
  = 10 µm
 = 70 µm
r
t
z
p
2
2
d
K
K
  = 1 mm
= 2900 N/mm
= 2900 N/mm
t
r
2
2
f
a
z
p
f
  = 10 µm
 = 70 µm
µ  =  0,1
Variation of the helix angle λ
Variation of the cutting edge radius rβ
0
90
180
deg
360
rotation angle φ
 
 
0
90
180
deg
360
-4
-2
0
N
4
force in y-direction Fy
rotation angle φ
 
 
-4
-2
0
N
4
-4
-2
0
N
4
 
 
Fig. 12.10 Influence of the helix angle (left) and the cutting edge radius (right) on the  
cutting forces 
The calculation shows a significant influence of these parameters. The sudden 
rise of the cutting forces at small helix angles is noticeable. Also, increased cutting 
forces due to a higher cutting edge radius can be seen, which is typical for wearing 
end mills. This means that neglecting these effects might cause strong divergences 
when simulating the cutting forces and applying them to the machine tool struc-
ture. Especially the dynamic excitation of the end mill is affected [15]. 
The above-described force model consists of the major influences, which occur 
in micro milling. However, because of its non-linear and complex character it is 
difficult to be transferred into the frequency domain. It is therefore rather predes-
tinated for simulations in the time domain. Thus, for the following analyses in the 
time domain some simplifications are made: 
 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
277
 
• The feed per tooth fz is constantly set to 10 µm, which reduces the influences of 
the ploughing effect, 
• all experiments are carried out in full-immersion cutting to reduce high dynam-
ic excitation frequencies at the entrance and exit of the cutting edge. 
The used cutting force model corresponds to the implementations described in [4]. 
Solely the specific force constants Ki are adapted according to the varying depth of 
cut ap and the adjusted spindle speed n (see Fig. 12.9). 
12.2.5   Stability Prediction 
Stability charts can be calculated to predict stable cutting processes and to im-
prove the efficiency of the production. In macro-scale milling, two different types 
of instabilities can appear. They are referred to as (secondary) Hopf instability and 
period doubling (also flip instability). Period doubling usually occurs at low radial 
immersion and when using cutting tools with a small number of cutting edges. It is 
therefore under steady investigation for high speed cutting (HSC) processes. Sev-
eral analytical methods for stability prediction have been successfully developed 
both in the frequency domain [1, 4] and in the discrete time domain [2, 7]. The 
methods vary regarding the required computing time, which strongly affects their 
efficiency when high-order DOF systems are analyzed. In this context, the FE 
model is only applied to the case of full immersion cutting. Thus, the zeroth-order-
approximation method [1] is used. 
For stability analyses, the linearized form of the cutting force at a stationary 
operation point, i. e. the constant feed rate, is coupled to the system equations of 
motion. The equations can be transformed into the frequency domain by approx-
imating the force directional coefficients with only the zero order of their Fourier 
series. Although the spindle speed is explicitly involved in the governing delay-
differential-equation (DDE) by the gyroscopic and internal damping terms, the 
change of the structural dynamics (i. e. FRF at tool tip point) due to the spindle 
speed can be neglected for the considered spindle speed range. Reasons for that 
are the non-rotating modeling of the oscillator chains and relatively small rotary 
inertia of the end mill. 
12.3   Experimental Investigation 
12.3.1   Experimental Set-Up 
All experiments are carried out on a WISSNER Gamma 303 HP 3-axis milling 
machine tool using a Precise SC3062 high-frequency spindle with a maximum 
spindle speed of 60,000 rpm. Due to effects such as tool wear and premature tool 
breakage the micro milling process can still be seen as hardly reproducible. There-
fore, only one type of end mill is used. The two-fluted end mills with a nominal 
diameter of d = 1 mm are TiAlN-coated and possess a helix angle of λ = 30°. All 

278 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
experiments are conducted with brass (CuZn39Pb1) as workpiece material. To en-
able statistical analyses three tests are carried out at each operating point. 
Different measuring devices are used to gather signals describing the process 
characteristics. 
• the process forces are measured with a Kistler Dynamometer 9256C2, 
• the acoustic characteristics are recorded with a conventional microphone 
(maximum sample rate: 16 kHz), 
• the tool deflection and its velocity are measured with a Polytec Vibrometer 
OFV-353. 
All signals are logged with a National Instruments data acquisition system 
NI9162–USB and signal-treated (e. g. FFT) with MATLAB. 
12.3.2   Results 
The verification of the calculated stability charts requires a reliable criterion for 
unstable process conditions. Therefore, it is common practice to divide measured 
signals into their spectral components by applying a Fourier transformation. In 
case of unstable process conditions chatter frequencies can then be detected. Fig-
ure 12.11 exemplarily shows the spectra of measured forces and microphone sig-
nals at a spindle speed of n = 28,000 rpm and increasing values of the depth of cut 
ap from 60 µm to 105 µm. 
 
0
2
4
6
kHz
10
60
80
µm
110
0
0.1
0.2
depth of cut ap
Frequency
Magnitude
0
2
4
6
kHz
10
60
80
µm
110
0
0.1
0.2
Frequency
depth of cut ap
 
Fig. 12.11 Spectra of the force signals (left) and microphone signals (right) 
Both signals clearly reveal typical chatter frequencies above an ap-value of 
90 µm. It is remarkable that almost all chatter cases come along with multi-chatter 
frequencies. However, high magnitudes above 6 kHz can only be found at unsta-
ble operating points. Their appearance is therefore used as a chatter criterion. Re-
garding the microphone signals it can be stated that the frequencies with greater 
magnitude are related to the dominant natural frequency of the STT system. Other 
frequencies arise from a combination between the basis chatter frequency and the 
tool engagement frequency. This phenomenon is usually observed in macro-scale 
milling with low radial immersion but not in full immersion cutting processes, 
where only the frequency around the most flexible mode is addressed for chatter 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
279
 
[1, 4, 7]. Even though the spectrum of the microphone signals shows a lot more 
noise, presumably due to the minimal quantity lubrication (MQL), chatter fre-
quencies could reliably be found. More frequency contents can be seen in the 
spectrum of the force signals. The most significant is the cutting edge engagement 
frequency. Others are the spindle frequency and its multiples. All decisions as to 
whether an operation point is stable or unstable could be made from measurements 
from both devices yielding the same result. 
Considering the large number of measured data a way of clearly representing 
the chatter frequencies is needed. For this purpose, the Campbell diagram is pre-
destinated. Here, the chatter frequencies at different spindle speeds are visualized. 
Spindle speed dependencies of the chatter frequencies and possible causes for 
non-linearities or other phenomena can be analyzed in detail. Figure 12.12 shows 
Campbell diagrams for unstable operating points between 26,000 rpm and 
33,000 rpm. 
 
 
 
chatter frequencies scanned from force signals
chatter frequencies scanned from microphone signals
multiples of the spindle frequency n x
calculated spindle speed dependend chatter frequencies 
fsp
 
 
Fig. 12.12. Campbell diagrams from the force (left) and microphone spectra (right) 
The parallel dashed lines signify the multiples of the spindle frequency. Espe-
cially in the Campbell diagram of the force signal it can be seen that some fre-
quencies are located on those lines. All frequencies between the dashed lines are 
possible chatter frequencies. According to the theory of possible Hopf chatter fre-
quencies [7], the chatter frequencies correspond to basic eigenfrequencies between 
7 kHz and 7.2 kHz, which is presumably caused by the STT system. Therefore, 
the chatter frequencies are compared to calculated spindle-speed-dependent chat-
ter frequencies. A good accordance can be stated for both diagrams. However, the 
microphone spectra are considered to be the superior method for chatter detection. 
Figure 12.13 shows the analytically computed stability charts, calculated by using 
the previously detected chatter frequencies, as well as the experimentally deter-
mined stability charts. 

280 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
26.000
27.000
28.000
29.000
30.000
31.000
rpm
33.000
0
50
100
150
µm
250
Spindle Speed
depth of cut ap
 
 
experimentally determined stability limit
natural frequency
Mode 4    7085.56 Hz & 7246.88 Hz        0.0127 in x and 0.0051 in y direction
Mode 2      799.09 Hz &   799.10 Hz        0.0289 in x and y direction
Mode 3    1736.64 Hz & 1736.78 Hz        0.0189 in x and y direction
Mode 1      337.38 Hz;                             0.0165 in x and y direction
damping ratio
unstable cutting
stable cutting
 
Fig. 12.13 Experimentally determined stability chart and simulated stability lobes with dif-
ferent chatter frequencies 
It can be seen that the fourth mode of the machine tool model is dominant. The 
measured basic chatter frequency corresponds to this mode. The asymmetric mod-
eling in x and y-directions also takes the mode interaction into account. Influences 
of other modes cannot directly be determined from the chatter frequencies due to 
their small significance compared to the fourth mode. However, their effects can 
be observed from the milled surfaces as shown in Figure 12.14. 
 
200 µm
 
200 µm
 
200 µm
 
 
Fig. 12.14 Milled surfaces with stable cutting conditions at 28,000 rpm (left), unstable cut-
ting conditions at 31,000 rpm (middle) and at 29,000 rpm (right) 
The milled surface with stable conditions shows steady traces of the cutting 
edge trajectories. In contrast to that, unstable cutting conditions lead to different 
surfaces. Effects of overlaid vibrations can be seen additionally to the kinematic of 
the cutting edge trajectories. At 29,000 rpm, high-frequent deviations of the TCP 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
281
 
are reasons for that. This corresponds to the fourth mode above of 7 kHz. At 
31,000 rpm, a waviness caused by lower frequent vibrations can be seen. It is sup-
posed to be caused by the first three modes. 
The chatter frequencies as seen in Figure 12.11 and Figure 12.12 vary in their 
magnitude as well as in their frequency value. One reason for that are changing 
conditions of the cutting process and the machine tool structure. Analyses of the 
tool holder and the clamping conditions are carried out in order to point out the 
most significant influences. Figure 12.15 shows the run-out as a function of  
the spindle speed measured at the tool shank. Also, the chatter frequencies at  
different clamping conditions are analyzed. 
 
stiff
loose
0
2
4
6
kHz
10
0
m/s
0.02
Frequency
velocity
10.000 20.000 30.000 40.000
rpm
60.000
0
2
4
6
µm
10
Spindle Speed
deflection δ
 
Fig. 12.15 Run-out as a function of spindle speed (left) and chatter frequency of the end 
mill at different clamping conditions (right) 
It can be seen that the tool run-out is strongly influenced by the spindle speed. 
Therefore, the consideration of this effect within the comprehensive model is ne-
cessary. High magnitudes of frequencies, also at odd multiples of the spindle, and 
tool engagement frequency in force can be explained by that. 
A significant influence on the dominant chatter frequency depending on the 
clamping conditions of the tool can also be stated. The difference of the chatter 
frequency can amount up to 2 kHz, which strongly affects the calculation of the 
stability chart. 
12.4   Optimization 
As depicted in the preceding section, chatter frequencies strongly depend on the 
variation of tool clamping and process conditions. This complicates the analytical 
determination of stability charts. A reliable method to identify chatter frequencies 
without extensively repeating the milling operations at different depths of cut ap 
would therefore be helpful. For this purpose, an experimental set-up is illustrated 
in Figure 12.16. 
Piezo-ceramic actuators are clamped between the workpiece and the clamping 
vice on the machine tool. The workpiece is excited with different signals during 
the milling process in order to evoke chatter. 

282 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
clamping vice
piezo-actuators
micro end mill
laser beam
from Vibrometer
without excitation
excitation with chirp signal
experimental setup
depth of cut ap
40
50
60
µm
80
0
2
4
6
kHz
10
0
m/s
4
x 10
-3
Frequency
velocity
40
50
60
µm
80
0
2
4
6
kHz
10
0
0.5
1
Frequency
depth of cut ap
(m/s )/V
-1
40
50
60
µm
80
0
2
4
6
kHz
10
0
1
Frequency
depth of cut ap
 
Fig. 12.16 Workpiece excitation by piezo-actuators 
During the milling operation, the velocity of the micro end mill is measured us-
ing a laser vibrometer. Chatter frequencies can be determined from the spectra of 
the velocity of the end mill as soon as the process reaches the critical depth of cut 
ap (in this case ap = 60 µm). When a chirp signal is applied to the piezo-actuators 
the chatter frequencies can already be detected from the frequency response func-
tion (velocity/voltage) at a depth of cut of ap = 50 µm. The similar phenomenon is 
also observed using noise signals as excitation, with more frequency contents, 
however. 
Thus, this method allows the location of chatter frequencies at a very early 
stage of instability. Furthermore, no measurement equipment has to be applied, 
which possibly changes the dynamic behavior. The intended milling parameters 
can be used and the tool wear can be reduced compared to conventional methods. 
12.5   Conclusion 
This chapter has presented both analytical and experimental studies on the process 
stability of micro-milling . Experimental modal analyses of the machine tool struc-
ture as well as of the end mill were carried out. Subsequently, a comprehensive 
model including the machine tool dynamics as well as the process forces, was de-
veloped in order to calculate stability charts. The model includes rotational and 

12   Process Machine Interactions in Micro Milling 
283
 
gyroscopic effects of the spindle-tool holder-tool-system (STT). The model for the 
dynamic process forces is based on a geometrical description of the cutting 
process. Influences of the helix angle as well as the cutting edge radius were taken 
into account. Experimental determinations of the specific cutting forces were then 
carried out to complete a preliminary parameter identification. 
Using the model, calculated and experimentally determined stability charts 
were compared. Measured force, acoustic and optical signals were analyzed and 
employed as chatter criterion. The spindle speed dependence of the chatter fre-
quencies were visualized in Campbell diagrams in order to verify the basic chatter 
frequencies. It is noticeable that the first bending resonance frequency of the ana-
lyzed end mills under stiff clamping conditions was detected at 8.7 kHz whereas 
the measured chatter frequencies during the milling process were between 7 kHz 
and 8.5 kHz. It can therefore be concluded that the chatter frequencies are not only 
due to the dynamic behavior of the end mill but arise from complex interactions of 
the structure eigenfrequencies. Measurements of the milled surfaces confirm this 
presumption. Since the chatter frequencies significantly influence the stability of 
the system, experiments on the tool run-out and the clamping conditions of the 
tool holder were carried out. Divergences of the chatter frequencies of up to 2 kHz 
were detected. As a result of the sensitive dynamic behavior an experimental setup 
for chatter detection was introduced. The workpiece was excited with different 
signals by piezo-electric actuators. Thereby, a reliable in-situ detection of the chat-
ter frequencies without modifying the dynamic system (e. g. by the use of addi-
tional measurement equipment) could be realized. 
References 
[1] Altintas, Y., Budak, E.: Analytical prediction of stability lobes in milling. CIRP An-
nals 44, 357–362 (1995) 
[2] Bayly, P.V., Halley, J.E., Mann, B.P., Davies, M.A.: Stability of interrupted cutting 
by temporal finite element analysis. ASME J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 125, 220–225 (2003) 
[3] Brammertz, P.H.: Die Entstehung der Oberflächenrauheit beim Feindrehen- Bericht 
aus dem Laboratorium für Werkzeugmaschinen und Betriebslehre der TH Aachen, 
Industrie-Anzeiger, Essen, Nr.2, pp. 25–32 (1961) 
[4] Budak, E., Altintas, Y.: Analytical Prediction of Chatter Stability Conditions for Mul-
tidegree of Freedom Systems in Milling. Part I: General Formulation, Part II: Appli-
cation of the General formulation to Common Milling Systems. Transactions of the 
ASME J. Eng. Ind. 120, 22–36 (1998) 
[5] Duarte, M.L.M., Ewins, D.J.: Rotational degrees of freedom for structural coupling 
analysis via finite-difference technique with residual compensation. Mech. Syst. Sig-
nal Process 14(2), 205–227 (2000) 
[6] Filiz, S., Ozdoganlar, O.B.: A three-dimensional model for the dynamics of micro-
endmills including bending, torsional and axial vibrations. Precis. Eng. 35, 24–37 
(2011) 
[7] Insperger, T., Stépán, G.: Updated semi-discretization method for periodic delay-
differential equations with discrete delay. Int. J. Numer. Methods Eng. 61, 117–141 
(2004) 

284 
E. Uhlmann et al.
 
[8] Jun, M.B.G., DeVor, R.E., Kapoor, S.G.: Investigation of the Dynamics of Microend 
Milling—Part II: Model Validation and Interpretation. ASME J. Manuf. Sci. 
Eng. 128, 901–912 (2006) 
[9] Kienzle, O., Victor, H.: Spezifische Schnittkräfte bei der Metallbearbeitung. 
Werkstatttechnik und Maschinenbau 47(5), 224–225 (1957) 
[10] L’Vov, N.P.: Determining the minimum possible Chip-Thickness. Machines & Tool-
ing 40(4), 45–46 (1968) 
[11] Malekian, M., Park, S.S., Jun, M.B.G.: Investigation of Critical Chip Thickness and 
Micro Ploughing Forces. In: Proceedings of CIRP 2nd International Conference on 
Process Machine Interactions, Vancouver, Canada (2010) 
[12] Mascardelli, B.A., Park, S.S., Freiheit, T.: Substructure coupling of microend mills to 
aid in the suppression of chatter. ASME J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. 130, 011010 (2008) 
[13] Moriwaki, T., Shamoto, E.: Ultraprecision Ductile Cutting of Glass by Applying Ul-
trasonic Vibration. Annals of the CIRP 41(1), 141–144 (1992) 
[14] Nelson, H.D., McVaugh, J.M.: The dynamics of rotor-bearing systems using finite 
elements. ASME J. Eng. Ind. 98(2), 593–600 (1976) 
[15] Schauer, K.: Entwicklung von Hartmetallwerkzeugen für die Mikrozerspanung mit 
definierter Schneide, Dissertation, TU Berlin (2006) 
[16] Schmitz, T.L., Donaldson, R.R.: Predicting high-speed machining dynamics by sub-
structure analysis. CIRP Ann. - Manuf. Technol. 49(1), 303–308 (2000) 
[17] Shi, Y., Mahr, F., von Wagner, U., Uhlmann, E.: A spatial multiple degree of free-
dom machine tool model for micro milling simulation. In: Proc. 2nd CIRP-PMI, 
MM06, Vancouver (2010) 
[18] Uhlmann, E., Mahr, F., Shi, Y., von Wagner, U., Eßmann, J.: Interactions between 
mechanical vibrations and surface roughness during the micro milling process. In: 
Proceedings of CIRP 1st International Conference on Process Machine Interactions, 
Hannover, Germany, pp. 978–973 (2008) 
[19] Wauer, J.: Kontinuumsschwingungen. Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, Wiesbaden (2008) 
[20] Yuan, Z., Zhou, M., Dong, S.: Effect of diamond tool sharpness on minimum cutting 
thickness and cutting surface integrity in ultraprecission machining. Journal of Mate-
rials Processing Technology 62, S.327–S.330 (1996) 
[21] Zorzi, E.S., Nelson, H.D.: Finite element simulation of rotor-bearing systems with in-
ternal damping. ASME J. Eng. Power 99(1), 71–76 (1977) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 285–308. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 13    
Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling 
the Phenomenon of Tool Extraction 
B. Denkena, E.P. Stephan, M. Maischak, D. Heinisch, and M. Andres 
Abstract. Tool extraction is a phenomenon, where the end mill slips out of the 
shrink-fit chuck in axial direction during the cutting process. This leads to severe 
damage of the workpiece, the tool and in some cases even the machine spindle. So 
far, this is an unexplained problem with no repeatability. In this article, experi-
mental investigations such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and residual 
stress measurements on the clamping surface of shrink-fit chucks affected by tool 
extraction are presented. Furthermore, results from experiments on a special test-
rig and a mathematical approach, which aims at the prediction of failures due to 
Process Machine Interaction, are described. Within the mathematical approach, a 
finite element model of the tool and the tool holder is linked with a cutting force 
simulation. The dynamic behavior of the spindle is determined by frequency re-
sponse function measurements. From these measurements, a modal model is de-
duced and coupled with the finite element model of the tool holder. The presented 
mathematical model is used to compute the resulting stresses in the interface of 
those components due to process forces.  
13.1   Introduction 
Thermal shrink-fit tool holders are widely used in high speed (HSC) and high per-
formance cutting (HPC), where high torque transmission and excellent concentric-
ity is required [1]. The clamping mechanism of shrink-fit chucks is based on an  
interference fit between the chuck and the tool shank. By heating up the chuck, 
typically by a high-frequency inductor, the inner diameter extends and the tool can 
be fed into it. At cooling down, the chuck reverts to its original size and thus 
clamps the tool. In comparison to other tool holders the clamping forces of shrink-
fit chucks are very high and concentricity typically is below 3 µm at 3 times the 
tool diameter. Hence, especially for HSC milling operations, where spindle speeds 
exceed 10,000 rpm, shrink-fit tool holders are commonly used due to the simplici-
ty of the tool holder’s design, which contributes to its balance. There are no 
clamping mechanisms, which have to be counterbalanced (Fig. 13.1) [2].  
Analytical dimensioning of shrink-fits can be found in DIN 7190 [3], which is 
adequate for calculating the main parameters such as the joint pressure and the re-
quired interference depending on the intended loads. Rondé [4] performed  

286 
B. Denkena et al.
 
extensive experimental investigations on thermal shrink fit holders and developed 
analytical approaches for the calculation of transferable forces and the deforma-
tion behavior of collet chucks. Furthermore, he pointed out that shrink-fit chucks 
are excellent for transferring the highest torque compared to the other investigated 
collet chucks and are therefore well-suited for HSC and HPC. 
 
 
Fig. 13.1 Shrink-fit tool holder Ø 16 mm [Schunk] 
Tool extraction is a phenomenon, where the end mill slips out of the shrink-fit 
chuck during the cutting process, which leads to severe damage of the workpiece, 
the tool and in some cases even the spindle [5, 6]. There is also the risk of injury 
to the worker by splintering parts. Tool extraction is a problem mainly reported 
from high speed or high performance cutting [7].  
 
 
Fig. 13.2 Extracted milling cutter 
Figure 13.2 shows a milling cutter, which slipped out of the shrink-fit chuck 
and broke off during high speed milling of aluminum. From reported cases it is 
known that an extraction of several millimeters sometimes occurs after only a few 
minutes of operating time. In other cases, shrink-fit malfunction appeared after 
months of operation. Until now, no specific repeated pattern has been recognized. 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
287
 
The appearance of tool extraction can also not be connected to obvious chatter vi-
brations. Furthermore, there are no obvious faults related to the shrinking process. 
Hence, the cause of this phenomenon is presently unknown but it is legitimately 
assumed that it is an effect from the interaction of the cutting process and the 
tool/tool holder/spindle dynamics. Thus, for investigating the phenomenon of tool 
extraction the dynamic behavior of the spindle as well as the milling process have 
to be considered. 
Solution Approach   
The objective is the comprehension and subsequently the prediction of critical 
machining conditions (see Fig. 13.3). Therefore, after analyzing damage cases, the 
phenomenon is analyzed by creating a simulation model of the tool and the shrink-
fit holder. This model enables the transient calculation of the stresses in the con-
tact zone between the tool shank and the holder’s clamping bore. The interaction 
with the cutting process and the spindle dynamics is performed by coupling the 
tool/tool holder model with a cutting force calculation on one side and a dynamic 
model of the spindle on the other side. 
 
 
 
Fig. 13.3 Solution approach 
Supplementary to the simulations, experimental investigations are performed. 
Shrink-fit holders and tools from damage cases are analyzed. Experiments for the 
verification of the simulation models are carried out, and test series on a test rig 
are conducted to reproduce the phenomenon of tool extraction. The comprehen-
sion as to which circumstances make the interface between the tool and the tool 
holder fail enables the prediction of critical machining conditions.  

288 
B. Denkena et al.
 
The next section presents selected damage cases and shows results from ana-
lyses of the accordant shrink-fit holders. Furthermore, the test-rig for reproducing 
the tool extraction experimentally is described as well as results from those expe-
riments. Subsequently, the simulation model of the tool and the tool holder is in-
troduced, followed by simulation results and a short summary.  
13.2   Experimental Investigations 
As the phenomenon of tool extraction is not yet known in detail, the analysis of 
damage cases may help to understand the interaction between the tool shank and 
the tool holder’s clamping surface. In this section, two damage cases are de-
scribed, where tool extraction occurred. Furthermore, the clamping surface of sev-
eral shrink-fit tool holders subjected to tool extraction has been analyzed and the 
results are discussed here. Finally, a test-rig for reproducing tool extraction under 
pre-determined conditions is shown and results are presented. 
13.2.1   Damage Cases 
The following damage cases occurred at high speed milling of aluminum work-
pieces for aerospace parts. In aerospace industry, integral components made from 
aluminum are widely used. To avoid joints those parts are manufactured from sol-
id blocks. The advantage is the optimal usage of the material properties at a mini-
mum weight. As integral components typically have a material removal rate of 
more than 95 %, high cutting speeds and feed rates are required for economic cut-
ting processes. In those high speed cutting processes tool extraction is a known 
problem and leads to severe damage, not only to the tool and the workpiece but in 
some cases also to the spindle and, thus, causes a significant economic loss. 
Figure 13.4 shows a workpiece of Al7075, where the tool, a Ø25 mm serrated end 
mill, slipped out of the holder by 5 mm at a revolution speed of 16,000 rpm and a 
feed rate of 21 m/min. The depth of cut was continuously increased by a 5°-angled 
tool path at 15 mm width of cut. At the corner, where the direction of feed changes 
by 90 degrees and an increase of the immersion angle occurs, the cutter started to 
move out of the shrink-fit holder in axial direction. After approximately 30 mm 
the cutting forces exceeded the material limits and the tool broke off. The marks 
on the workpiece right before the point of process interruption indicated severe vi-
brations of the tool. At that point, the end mill had slipped out of the shrink-fit 
holder by approximately 5 mm. 
In contradiction to the previous case, the tool damage described in the follow-
ing occurred at high performance cutting of titanium during a test series. As 
shown in Figure 13.5, the workpiece was machined by slot milling with an overlap 
of 17 mm with a Ø25 mm three-edged end mill. The depth of cut was 50 mm at a 
spindle speed of 636 rpm and a feed rate of 0.15 mm per tooth. 
 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
289
 
 
Fig. 13.4 Aluminum workpiece subjected to tool extraction  
 
 
Fig. 13.5 Tool extraction at titanium workpiece and broken tool with tool holder 
As titanium is a high-tensile material, machining is carried out at comparatively 
slow cutting speeds and the cutting forces are much higher compared to the ma-
chining of aluminum. In this case, a reinforced shrink-fit holder with a wall thick-
ness of 17 mm was used. The interference of the tool shank and the holder is 
24 µm and thus lies within the tolerance compared to other shrink-fit holders. 
Measurements with a tri-axial dynamometer mounted between the workpiece re-
vealed that process forces were increasing from line to line due to increasing wear 
of the cutting edges. 
13.2.2   Analysis of Shrink-Fit Chucks Subjected to Damage 
In order to investigate the causes of tool extraction, shrink-fit holders from several 
damage cases were analyzed by geometry measurements, scanning electron mi-
croscopy (SEM), residual stress measurements, hardness testing as well as surface 
and roughness measurements. For comparison, new and normally used tool hold-
ers were also analyzed in the same manner. Measurements of the interference be-
tween tool shank and the holder’s clamping bore showed that the tool holders in 
the damage cases do not have significant lower interference fits than other holders. 

290 
B. Denkena et al.
 
The subsequent analyses concentrated on the clamping surface of the shrink-fit 
holders. Therefore, the holders were serrated into smaller parts as shown in Figure 
13.6 in order to gain access to the clamping surface. With these parts surface mea-
surements at different positions were performed using SEM. Moreover, measure-
ments of the residual stresses in the clamping surface were performed at the five 
axially-ordered spots designated in Figure 13.6. 
 
 
Fig. 13.6 Shrink-fit holder subjected to tool extraction  
 
With an X-ray diffractometer of the type GE XRD 3000 P the stresses were 
measured in axial (x) and circumferential (y) direction. For the presented data, 
damaged shrink-fit chucks with different tool diameters were analyzed. The re-
sults were compared to new shrink-fit chucks and to those already subjected to 
several clamping cycles. 
Figure 13.7 shows the mean values of the residual stresses divided into three 
groups. New shrink-fit chucks, those subjected to several clamping cycles for ref-
erence and holders from damage cases. Subdivided by circumferential and axial 
direction, mean values for each of the three groups were calculated and related to 
the mean stresses of the new shrink holders. 
The mean stress amplitudes proved that – compared to the new and normal-
lyused – the residual stresses in holders affected by tool extraction are significant-
ly higher than in new or normally used chucks. Especially in the circumferential 
direction, the residual stresses increased at a higher percentage than in axial direc-
tion. This indicates that the material properties in the clamping surface are not  
only affected in axial direction when tool extraction occurs but rather in circumfe-
rential direction. 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
291
 
 
Fig. 13.7 Measurements of residual stress in clamping surfaces  
Thus, with the help of SEM measurements the clamping surface is further in-
vestigated. In Figure 13.8 a) a section of the clamping surface of a shrink-fit chuck 
being used for several clamping cycles without tool extraction is shown. On the 
surface, the grinding grooves from the manufacturing process can clearly be iden-
tified in circumferential direction. Moreover, the surface is flattened due to the 
previously applied clamping pressure.  
The bright marks on the clamping surface of the shrink-fit chuck in Figure 13.8 
b), which was subjected to tool extraction, corroborate the theory of the tool shank 
revolving and flexing in the clamping bore and piece-wise slipping in the axial di-
rection. 
 
Fig. 13.8 SEM measurement of new and damaged clamping surface   

292 
B. Denkena et al.
 
Thus, neglecting thermal effects so far, it seems that not only axial slipping be-
tween tool shank and shrink-fit chuck but rather circumferential slipping is a main 
phenomenon when tool extraction occurs. Hence, it is assumed that, due to dy-
namic interaction between the tool and the workpiece, tool extraction is a combi-
nation of axial and circumferential slipping. Once static friction is lost, axial force 
induced by the right-handed helix angle of the milling cutter leads to a relative  
axial movement. 
13.2.3   Experimental Investigations on Test Rig 
In order to experimentally determine the dynamic conditions, which lead to tool 
extraction, a special test-rig has been designed and built up (Fig. 13.9). With this 
test-rig, different tool holders can be exposed to dynamic loads at revolution 
speeds of up to 20,000 rpm. The tool holder is mounted on a conventional milling 
spindle and a carbide cylinder is clamped in the holder as a dummy tool. The car-
bide cylinder itself is connected to a rotor shaft designed for transferring the loads 
to the tool/tool holder interface. The loads are applied via electromagnetic actua-
tors in radial and axial direction. With a second milling spindle, connected by an 
axially-elastic clutch, torque loads can also be applied. The displacement of the ro-
tor shaft is measured at the radial lamination core in radial and axial direction with 
five eddy current sensors. The rotational displacement between tool and tool hold-
er is measured via rotary-pulse generators in the spindles. The test-rig is controlled 
via a rapid prototyping system, which allows fully-automated operation and the 
deterministic application of harmonic and non-harmonic load spectra.  
 
 
Fig. 13.9 Spindle test-rig at IFW  

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
293
 
More than 100,000 tests were performed with diameter 12 and 16 mm tool-
tool-holder combinations at usual interference fits. However, test results showed 
that dynamic loads applicable by the test-rig are too low to enforce shrink-fit fail-
ures in terms of relative axial or rotational displacement of tool shaft and tool-
holder. This might not only be explained by the forces but also by differences in 
the structural dynamic behavior of the tool/tool holder/spindle assembly in the 
test-rig compared with that in a cutting process. Thus, widened shrink-fit chucks 
were used for further tests. At these chucks, the clamping bore was previously wi-
dened by honing. With this process, the cylindricity and surface quality of the 
clamping bore are only minimally affected as honing is also the finishing process 
in the production of shrink-fit chucks.  
In the following, results from tests with widened shrink-fit chucks with a no-
minal diameter of 16 mm are presented. In these tests, tool extraction occurred 
under several dynamic loads. The parameters defining the dynamic load are ampli-
tudes of radial and axial force, excitation frequency and torque. The loads in radial 
(Fr(t)) and axial (Fa(t)) direction are then defined as a harmonic function: 
 
( )
(
)
(
)
( )
(
)
0,
0,
0,
sin 2
sin 2
sin 2
r
x
x
x
y
y
xy
y
a
z
z
xz
z
F
t
A
f t
F
A
f t
F
F
t
A
f t
F
π
π
ϕ
π
ϕ
=
+
+
+
+
=
+
+
 
(13.1) 
The torsional load is defined as constant (M). The interference-fit as a parameter is 
induced by using shrink-fit chucks with different widening. Furthermore, proper-
ties of the clamping bore have to be considered, such as cylindricity, surface 
roughness and the coefficient of friction between tool shank and clamping surface. 
During the tests, the radial, axial and angular displacement of the rotor shaft is 
measured. Radial displacement is measured on the left and right side of the radial 
laminaton core. As the measurement location on the right is closer to the tool/tool 
holder assembly its amplitude y2 is used within the analysis of the test results. In 
Figure 13.10, the ranges of the varied parameters and the discrete parameter val-
ues are shown. As the system of rotor shaft, tool, tool holder and spindle shows 
frequency-dependent dynamic behavior when excited by harmonic loads, the exci-
tation frequency is an important parameter. Within only small frequency ranges 
large variations in the resulting amplitude may occur. Thus, frequency is the pa-
rameter with the most variation. In order to reduce the number of experiments on-
ly few parameters were varied, as shown in Figure 13.10. Other parameters  
remained constant or zero, i. e. the tests were performed at a constant revolution 
speed of 1,000 rpm, only radial force in y-direction, constant axial force and  
torque. 
Analyzing the amplitude y2 (near the tool) reveals the dynamic behavior of the 
system under forced vibration in radial y-direction. In Figure 13.11 (top), the y2 is 
plotted against the excitation frequency fy for Ay = 1,250 N and F0,z = 250 N and 
M ≥ 30 Nm. The diagram clearly shows some of the resonances of the system. A 
modal analysis of the rotor shaft shows the first bending eigenfrequency at 130 Hz 
with a very high amplitude so that no tests are possible around this frequency. The 
second and third eigenfrequency can be found at 335 and 417 Hz, both with a sim-
ilar mode shape, where bending occurs at tool and tool holder. The histogram in  
 

294 
B. Denkena et al.
 
 
Fig. 13.10 Ranges and values for varied parameters 
 
 
Figure 13.11 (bottom) shows the distribution of failure occurrence related to exci-
tation frequency. The histogram includes all experiments, where an axial dis-
placement and/or a rotational displacement between tool shank and tool holder  
occurred (both referred to as “failure”). Obviously, more than 90 % of the failures 
occurred around an excitation frequency of 400 Hz, the third resonance in  
y-direction of the rotor shaft/tool/tool holder/spindle system, even though there are 
higher amplitudes at other frequencies. Thus, it can be concluded that frequencies 
exciting mode shapes with high bending at tool and tool holder promote tool ex-
traction. Furthermore, test analyses revealed that the rotational load also plays an 
important role as tool extraction has only happened under significant torque so far. 
Of course, other parameters, especially the interference fit, are also responsible for 
the combination of load parameters leading to tool extraction. 
In Figure 13.12, an example of tool extraction occurring during a test is shown. 
The excitation frequency fy is 398 Hz with an amplitude Ay of 1,250 N and a tor-
que load M of 35 Nm. The bottom right plot shows the rotational displacement be-
tween tool shank and tool holder. At the time the torque load is applied, the tool 
starts revolving in the shrink fit chuck. At approximately the same time, the tool 
moves axially out of the holder, both movements slightly decrease with time. It is 
characteristic within this test that an axial displacement can occur even without an 
axial load. In most of the tests, the rotational displacement is much higher than the 
axial displacement.  
 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
295
 
 
Fig. 13.11 Amplitude y2 against frequency (top) and occurrence of failures (bottom) 
 
 
Fig. 13.12 Example of single analysis of tool extraction  

296 
B. Denkena et al.
 
In Figure 13.13, the clamping surfaces of a shrink-fit chuck subjected to expe-
rimental tests but without tool extraction (a) is compared to surfaces from shrink-
fit chucks, where tool extraction occurred (b - d). In Figure 13.13a, only the 
grooves from honing can be seen whereas b, c and d all show significant stripes in 
circumferential direction, apparently caused by the revolving of the tool shank. In 
axial direction, no significant marks can be found. This is due to the fact that the 
ratio of circumferential displacement and axial displacement related to the clamp-
ing surface in all experiments with tool extraction lies between 3.5 and 20,000. 
The ratio tends to rise with increasing interference fit. Comparing these results 
with the analysis of the damage cases presented in section 13.2.2, it is assumed 
that in the case of tool extraction a sudden increase of torque first leads to a re-
volving of the tool followed by an axial movement primarily caused by axial 
process force. In order to understand what happens in the interface of the tool and 
the tool holder, finite element simulations are performed with a mathematical 
model of the tool and the tool holder is described in the following sections. 
 
 
Fig. 13.13 Clamping surface of shrink-fit chuck without (a) and with tool extraction (b - d) 
13.3   Mathematical Modeling  
For a numerical simulation allowing the prediction of tool extraction during a cut-
ting process a finite element model of the tool holder and the shrunk tool is essen-
tial. The governing equation describing the cutting process is the visco-elastic  
 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
297
 
wave equation. Equipped with appropriate boundary and initial conditions, the 
displacement field u(x,t) occurring in the system of tool and tool holder during the 
process satisfies the following boundary and initial value problem (BIVP). 
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
( )
,
,
 
 
,
,
       in   Ω
0,
 
,
 ,
     on   Γ
0,
   
,
·
,
     on   Γ
0,
,0   
,0
 .
D
N
x
x t
div
x t
div
x t
x t
T
x t
x t
T
x t
x t
T
x
x
ρ
β
σ
σ
σ
−
−
=
×
=
×
=
×
=
=
u
u
u
f
u
U
u
u
0
T
n
u



    (13.2) 
In the above problem, the domain Ω represents the structure of tool and tool hold-
er and its boundary ∂Ω is decomposed into the two disjoint sets ΓN and ΓD. The 
given data is the density function ρ(x), which is assumed to be independent of 
time. Moreover, volume forces f(x,t) as well as boundary tractions T(x,t) on the 
Neumann boundary part ΓN and inhomogeneous displacements U(x,t) on the Di-
richlet boundary part ΓD are assumed to be given during the whole process. More 
precisely, the boundary tractions result from the cutting process and act at the tip 
of the tool and the inhomogeneous displacements result from the dynamic beha-
vior of the spindle interacting with the tool holder. Both the cutting forces and the 
vibrations of the spindle were modeled separately to save a time-consuming finite 
element model consisting of all of the four mentioned structures (spindle, tool, 
tool holder and workpiece), see also the upper right image in Figure 13.3. In the 
following sub-sections, the finite element model of the tool and the tool holder, 
the model of spindle dynamics, the cutting force model and the coupling of the 
three models are described in detail. 
13.3.1   Finite Element Model of Tool and Tool Holder 
In the above BIVP, the associated material law is Hooke’s law for linearly-elastic 
material. The tool is made of carbide and since the considered workpiece is alumi-
num no plastic deformations are assumed to occur in the tool or in the tool holder. 
A transient three-dimensional finite element model is used to approximate the 
BIVP for the structure of tool and tool holder. The time discretization is performed 
with the Discontinuous Galerkin Method (DGM), see [8], using piece-wise qua-
dratic basis functions. Frictional contact conditions on the contact interface be-
tween tool and tool holder within the model have been neglected since the two 
structures are assumed to stick along the whole contact interface after the shrink-
ing process up until critical tangential stresses are exceeded, i. e. tool extraction 
occurs. Hence, in the above problem, the domain Ω represents the compound of 
tool and tool holder owning inhomogeneous material parameters, see Figure 
13.14. 
 
 

298 
B. Denkena et al.
 
 
Fig. 13.14 Cross-section of the FE-model of tool and tool holder 
 
The shrinking process is approximated by a linear heat strain law. The corres-
ponding contact pressure is modeled by applying a negative change of temperature 
to the tool holder. The required temperature change is computed with the follow-
ing formula 
 
Δ
Δ
α
=
T i
r
T
r  
(13.3) 
where ∆r denotes the interference fit, αΤ represents the coefficient of thermal ex-
pansion of the tool holder and ri considers the inner radius of the tool holder. This 
approach leads to a volume force denoted by f(x,t) in the BIVP, which is indepen-
dent of time. In the weak formulation, the volume force reads 
 
( ) (3 ( )
2 ( ))div( ( ))
α
ψ
λ
μ
ϕ
Ω
Δ
+

T T
t
x
x
x dx  
(13.4) 
where ψ(x) and ϕ(x) denote temporal and spatial basis functions respectively and 
λ(x) and μ(x) are the Lamé coefficients depending on the materials.  
To simulate the process numerically a transient three-dimensional finite element 
method is implemented considering the close-to-process structure of tool and tool 
holder. Therefore, the elastic wave equation is re-written into a system of first or-
der equations in time by introducing the velocity v as an additional unknown vari-
able such that the DGM in time can be applied 
 
( ) (
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
,
,
  
,
 
,
.
x
x t
div
x t
div
x t
x t
ρ
β
σ
σ
−
=
−
−
=
u
v
0
v
v
u
f


 
(13.5) 
By applying the DGM in time and standard FEM in space to the above problem, 
the corresponding discrete weak formulation results in a linear system of equa-
tions for the coefficients of the finite element basis functions of displacement and 
of velocity. To circumvent large displacements due to the rotation of the system 
the displacements and the velocities are described in rotational coordinates. By 
further applying the approach of Li and Wiberg [9] the system can be decoupled 
into a system concerning the velocity and three linear equations for the displace-
ment coefficients. Finally, the stiffness matrix resulting from the divergence term 
in the elastic wave equation is used to approximate the material damping with 
damping factor β within the process. Let ⊗ be the tensor product, then the two li-
near systems are: 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
299
 
 
1
1
2
2
3
3
2
·
2
3
k
k
k
ρ
−
−
−
−


+
−












+
=
−













+



⊗
+
⊗
⊗

ρ
C
ρ
C
A
M v
F
Au
v
C
C
C
v
F
Au
v
F
M
A
Au
M
      (13.6) 
 
3
1
2
1
2
3
3
1
2
3
15
·
2
2
3
4
4
10
−
−


+














=
+
+
−
















−
+
+




k
k
k
k
k
k
k
Au
Av
u
A
0
0
u
Au
Av
Av
Av
0
A
0
u
0
0
A
Av
Av
Av
 
(13.7) 
Within the systems the matrix Mρ denotes the mass matrix, MC the mass matrix 
resulting from the coriolis force and A = K – ω2MZ the sum of the stiffness matrix 
K and the mass matrix MZ resulting from the centrifugal force multiplied by the 
square of the revolution velocity ω. The three by three matrices Cρ, CC, and CA 
(see 13.8) are the corresponding coefficient matrices resulting from the analytical 
time integration of the DGM and the decoupling of the system, where ϕι are the 
hat basis functions and the first bubble function in time. 
 
8
3
4
10
3
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
3
3
3
3
24
24
60
4
5
8
3
10
7
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
2
3
3
3
3
24
24
60
10
7
10
3
30
13
1
1
1
1
4
3
3
3
3
15
60
60
225
,
,
0
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
k
β
β
β
β
β
β
β
β
β
ω
+
+
−
−
−
−
−
+
+
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
−












=
=
=


















ρ
C
A
C
C
C
(13.8) 
The time step is denoted by k and the vectors u– and v– represent the coefficient 
vectors of the displacement and the velocity at the end of the previous time inter-
val respectively. Finally, the vectors F1, F2, and F3 correspond to the right hand 
side vectors resulting from the volume force and the boundary conditions. The two 
linear systems have to be solved in each time step. 
A prediction of an extraction of the tool can be made by observing the stresses 
occurring at the interface of tool and tool holder during the process simulation. 
Using the DIN 7190 norm [3], which concerns the necessary contact pressure of 
shrunk tools, an extraction may be possible, if the ratio of contact pressure and 
tangential stresses falls below a determined bound. Of course, this may occur only 
locally so that experimental tests have to be made to validate the simulations. 
13.3.2   Model of Spindle Dynamics 
Since the spindle is not close-to-process a direct implementation of the whole 
structure into the transient finite element model described in Section 13.3.1 seems 
unnecessary. However, the dynamic behavior of the spindle may lead to devia-
tions and vibrations of the whole system, which cannot be neglected. 

300 
B. Denkena et al.
 
For this reason, a sub-structure modeling technique using experimental modal 
analysis (EMA) is applied. General techniques for sub-structure modeling are de-
scribed in [10–12]. Receptance coupling techniques for the tool/tool hold-
er/spindle assembly are especially subject to numerous works related to stability 
prediction for cutting processes [13–20]. 
The model of the spindle dynamics obtained from EMA is characterized in 
modal degrees of freedom. In order to integrate such a model in a finite element 
simulation it is transformed to a model containing physical degrees of freedom re-
ferred to a virtual point P at the joint between the tool holder and the spindle, see 
Figure 13.15a.  
 
 
Fig. 13.15 Measurement of spindle dynamics with HSK flange from separated tool holder  
To derive the model in modal degrees of freedom 24 frequency response func-
tions (FRFs) were measured on an HSK-A-63 flange of a separated shrink-fit 
chuck, as depicted in Figure 13.15b. The system was excited at two reference 
points in radial direction by using an impact hammer with integrated force sensor. 
The resulting excitation of the structure was measured by four tri-axial accelera-
tion sensors mounted on the HSK-A-63 flange. The obtained acceleration FRFs 
were integrated twice in order to obtain the receptances. A modal model with 34 
degrees of freedom within the frequency band of 200 to 2,500 Hz was created us-
ing a poly-reference parameter estimation method.  
By using the modal mass, damping and stiffness matrices MΦ, DΦ, KΦ and the 
incomplete mode shape matrix Φ obtained from the EMA, the system can be 
transformed into the following ordinary differential equation (ODE) with both 
physical and modal degrees of freedom representing the dynamic behavior of the 
spindle at the HSK flange: 
 
( )
( )
( )
( )
(0)
(0)
0
+
+
=
=
=



T
T
T
t
t
t
t
M x
D x
K x
F
x
x
 
(13.9) 
Within this system, MT, DT, and KT denote the transformed mass, damping and 
stiffness matrix respectively. F(t) is the force vector resulting from excitation of  
 
 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
301
 
 
Fig. 13.16 Comparison of measured and modeled FRFs   
 
 
the interface between tool holder and spindle. The first six components of x(t) de-
note the three translational and rotational degrees of freedom at the center point P. 
Figure 13.16 compares the drive point measurements with the estimated main de-
grees of freedom in radial x and y-direction from the transformed modal model. 
As can be clearly seen, the FRFs estimated from the transformed modal model re-
produce the measurements well. 
13.3.3   Cutting Force Model 
The boundary tractions T(x,t) in the BIVP resulting from the cutting process are 
computed by a cutting force model [21–23]. They correspond to the cutting forces 
of the process and are indispensable as they cause an excitation of the structure of 
tool and tool holder. The cutting force model is based on the assumption that the 
forces are proportional to the infinitesimally small cross-sectional surface 
i
j
A  and 
the associated arc length 
i
jb . The part of the cutting edge indenting the workpiece 
from the tip of the tool to the cutting depth ap is divided into n chips, where i de-
notes the chip number and j the number of the cutting edge, see Figure 13.17. To 
compute the surface
i
j
A the cutting edge trajectory is used to determine the chip 
thickness 
i
jh . According to Altintas [24], the proportionality of the tangential, 
radial and axial force components Ftra to 
i
j
A  and 
i
jb  is linear and demands the  

302 
B. Denkena et al.
 
experimental determination of shear force coefficients Ktra,c as multipliers to the 
surface and cutting coefficients Ktra,e as multipliers to the arc length. 
Once the coefficients are determined for the process the forces acting at each 
cutting edge j are computed to 
 
{
}
,
,
.
=
+
i
i
i
tra
tra c
j
tra e
j
j
A
b
F
K
K
 
(13.10) 
As the revolution velocity is assumed to be constant the tool rotation angle φ is a 
linear function of time t. 
 
 
Fig. 13.17 Model for determining the cutting edge trajectories and the cutting forces [23] 
If the forces are transformed into Cartesian coordinates by the transformation 
matrix 
xyz
tra
T
, i. e. 
 
{
}
{
}
=
i
i
xyz
xyz
tra
tra
j
j
F
T
F
 
(13.11) 
the corresponding process force at rotation angle φ can be computed as the sum 
over all chip numbers and all nz cutting edges to 
 
{
}
1
1
(
.
)
ϕ
=
=
= 
z
n
n
i
xyz
xyz
j
j
i
F
F
 
(13.12) 
However, this procedure assumes an ideal stiff tool, which is not the case in reali-
ty. For this reason, the model is extended considering self-excitations of the tool, 
which may be caused by the process forces. In this way, the chip thickness 
i
jh  is 
computed by considering the cutting edge trajectory at the rotation angle φ as well 
as a given deviation of the cutting edge at the same position and time. This will re-
sult in changes of the undeformed chip cross-section 
i
j
A  and therefore in different 
process forces. 
13.3.4   Coupling of the Models 
To predict a possible tool extraction during a cutting process the excitation of the 
structure of tool and tool holder resulting from the process forces has to be taken 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
303
 
into account. Furthermore, the structure is affected by the vibrations of the spin-
dle, which also result from the process forces. Hence, it is essential to couple the 
cutting force model on one side and the model of spindle dynamics on the other 
side with the transient finite element model of tool and tool holder, see Figure 
13.18. 
 
 
Fig. 13.18 Coupling of the models 
 
The coupling of the process forces is accomplished via a Dirichlet-to-Neumann 
mapping (DEN). The cutting edges in the cutting force model are discretized as n 
force vectors acting on the corresponding point of the cutting edge. Therefore, the 
finite element mesh at the tool tip is discretized such that the element edges of the 
mesh follow the cutting edges in the helix angle α, see also the left image of Fig-
ure 13.18. In this way, the n force vectors can be interpolated along the edges to a 
line force corresponding to the boundary traction T(x,t) in every time step. By ap-
plying the DGM the cutting forces contribute to the three vectors F1, F2, and F3 on 
the right hand side of the system (13.6). 
The implementation of the interaction of the structure of tool and tool holder 
with the cutting force process is explained in the following. The coupling process 
starts with an ideally stiff tool in the cutting force model, i. e. the deflection of the 
tool is 
0
0
( )
0.
=
xyz t
U
 The starting deflection of the tool for all subsequent time steps 
is determined by the deflection of the previous time step. The computed cutting 
forces
0 ( )
xyz
it
F
depending on the process parameters result in a deflection
1 ( )
xyz
it
U
of 
the tool for every time step ti. By using this deflection within the cutting force 
model in the same time step as described at the end of Section 13.3.3, the new 
forces 
1 ( )
xyz
it
F
 are calculated with the effective tool deflection. This procedure is 
repeated until the residual of two consecutive forces 
1
( )
( )
−
−
j
j
xyz
i
xyz
i
t
t
F
F
falls below 
a given bound. When the iteration loop has converged, the stresses on the interface 
of tool and tool holder can be computed. The coupling procedure at time step ti is 
visualized in Figure 13.19. 
 

304 
B. Denkena et al.
 
 
Fig. 13.19 Coupling of the cutting force model and the FE-simulation of tool and tool  
holder [6] 
 
On the other side, the vibrations of the spindle excited by the cutting forces in-
teract with the tool holder at the corresponding interface, see Figure 13.18. When 
the dynamic behavior of the spindle is known in terms of the ODE (13.9), it is 
coupled via a DEN mapping with the FE model of tool and tool holder by the in-
homogeneous Dirichlet data U(x,t) in the BIVP (13.2). Here, the Dirichlet boun-
dary ΓD is defined as the interface between tool holder and spindle. Starting with 
U(x,0) = 0 the displacement U(x,ti) is approximated by the solution x(ti) of the 
ODE (13.9). In detail, for every x on ΓD and every time step ti, the corresponding 
displacement is the sum of the translation in the first three components of x(ti) and 
the rotation of x around the center point P with rotation angles in the fourth to 
sixth component of x(ti)  
The force vector F(t) is necessary to solve the ODE (13.9). The deflection of 
the tool, which is caused by the cutting forces, results in an oscillation of the Di-
richlet boundary ΓD. Hence, the forces and moments in the first six components of 
the force vector F(t) on the right hand side of (13.9) are computed by the solution 
vectors u1, u2,, and u3 of the linear system (13.7). By computing the stress tensor 
σ(u) due to Hooke’s law, the forces and moments are computed to 
 
{
}
{
}
1
3
4
6
( )
:
( ( , ))
( )
:
(
)
( ( ( , ))
)
σ
σ
Γ
Γ
=
⋅
=
−
×
⋅




D
D
i
i
i
i
t
x t
dx
t
x
x t
dx
F
u
n
F
P
u
n
 
(13.12) 
where n denotes the normal outward to the Dirichlet boundary ΓD. Since the ei-
genfrequencies expressed by the model of spindle dynamics are not affected by an 
excitation the last 28 components of F(ti) are set to zero. To ensure that the correct 
data is exchanged within the coupling an iterative loop, as shown in Figure 13.19, 
is applied for every time step. This leads to a series of force vectors Fj(ti). Again 
the inner iteration stops, if the difference of two consecutive force vectors 
1
( )
( )
−
−
j
j
i
i
t
t
F
F
falls below a predefined bound. The cycle for a fixed time step 
it is visualized in Figure 13.20. 

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
305
 
 
Fig. 13.20 Coupling of the spindle dynamics and the FE-model of tool and tool holder [6] 
13.4   Application of Simulation Methods 
To approximate a cutting process with the help of the simulation methods de-
scribed in Section 13.3 the coupling of the different models has to be validated. 
For the coupling of the cutting force model with the finite element model of tool 
and tool holder the cutting forces of a cutting process are measured. These meas-
ured forces were compared with the forces resulting from the cutting force model 
when the coupling of the two models mentioned above is applied to the same 
process. 
 
 
 
Fig. 13.21 Transient simulation of process forces considering dynamic tool deflection  
The effect of the coupling, i. e. the consideration of the tool deflection within 
the cutting force model is visualized in Figure 13.21. The figure shows the forces 
in radial (Fr), axial (Fa) and tangential direction (Ft), which act on the cutting 
edges of the tool during one revolution of the cutting process. The continuous 
lines represent the forces from the cutting force model considering tool  
deflections, whereas the dashed lines are computed by the cutting force model 

306 
B. Denkena et al.
 
considering an ideally stiff tool. It turns out that the consideration of the tool dy-
namics has significant influence on the amplitude of the cutting forces, which 
should not be neglected. Furthermore, effects such as regenerative chatter can only 
be considered, if the models are coupled. 
With the help of the coupled models, simulations with various load cases are 
performed to investigate the stresses in the contact zone of the tool and the shrink-
fit chuck. As an example, Figure 13.22 shows the change in tangential stress in 
axial direction related to the initial stress state of the shrunk tool during a transient 
process simulation for a single time step. 
 
 
Fig. 13.22 Change in tangential stress in tool/tool holder interface due to cutting process 
The prediction of relative movement of the tool and the tool holder is made 
possible by observing the stresses in the contact zone. If the tangential stress ex-
ceeds a certain limit defined by the normal stress and a friction coefficient tool ex-
traction is assumed, the simulation is stopped.  
Summary 
The article shows experimental and mathematical approaches for the investigation 
of the phenomenon of tool extraction. The analysis of damage cases exhibits that 
tool extraction is caused by the dynamic interaction of the tool/tool holder/spindle 
structure with the cutting process. SEM and residual stress measurements of the 
clamping surface of damaged shrink-fit holders corroborate the thesis that the tool 
shank revolves in the clamping bore while simultaneously slipping out in axial di-
rection. With the help of a test-rig the phenomenon of tool extraction is repro-
duced under various load cases and main parameters are analyzed. 
Furthermore, simulations with a finite element model of the tool and the tool 
holder are performed concentrating on the stresses in the interface between the 
tool shank and the tool holder. In order to consider the dynamic behavior of  

13   Numerical Computation Methods for Modeling the Phenomenon  
307
 
the spindle a modal model is deduced from frequency-response-function-
measurements and coupled with the FE-model. The cutting process is simulated 
by geometrical intersection of the tool trajectory with the workpiece. The process 
forces are determined according to a cutting force model presented by Altintas 
[24]. The coupling of these models takes into account the tool deflection induced 
by the process forces and vice versa. Within transient simulations, the change of 
the stresses in the interface region resulting from the process machine interaction 
are computed aiming at the prediction of tool extraction. 
References 
[1] Schulz, H., Rondé, U.: Werkzeuge schrumpfspannen. Werkstatt und Betrieb 127(11), 
873–875 (1994) 
[2] Eastman, M.: Shrink-Fit Toolholding, Cutting Tool Engineering 49(3) (1997) 
[3] Deutsches Institut für Normung e.V., Pressverbände - Berechnungsgrundlagen und 
Gestaltungsregeln. Beuth Verlag, Berlin (February 2001) 17.040.10; 21.120.10/ 
[4] Rondé, U.: Untersuchung von Systemen zum Spannen von Zylinderschaftwerkzeugen 
unter besonderer Berücksichtigung ihrer Eignung für die Hochgeschwindigkeitsbear-
beitung, Dissertation, Darmstadt (1994) 
[5] Denkena, B., Stephan, E.P., Maischak, M., Heinisch, D., Andres, M.: Numerical 
computation methods for process-oriented structures in metal chipping. In: Denkena, 
B. (ed.) 1st International Conference on Process Machine Interactions, vol. 1, pp. 
247–256. PZH Produktionstechn, Zentrum (2008) 
[6] Denkena, B., Stephan, E.P., Maischak, M., Heinisch, D., Andres, M., Krüger, M.:  
Investigations on Dynamic Tool, Structure and Process Interaction. In: Altintas, Y. 
(ed.) 2nd International Conference on Process Machine Interactions, Vancouver 
(2010) 
[7] Fladerer, F.: Haltemomente sind beim Schrumpfen ein Maß für die Produktivität. Ma-
schinenmarkt 31(32), 28–29 (2007) 
[8] Johnson, C.: Numerical solution of partial differential equations by the finite element 
method. Dover Publ., Mineola (2009) 
[9] Li, X.D., Wiberg, N.E.: Structural dynamic analysis by a time-discontinuous Galerkin 
finite element method. Internat. J. Numer. Methods Engrg. 39(12), 2131–2152 (1996) 
[10] Duarte, M.L.M.: Experimentally derived structural models for use in further dynamic 
analysis, Dissertation, University of London (1996) 
[11] Ewins, D.J.: Modal testing, Theory, practice and application. Research Studies Press, 
Baldock (2000) 
[12] Allen, M.S., Mayes, R.L., Bergman, E.J.: Experimental modal substructuring to 
couple and uncouple substructures with flexible fixtures and multi-point connections. 
Journal of Sound and Vibration 329(23), 4891–4906 (2010) 
[13] Altintas, Y., Weck, M.: Chatter Stability of Metal Cutting and Grinding. CIRP An-
nals - Manufacturing Technology 53(2), 619–642 (2004) 
[14] Park, S.S., Altintas, Y., Movahhedy, M.: Receptance coupling for end mills. Interna-
tional Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 43(9), 889–896 (2003) 
[15] Filiz, S., Cheng, C.H., Powell, K.B., Schmitz, T.L., Ozdoganlar, O.B.: An improved 
tool-holder model for RCSA tool-point frequency response prediction. Precision En-
gineering 33(1), 26–36 (2009) 

308 
B. Denkena et al.
 
[16] Schmitz, T.L.: Torsional and axial frequency response prediction by RCSA. Precision 
Engineering 34(2), 345–356 (2010) 
[17] Özsahin, O., Ertürk, A., Özgüven, H.N., Budak, E.: A closed-form approach for iden-
tification of dynamical contact parameters in spindle-holder-tool assemblies. Interna-
tional Journal of Machine Tools and Manufacture 49(1), 25–35 (2009) 
[18] Ertürk, A., Özgüven, H.N., Budak, E.: Analytical modeling of spindle-tool dynamics 
on machine tools using Timoshenko beam model and receptance coupling for the 
prediction of tool point FRF. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manufac-
ture 46(15), 1901–1912 (2006) 
[19] Ahmadian, H., Nourmohammadi, M.: Tool point dynamics prediction by a three-
component model utilizing distributed joint interfaces. International Journal of Ma-
chine Tools and Manufacture 50(11), 998–1005 (2010) 
[20] Kolar, P., Sulitka, M., Janota, M.: Simulation of dynamic properties of a spindle and 
tool system coupled with a machine tool frame. The International Journal of Ad-
vanced Manufacturing Technology, 1–10 (2010) 
[21] Clausen, M.: Zerspankraftprognose und –simulation für Dreh- und Fräsprozesse, 
Hannover (2005) 
[22] Denkena, B., Tracht, K., Schmidt, C.: A flexible force model for predicting cutting 
forces in end milling. Production Engineering – Research and Development 13(2), 
15–20 (2006) 
[23] Denkena, B., Schmidt, C.: Experimental Investigation and Simulation of Machining 
Thin-Walled Workpieces. Production Engineering – Research and Development 1(4), 
343–350 (2007) 
[24] Altintas, Y.: Manufacturing automation. Metal cutting mechanics, machine tool vi-
brations, and CNC design. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge (2000) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 309–328. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 14 
Dynamic and Thermal Interactions  
in Metal Cutting 
P. Eberhard, U. Heisel, M. Storchak, and T. Gaugele 
Abstract. This contribution presents a physical cutting process model based on 
the Discrete Element Method (DEM), which allows the simulation of dynamic and 
thermal interactions in metal cutting. Core component of the approach is the DEM 
model of a solid with elastic-plastic deformation modes, which is verified in stan-
dardized tensile and Charpy impact tests as well as other non-standardized tests. 
The model is enhanced such that the thermo-dynamics of a solid due to heat con-
duction can be included, which is also verified in different tests. The applicability 
to model-cutting processes is shown in the simulation of orthogonal cutting 
processes. The results of the simulation are compared to experimentally obtained 
results for both forces as well as temperatures. For verification purposes, an FEM 
model is made, which predicts both forces on the tool as well as temperatures. 
14.1   Introduction 
For decades, there has been a steady increase of the quality of machine tools. For 
further improvement, a better understanding of the interactions between the ma-
chine tool and the physics of the manufacturing process is necessary. A mapping 
of the process to an appropriate physical model is often challenging from a com-
putational mechanics point of view as there are often large deformations as well as 
a steady evolution of boundaries and new surfaces. For a mesh-based approach, 
this may prove to be awkward due to constant remeshing and a mapping of quanti-
ties between successive meshes. Alternatively, a meshless method like the DEM 
naturally includes the separation of material and large deformations. A conven-
tional DEM model consisting of rigid spherical particles for granular material is 
enhanced by cohesive visco-elastic-plastic interactions. This generates a ‘granular 
solid’, which is subjected to virtual material tests to verify it and to determine pa-
rameter values. The mechanical state of the particles is extended to include ther-
mal properties and heat conduction, too. Thereby, an established workpiece model 
is machined in orthogonal cutting processes. The obtained results are compared to 
experimentally-obtained results and FEM references. The experiments are made 
on a specifically designed test bed, which allows the measurement of forces on the 
tool during cutting. To include different cases of cutting, the stiffness of the test 

310 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
bed as well as the angle of inclination of the tool can be modified so oblique cut-
ting processes can also be considered. 
14.2    Experimental Investigations 
For verification purposes experimental investigations are made. The following 
section describes the setup and the results of the experiments. 
14.2.1   Test Setup  
To investigate the interaction processes in cutting a test bed is set up, whose CAD 
model and machine prototype are shown in Figure 14.1. The bed of the test bed is 
manufactured from massive polymer concrete slabs und carries the tool holder, 
which is mounted in gantry design. In addition, the gantry is connected to the bed 
via solid tension rods. The pre-stressing of the tension rods is adjustable. For this 
reason, flexibilities can be systematically introduced in order to verify the coupl-
ing model. Moreover, a table is mounted onto the bed, which carries the tool hold-
er via a measurement platform. The table drive is realized by a linear direct drive, 
which enables a continuous modification of the cutting speed from 0 to 200 m/min 
and hence covers the conventional cutting speed range. The drive system consists 
of a linear engine, a servo control unit including power electronics and a PC as su-
perordinate control. An important objective in the design of the test bed is to 
largely disable the dynamic behavior of the structure when measuring the process 
forces. 
 
 
Fig. 14.1 CAD-model and general view of the test bed 
To examine the stiffness of the test bed different measurements are performed 
in feed direction (x-axis) and in the direction of depth setting (z-axis). A stiffness 
of approximately 490 N/µm is determined in z-direction for the table and tool 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
311
 
holder, which represents an excellent value. The stiffness of the gantry in x-
direction is 230 N/µm, which is also sufficient for the investigations to be con-
ducted. 
In order to investigate to what extent the stiffness of the structure is influential, 
flexibilities are systematically introduced into the structure by means of specifical-
ly developed stiffness elements. Thus, the stiffness between tool holder and gantry 
as well as between workpiece and table can be reproducibly modified. This is car-
ried out by means of a “stiffness element”, which consists of two plates with disc 
springs placed in-between, see Figure 14.2a. The stiffness of the elements is sub-
sequently modified in the range from 1,000 to 10,000 N/mm, whereby the effect of 
the static stiffness, apart from the possible minor stiffness of the tool, can be rela-
tively well distinguished from the effect of the static stiffness of the entire setup. 
The modification of the stiffness of the element is guaranteed by the number of 
disc springs. Figure 14.2b exemplifies the examination of two different static 
stiffnesses of the element. The diagram in Figure 14.2b suggests that the stiffness 
element guarantees a maximum displacement of 0.5 mm. If further load is applied, 
the element shuts and its two plates operate as one solid common body. 
To investigate the effect of the static stiffness on the resultant forces and to de-
termine the resultant forces in orthogonal and free three-dimensional cutting, a 
measuring chain was assembled and set up. The signals were recorded and 
processed as well as controlled and evaluated by means of a program developed 
under the LabVIEW GUI 7.1, which consists of three separately operating Lab-
VIEW programs. One program serves to record and visualize the data, another to 
calibrate and another to statistically evaluate the resultant forces. 
Free three-dimensional cutting is guaranteed by the twisting of the tool head 
around the angle of inclination λS. The general view of the test setup for three-
dimensional cutting is shown in Fig. 14.3. In the investigations of the machining 
of steel C45, the angles of inclination of 15° and 45° are used and the cutting force 
Fx, the shear force Fy and the thrust force Fz are recorded. 
 
 
 
a) 
b) 
Fig. 14.2 Stiffness element and its static stiffness 
 

312 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
 
Fig. 14.3 Performing a free three-dimensional cutting process on the test bed 
The heat flows are established by experimental determination of the tempera-
ture change in the parts and assemblies. To investigate the effect of the ambient 
temperature on the heat flows inside the machine structure, the test bed is put into 
a climate chamber together with the entire measuring equipment required for the 
test. In the course of the investigations, the ambient temperature is varied in a 
range from +14°C to +36°C, see [4]. 
The experimental investigations to determine the temperature in the primary, 
secondary and tertiary cutting zones are performed by means of semi-artificial 
thermocouples, which are based on the Seebeck effect [5], [6] and [7]. Two me-
thods are applied. With the first method the temperature distribution in the work-
piece and in the chip can be examined [8]. One thigh of the thermocouple is made 
of constantan wire, the other thigh of the material to be machined. Thus, a thermo-
couple of the type “J” is generated. With the second method, the temperature dis-
tribution at the border between wedge and chip can be examined [8]. In this case, 
one thigh of the thermocouple is formed by constantan foil, which is clamped in-
between two carbide plates. The workpiece is used as the second thigh. The con-
stantan foil and all the tools are isolated from the upper and lower inserts. Depend-
ing on the relative position of the upper and lower inserts to each other, and de-
pending on the type of tool sharpening, the position of the foil can be modified 
relative to the wedge point. Hence, the cutting temperatures can be measured at 
different points, mainly in the secondary cutting zone. As is the case in the first 
method, a thermocouple of type “J” is also generated. The signals are recorded 
and processed as well as controlled and evaluated by means of a program devel-
oped under the LabVIEW GUI 7.1.  
 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
313
 
14.2.2   Temperature and Force Measurements 
The following section summarizes the measurement of forces and temperatures. 
14.2.2.1   Forces in Orthogonal and Free Three-Dimensional Cutting 
The investigations of the resultant forces in both orthogonal and free three-
dimensional cutting represent a data basis for the verification of cutting models. 
Figure 14.4 shows the course of the cutting and thrust force in the orthogonal ma-
chining of steel C45 with different cutting speeds from 50 to 150 m/min at differ-
ent cutting depths. As expected, the dependencies show a significant rise of the 
forces with increasing cutting depths. The increase of the cutting speed, however, 
has only little effect on the resultant forces. 
In three-dimensional cutting, the components of the resultant force, i. e. the cut-
ting force Fx, the shear force Fy and the thrust force, increase, as expected, with in-
creasing cutting depth, see Figure 14.5. The size of the cutting force, in contrast, 
hardly changes with an increasing angle of inclination λS. The course of the thrust 
force flattens with a greater angle of inclination and the same maximum values. 
The shear force Fy increases with an increasing angle of inclination. This reaction 
is intensified with increasing cutting depths ap. The increase of the shear force 
with an increasing angle of inclination can be explained with the extension of the 
cutting length or width. 
 
0
1000
N
3500
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
mm
0,6
Cutting force
Depth of cut
2000
100 m/min
150 m/min
0
0,1
0,2
0,3
0,4
mm
0,6
Thrust force
Depth of cut
0
400
800
N
1600
100 m/min
150 m/min
 
Fig. 14.4 Resultant forces in orthogonal machining of steel C45 
14.2.2.1   Investigation of the Temperatures in the Cutting Zones  
Moreover, investigations on thermal phenomena in the cutting zones are con-
ducted in order to verify the cutting model. The temperatures in the primary, sec-
ondary and tertiary cutting zones and in the base material are used as references. 
Characteristic signals in the primary cutting zone and in the chip are shown in 
Figure 14.6.  

314 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
0
500
1000
1500
N
2500
0
0,1
0,2
mm
0,4
Depth of cut
Cutting force
S=15°
S=45°
a) 
0
0,1
0,2
mm
0,4
Depth of cut
Shear force
0
200
400
N
800
S=15°
S=45°
b) 
0
200
400
N
800
0
0,1
0,2
mm
0,4
Depth of cut
Thrust force
S=15°
S=45°
c) 
Fig. 14.5 Dependency of the resultant forces on the angle of inclination λS 
The shape of the signal and the amplitude during cutting correspond to the posi-
tion of the temperature sensor and to the constantan thigh in the different layers of 
the material respectively. In practice, the method with the welded constantan wire 
[8] can only be applied in comparably large cutting depths so as to realize a rea-
sonable resolution and to be able to precisely determine the position of the con-
stantan thigh. Therefore, this method was applied in experimental investigations to 
determine the temperature in the primary and tertiary cutting zone and in the base 
material. The method on the basis of the constantan foil clamped in-between two 
inserts does not exhibit such a restriction and was hence used as the basic method 
for recording the cutting temperatures in the secondary cutting zone. The change 
in temperature in the secondary cutting zone or in the chip, depending on the  
 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
315
 
 
Fig. 14.6 Characteristic course of the signal in the primary cutting zone and in the chip 
 
cutting speed and the distance L of the measuring point and on the position of the 
constantan foil relative to the cutting edge of the die plate, is shown in Figure 14.7 
for a free three-dimensional cutting process. The figure shows that the change in 
temperature at a cutting speed of 50 m/min is extreme. The maximum is reached at 
a distance of 1 mm between the measuring point and the cutting edge. This corres-
ponds to the known temperature distribution in the secondary cutting zone. At cut-
ting speeds of 100 m/min and 200 m/min, a temperature maximum is only reached 
at greater distances to the cutting edge. The results of the FEM cutting model are 
summarized in Table 14.1 for a distance of 0.25 mm to the cutting edge. The max-
imum difference between the simulated and experimentally recorded results 
amounts to 13.8 %, which can be regarded as an acceptable error in thermal  
investigations. 
 
0
200
400
°C
800
0
mm
Temperature
Distance from cutting edge
0,4
0,8
1,4
50 m/min
100 m/min
200 m/min
0
50
100
150
m/min
250
Cutting speed
L=0,25
L=0,50
L=0,70
L=1,00
L=1,25
Temperature
0
200
400
°C
800
 
Fig. 14.7 Temperature change in the secondary cutting zone 
Table 14.1 Simulated and experimentally recorded temperatures in the secondary cutting 
zone 
v, m/s 
Tsim, °C 
Texp, °C  
50 
370 
319 
100 
475 
438 

316 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
14.3   Material and Cutting Models 
Two cutting models are set up. One is based on the FEM, the other is built on a 
mesh-free DEM approach. 
14.3.1   FEM 
The FEM model was developed with the commercial product LS-DYNA for the 
orthogonal and three-dimensional cutting process [9], [10]. In setting up the model 
it is assumed that the conditions along the cutting edge are the same. A boundary 
condition for the workpiece is that the lower workpiece edge is to be fixed in both 
directions. Regarding the tool it is assumed that the edges averted from the work-
piece are fixed in the direction of depth setting. The movement of the tool is pre-
determined by a rheonomic constraint in feed direction.  
The algorithm for the plastic deformation comprises the following calculation 
methods: 
• 
Initialization (initial conditions, boundary conditions, maximum inte-
gration time step size and step size for remeshing)   
• 
Organizing the time cycle 
• 
Calculating the clamping condition 
• 
Evaluating the fraction criterion (Johnson-Cook criterion, geometrical 
criterion and criterion of maximum tensile stress. If one criterion is 
fulfilled for one element, the element is removed.) 
• 
Controlling the step size to renew the FE mesh 
 
The calculation is organized by means of the developed program manager 
OCFEM. The program manager has its own pre-processor to prepare the entry da-
ta, a mesh generator, the control of the LS-DYNA solver and the LS-DYNA post-
processor. Furthermore, another post-processor is available to extract the diagrams 
of the cutting force components and of the specific chip forming work.  A sche-
matic diagram of the operating mode of the OCFEM with external modules and 
files is shown in Figure 14.8. The data transfer between the individual models 
takes place by means of ASCI files. The developed FEM model was verified by a 
comparison of the experimental and calculated values. The cutting and thrust 
forces and the chip compression coefficient Кa were used as references. Steel C45, 
which was cut with a cutting speed of 100 m/min at a depth of cut of 0.1 mm, was 
used as test material. A value of 8° was selected for the cutting angle and a value 
of 5° for the angle of clearance. The results of the verification of the FEM cutting 
model are presented in Table 14.2. The f is a chip load per revolution. The results 
suggest that the model provides adequate results for the cutting force but inade-
quate values for the thrust force and chip compression coefficient, i. e. values that 
are clearly too low. 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
317
 
 
Fig. 14.8 Schematic diagram of the program setup with OCFEM 
Table 14.2 Data for FEM verification 
f, 
mm/rev
Кa 
Fx, N 
Fz, N 
Exp. FEM Err. % Exp. 
FEM 
Err. % Exp. 
FEM 
Err. % 
0.15 
2.72 
1.9 
-30 
561±45 
416 
26 
383±37
76 
80 
2.6 
-27 
519±36 
20 
334±31
77.24 
2.4 
-13 
558±50 
4.35 
369±60
47.38 
0.30 
2.4 
1.9 
-21 
940±55 
832 
11.5 
473±57
106 
77.6 
2.2 
-14 
875±92 
4.9 
430±55
75.3 
2.5 
-16 
534±39 
4.8 
377±38
51.2 
14.3.2   Discrete Element Method 
Some fundamentals of the Discrete Element Method (DEM) are summarized in 
the following. This method is then used for cutting simulations. 

318 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
14.3.2.1   Dynamics of Particle Systems 
The DEM models the motion of usually free and rigid particles, which interact 
with each other, and the system boundaries in case of physical contact. A DEM 
algorithm can be sub-divided into three major steps, which are neighborhood 
search, force computation and integration of the equations of motion. The neigh-
borhood search delivers the information as to which particles are in physical con-
tact and can therefore interact. Based on this information, the forces acting on the 
particles are evaluated. Usually, a force-displacement approach is employed, 
which calculates penalty forces based on negligible overlaps. The last step is to in-
tegrate the equations of motion. 
Neighborhood search algorithms are not explained here. For information about 
those and more detailed information about the method in general refer to [11]. 
The translational dynamics of a free particle i with position vector ri is readily 
described using Newton’s equation, see [12], 
i
i
i
m
f
r =

 
 
(1)
with the vector of external forces fi. If rotational dynamics also has to be consi-
dered, Euler’s equation of rigid body motion can be used, which reads 
i
i
i
i
i
i
t
ω
I
ω
ω
I
=
⋅
×
+
⋅
 
(2)
where Ii  is the particle’s inertia tensor,  ωi is its rotational velocity and ti the vec-
tor of external torques. The differential equations (1) and (2) can be solved with 
several numerical integration schemes. The model setup with dynamically moving 
particles and evolving boundaries in conjunction with impacts indicates an inte-
grator, which is not sensitive to jumps in the right hand side of the equation. Fur-
thermore, it should be possible to implement it in an implicit manner for stability 
reasons as in a general case the frequencies of the system are not known in ad-
vance for all times. For these reasons, an implicit Newmark scheme is chosen. See 
[11] for the details. 
14.3.2.2   Particle Force Laws 
The right hand side of equations (1) and (2) contains force laws, which are eva-
luated based on force-displacement relationships. To generate a repulsive poten-
tial, which is used, if two separate bodies collide, either linear springs are used or, 
limited to spherical particles, a Hertz contact force, see [13]. To define a realistic 
material model of engineering materials, however, cohesive forces are needed. 
Depending on particle shape, the physics of the problem and other factors, differ-
ent approaches can be employed. In this approach, spheres are used as the only 
particle shape as the contact geometry is then determined fast and computational-
ly-efficient, thus allowing for a finer discretization. The chosen approach is to 
connect adjacent spheres with massless, visco-elastic-plastic rods in their centro-
ids, which generates what will be called a ‘granular solid’. 
The visco-elastic-plastic rods are represented by a force law, which has been 
developed based on a piece-wise linear hardening model in [14]. Subjecting a duc-

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
319
 
tile specimen to uni-axial loading generates a stress-strain relationship, as depicted 
in Figure 14.9. Loading beyond the yield point σ0.2 causes plastic flow of the ma-
terial. Analogously, the strain ε0.2 corresponding to σ0.2 can be defined. Subsequent 
loading in the opposite direction causes the material to flow plastically further, if σ 
< σy2 with |σ0.2| > |σy2|. Based on this observation, the model as illustrated in Fig-
ure 14.10 is developed. The stress strain relationship is governed by 
)
(
0.2
0.2
rod
ε
ε
ε
σ
−
+
=
k
E
. 
 
(3)
A loading below σ0.2 results in a linear elastic state of stress with Young’s mod-
ulus E. Further loading beyond the elastic limit results in plastic flow with harden-
ing determined by parameter k. In that case, the initial stress-strain-curve is shifted 
in the stress-strain-plane by the parameters σ0 and ε0, which are obtained by equat-
ing the lines g(ε) and h(ε), see [15] for a detailed explanation. 
 
σy2
σ
ϵ
σ0.2
σy
σ0.2
σ0
ϵ
ϵ0 ϵy
h(ϵ)
g(ϵ)
σ
 
Fig. 14.9 Stress-strain hysteresis 
Fig. 14.10 Elastic-plastic force law 
The state of stress σij in a rod connecting two particles i and j results in a force act-
ing on the particles it connects. The elastic plastic force fi,ep acting on particle i is 
calculated by 
ij
ij
ep
i,
A
f
j
=
σ
 
 
(4)
where Aij is the cross sectional area of the rod. It is calculated as arithmetic mean 
of the radius of both particles involved. As each real material sustains loading only 
to a certain limit, the rod connection is removed, if 
max
σ
σ ≥
 
 
(5)
where σmax is the maximum bearable stress of the rod connection. This can also be 
expressed as maximum bearable strain εmax. 
14.3.2.3   Mechanical Properties of the Solid 
The cohesive force interaction is applied to all particles, which mechanically inte-
ract in the initial configuration. The procedure to generate an initial configuration 

320 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
is roughly sub-divided in a deterministic approach and two random approaches. In 
the deterministic approach, the particles are arranged as a mono-disperse distribu-
tion in a regular, face-centered cubic lattice (fcc), which is a purely geometric 
problem. The random approaches require a full simulation each time until a static 
equilibrium of the system is reached. The first random approach is to drop a dis-
tribution of particles into a container under the influence of gravity and wait until 
they come to a rest. The second approach uses a containment holding an aggregate 
of particles, which is sufficiently smaller in volume than the containment. In the 
course of the simulation, the particles are inflated and move randomly within the 
box. Increasing particle radii cause increasing pressure on the box walls, which is 
used as a trigger to stop the simulation as soon as a pre-defined pressure threshold 
is reached. The random approaches can be used in a meaningful manner with 
poly-disperse distributions. 
The generated solid is subjected to several tests to assess its mechanical proper-
ties. These are a test for isotropy, a tensile test and a Charpy impact test. For an 
isotropy test, specimens are subjected to slow tensile and torsional strain to ex-
amine how many particles are needed and how they should be arranged. Tensile 
tests are made according to the appropriate standard, which allows for comparison 
with experimental results and results from literature. The objective of a tensile test 
with regard to a granular solid is to determine parameter values for the interaction, 
which governs elastic-plastic behavior. For a more detailed explanation of tensile 
and isotropy tests and some results, see [16]. To examine how the model behaves 
under dynamic loading as opposed to static loading, as in the case of the tensile 
test, a Charpy Impact Test is conducted as specified in the corresponding standard 
[17]. In a Charpy impact test, a notched specimen with a square cross-section. as 
shown in Figure 14.11, is hit by a hammer on the opposite side of the notch, as in-
dicated in Figure 14.12. The hammer is fixed to a pendulum and released from a 
pre-defined height, thus hitting the specimen with a known kinetic energy. As the 
specimen breaks during the impact and absorbs energy, the pendulum with  
the hammer reaches a smaller amplitude after impact than it had before. The 
amount of absorbed energy can then be readily calculated from the difference of 
amplitudes. 
 
55mm
10mm
2mm
hammer
specimen
counter bearing
 
Fig. 14.11 Standardized test specimen 
Fig. 14.12 Test setup 
 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
321
 
A Charpy impact test is simulated with a regular specimen, i. e. the particles are 
arranged in an fcc lattice and an inflated specimen with parameters as given in Ta-
ble 14.3. 
 
Table 14.3 Parameters of Charpy impact test specimen 
 
 
regular specimen inflated specimen 
particle radius r [m] 
4*10-4 
4*10-4 
number of particles [1] 20000 
20000 
Erod [N/m2] 
5.31*1010 
11.2*1010 
Ε0.2 [1] 
0.285% 
0.295% 
ε [1/s] 
1.0 
1.0 
ρ [kg/m3] 
2700 
2700 
 
The amount of absorbed energy for both types of specimen is shown in Fig-
ures 14.13 and 14.14. Increasing the maximum strain εmax before rupture for a rod 
increases the amount of energy it can absorb. This can be seen in Figure 14.13, 
where εmax is chosen to be 0.07, 0.08 and 0.09. The best agreement with the expe-
rimental value of 6.99 J is found for εmax = 0.08. In a similar manner, the absorbed 
work is determined for a random specimen as seen in Figure 14.14. Here, the best 
agreement is found for εmax = 0.09. An alternative setup of the test is given in [18]. 
 
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0
2
4
6
8
displacement [m]
energy [J]
 
 
0.07
0.08
0.09
experiment
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0
2
4
6
8
displacement [m]
energy [J]
 
 
0.08
0.09
0.10
experiment
Fig. 14.13 Absorbed energy for regular 
specimen  
Fig. 14.14 Absorbed energy for inflated 
specimen 
14.3.2.4   Thermal Interaction 
Apart from reproducing a cutting process on a kinematic and kinetic level, thermal 
aspects have to be considered, too. Analogously to the mechanical state and  

322 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
interactions, a thermal state and thermal interactions are defined. To each particle i 
with mass mi and heat capacity ci a temperature Ti is assigned, whose change is 
governed by  
i
i
i
i
T
m
c
Q
Δ
=
Δ
 
 
(6)
where Qi is the internal energy. A finite change of internal energy ΔQi = ΔQj is in-
duced, if two particles i and j interact mechanically, i. e. are in contact. The ex-
change of energy is governed by Fourier’s law, see [19], 
(
)
j
i
ij
ij
T
T
A
Q
−
= δ
λ

, 
 
(7)
and depends on the heat conductivity λ of the material, the distance of the particles 
δij and the cross-section Aij, which the heat flows through. For a definition of the 
flux surface, see [23]. 
14.3.2.5   Setup of the DEM Orthogonal Cutting Model 
For the orthogonal cutting model, a setup as depicted in Figure 14.15 is chosen. 
The tool has no dynamics of its own. Constraints are used for both feed and depth 
of cut h. The workpiece has length l and height H.  
 
Fig. 14.15 Model setup for orthogonal DEM cutting simulation 
 
An illustration of the model is shown in Figure 14.16.The rake angle α = 8° and 
clearance angle γ = 4° are fixed. The tool surface is described by triangle elements 
interacting with the spheres of the workpiece model based on the Hertz force law, 
see [11]. The forces acting on each triangle element are accumulated on a common 
reference frame and can thus be interpreted as cutting and passive force. For the 
temperature interaction, all dissipative force components, e. g. plastic force com-
ponents, are interpreted such that they increase the internal energy and thus the 
temperature. Depending on the material and the model, only a fraction 0≤β≤1 of 
the plastic work, which is called Taylor-Quinney coefficient, causes a rise in  
temperature. 
l
H
x
z
h

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
323
 
 
Fig. 14.16 DEM cutting model 
14.3.2.6   Comparisons of the DEM Model with Experimental Results 
To assess the quality of the DEM model, experimentally obtained results for both 
cutting forces and temperatures generated during cutting are compared with the 
numerical results. For the temperature interaction it is assumed that plastic defor-
mation is dissipated with a Taylor-Quinney coefficient β = 0.4 for aluminum and 
β = 0.9 for steel. The parameters of the interaction are chosen as 
Erod = 1.8·1011 N/m2, εmax = 0.16, ε0.2 = 0.003, k = 0.01·Erod, and r = 0.04 mm. The 
experimental and simulated cutting forces  are compared in Figure 14.17 for dif-
ferent depths of cut h ranging from h = 0.2 mm to h = 0.4 mm.  
 
0
1
2
3
−400
−300
−200
−100
0
displacement [mm]
force [N]
 
 
0.4
0.3
0.2
0
1
2
3
4
0
50
100
150
200
250
time [ms]
temperature [K]
 
 
0.43
0.36
0.23
0.17
 
Fig. 14.17 Cutting force for Aluminum 
AlMgSi1.0 
Fig. 14.18 Temperature increase for 
h = 0.2 mm 
 

324 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
The experimental results are shown as constant levels with dashed lines and 
with the color-coding indicating the depth of cut. It can be seen that for 
h = 0.2 mm there is good agreement in the steady state regime. For larger depths of 
cut, agreement is slightly worse but still good. The temperature increases generat-
ed during cutting are shown in Figure 14.18 for different vertical positions meas-
ured from the top of the workpiece indicated in the legend in [mm] for 
h = 0.2 mm. In the chip at a depth of 0.17 mm, a rise of 200 K can be reported. 
This fits quite well to the results reported by [20]. For Ck45, the forces of the 
steady state regime are shown in Figure 14.19. The simulated cutting force agrees 
well with the experimental results, which are not available for depths of cut great-
er than h = 0.3 mm. The evolution of the simulated passive force, which decreases 
and increases again with increasing depth of cut for 0.1 mm < h < 0.3 mm, is due 
to discretization effects. The decrease for h ≥ 0.3 mm is due to the chip pressing 
against the rake face of the tool. The temperature increase in the workpiece for 
h = 0.5 mm is shown in Figure 14.20 with the vertical position of measurement in-
dicated in the legend in [mm], assuming a Taylor-Quinney coefficient of β = 0.9. 
The measured temperature increase for a depth of cut of 0.3 mm is ΔT = 340 K. 
This is significantly lower than the simulated temperature increase in the chip, 
which is shown for the vertical positions 0.04 mm and 0.43 mm and is found to be 
around ΔT = 450 K. An explanation for this behavior is a too high value for β and 
too much compressive plastic deformation in the chip. For vertical positions dee-
per within the workpiece, far better agreement can be seen, e. g. at 0.7 mm and 
1.0 mm. The temperature curve for 0.56 mm illustrates how the temperature peaks, 
when the tool passes, but the heat quickly distributes in the rest of the workpiece. 
See [21, [22], [23]for further results.  
 
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
200
400
600
800
depth of cut [mm]
force [N]
 
 
cut sim
passive sim
cut exp
passive exp
Fig. 14.19 Cutting force and passive force for Ck45 
 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
325
 
0
2
4
6
8
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
time [ms]
temperature [K]
 
 
0.04 sim.
0.43 sim.
0.56 sim.
0.69 sim.
1.0 sim
0.30 exp.
0.70 exp.
1.0 exp.
 
Fig. 14.20 Temperature increase for Ck45 
An illustration of the cut off chip is shown in Figure 14.21. The chip is cohe-
sive and clearly separated from the rest of the workpiece. 
 
 
Fig. 14.21 Illustration of cut-off chip 
14.3.2.7   Orthogonal Cutting with Tool Dynamics 
To expand the applicability of the so-far discussed approach some constraints of 
the tool are removed and additional dynamics are introduced into the system. The 
mounting of the tool is changed giving it a rotational degree of freedom, as illu-
strated in Figure 14.22. This allows for a vertical movement of the tool tip and a 

326 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
eb
e
w
x
z
t
m
tI
t
C
rotational movement of the overall tool. The tool is coupled with a rotational 
spring-damper combination. The dynamics of the tool is integrated into a separate 
simulator, a program to model multi-body systems. Both particle and multi-body 
simulator are coupled in a co-simulation approach, where state variables as well as 
kinetic quantities are exchanged at fixed time steps. See [18] for a more detailed 
explanation. 
 
 
Fig. 14.22 Model setup for orthogonal DEM cutting simulation 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
−250
−200
−150
−100
−50
0
displacement [mm]
force [N] / Δ z [10−2 mm]
 
 
cut force
Δ ztool
0
1
2
3
4
5
−50
0
50
100
150
displacement [mm]
force [N] / Δ z [10−2 mm]
 
 
passive force
Δ ztool
 
Fig. 14.23 Cutting force for elastic tool 
support 
Fig. 14.24 Passive Force for elastic tool 
support 
 
The model parameters are unchanged, except Erod = 5.9 1010 N/m2. The para-
meters determining where the tool is fixed are chosen as we = 0.02 m and 
be = 0.04 m, i. e. both passive and cutting force bring about a torque on the tool. 
The cutting force for a normalized workpiece width of 1 mm and the depth of cut 
are both shown in Figure 14.23, indicated in the legend by ‘cut force’ for the force 
and ‘Δztool’ for the change of vertical position of the tool tip. It can be seen that 
starting from an initial depth of cut of 0.4 mm the cutting depth continuously in-
creases with continuous tool feed. A similar behaviour can be seen in Figure 14.24 

14   Dynamic and Thermal Interactions in Metal Cutting 
327
 
for the passive force. A steep rise in passive force as the tool enters the workpiece 
is followed by a continuous increase as the cutting depth increases. The tool tip 
moves deeper and deeper into the workpiece due to the moment acting on the tool. 
As the length of the workpiece is chosen as l = 4 mm both passive and cutting 
force vanish for a tool displacement exceeding 4 mm. 
14.4   Conclusion 
This contribution illustrates that the proposed material model based on the Dis-
crete Element Method allows to capture essential characteristics of elasto-plastic 
solids. The separation of material as shown for a Charpy impact test and in cutting 
processes is included without effort. The comparison of simulated and experimen-
tally obtained cutting forces demonstrates that good agreement can be reached, 
both on a qualitative as well as a quantitative level. An extension of the model 
such that the thermodynamics of heat conduction can be included has been suc-
cessfully implemented. Comparing the temperatures generated during cutting 
shows that, for an appropriate choice of the Taylor-Quinney coefficient, good 
agreement between simulation and experiment can be reached. A further en-
hancement of the cutting process model, such that dynamics of the tool can be in-
cluded, is made based on a co-simulation approach. There, the tool dynamics is 
accounted for in a separate multi-body simulator. The entirely different and physi-
cally sound behavior of the system once the constraints are removed shows the in-
creased applicability of the approach for modeling the interaction between tool, 
workpiece and machine. 
References 
[1] Tsai, L.-W.: Robot Analysis – The Mechanics of Serial and Parallel Manipulators. 
John Wiley & Sons, New York (1999) 
[2] Merlet, J.-P.: Parallel Robots. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht (2000) 
[3] Preumont, A.: Mechatronics – Dynamics of Electromechanical and Piezoelectric Sys-
tems. Springer, Dordrecht (2006) 
[4] Heisel, U., Storchak, M., Stehle, T.: Einfluss der Umgebungstemperatur beim ortho-
gonalen Zerspanen. wt Werkstattstechnik Online 100, 89–98 (2010) (in German) 
[5] Frohmüller, R., Knoche, H.-J., Lierath, F.: Aufbau und Erprobung von Temperatur-
messeinrichtungen durch das IFQ im Rahmen des Schwerpunktprogramms Spanen 
metallischer Werkstoffe mit hoher Geschwindigkeit. Spanen metallischer Werkstoffe 
mit hohen Geschwindigkeiten Kolloquium des Schwerpunktprogramms der DFG, 
108–115 (1999) (in German) 
[6] Körtvelyessy, L.V.: Thermoelement Praxis. Vulkan Verlag, Essen (1981) (in Ger-
man) 
[7] Müller, B.: Thermische Analyse des Zerspanens metallischer Werkstoffe bei hohen 
Schnittgeschwindigkeiten. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen (2004) (in German) 
[8] Heisel, U., Storchak, M., Stehle, T., Korotkih, M.: Temperaturbestimmung in den 
Zerspanzonen. wt Werkstattstechnik Online 100, 365–370 (2010) (in German) 

328 
P. Eberhard et al.
 
[9] Heisel, U., Krivoruchko, D.V., Zaloha, V.A., Storchak, M.: Cause Analysis of Errors 
in FE Prediction of Orthogonal Cutting Performances. In: 10th CIRP International 
Workshop on Modeling of Machining Operations, pp. 141–148 (2007) 
[10] Heisel, U., Kryvoruchko, D.V., Zaloha, V.A., Storchak, M., Emelyanenko, S., Seli-
vonenko, S.N.: Finite Element Analysis of Cutting Force Dynamics. In: Proceedings 
of the 11th CIRP Conference on Modeling of Machining Operations, September 16-
18, pp. 163–170 (2008) 
[11] Fleissner, F.: Parallel Object Oriented Simulation with Lagrangian Particle Methods. 
Schriften aus dem Institut für Technische und Numerische Mechanik der Universität 
Stuttgart, Bd. 16. Shaker Verlag, Aachen (2010) 
[12] Geradin, M., Rixen, D.: Mechanical Vibrations. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester 
(1998) 
[13] Lankarani, H.M., Nikravesh, P.E.: A Contact Force Model with Hysteresis Damping 
for Impact Analysis of Multibody Systems. Journal of Mechanical Design 112, 369–
376 (1990) 
[14] Liu, K., Gao, L., Tanimura, S.: Application of Discrete Element Method in Impact 
Problems. JSME International Journal, Series A 47, 138–145 (2004) 
[15] Fleissner, F., Gaugele, T., Eberhard, P.: Application of the Discrete Element Method 
in Mechanical Engineering. Multibody System Dynamics 18, 81–94 (2007) 
[16] Gaugele, T., Fleissner, F., Eberhard, P.: Simulation of Material Tests using Meshfree 
Langrangian Particle Methods. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engi-
neers, Part K: Journal of Multi-body Dynamics 222(K4), 327–338 (2008) 
[17] DIN10045, Kerbschlagbiegeversuch nach Charpy. Deutsches Institut für Normung 
e.V., Berlin (1991) 
[18] Gaugele, T., Eberhard, P., Storchak, M., Heisel, U.: A Discrete Material Model used 
in a Co-simulated Charpy Impact Test and for Heat Transfer. In: Proceedings of the 1. 
International Conference on Process Machine Interactions, pp. 361–369 (2008) 
[19] Tychonoff, A., Samarski, A.: Differentialgleichungen der mathematischen Physik. 
Deutscher Verlag der Wissenschaften, Berlin (1959) (in German) 
[20] Jaspers, S., Dautzenberg, J.: Material Behavior in Metal Cutting: Strains, Strain 
Rates, and Temperatures in Metal Cutting. Journal of Materials Processing Technolo-
gy 121, 123–135 (2002) 
[21] Gaugele, T.: Application of the Discrete Element Method to Model Ductile, Heat 
Conductive Materials. Dissertation, University of Stuttgart (2011) (submitted) 
[22] Eberhard, P., Gaugele, T.: Quasi-static and dynamic properties of separable continua 
based on Lagrangian Particle Methods. In: Proceedings of the International Confe-
rence on Particle-Based Methods, Fundamentals and Applications (Particles 2009), 
pp. 398–401 (2009) 
[23] Gaugele, T., Eberhard, P., Fleissner, F.: Particle Methods Used to Model Cutting 
Processes Including Heat Conduction. In: Proceedings of the International Confe-
rence on Particle-Based Methods, Fundamentals and Applications (Particles 2009), 
pp. 142–145 (2009) 
 

Chapter 15
Surface Generation Process with Consideration
of the Balancing State in Diamond Machining
C. Brandt, A. Krause, J. Niebsch, J. Vehmeyer, E. Brinksmeier,
P. Maass, and R. Ramlau
Abstract. In order to manufacture optical components or mechanical parts with
high requirements regarding surface quality, diamond machining is frequently ap-
plied. Nevertheless, to achieve the desired surface quality, the understanding of the
surface generation process and its inﬂuencing parameters is highly important. One
crucial parameter is the residual unbalance of the main spindle. As the residual un-
balance affects the process and vice versa, the investigation of the process-machine
interaction is necessary. In this paper results of experimental work and mathematical
modelling of diamond machining under varying balancing states are presented. The
experiments show the connection between unbalances and resulting surface quality;
the mathematical model provides the possibility to simulate the surface quality for
given unbalances distributions. Furthermore, regularization techniques in order to
solve the inverse problem of computing the optimal balancing state for a given or
desired surface quality are presented.
15.1
Introduction
Ultraprecision diamond machining is mainly used to manufacture optical parts or
microstructures with form deviations of less then one micron and surface rough-
ness in the range of a few nanometers. To obtain these accuracies the requirements
regarding machine tool accuracy, process control and environmental conditions are
exceptional.
But even if all these requirements are met, unintended vibrations either induced
by the environmentor by the process itself can result in insufﬁcient part quality. Usu-
ally external vibrations can be kept low by appropriate foundations of the machine
tool. In contrast, process induced vibrations can occur because of misaligned tools
or workpieces, unsymmetrical workpieces, unsymmetrical workpiece mounting or
inhomogeneous workpiece materials. All these effects lead to non-homogeneous
mass distribution for the rotational axis of the system and therefore to vibrations
when under rotation. If existent these process induced vibrations can lead to an
B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 329–360.
springerlink.com
c⃝Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

330
C. Brandt et al.
increased form deviation and an increased surface roughness depending on the ex-
citing frequency. Therefore, precision balancing is crucial for ultraprecision ma-
chining processes [7]. In this chapter only ultraprecision turning will be considered,
nevertheless basic balancing principles will apply for other processes using rotating
spindles as well. The balancing process in ultraprecision machining is done man-
ually and it generally takes more than one iteration step to get the best balancing
condition.
The goal of the project is to get a deeper understanding of the interaction be-
tween balancing and the surface generation process in ultraprecision machining.
Therefore, a process-machine model has been developed which allows to predict the
surface topography based on the balancing state considering the interaction between
the machine tool structure and the machining process. In a ﬁrst step, we developed
an interaction model for the experimental platform, see Section 15.3. A structure
model was developed to determine the vibrations for given force and moment dis-
tributions induced by unbalances as well as forces from the cutting process. This
model can also be utilized to determine unbalance distributions or balancing weights
from vibration data measured by sensors during idle spindle speed. Additionally, an
analytical process model for describing the cutting forces during the cutting pro-
cess has been developed. The cutting forces were related to the surface structure of
the workpiece. Since the cutting forces inﬂuence the vibrations of the machine and
vice versa, both sub-models have to be merged into a mechanical-dynamical model.
The complete model will enable us to determine the effective cutting forces and
displacements related to the workpiece surface. This model also allows to compute
the surface quality and in the future a necessary balancing state to achieve a needed
surface quality.
15.2
Balancing in Ultraprecision Diamond Machining
Balancing procedures are commonly used wherever rotating parts or spindles (re-
ferred to as rotors) are not allowed to exceed a certain eccentricity. To specify a
balanced or unbalanced rigid rotor respectively, the balance quality grade G is used.
The balance quality grade represents the tolerable track speed (mm/s) of the center
of gravity: G = ezulω where ezul is the tolerable eccentricity and ω the angular ve-
locity. For example G6.3 stands for a tolerable track speed of 6.3 mm/s. Within the
DIN ISO 1940-1 quality grades from G6.3 down to G0.4 are considered for con-
ventional machining [1]. These values are summarized in a diagram (Fig. 15.1). The
diagram allows for instance to obtain a tolerable speciﬁc unbalance for a needed
G value and the operating speed n. Additionally, these G values are standardized
for characteristic machine tool constructions where the mass of the rotor is within
a deﬁned range of the total mass [13]. To show the difference between balancing
in conventional machining and ultraprecision machining the diagram has been ex-
tended by the G value range which was set as a target for the project described in
this article. The named target range for ultraprecision machining is G0.04 or less
(depicted area, Fig. 15.1).

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
331
Fig. 15.1 Balance quality
grades
15.2.1
Single-Plane Balancing
For ultraprecision machine tools rigid rotor behavior can be assumed for the main
spindle, which means the rotor will not or only insigniﬁcantly change its form or
unbalance state while running with operational speed or slower. In principle every
unbalance state for a rigid rotor can be compensated with two balancing planes
[13, 18]. In general these unbalances can be classiﬁed into three different types:
static unbalance, moment unbalance and dynamic unbalances.
A static unbalance occurs when a single unbalance is set to the radial plane of
a fully balanced rotor (Fig. 15.2). Hence, the center of gravity will be shifted away
from the shaft axis. When the spindle starts to rotate the unbalance will cause a cen-
trifugal force and therefore a vibration of the system. This kind of unbalance can
be compensated by either removing material from the spindle in the direction of the
unbalance or by adding a counterweight in the opposite direction of the unbalance.
The unbalance can be detected without continuous rotation of the spindle. The com-
pensation procedure is called single-plane-balancing (static balancing), because the
compensation is done in a single plane only [13]. Strictly speaking the above exam-
ple is only valid for a two dimensional system. But, although all real systems are
three dimensional, some may be treated as two dimensional [4].
A moment unbalance is caused by two identical unbalances, regarding their ab-
solute value, which are located opposite to each other in different radial planes
(Fig. 15.3). This unbalance cannot be detected without rotating the spindle. Under
rotation the two occurring unbalances will cause opposing centrifugal forces in dif-
ferent planes and therefore a moment to the spindle will occur [13]. The described
Fig. 15.2 Static unbalance
of a planar rotor [5]

332
C. Brandt et al.
Fig. 15.3 Moment unbal-
ance [5]
effect will be referred to as moment unbalance. As well as a static unbalance, a mo-
ment unbalance is mainly theoretical or will be used to describe a rotor or spindle
where the main inﬂuence is given by the moment unbalance. The depicted two kinds
of unbalances are necessary to describe and understand unbalances which occur in
real spindle systems. These unbalances are called dynamic unbalance and can be
described as a combination between a static unbalance and a moment unbalance.
Fig. 15.4 shows an example of dynamic unbalance. The center of gravity for the
workpiece and the counter weight could not be aligned within the balancing plane.
Therefore, the overlapping workpiece lead to a moment unbalance for the rotating
spindle.
Fig. 15.4 Dynamic un-
balance with single-plane
balancing (static balancing)
[4]
15.2.2
Dual-Plane Balancing
The described process of single-plane balancing is only capable of compensating
static unbalances. Furthermore, for most balancing setups a moment will be induced
because of the axial distance between balancing plane and unbalance. The general
balancing condition for most workpieces is called dynamic unbalance. It can be
regarded as a combination between static unbalance and a moment unbalance.
This dynamic unbalance can be compensated with a second balancing plane
within which a compensatory moment can be applied, see Fig. 15.5. With two bal-
ancing planes it is possible to compensate for all unbalance situations that may
occur, as long as the spindle can be considered as rigid [13]. Nevertheless, a second
balancing plane is increasing the complexity of the system and therefore, the effort
to balance a system will be increased too.

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
333
Fig. 15.5 Dual-plane-
balancing principle [4]
15.2.3
Ultraprecision Machine Tools
For most ultraprecision machine tools balancing is a manual, iterative and time con-
suming process with the goal to minimize the occurring vibrations. This process has
to be carried out whenever the workpiece is changed, because a small difference
in position can lead to a signiﬁcant unbalance. Depending on workpiece size and
mounting situation (centric or eccentric), a rough balancing is done by applying a
counter weight. The ﬁne balancing is done by applying set screws to the chuck.
15.2.4
Balancing Dependent Surface Generation
Because of the high requirements for the machined surfaces in ultraprecision ma-
chining it is necessary to understand to which extent the surface generation process
is inﬂuenced by the different process parameters. For this chapter the surface gen-
eration will be observed and investigated with regard to the balancing state of the
main spindle. As mentioned before balancing is one crucial factor for ultraprecision
machining but up to now it has not been investigated to which magnitude an occur-
ring unbalance inﬂuences the surface topography or the surface generation process
respectively.
To characterize the surface topography of the generated surfaces different mea-
surement devices are used. The form is measured by using an optical ﬂatness tester,
where it is possible to assess the whole surface of the chosen samples. Roughness
measurements are taken by white light interferometry and by tactile proﬁlometry (s.
Chap 1, Sect. 4 Workpiece analysis).
15.2.5
Process Forces with Regard to Unbalances
During machining an unbalance will lead to a deﬂected workpiece and therefore
change the depth of cut and consequently the process forces periodically. As the
process forces also act on the tool, the tool will be deﬂected as well. It can be
estimated, that the cutting force will deﬂect the tool opposite to the cutting direction,
but the tool will also be moved away from the surface and therefore reduce the
effective depth of cut. In consequence, the cutting force will be reduced and the tool

334
C. Brandt et al.
will move back in cutting direction and towards the surface as well. Depending on
the occurring forces, the damping properties of the tool and the unbalance, the tool
will either start to vibrate itself or it will reach a state of equilibrium.
Due to the interaction between the workpiece and the tool the surface of the
workpiece will be distorted. For an unbalanced and therefore vibrating workpiece
the engaged tool will act as a damper and reduce the induced vibrations. Due to this
process machine interaction it is necessary to take the process forces into account
with regard to the unbalance state and the resulting surface topography . But, be-
cause of size effects process models applied in conventional machining cannot be
applied. Previous investigations showed that in diamond turning the forces increase
for higher cutting velocities [11] whereas in conventional machining the forces de-
crease at higher cutting velocities because of heating and softening of the workpiece
material [14].
To assess the process forces during ultraprecision machining measurements have
been carried out using a triaxial dynamometer for low forces. The dynamometer is
mounted beneath the tool holder, on top of the test stands z-axis.
15.3
Experimental Setup
Commercially available ultraprecision machine tools are designed for manual single-
plane balancing and therefore, it is not possible to compensate for dynamic un-
balances. But, if a second balancing plane would be applied to an ultraprecision
machine tool a rise in workpiece quality relating to surface roughness and form
accuracy can be assumed.
To investigate the inﬂuence of dual-plane balancing in ultraprecision diamond
machining a test stand has been designed and built. Balancing experiments have
been carried out to investigate the inﬂuence between surface topography and corre-
sponding balancing situation. As the main goal of the investigations is to identify
and characterize balancing dependent effects during ultraprecision machining the
experimental procedure has been kept as simple as possible to reduce the inﬂu-
ence of other effects. For this reason face turning was chosen as machining pro-
cess and plane discs (Fig. 15.6) were machined. As a result only one axis has to
be moved during machining. For all experiments an aluminum alloy (AlMg3) was
used a workpiece material which is commonly used for ultraprecision machining
processes.
Fig. 15.6 Machined planar
sample

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
335
Fig. 15.7 Balancing experiment platform (test stand), cross sectional view of the main spin-
dle (courtesy: Kugler) [5]
15.3.1
Test Stand
The test stand (Fig. 15.7, left) is based on an ultraprecision turning lathe, which
contains an automatic dual-plane balancing system. This system consists of two in-
dependent balancing actuators, so called balancers, both attached to the spindle. The
ﬁrst balancer is located in front of the air bearing near the chuck, the second is lo-
cated behind the air bearing near the motor (Fig. 15.7, right). Attached to the spindle
housing are two vibration sensors located in same radial plane as the correspond-
ing balancers. Their signal is send to a control unit for analyzing and interpreting
the vibration data. The control unit calculates a balancing solution according to the
analyzed vibration data and sends a control impulse to each balancer. Because each
adjustment that is made to a balancer is simultaneously inﬂuencing both balancing
planes, the control unit is not able to calculate a single step solution, but has to ap-
proximate iteratively the best solution. This procedure demonstrates the complexity
of dual-plane balancing. For the functional principle of a single balancer and the
customizable machine tool properties, see [4, 5, 6].
15.4
Structure Process Interaction Model
In order to improve the balancing process with mathematical methods, a simulation
environment of the whole process has to be developed. The crucial point hereby
is the connection between unbalances and surface topography. Therefore, a model
which considers the interaction between machine structure and cutting process has
been built up. In the following subsections the separate parts of this model are pre-
sented, namely the machine model in 15.4.1, the process model in 15.4.2, the cou-
pling in 15.4.3 and the visualization of the surface topography in 15.4.4.

336
C. Brandt et al.
15.4.1
The Structure Model
The experimental platform from Fig. 15.7 has a complex structure which is difﬁcult
to model in full detail. Thus, simplifying assumptions have been made that enable
us to handle the model mathematically but also make sure that the simpliﬁed model
is still a good approximation of the reality.
15.4.1.1
System Matrices
First, we have divided the platform into components which are illustrated in Fig.
15.8, namely the rotating part of the spindle, the spindle casing, the rotating part
of the motor, and the motor casing. The spindle rotor and casing are connected by
an air bearing with two spherical calottes. We have modelled this bearing by two
spring-damper elements although in a ﬁrst attempt any damping in the springs was
neglected. The motor bearings are also modelled as spring-damper elements. Spin-
dle and motor are connected by a coupling that can compensate misalignments in
axial and radial directions as well as torsion. It is also modelled as a spring element.
Spindle and motor are supported by a granite base that is assumed to be rigid. The
joints to the granite base are modelled as ﬁrm spring elements. Additionally, Figure
15.8 shows the coordinate system. In operation, the spindle rotates counterclockwise
around the z-axis.
Secondly, we have developed a vibration model for each part of the machine sep-
arately. If we would consider only unbalances as possible reasons for vibrations it
would be sufﬁcient to allow vibrations in radial directions x and y only. Since unbal-
ances cause harmonic vibrations and we assume isotropic bearings, the vibrations
in x and y direction are the same except for a phase shift of π/2. Nevertheless, the
forces from the cutting process act in all three directions. Thus each point along the
z-axis, i.e. each beam element of inﬁnitesimal length ∂z, has the following degrees
of freedom (DOF): the displacement u,v,w in x,y,z direction, the torsion angle βz,
and the rotational angles βx,βy. We collect the DOF in a vector u = u(z,t). The
computation of u is based on an energy formulation, the so called Principle of Vir-
tual Displacements, see [8], Chapter 5. This principle is equivalent to equilibrium
conditions from which a partial differential equation for u(x,t) can be derived. Start-
ing from the energy formulation, we use the Finite Element Method (FEM) for the
discretization in the space variable x. We arrive at a system of ordinary differential
equations (ODE) in time of the form
M¨u(t)+ Su(t) = p(t),
(15.1)
where M denotes the mass matrix, and S the stiffness matrix. In case of damping in
the system a third term D˙u(t) on the left hand side with a sparse damping matrix
D would be added. For the discretization, the considered parts of the platform are
divided into elements with nodes at each end. The movement of each point between
the nodes is described by ansatz functions scaled with the movement of the nodes.
Considering the boundary and transition conditions between the end node of one
element and the ﬁrst node of the next element we will get system matrices M and

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
337
S for each part of the platform. This procedure is well known and we have mainly
followed [8] in order to derive the matrices. We have used the following partition:
1. Spindle rotor with the coupling: 36 elements.
2. Spindle casing: 30 elements.
3. Rotor part of the motor: 3 elements.
4. Motor casing: 2 elements.
Fig. 15.8 Modeled parts of
the test stand
As
introduced
above,
each
node
has
6
degrees
of
freedom
(DOF).
The DOF of each of the parts speciﬁed above are collected in vectors
usp−rot,usp−cas,um−rot,um−cas. A discretization in Ni elements in our model
leads to Ni + 1 nodes and thus 6 · (Ni + 1) DOF in the model of the ith
part. The vectors of DOF are subject to equation (15.1) with mass matrices
Msp−rot,Msp−cas,Mm−rot,Mm−cas and stiffness matrices Ssp−rot, Ssp−cas, Sm−rot,
Sm−cas. If we collect all DOF in one vector
u = (uT
sp−rot,uT
sp−cas,uT
m−rot,uT
m−cas)T,
(15.2)
we get a block diagonal structure for the entire mass and stiffness matrix of the
dimension 450× 450.
Additionally, we have to consider the bearing elements that connect the DOF
of the corresponding nodes in the connected parts via a stiffness parameter C and
damping parameters D. This results in additional diagonal and in off-diagonal ele-
ments of the entire stiffness matrix which are collected in sparse matrices Cair for
the air bearing, Cm for the motor, and Cc for the coupling of motor and spindle:
S =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
Ssp−rot
0
0
0
0
Ssp−cas
0
0
0
0
Sm−rot
0
0
0
0
Sm−cas
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠+
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
Cair
−Cair
0
0
−Cair Cair + Cc
−Cc
0
0
−Cc
Cc + Cm −Cm
0
0
−Cm
Cm
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(15.3)
The damping matrix D will have the same structure as the additional sparse ma-
trices in the stiffness matrix. Stiffness values for the coupling between motor and
spindle were provided by the manufacturer. For the air bearing between spindle
and spindle casing we had to rely on an inspection record that stated measurement

338
C. Brandt et al.
Fig. 15.9 Comparison of
model and measurement
data for given unbalance.
The two sensors are ﬁxed
in y-direction on the casing
above the two balancers [2]
values for the axial and radial stiffness of the bearing in the steady state. We mention
again, that we have neglected the damping in a ﬁrst attempt mainly because of the
lack of information. The identiﬁcation of damping coefﬁcients will be part of future
investigations.
15.4.1.2
Model Adjustment
Although we have carefully modelled the elements with respect to their geometry
and physical properties, we still made simpliﬁcations. Therefore, the model may
not ﬁt reality immediately. The most uncertain values are the stiffness parameters
for the bearings, in particular those from the air bearing. A modal analysis of the ex-
perimental platform was carried out in order to adjust the model eigenfrequencies to
the eigenfrequencies of the platform but the analysis turned out to be faulty. So far,
the only reliable information we have of the real platform are the vibrational data
for certain deﬁned unbalance settings in a frequency range of 5···50 Hz. For a good
model, the measured data has to ﬁt the computed data reasonably well. With the
pre-chosen model parameters we were not able to achieve this data ﬁt immediately.
Hence, we have changed the stiffnesses for all bearings and monitored its effect on
the vibrational response. It turned out that the stiffness of the air bearing changed the
vibrational behavior most notably, i.e. a reduction of its stiffness produced a desired
eigenfrequency at 15 Hz. The inﬂuence of other bearings on the lower eigenfre-
quencies was insigniﬁcant. A comparison of the data produced by the model with
the measurements can be seen in Fig. 15.9. Although this ﬁrst attempt to optimize
the model according to the sparse information was successful, it is still questionable
if the model reﬂects the machine correctly in all necessary aspects. It is planned to
carry out further modal analyses in the near future. With these data available, a more
reliable model can be generated. Meanwhile, we have used this model for further
computations and tests, in particular the combination with the force model.

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
339
15.4.1.3
Solution of the Vibration Equation in the Presence of Unbalances
If only unbalances in our machine tool are considered, the right hand side p =
punb(t) of equation (15.1) has harmonic entries depending on the angular velocity ω.
In practice, the revolution speed n in rpm is given, therefore we have ω = 2π
60 n. An
unbalance is modelled as a mass Δm displaced from the shaft by a vector r = rei·φ
where φ is the angle to a given zero position. If the displaced mass rotates with an
angular velocity ω it induces a centrifugal force of an absolute value F :
F = ω2b, with b := Δmr.
The projection of this force onto the x- and y- axis yields
Fx = ω2bsin(ωt + φ) = ℑ(ω2beiφeiωt),
Fy = ω2bcos(ωt + φ) = ℜ(ω2beiφeiωt),
where ℑand ℜdenote the imaginary and real part of a complex number. Those
forces only apply to the displacement DOF in x-direction, and y-direction. All the
other DOF are not affected. Therefore, the sub-vector pk of p containing the entries
for the DOF of the k-th node, k =,··· ,N, has the form
pk =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
ℑ(ω2bkeiφkeiωt)
ℜ(ω2bkeiφkeiωt)
0
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
We split punb(t) = (pk)k into part with sin and cos entries only in order to apply the
right hand side ansatz for each of the parts to solve (15.1):
punb = ℑ(q1eiωt)+ ℜ(q2eiωt), with q1,2 = (q1,2
k )k
(15.4)
q1
k =

ℑ(ω2bkeiφkeiωt),0,0,0,0,0
⊤
q2
k =

0,ℜ(ω2bkeiφkeiωt),0,0,0,0
⊤.
Inserting the equation uj
unb(t) = ujeiωt, j = 1,2 and its second derivative in (15.1)
yields
uunb = u1
unb(t)+ u2
unb(t),
= ℑ((−ω2M+ S)−1q1eiωt)+ ℜ((−ω2M+ S)−1q2eiωt).
(15.5)
The solution of (15.1) is the sum of the particular solution uunb and the general
solution of the homogeneous equation with right hand side zero. After a certain
time of rotation with a constant angular velocity and no other forces than those from
unbalances the homogeneous solution will die out due to small damping effects.
Hence, in this case we have the solution uunb.

340
C. Brandt et al.
15.4.2
The Process Model
The submodel for the machining process consists of two parts: a force model to
simulate the actual cutting force and a model for the actual process parameters as
well as the tool tip position on the workpiece surface. Actual parameter means that
the parameter is time dependent in contrast to the given constant input parameters at
the test stand. Figure 15.10 shows a schematic diagram of the considered diamond
face turning process. In face turning the tool is moving along the x-axis with a feed
velocity vf and cuts the workpiece with a depth of cut ap at its front face. The acting
force can be split in three components, the cutting force Fc in negative y-direction,
the thrust force Ft in z-direction and the feed force Ff in negative x-direction. In
the considered process, the cutting velocity vc(t) = 2πn(r−d(t)) is decreasing with
time since the rotational speed n is constant but the travelled distance d is increasing.
Therefore, we need a force model that includes the cutting velocity vc in addition to
the depth of cut ap and the feed rate f deﬁned as the distance the diamond tool is
travelling during one revolution.
Fig. 15.10 Scheme of the
considered face turning
process
15.4.2.1
The Force Model
As there are a lot of standard force models for conventional cutting processes, the
development of force models for micro cutting is an actual research topic, because
several so called size effects occur like cutting edge effect, minimum chip thickness
and ploughing effects. See [15] for an overview about size effects in cutting opera-
tions. New force models have been developed, like the recently proposed slip-line
force model for micro turning with edge tool [9] including strain and temperature
effects. The critical chip thickness and micro ploughing effects are also examinated,
see for example [12].
In ultra-precision turning the situation is exceptional. The cutting parameters like
depth of cut and feed rate are in the range of some micrometers, which is possible
due to the use of diamond tools with much sharper cutting edges than conventional
(carbide) tools and the application of ultraprecise machine tools. Therefore, some
of the mentioned size effects do play only a subordinate role in diamond cutting

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
341
and the mentioned conventional models are not applicable to ultra-precision turning
experiments. Nevertheless, the forces in the experiments show a typical behavior
for micro machining and the used workpiece material (aluminium alloy AlMg3),
i.e. the thrust force is the dominant force component and the forces are in the range
of one Newton or less.
Another class of force models for micro turning are modiﬁed Kienzle models,
see [14]. In [10] an ansatz is presented to calculate an undeformed chip thickness h
which permits to consider tools with different tool nose geometries. Another modi-
ﬁed Kienzle ansatz is proposed in [17] where the speciﬁc cutting force kc is repre-
sented as a product of functions including cutting velocity vc, friction μ, uncut chip
thickness h and cutting edge radius rβ, i.e.
kc = f1(h)f2(vc)f3(rβ)f4(μ),
(15.6)
with functions f1(h) = ch−m and f2 = α1vβ1
c + α2v−β2
c
. We picked up this idea and
the form of the functions f1 and f2 to model the speciﬁc cutting force as product
of functions gi depending on the depth of cut ap, the feed rate f and the cutting
velocity vc , i.e. to model the speciﬁc force in the form
kc = g1(ap)g2(f)g3(vc) .
(15.7)
Similar equations hold for the speciﬁc thrust and feed forces kp and kf . The func-
tions gi (i = 1,2,3) and the model constants therein are determined with help of
force measurements with different cutting conditions, see Table 15.1 for details.
Table 15.1 Experimental conditions for diamond turning experiments
Parameter
value range
rotional spindle speed n = 800...1500 rev/min
feed rate
f = 4...12 mm/min
depth of cut
ap = 2...14 μm
tool nose radius
rε = 760 μm
workpiece material
AlMg3
The measurements of the speciﬁc forces over the depth of cut and feed rate are
illustrated in Fig. 15.11 forces together with the ﬁtted curves g1 and g2 (solid line)
which had been determined to be of the form
gi
1(ap) = ci
aa−mia
p
(i = t, f,c)
(15.8)
and
gi
2(f) = ci
f f −mi
f
(i = t, f,c).
(15.9)
The function g3 has been determined to be of form of the function f2, i.e.
gi
3(vc) = αi
1v
β i
1
c + αi
2v
−β i
2
c
(i = t, f,c).
(15.10)

342
C. Brandt et al.
Fig. 15.11 Measured speciﬁc forces over depth of cut (left hand side) and feed (right hand
side). The measured thrust force is represented by circles and the measured cutting force by
x-marks. The ﬁtted curves g1 and g2 given by equation (15.8) and (15.9) are plotted as solid
line [3]
Fig. 15.12 Measured spe-
ciﬁc forces over cutting
velocity. The measured
thrust force is represented
by circles and the measured
cutting force by x-marks.
The ﬁtted curve g3 given by
equation (15.10) is plotted
as solid line [3]
The function g3 and the measurements of the speciﬁc forces over cutting velocity are
shown in Fig. 15.12. Using the speciﬁc cutting forces we are now able to calculate
the speciﬁc cutting force components via the usual relationship for the forces by
Kienzle (see [14]):
Fc = kcAc,
Ft = ktAc,
Ff = kf Ac ,
(15.11)
where Ac denotes the cross sectional area of cut which can be approximated by
Ac = ap f.
15.4.2.2
Simulation of the Tool Path
The second part of the process model consists of the simulation of the actual process
parameter and the tool path. Basically, the description of the tool tip position on the
surface is given by the movement of the tool, the deﬂections δi (i = x,y,z) of the tool
as well as the deﬂections Δi (i = x,y,z) and tilting βi (i = x,y,z) of the workpiece,
i.e.

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
343
x(t) =
−r + vft
−δx(t)−Δx(t),
(15.12)
y(t) =
−δy(t)−Δy(t),
(15.13)
z(t) = −ap + 1
2lh

δ 2
x + δ 2
y

+δz(t)−Δz(t)−x(t)tan(βy(t)) ,
(15.14)
where lh denotes the length of the tool holder. The angle βy denotes the rotation of
the workpiece around the y-axis. This tilt of the workpiece can inﬂuence the actual
depth of the cut ap which is described in equation (15.14). Since the deﬂections
affect the actual tool tip position and we now deﬁne time dependent process param-
eters, namely the actual depth of cut
ap(t) = −z(t)
(15.15)
and
vx(t) = ˙d(t),
with d(t) = x(t)+ r.
(15.16)
The actual feed rate f is given by f(t) = n−1vx(t). In contrast to the given constant
input parameters of the test stand, the time dependant parameters are called “actual
parameters”.
These actual process parameters are plugged into the equation (15.11) for the
force components using the equations for the speciﬁc forces (15.7). Using the actual
forces, we are now able to determine the deﬂections of the tool holder which are
proportional to the forces
δx(t) = Ff (t)
kex
,
δy(t) = Fc(t)
key
,
δz(t) = Ft(t)
kez
.
(15.17)
Here kei denotes the corresponding stiffness in the direction i (i = x,y,z). Since
all force components have the same structure we get for all three spatial directions
(j = x,y,z) the deﬂection
δj(t) = k−1
ei

ci
a ap(t)−mia

˜ci
f f(t)−mi
f

αi
1vc(t)β i
1 + αi
2vc(t)−β i
2

ap(t)f(t)
(15.18)
with (i = f,c,t) for (j = x,y,z). Derivatives of the equations for the position
(15.12)-(15.14) and deﬂections (15.18) combined with equation (15.11),(15.15) and
(15.16) for the actual parameters deliver a system of ordinary differential equations
of the form
˙δx(t) = vf −vx(t)−˙Δx(t),
(15.19)
˙δy(t) =
1
nkey
˙kc(t)ap(t)vx(t)+ kc(t)[ ˙ap(t)vx(t)+ ap(t)˙vx(t)]

,
(15.20)
˙δz(t) =
1
nkez
˙kt(t)ap(t)vx(t)+ kt(t)[ ˙ap(t)vx(t)+ ap(t)˙vx(t)]

,
(15.21)
˙vx(t) =
˙δx(t)−n−1k−1
ex vx(t)
˙kf (t)ap(t)−kf(t) ˙ap(t)

n−1k−1
ex kf (t)ap(t)
,
(15.22)

344
C. Brandt et al.
˙ap(t) = −1
lh

δx(t) ˙δx(t)+ δy(t) ˙δy(t)

−˙δz(t)+ ˙Δx(t),
+(r −d(t))
˙βy(t)
cos2 (βy(t)) −vx(t)tan(βy(t)) ,
(15.23)
˙d(t) = vx(t),
(15.24)
˙kf (t) = −cf
a ˜cf
f

ap(t)−mf
avx(t)−mf
f

α f
1 β f
1 vc(t)β f
1 −1 −α f
2 β f
2 vc(t)−β f
2 −1
+

mf
aap(t)−mf
a−1 ˙ap(t)vx(t)−mf
f + mf
f vx(t)−mf
f −1 ˙vx(t)ap(t)−mf
a


α f
1 vc(t)β f
1 + α f
2 vc(t)−β f
2

(15.25)
˙kc(t) = −cc
a ˜cc
f

ap(t)−mcavx(t)−mc
f

αc
1β c
1vc(t)β c
1−1 −αc
2β c
2vc(t)−β c
2−1
+

mc
aap(t)−mca−1 ˙ap(t)vx(t)−mc
f + mc
f vx(t)−mc
f −1 ˙vx(t)ap(t)−mca


αc
1vc(t)β c
1 + αc
2vc(t)−β c
2

,
(15.26)
˙kt(t) = −ct
a ˜ct
f

ap(t)−mtavx(t)−mt
f

αt
1βt
1vc(t)βt
1−1 −αt
2βt
2vc(t)−βt
2−1

mt
aap(t)−mta−1 ˙ap(t)vx(t)−mt
f + mt
fvx(t)−mt
f −1 ˙vx(t)ap(t)−mta


αt
1vc(t)βt
1 + αt
2vc(t)−βt
2

.
(15.27)
Hereby, we deﬁned ˜ci
f = ci
f nmi
f , because of the relation vx(t) = n f(t) and equation
(15.9). The cutting velocity is calculated by vc(t) = 2πn(r −d(t)) and the vibrations
Δi, i ∈{x,y,z}, as well as the tilt angle βy of the workpiece and their derivatives are
determined by the structural submodel. The system of differential equations will
be solved numerically with the MATLAB solver ”ode15i”. The stiffness values kei
(i = x,y,z) are determined by the geometrical dimensions of the tool holder and its
elasticity module (material: steel, E = 210 kN/mm2). The resulting actual forces Fi
are calculated by the deﬂections δ using equation (15.17). The numerical results are
presented in Sect. 15.4.5.
15.4.3
Coupling of the Submodels
In the last two sections both submodels have been presented, the structure model and
the process model. Solving the ODE (15.1) lead to the vibrations u of all elements
of the discretization. The ﬁrst six entries are related to the workpiece and are input
parameters for the system of differential equations (15.19)-(15.27), i.e.
(Δx,Δy,Δz) = (u1,u2,u3)
andβy = u5 .
(15.28)
The process model computes the actual forces and deﬂections of the tool which act
at the tool tip position on the workpiece. Therefore, these forces add up to the forces

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
345
of the unbalances in the right hand side of equation (15.1). The resulting additional
load vector has the form
pcut(t,u(t)) = (Ff ,Fc,Ft,0,Mc,Mt,0,··· ,0)T,
with M{t,c} = F{t,c} × ra,
where ra(t) = r −d(t) denotes the radius of the workpiece minus the already trav-
elled distance of the tool on the workpiece, cf. Fig. 15.10. Thus, a coupled system
of ODEs
M¨u(t)+ Su(t) = punb + pcut (t,F(t,w),Mt(t,w),Mc(t,w)) ,
˙w(t) = g(t,w(t), ˙w(t),u(t)) ,
has to be solved, where the function g is given by the system of differential equa-
tions (15.19)-(15.27) and the corresponding variables are collected in the vector
w = (δx,δy,δz,vy,ap,d,kt,kf ,kc). In order to solve the non-linear coupled system
approximately, we have employed a time step algorithm and assumed the forces and
moments from the cutting process to be constant during a small time interval, i.e.
pcut(t) = pcut(ti) for t ∈[ti,ti + Δt]. Now,
u(t) = A(punb + pcut(ti)), t ∈[ti,ti + Δt],
where A describes the solution operator of (15.1). The resulting deﬂections
(Δx,Δy,Δz) from (15.28) are plugged into the force model and we compute
(Ff (ti+1),Fc(ti+1),Ft(ti+1)) = B(u(ti + Δt)) = B(δx,δy,δz)
at ti+1 = ti + Δt. Here B denotes the solution operator for solving (15.19)-(15.27)
and use (15.17) afterwards. Again, we assume the cutting forces to be constant over
the next time interval [ti+1,ti+1 + Δt]. This routine is repeated until the end of the
desired time interval t ∈[t0,tend] is reached, for which the coupled system should be
solved.
15.4.4
Surface Visualization
The visualization of a three-dimensional representation of a surface is an intuitive
but powerful and ﬂexible technique in surface characterization and comparison. Sur-
faces produced in face turning can be represented as a continuous function S(x,y)
describing the surface height over the (x,y)-plane. For visualization and other digi-
tal processing, (x,y) is an element of a discrete support set consisting of regular or
irregular arranged points. For objective characterization, three dimensional surface
parameters can be derived from the surface function S, see [16] for more details.
We make investigations to study the surface at two scales. We are interested in the
form deviation of the global workpiece but also in the roughness structure. During
the development it turns out to be more efﬁcient to decompose large surfaces into
two scales and to simulate both scales separately. This is done not only for the
save of computation time but also for avoiding alias effects which may occur when

346
C. Brandt et al.
Fig. 15.13
Radial sur-
face sections under ideal
conditions and for a simula-
tion, both with ap = 1mm,
f = 0.5mm, rε = 0.76mm
large surfaces at ﬁne discretization are sampled down. Consequently, we calculate
S on a small rectangular sub domain at ﬁne discretization to visualize the roughness
proﬁle and to determine the local surface parameters. Therefore, a kinematic surface
simulation is developed in the following subsections. The global form is provided
by S, evaluated on selected tool tip positions.
15.4.4.1
Simulation of Surface Generation
The ideal kinematic surface resulting from face turning can be described by a set of
radial sections. Each radial section Sk is built by repetitions of the edge geometry in
intervals of feed per revolution. If a round nosed tool of radius rε is used, we can
formulate each radial section by
Sk(x) = rε −

r2ε −

x+ (k −1/2)f −
x+ k f
f

f
2
−ap,
x ∈[0,r],k ∈[0,1),
where k2π denotes the section’s angle. An ideal radial section S0 is shown in Fig.
15.13. The surface proﬁle will change in two ways with respect to vibrations of the
workpiece and deﬂections of the tool. Firstly, the repetitions will not be necessarily
equidistant and the turning grooves will differ in their depth. Secondly, the geome-
try of each channel will change because tool and workpiece will not be positioned
orthogonal to each other. Figure 15.13 shows also a simulation result for a disturbed
process.
In the following, a discrete surface generation model, which is coupled with the
process model, is presented to provide the surface function S depending on vibra-
tions of the workpiece and tool deﬂection. The central component of the model is
the parameter to state operator
Φ : P →
 4×4,
(15.29)

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
347
Fig. 15.14 Coordinate sys-
tem for dynamic surface
simulation; rotational mo-
tion of workpiece and tool
which maps kinematic information, provided by the structure model, to homoge-
neous matrices used to formulate the tool trajectories.
15.4.4.2
Calculation of the Tool Trajectories
Basically, the interacting objects, workpiece and tool, are assumed to be solid such
that they are conﬁgured in the coordinate system for any time point t by a rotation
and a translation. Thus, the tool and workpiece trajectories are given by afﬁne linear
mappings ΦT and ΦW. In computer graphics homogeneous matrices are used to
perform such transformations. Therefore, we introduce a homogeneous coordinate
system, which is built from cartesian coordinates by
(x,y,z) →(x,y,z,1).
(15.30)
The characteristic motions in turning processes are the rotation of the workpiece
around the z-axis, which is expressed by
ΦW = RZ(φ) =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
cos(φ) −sin(φ) 0 0
sin(φ) cos(φ) 0 0
0
0
1 0
0
0
0 1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠,
and the translation of the tool along the x-axis, which is expressed by
ΦT = T((r −fNt,0,lh −ap)) =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1 0 0 r −fNt
0 1 0
0
0 0 1 lh −ap
0 0 0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
These two operators describe the movement of the tool and of the workpiece under
ideal conditions. The positioning and alignment errors are included into the model
by applying further translations and rotations. Figure 15.14 shows the tilt angles βx

348
C. Brandt et al.
and βy of the workpiece. The moment acting around the x-axis has only a marginal
effect to surface generation, and therefore it is neglected in our model. The rotation
rate is assumed to be constant. This leads to the operator for the movement of the
workpiece:
ΦW = T(Δ)RY(βy)RZ(φ).
(15.31)
The tool inclination is changed appropriate to the deﬂection provided by the force
model by applying multiple rotations, which leads to
ΦT = T((r −fNt,0,lh −ap))R(δx,δy).
So far, the movement of the tool is described by ΦT and that one of the workpiece
by ΦW. For the material removal algorithm the relative position of the tool to the
workpiece is compulsory. ΦW and ΦT give absolute positions, but we can carry over
the workpiece operation to the tool using
Φ := Φ−1
W ΦT.
(15.32)
The diamond tool, or more precisely its edge geometry, can be parameterized as
ε(ϕ) = (rε cosϕ,0,−rε sinϕ −l + rε,1)T,
ϕ ∈[0,π],
(15.33)
with tool radius rε and length lh. Thus, the relative tool trajectories are given by
Φε(ϕ) for ϕ ∈[0,π]. In case of ideal conditions, i.e. no vibration, no displacement
and no deﬂection, (15.32) can be written as
Φ =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
cos(−φ) −sin(−φ) 0 (r −fNt)cos(−φ)
sin(−φ) cos(−φ) 0 (r −fNt)sin(−φ)
0
0
1
lh −ap
0
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(15.34)
In Fig. 15.15 the ideal and disturbed tool tip locus is visualized. For the ideal case the
trajectories of the tool tip are given by applying the tool tip ε(π/2) = (0,0,−l,1)T to
(15.34), leading to (x,y,z,1)T = ((r −fNt)cos(−φ),(r −fNt)sin(−φ),−ap,1)T,
i.e. a spiral with decreasing radius appropriate to the feed rate located parallel to the
workpiece surface at height −ap.
15.4.4.3
Material Removal Process
The material removal takes place under ideal conditions, i.e. a homogeneous,
isotropic material and an ideal sharp tool in the sense of a cutting edge rβ = 0
are assumed. Consequently, the material passed by the cutting edge will be removed
completely, in particular no ploughing or elastic recovery is considered. Therefore,
the swept volume of the moving edge
Φε(ϕi),
0 = ϕ0 < ··· < ϕn = π
is used to update the surface function S for points, which are passed by the cutting
edge.

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
349
Fig. 15.15
Relative tool tip locus for ideal conditions (left) and for an oscillating surface
(right); ap = 1mm, f =0.5mm
15.4.5
Numerical Simulation Results
Following Sections 15.4.4.2 and 15.4.4.3, a surface generation model for micro turn-
ing processes has been implemented. The model is able to simulate the global form
and roughness structure of the machined surface depending on the balancing state of
the machine. As mentioned in 15.4.2, the differential equations system for the pro-
cess model is solved numerically. The ODE (15.1) of the structure model is solved
numerically, too. A detailed description how to reformulate and solve the problem is
proposed in [2]. All algorithms are implemented in the mathematical programming
environment MATLAB. First, we tested the algorithm with different time steps Δt.
The experiments showed that for higher frequencies the time resolution has be cho-
sen smaller. In particular, for the rotational speeds in our simulation we have to use
time steps equal or less than 1 ms.
We then tested the algorithm for several parameter settings. As expected, the
presence of unbalances mainly affects the deﬂection or vibration amplitudes in ra-
dial direction x and y. Nevertheless, the deﬂection in z direction is affected, too.
We can also observe quantitative effects for unbalance distributions of different
magnitude. Here, we will only present one example with the parameters deﬁned
in Table 15.2, setting 1. We have used two different sets of unbalance distributions
f1 = ([22.4 gmm,63◦],[4.5 gmm,243◦],[4.7 gmm,2◦]) and f2 = ([22.4 gmm,63◦],
[0.45 gmm,243◦], [0.47 gmm,2◦]). The ﬁrst position corresponds to the workpiece,
the second and the third to the balancer planes.
Figure 15.16 shows the development of the deﬂection of the workpiece in di-
rection of the spindle over time for both unbalance settings. The vibration in radial
direction as well as the development of the depth of cut are shown in Fig. 15.17.
Fig. 15.18 presents the thrust force Ft and the cutting force Fc. The higher unbal-
ance distribution f1 causes vibrations with bigger amplitudes.

350
C. Brandt et al.
Table 15.2 Parameter setting for the simulations
Parameter
setting 1
setting 2
setting 3
rotational spindle speed n = 25Hz
n = 25Hz
n = 20Hz
feed rate
f = 5.33 μm/rev f = 500 μm/rev f = 8.33 μm/rev
depth of cut
ap = 5 μm
ap = 5 μm
ap = 5
tool nose radius
rε = 760 μm
rε = 760 μm
rε = 760 μm
workpiece radius
r = 30 mm
r = 5 mm
r = 30 mm
tool holder length
lh = 25 mm
lh = 25 mm
lh = 25 mm
time step
Δt = 1 ms
Δt = 0.1 ms
Δt = 1 ms
Fig. 15.16 Deﬂection of the workpiece in z-direction for f1 and f2; entire time interval (left),
and detail (right)
Fig. 15.17 Deﬂection of the workpiece in y-direction for f1 and f2 and depth of cut
The output of the process machine interaction model can also used to visualize
the machined surface. In a ﬁrst step, surface simulations for simple oscillations of
type
βy(t) = ∑
i
ki sin(piωt),
ω = n2π,
(15.35)

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
351
Fig. 15.18 Simulated thrust and cutting force
are carried out in order to verify the basic function of the surface model. It is clear
that frequencies pin in the signal βy can be recovered in the surface structure because
the workpiece is rotating with angular speed ω. In Fig. 15.19 two example surfaces
for different oscillations are shown.
Fig. 15.19 Simulated surfaces for oscillations of type (15.35)
In a second step, the robustness of surface generation is evaluated with the help
of the implemented surface model. This is an important step, because all input os-
cillations are result of numerical solved differential equations. Figure 15.20 shows
exemplarily a simulated surface for an oscillation βy of (50+ε)Hz, where ε denotes
a small disturbance. When no disturbance exists (ε = 0) and a rotation frequency of
50Hz is assumed, the resulting surface is an inclined plane. With increasing degree
of disturbance the form error grows rapidly, which is demonstrated in Figure 15.20
for ε = 10−4,10−3,10−2. For ε = 10−4 a ﬁrst distortion appears, which is growing
intensively for increasing disturbance. Finally, for ε = 10−2 the oscillation is heavily
asynchronous to the rotation leading to a completely wrong visual impression.
Model problems with reduced workpiece diameter and high feed speeds are con-
sidered for the beneﬁt of short calculation time for all sub-models. The process
parameters of setting 2 in Table 15.2 are used in three model problems with dif-
ferent unbalance conﬁgurations, see Table 15.3. The related surfaces are plotted in

352
C. Brandt et al.
(a) ε = 10−4
(b) ε = 10−3
(c) ε = 10−2
Fig. 15.20 Simulated surfaces for an oscillation of (50+ε)Hz; n = 50Hz,r = 30mm
Fig. 15.21 (a)–(c). In case (a), where no unbalances are set, a wavy surface can be
detected. This corresponds to the power spectrum of βy, where three different fre-
quencies can be identiﬁed. In case (b) and (c), where unbalances for the workpiece
or balancer planes are set, only the rotation frequency can be identiﬁed in the power
spectrum. The result is an inclined surface.
Table 15.3 Unbalance conﬁguration for the model problems of setting 2
no. unbalance workpiece unbalance balancer planes 1 and 2
(a)
no
no
(b)
no
([4.5 gmm,243◦],[4.7 gmm,2◦])
(c)
[22.4 gmm,63◦]
([4.5 gmm,243◦],[4.7 gmm,2◦])
(a) No Unbalances
(b) Plane 1&2 set
(c) Unbalance at workpiece
and plane 1&2 set
Fig. 15.21 Simulated surfaces for model problems
In a last step, surfaces under practical relevant conditions concerning workpiece
dimension and process parameters are computed. For a workpiece diameter of 60
mm and a feed rate of 5.33μm more than 5.600 overlapping channels generate the
resulting surface. To realize simulation results with reasonable expense, a two scale
model is compulsory.In analogy to the experiments, a set of simulations for different
rotation rates (n = 1200,...,1800 [min−1]) and feed rates (f = 5.33,...,8.33 [μm])
with two different balancing states are carried out. In the unbalanced case, only the

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
353
(a) Global form
(b) Roughness proﬁle
Fig. 15.22
Simulated surfaces for setting 3, Table 15.2, unbalanced (1.823g at the
workpiece)
(a) Global form
(b) Roughness proﬁle
Fig. 15.23 Simulated surfaces for setting 3, Table 15.2, best possible balancing state
rotation frequency can be identiﬁed in the oscillations βx,βy,βz. The displacements
and deﬂections are relatively small compared to the dominant oscillation βy and
the resulting surface is an inclined plane. The global form and a small rectangular
domain of 150μm× 50μm are plotted in Figure 15.22. In the case of best possible
balancing state, βy indicates one frequency, which is close to the rotation frequency,
e.g. 48.96Hz for n = 50Hz. It can be assumed that this deviation is of numerical
nature. The simulated surface is highly defective, see Figure 15.23, and corresponds
to the scenario shown in Figure 15.20 (c).
15.5
Solving the Inverse Problem for Balancing
So far, we presented a process-machine interaction model which can compute the
surface topography of the workpiece with a given unbalance distribution and input
process parameters. Mathematically spoken, we have derived an operator A which

354
C. Brandt et al.
maps the vector p containing the unbalances distribution and the process parameters
to a surface S, i.e. we have the following operator equation
A(p) = S.
(15.36)
This equation is called forward formulation of our model. Assuming now that for a
given surface S, we are interested do determine the necessary balancing state in or-
der to obtain the surface S, i.e. to solve equation (15.36) with respect to p. However,
measurement devices typically have limited precision and we assume that unprecise
and noisy measurement data Sδ are available, which fulﬁll ||S −Sδ|| ≤δ, where
δ denotes the measurement precision. Usually this operator is not continuously in-
vertible, which means that for given noisy data Sδ with a data error of the function
pδ = A−1(Sδ) might be an arbitrary bad approximation of the true unbalance dis-
tribution p. Problems with those properties are referred to as being ill-posed. In this
case, least square techniques, where pδ is computed as the minimizer of ∥Ap−Sδ∥2,
are unstable. The computation of pδ can be stabilized by using the regularization
methods presented in Chap. 3, i.e. by minimizing the so-called Tikhonov-functional
pδ
α = min
p ∥Ap −Sδ∥2 + αΨ(p)
(15.37)
instead. The penalty term Ψ(p) acts as a stabilizer and prevents large values of
Ψ(p).Typical choices of Ψ are, e.g.
Ψ(p) = ∥p∥p :=

∑
i
|pi|p
1/p
, 0 < p ≤2.
(15.38)
In a ﬁrst attempt we invert the structural submodel, i.e. given a vibration u we deter-
mine the unbalance distribution p causing the vibrations. This results are presented
in Chap. 3. Future work is dealing with the inversion of the full forward problem
(15.36).
15.6
Experimental Results
Face turning experiments were conducted to show to which extent an unbalance
affects the resulting surface topography. To further assist the investigation and un-
derstanding of the process-machine-interaction force measurements were carried
out during machining.
There are two main effects which result from an unbalance. First, the spindle on
which the unbalance is acting is deﬂected and performs a tumbling motion which
leads to a differing tool path. Second, the unbalance induces a vibration to the whole
machine tool structure where the magnitude of this vibration depends on the damp-
ing properties of the machine tool. These effects have different inﬂuences with re-
gard to the process, surface topography and process forces.

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
355
15.6.1
Form Deviation
The initial experiments showed a trend to higher form deviations (peak to valley,
s. Fig. 15.24) for unbalanced workpieces or workpieces which were machined with
an additional unbalance. In this context unbalanced workpiece means a workpiece
without any balancing procedures prior to machining. An additional unbalance is a
weight added to the workpiece by the use of setscrews to amplify balance induced
effects.
Fig. 15.24 Form deviations for balanced (left) and unbalanced (right) workpiece [11]
The inﬂuence of an unbalance in terms of form deviation can be seen in Fig.
15.25 and Fig. 15.26. The diagrams show the form deviation versus the depth of cut
and feed. Additionally, the cross sectional area of cut Ac is given for each experi-
ment series. In correspondence to previous experiments workpieces with unbalance
show a larger form deviation in general. Larger cross sectional areas of cut show
similar form deviations for workpieces with and without unbalances compared to
smaller cross sectional areas of cut. It is assumed that the engagement of the tool
is damping the unbalance induced vibration and the tumbling motion of the work-
piece respectively and therefore leads to similar values of form deviation compared
to machined workpieces without unbalance.
15.6.2
Surface Roughness
The initial experiments could not show a clear dependency between unbalance and
surface roughness as large deviations within the roughness data prevented any clear
correlation [5]. Additionally, the roughness values are still within the limit of 10 nm
Ra (i.e. optic quality) in the majority of the cases for machining with unbalance.

356
C. Brandt et al.
Fig. 15.25 Form deviation vs. depth of cut (with and without unbalance) [11]
Fig. 15.26 Form deviation vs. feed (with and without unbalance) [11]
From Fig. 15.27 and Fig. 15.28 it can be seen that the difference between ma-
chining with and without unbalance are only marginal. The roughness values are
slightly higher for machining with unbalance but for the observed cutting parame-
ters no strong inﬂuence can be observed.
Possibly the test stand is working at its limit in terms of accuracy as it has a lower
stiffness compared to current ultraprecision machine tools. Another possibility for
the low inﬂuence of unbalances is assumed in the process kinematic, as for turning
the surface normal and the direction of the force generated by the un-balance are
perpendicular to each other. For that reason the workpiece will not be deﬂected di-
rectly in direction of the tool which would cause a periodical change for the depth of
cut. Therefore, the current investigations will be extended by ultraprecision milling
experiments. For these experiments the normal of the generated surface and the di-
rection of the unbalance induced forces and with that the motion of the tool will be
the same.

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
357
Fig. 15.27 Surface roughness vs. depth of cut (with and without unbalance) [11]
Fig. 15.28 Surface roughness vs. feed (with and without unbalance)
15.6.3
Force Measurements
For the used workpiece material (AlMg3) the measured forces showed a character-
istic order in terms of their magnitude. The inﬂuencing effect of the unbalance is
always largest for the thrust force, followed by the cutting force and the feed force
with the lowest values.
Figure 15.29 shows the components of the resulting forces versus the depth of
cut. The dashed line represents the experiments where an unbalance was applied,
the continuous line represents the experiments in balanced state.
As expected, the forces rise with an increase for the depth of cut. From these
experiments it can be seen that there is a signiﬁcant difference between balanced
and unbalanced workpieces only for the thrust force, whereas the cutting force and
the feed force are almost equivalent for balanced and unbalanced states. As the
thrust force is depending on the friction of the chip on the rake face, it is estimated
that the thrust force will have a speciﬁc value for a balanced workpiece. In addi-
tion, if the workpiece is unbalanced, it will be deﬂected and perform a tumbling

358
C. Brandt et al.
Fig. 15.29 Process forces Fi vs. depth of cut [11]
Fig. 15.30 Changed clear-
ance angle because of tum-
bling motion [11]
motion additionally to the rotation. The tumbling motion will tilt the workpiece pe-
riodically with respect to the tool. The tilting will not change the friction between
chip and rake face, but the angle between the workpiece surface and clearance face
will change periodically. For balanced machining this angle will be equivalent to
the clearance angle. For unbalanced machining if the workpiece is tilting towards
the clearance face, this angle will decrease and induce a larger frictional load on the
clearance face. With this additional frictional load the increased thrust force for un-
balanced workpieces can be explained. The cutting force would have been expected
to show a signiﬁcant rise for unbalanced machining, because of the change in the
depth of cut. But at this stage this phenomenon cannot be explained.
A similar behavior for the force components can be recognized for an increasing
feed, again only the thrust force is inﬂuenced by the unbalance (see [11]).
15.7
Summary and Outlook
Up to now only single plane balancing has been used for ultraprecision machin-
ing processes although a secondary balancing plane seems promising with regard

15
Balancing in Diamond Machining
359
to an optimized surface quality. Utilizing a test stand with dual-plane-balancing
capabilities machining experiments have been conducted to show the dependence
between balancing quality and surface generation.
Additionally, a modelling approach of the interaction between machining process
and machine tool structure has been developed. Two submodels (structure model
and process model) are combined in a nonlinear way, and the resulting interaction
model is solved numerically by a time step algorithm. The solution is used as a
basis to determine the surface topography and the surface quality by using a surface
simulation program which is still under development. The setup of the mathematical
model is supported by the experimental data.
The mathematical model of the dependency between unbalances and surface to-
pography will enable us to predict the surface quality of a workpiece for a given
balancing state of the machine as well as to compute the balancing state which is
necessary at least for a given surface quality. Additionally, the necessary balancing
weights can be determined efﬁciently from vibrational measurements at the casing
of the machine. This will reduce time to setup the machine for the cutting process
with a desired accuracy.
The experimental investigations showed an inﬂuence of the balancing quality
with respect to the form deviation of the machined workpieces. The form deviation
rose for machining with an additional unbalance. But for the same parameters the
form deviation decreased if the cross sectional area of cut was increased, which was
accounted for with a higher damping of the engaged tool. Although it was assumed
for unbalanced machining to have an impact on surface roughness, machining with
an additional unbalance showed only marginal differences compared to balanced
machining. Due to its adjustment possibilities the test stand is not as stiff as stan-
dard ultraprecison machine tools, we assume that the lower stiffness is responsi-
ble for difﬁculties in showing a clear dependency between unbalance and surface
roughness.
Surprisingly only the thrust force was considerably affected by the unbalances.
Cutting force and feed force did not show any clear effects for unbalanced machin-
ing. This behavior has not been anticipated, least for the cutting force. The lack of
inﬂuence with respect to the cutting force cannot be explained at this stage.
As the project is still in progress it is planned to investigate circumferential
milling as an additional ultraprecision machining process. For this process the di-
rection of the unbalance induced centrifugal force and the direction of the surface
normal are the same. Therefore, any motion of the tool in radial direction will di-
rectly affect the surface generation. Consequently the inﬂuence of unbalances on the
surface topography will be larger than for turning.
Acknowledgements. The presented research has been funded by the German Research
Foundation DFG within the Priority Program 1180.

360
C. Brandt et al.
References
1. DIN ISO 1940-1 mechanical vibration - balance quality requirements for rotors in a
constant (rigid) state - part 1: Speciﬁcation and veriﬁcation of balance tolerances
2. Brandt, C., Niebsch, J., Ramlau, R., Maass, P.: Modeling the inﬂuence of unbalances
for ultra-precision cutting processes. ZAMM - Journal of Applied Mathematics and Me-
chanics/Zeitschrift f¨ur Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik 91(10), 795–808 (2011),
doi:10.1002/zamm.201000155
3. Brandt, C., Niebsch, J., Vehmeyer, J.: Modelling of ultra-precision turning process in
consideration of unbalances. In: 13th CIRP Conference on Modeling of Machining Op-
erations (2011)
4. Brinksmeier, E., Gl¨abe, R., Krause, A.: Precision balancing in ultraprecision diamond
machining. In: Laser Metrology and Machine Performance 8, Lamdamap 2007, vol. 8,
pp. 262–269 (2007)
5. Brinksmeier, E., Krause, A.: Dual plane balancing for diamond machining processes.
In: 3rd International Conference High Performance Cutting (HPC), Dublin, pp. 517–528
(2008)
6. Brinksmeier, E., Krause, A.: Surface generation in ultraprecision diamond machining
utilising dual-plane-balancing. In: International Conference on Process Machine Inter-
actions, Hannover, pp. 335–342 (2008)
7. Brinksmeier, E., Riemer, O.: Deterministic prodcution of complex optical elements. In-
ternational Journal of Production Engineering and Computers - Special Issue on CAPP
and Advances in Cutting Technology 4(5), 63–72 (2002)
8. Gasch, R., Knothe, K.: Strukturdynamik Bd. 2: Kontinua und ihre Diskretisierung.
Springer, Berlin (1989); IX, 336 S: graph. Darst
9. Jin, X., Altintas, Y.: Slip-line ﬁeld model of micro-cutting process with round
tool edge effect. Journal of Materials Processing Technology (2010) (in press),
doi:10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2010.10.006
10. K¨ohler, J.: Berechnung der Zerspankr¨afte bei variierenden Spanungsquerschnittsformen.
Ph.D. thesis, Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover (2010)
11. Krause, B.: Process forces in diamond machining with consideration of unbalances. In:
CIRP PMI, Vancouver (2010)
12. Malekian, M., Park, S., Jun, M.: Investigation of critical chip thickness and micro plough-
ing forces. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Process Machine In-
teractions, Vancouver, Canada, June 10-11 (2010)
13. Schneider, H.: Auswuchttechnik. Springer (2007)
14. T¨onshoff, H.K., Denkena, B.: Spanen: Grundlagen, 2., erw. und neu bearb. auﬂedn.
Springer, Berlin (2004); XXIV, 417 S.: Ill., graph. Darst
15. Vollertsen, F., Biermann, D., Hansen, H., Jawahir, I., Kuzman, K.: Size effects in man-
ufacturing of metallic components. CIRP Annals - Manufacturing Technology 58(2),
566–587 (2009), doi:10.1016/j.cirp.2009.09.002
16. Dong, W.P., Blunt, L.: Three-dimensional surface topography, 2nd edn. Penton Press
(2000), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/book/
9781857180268, XXII, 285 S
17. Weber, M., Autenrieth, H., Kotschenreuther, J., Gumbsch, P., Schulze, V., Lohe, D.,
Fleischer, J.: Inﬂuence of friction and process parameters on the speciﬁc cutting force and
surface characteristics in micro cutting. Machining Science and Technology 12, 474–497
(2008), doi:10.1080/10910340802518728
18. Zhou, S., Shi, J.: Active balancing and vibration control of rotating machinery: A survey.
The Shock and Vibration Digest 33, 361–371 (2001)

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 361–379. 
springerlink.com                                               © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 16  
Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization  
of a Turning Process 
R. Britz, T. Maier, F. Schwarz, H. Ulbrich, and M.F. Zaeh 
Abstract. Today, the productivity of machine tools is limited by the interactions 
between machine and process. A method to predict these limits is presented here 
using simulation model and an appropriate optimization algorithm. Therefore, a 
short overview of the used theories in multi-body dynamics, cutting processes and 
the mechanical model of the turning lathe is given. Furthermore, a modular cutting 
force model as well as the coupling between process and structure is introduced. 
For optimization, it is necessary to develop an objective function, where the quali-
ty and the productivity of the processes have to be represented. Finally, results of 
the optimization process are shown. 
16.1   Introduction  
Interactions between machine structures and manufacturing processes, such as vi-
brations due to unsteady cutting, limit the process flow. With a detailed prediction 
of these interactions it is possible to optimize operation charts, machine parame-
ters, path parameters and further details. The goal of the SPP1180 project "Para-
metric modeling, prediction and optimization of interaction between machining 
process and structure using multi-body systems and implicit filtering" is to build a 
simulation model of an existing turning lathe and to optimize the manufacturing 
process with implicit filtering.  
In this work, a facing process is used as test case. The machining operation runs 
as follows: The turning tool moves to the point, where the machining starts. At 
this point, the exact time of contact between the turning tool and the workpiece is 
detected and an additional connection between cutting edge and workpiece is es-
tablished. This process is modeled by a modified unilateral contact augmented by 
a cutting model. 
In Section 16.2, an overview of the mechanical model of the turning lathe is 
given as well as a model of the coupling between process and structure. For opti-
mization it is necessary to develop an objective function, where the quality and the 
productivity of the processes have to be represented. The objective function is de-
veloped and presented in Section 16.3. Simulation results are utilized to calculate 
the new surface and its characteristics, which criteria for an assessment of the  

362 
R. Britz et al.
 
machining quality are obtained from. These results, combined with the productivi-
ty of the process, are used as objective function variables. Optimized parameters 
for the operation are detected with respect to the dynamic limits of the working 
machine. Finally, results of the optimization process are shown and compared to 
measurements. 
16.2   Modeling 
16.2.1   Multi-body Dynamics with Smooth Contacts  
A brief overview is given for the equations describing the dynamics of systems 
with bilateral and unilateral contacts including friction; a detailed description can 
be found in [1]. The main focus is the formulation of contact problems. There are 
two different ways to describe systems containing contacts: the associated force 
laws can be functions of the system state or set-valued. Due to the important influ-
ence of local compliance in the contact model of the cutting process, the unilateral 
contact formulation utilizes a functional force law; see [2]. This is in contrast to 
purely rigid contact models, which are subject of current research.  
Classically, contacts in multi-body dynamics are described as spring and dam-
per elements, minimizing penetration of the bodies coming into contact. Leading 
to continuous time-dependent state variables, the resulting systems are called 
smooth. The entire modeling uses MBSim, an open source multi-body simulation 
software initiated at the Institute of Applied Mechanics [3], and available at 
http:\\mbsim.berlios.de . 
16.2.2   Equations of Motion 
First attention is focused on multi-body systems without contact interactions. The 
basic equations of motion are  
 
)
,
,
(
)
(
t
q
u
h
u
q
M
=

.                                            (16.1) 
The mass matrix M  depends on the vector of generalized position q . The vector 
h  holds all smooth external and gyroscopic forces depending on q , the genera-
lized velocities u  and time t . For constrained systems, (Eq. 16.1) must be ex-
tended by the contact forces: 
 
λ
W
t
q
u
h
u
q
M
+
=
)
,
,
(
)
(

.                                      (16.2) 
The constraint matrix 
]
,
[
T
W
N
W
W =
 provides the transformation from the space 
of constraints to the configuration space. The vector 
]
,
[
T
N λ
λ
λ =
 holds values of 
the normal and tangential contact forces. 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
363
 
16.2.3   Contact Kinematics 
For all contacts including bilateral and unilateral, rigid and flexible models, a uni-
tary framework describes the kinematics of the associated contact points cr . These 
potential contact points on the contours need to be determined and lead to the gap 
distance 
N
g
 and the relative velocities 
N
g
 and 
T
g. This information is used for 
the calculation of generalized force directions W  as well as for the evaluation of 
force laws. Contours are described by a position vector 
)
,
(
s
q
r
r =
, the contour 
normal 
)
,
(
s
q
n
n =
 and the associated tangents, 
(
)s
r
s
q
t
t
∂
∂
=
=
/
)
,
(
1
1
 and 
2t  re-
spectively, which depend on the generalized position of the associated body and 
contour parameter s . Potential contact points are identified by the necessary con-
tact condition 
 
0
)
,
(
2
1
=






=
t
r
t
r
s
q
f
T
D
T
D
.                                       (16.3) 
The difference vector 
2
1
C
C
D
r
r
r
−
=
 between the potential contact points on both 
bodies is perpendicular to both tangents.  
 
 
Fig. 16.1 Contact between two bodies 
As an example, the evaluation of the contact kinematics between a circle and a 
general contour, as illustrated in Figure 16.1, is pointed out briefly. A detailed  
description can be found in [1]. The contour parameter for potential contacts is 
calculated by solving (16.3). Using the contour parameter s , which refers to po-
tential contact points, the distance between the two bodies results from 
2
n
D
r
N
g
=
. 
Based 
on 
the 
contact 
points, 
the 
Jacobians 
T
u
Ci
r
T
q
Ci
r
J
)
/
(
)
/
(
∂
∂
=
∂
∂
=

 between the system-space and generalized coor-
dinates of the two bodies are developed. The generalized force directions are 

364 
R. Britz et al.
 
 
2
2
1
1
C
T
C
T
T
N
J
n
J
n
W
+
=
,                                       (16.4) 
 
2
2
1
1
C
T
C
T
T
T
J
t
J
t
W
+
=
.                                      (16.5) 
N
W
and 
T
W  are used for projecting normal and tangential contact reactions 
in (16.2). 
16.2.4   Single-Valued Force Laws for Contacts 
A common approach to modeling-compliant unilateral contacts is to take into ac-
count contact elasticity by using spring and damper elements to penalize penetra-
tion in normal direction. Therefore, 
N
λ  is decomposed into forces resulting from 
the elastic and damping influence, 
Nc
λ
 and 
Nd
λ
 respectively. The normal contact 
force 
N
λ  is zero, if the bodies are separated. Using linear spring-damper ele-
ments, the force law is written as 
 
N
Nc
cg
−
=
λ
 if 
0
<
N
g
, else 
0
=
Nc
λ
.                              (16.6) 
For the damping value 
Nd
λ
, a linear correlation is applied for 
0
<
N
g
: 
 
N
Nd
g
d
−
=
λ
.                                                      (16.7) 
  
 
Fig. 16.2 Linear and non-linear force law [2] 
Fig. 16.3 Set valued and regularized  
 
 
 
 
              form of COULOMB’s law [2] 
Equivalent force laws are used for bilateral contacts without the distinction of 
case in (Eq. 16.6). Friction is considered in closed unilateral contacts. Using the 
normal force 
N
λ  and relative tangential velocity
T
g, the scalar force 
T
λ of planar 
Coulomb friction is given by: 
N
T
T
g
λ
μ
λ
≤

=0

,                                             (16.8) 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
365
 
N
T
T
T
T
g
g
g
λ
μ
λ



−
=

≠0
.                                    (16.9) 
This set-valued description is not suited for ordinary differential equation (ODE) 
solvers, which are used for time-integration during simulation. Since high uni-
directional tangential velocities without sign-change are expected during the  
cutting process, stick-slip transitions do not have to be taken into account, thus 
enabling the regularization of (Eq. 16.9) and ODE time integration. One possibili-
ty is to smooth the set-valued force law of Coulomb as follows 
 
N
v
g
T
T
T
T
ref
T
e
g
g
g
λ
μ
λ
ε










−
−
=

<
−




1
,                                    (16.10) 
 
N
T
T
T
T
g
g
g
λ
μ
λ
ε



−
=

>
.                                    (16.11) 
In contrast to (Eq. 16.8) and (Eq. 16.9), (Eq. 16.10) and (Eq. 16.11) do not permit 
real sticking characterized by 
0
=
T
g
 and i. g. 
0
≠
T
λ
. (Eq. 16.10) gives only 
0
=
T
λ
 for vanishing tangential velocities at the contact point. Both Coulomb fric-
tion laws, exact and regularized, are depicted in Figure 16.3. 
16.2.5   Machine Model 
The analyzed turning lathe has a classical design, see [2]. The spindle is embedded 
in the headstock, which is fixed to the machine foundation. To realize the move-
ment of the turning tool a composite of a longitudinal carriage and a top slide is 
used. In simulation, all components are modeled as rigid bodies with 6 degrees of 
freedom. The physical representation of a rigid body is reduced to mass, rotational 
inertia with respect to the point of reference and, if required, rigid geometric ele-
ments for contact descriptions. If the force application point is constant, it is poss-
ible to describe its position by a constant vector in the local coordinate system of 
the respective body. Otherwise, the geometry is described by a contour parameter 
(see Section 16.2.3), using interpolation methods [4, 5]. Arbitrary loads, including 
connections between bodies by spring-damper elements, can be applied. Spring-
damper elements describe the connections between the bodies. Experiments are 
made on a lathe, which has linear re-circulating ball bearings for the tracks. Vary-
ing levels of stiffness between the bear on and uplift loads can be observed, as in-
dicated in the manufacturers’ technical data sheets, see Figure 16.2. These tend to 
result in eigenfrequency responses at the point of change in stiffness, see [2]. The 
drives are modeled as kinetic excitations. 

366 
R. Britz et al.
 
16.2.6   Modular Cutting Force Model 
16.2.6.1   Analytical Model 
In order to determine the dynamic cutting forces at the workpiece and the tool cen-
ter point, depending on the process parameters, the applied materials and the tool 
geometry, a modular cutting force model was set up. Please note that a detailed 
description of the force model can be found in [6] and [7]. 
It is based on an analytical approach to describe the cutting forces. As there is 
no formula for the general description of all turning processes, a modular structure 
is chosen. Part formulations for the dynamic material behavior and non-linear fric-
tion at the tool chip interface can be selected, depending on the actual cutting 
process. According to [8], the total forces in cutting FC, in feed FF and in passive 
direction FP with respect to the side cutting edge angle ψ can be described as  
follows: 
CP
CS
C
F
F
F
′
+
′
=
,                                               (16.12) 
(
)
(
)
ψ
ψ
sin
F
F
cos
F
F
F
PP
PS
FP
FS
F
⋅
′
+
′
+
⋅
′
+
′
=
,                             (16.13) 
(
)
(
)
ψ
ψ
cos
F
F
sin
F
F
F
PP
PS
FP
FS
P
⋅
′
+
′
−
⋅
′
+
′
=
.                                (16.14) 
The prime symbol labels forces with respect to the cutting edge plane (see Fig. 
16.4), while the indices S and P mark components resulting from shearing and 
ploughing. [9] states that the shearing forces can be calculated by (Eq. 16.15) -
(Eq. 16.17) with the shear yield stress τs, the uncut chip thickness h, the width of 
cut b, the rake, the chip flow and the inclination angle α, η and i as well as the 
mean friction angle β and the shear angle Φ: 
(
)
(
)
β
η
α
β
β
η
α
β
τ
2
2
2
sin
tan
cos
sin
tan
tan
cos
sin
+
−
+
Φ
+
−
⋅
Φ
=
′
i
bh
F
s
CS
,                           (16.15) 
(
)
(
)
β
η
α
β
α
β
τ
2
2
2
sin
tan
cos
sin
cos
sin
+
−
+
Φ
−
⋅
Φ
=
′
i
bh
F
s
FS
,                           (16.16) 
(
)
(
)
β
η
α
β
β
η
α
β
τ
2
2
2
sin
tan
cos
sin
tan
tan
cos
sin
+
−
+
Φ
+
−
⋅
Φ
=
′
i
bh
F
s
PS
.                             (16.17) 
One solution for the determination of the ploughing forces is based on edge coef-
ficients per unit K’, which can be determined by cutting tests and extrapolating the 
measured forces to an uncut chip thickness of zero [9] 
b
K
F
CP
CP
⋅
′
=
′
, 
b
K
F
FP
FP
⋅
′
=
′
, 
b
K
F
PP
PP
⋅
′
=
′
.          (16.18, 16.19, 16.20) 
Furthermore, a strictly analytic approach for the ploughing forces, based on metal 
cutting simulations (see Sub-section 16.2.6.2), is described in [10]. 
 
 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
367
 
 
Fig. 16.4 Machining variables and cutting force directions for tools with a side cutting edge 
angle [7] 
16.2.6.2   Metal Cutting Simulation 
Additionally, a metal cutting simulation based on the Finite Element Method 
(FEM) is set up (see Fig. 16.5) to determine the required parameters τs, β and Φ. 
The used commercial pre-processor MSC.Mentat provides the possibility to define 
models automatically using python scripts. Based on the considered cutting 
process, a model of 2D orthogonal cutting is created, with tool and workpiece 
modeled as deformable bodies. The thermo-mechanically coupled Lagrangian 
numerical problem is handled by the MSC.Marc solver. Based on the work of 
[11], the contact of tool and chip is considered thermally ideal. While the distant 
parts of workpiece and tool remain at ambient temperature the heat transfer of free 
surfaces to the ambiance is neglected. 
Apart from the model generation, an appropriate material law has to be selected 
for the defined cutting process. The determination of work material flow stress in 
the primary shear zone is of high importance for the calculation of the cutting 
forces. Thereby, the flow stress is mostly affected by micro-structural conditions, 
temperature, strain and strain rate. The cutting force model modularly includes 
different constitutive material laws to cover different lattice structures (see also 
[12], [13]): 
 
• 
Body-centered cubic materials 
• 
Face-centered cubic materials 
• 
Hexagonal closest packed materials 

368 
R. Britz et al.
 
 
Fig. 16.5 Coupling of the analytical and numerical model [7] 
Additionally, the law of Johnson-Cook can be selected, which is often imple-
mented in commercial FEM software. Furthermore, a modified version of John-
son-Cook by [14] allows the consideration of the influence of blue brittleness on 
the flow-stress curve. 
Finally, an adequate description of the friction at the tool-chip-workpiece inter-
face is needed, as the friction conditions as well as the tool wear determine the 
heat generation in the secondary and tertiary deformation zone. Due to high con-
tact pressures, temperatures and chip velocities the interfacial friction is not conti-
nuous [15]. On the rake face, the normal stress decreases from maximum to zero 
from the tool tip to the point, where the chip separates from the tool. The shear 
stress divides into a sticking and a sliding region. The mean frictional angle β can 
be calculated directly, if measurement data for normal and frictional stress distri-
butions is available [7]. Otherwise, constant shear friction is chosen for the stick-
ing region while Coulomb friction is applied to the sliding region and β has to be 
derived from the FEM simulation. Therefore, the resulting stress distribution of 
the metal cutting simulation has to be evaluated in the deformation zones. In  

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
369
 
addition to β, the shear yield stress τs can be calculated from the stress distribution. 
The shear angle Φ can be determined from the chip formation. In addition, the 
point of material separation can be derived from the FEM results and used for the 
analytic determination of the ploughing forces [10]. 
As the temperature in the deformation zone plays a major role for an accurate 
simulation of the cutting process, an experimental setup has been developed to de-
termine the temperature of a real cutting process [6]. A high-speed pyrometer 
(Kleiber KGA 740-LO) provides the possibility of capturing the temperature while 
machining. To get results for both the workpiece and the tool flank face, a special 
test piece with milled holes has been developed (see Fig. 16.6). While the temper-
atures of the workpiece in decreasing distance to the tool can be observed at the 
beginning, the temperature of the tool is measured at the moment, when the tool 
penetrates the milled cavity. Afterwards, these results were used to calibrate the 
FEM metal cutting simulation. 
 
 
Fig. 16.6 Schematic representation of the temperature measurement setup [6] 
Finally, all necessary parameters are transferred to the analytical cutting force 
model so that it is possible to calculate the forces on workpiece and tool center 
point resulting from the defined cutting process. 
16.2.6.3   Comparison of Measurement and Simulation 
The validation of the modular cutting force model was performed by a comparison 
of simulated and experimentally-determined cutting forces. Therefore, facing tests 

370 
R. Britz et al.
 
were carried out at a turning center while capturing the resulting forces by a 3-
component tool holder dynamometer (Kistler 9121) carrying a tool with a side cut-
ting edge angle ψ of 45° and an inclination angle i of zero. To avoid the influence 
of machine vibrations the process was driven within stable cutting conditions. 
The results for the machining of AISI 1045 can be found in Figure 16.7. The 
simulated forces resulting from a model with the constitutive material law for 
body-centered cubic materials and an additional calculation for blue brittleness 
(see [7]) and the measured forces show high agreement in the area above 90 %.  
An even higher accuracy can be achieved by calibrating the model with meas-
ured temperature and force values. At this, the model updating is performed by 
iteratively optimizing the friction parameters. As reliable frictional and normal 
stress distributions can be currently found only by experimental determination (see 
[15]), it is of high importance to improve the theoretical description of interfacial 
friction in future research. 
 
 
Fig. 16.7 Comparison of measured and simulated forces, exemplarily in cutting direction 
(AISI 1045, v = 160 m/min, b = 2.83 mm) [7] 
In conclusion, the modular cutting force model is available for the calculation 
of the cutting forces on workpiece and tool center point. Hence, the parameterized 
analytical force model can be implemented into the Machine Process Interaction 
simulation. 
16.2.7   Coupling of Cutting Force Model and Multi-body 
Simulation Model 
16.2.7.1   Cutting-Specific Contact Extensions 
The simulation uses the cutting model mentioned above, which reduces the cutting 
process to a single force between the chisel and the workpiece. The force applica-
tion point on the chisel is always constant and thus modeled as a point. Since the 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
371
 
force application point on the workpiece depends on the position of the chisel and 
the angular position of the workpiece, it is modeled as a contour with switchable 
radius, see Figure 16.9. Furthermore, the orientation between chisel and workpiece 
has to be known to calculate the forces with (16.15) - (16.17). The position is af-
fected by the machine vibrations and must be determined at every time step; see 
[19]. For that, the cutting edge and workpiece contour are augmented with vectors, 
as illustrated in Figure 16.8. 
 
 
Fig. 16.8 Calculation of current cutting angles[19] 
The vectors describe the direction of the blade and the cutting face with respect 
to the chisel. Using them together with the frenet trihedron of the contour and the 
axial direction of the workpiece, all angles influencing the cutting forces can be 
determined. For example, the angle κ  is calculated from the bi-normal w
b
 and 
the direction of the blade 
m
s , as follows: 
m
w
m
w
s
b
s
b
−
−
= 2
π
κ
.                                            (16.21) 
To figure out the sign of the angle we evaluated the scalar product with the normal 
of the frenet trihedron 
w
n : 
)
sgn(
)
sgn(
m
ws
n
=
κ
.                                     (16.22) 
Additional angles are calculated accordingly. Note that these operations are made 
with respect to an absolute coordinate system. 
Up to now, equations have been formed to compute the radial penetration and 
all cutting angles. Penetration in axial direction and the discretization of the work-
piece, which yield an elliptical contact contour of the workpiece, are determined 
by imperfections of the workpiece or clamping of the workpiece during the cutting 
process. To this end, the oval contour of the workpiece is discretized during the in-
itialization, as shown in Figure 16.9.  

372 
R. Britz et al.
 
 
Fig. 16.9 Workpiece discretization 
The radius of the ellipse is described in polar coordinates and is added to the 
face side of the workpiece. The origin of the contour corresponds to the axis of ro-
tation. Before the cutting process starts, κ  is set to 45°. During the machining, the 
cut width b  depends on time and increases. The cutting forces are a function of 
chip width b  and depth h , so b  and h  have to be evaluated in each time step. 
For this purpose the initialized, previous and current contours and the length of the 
workpiece are stored. The gap between workpiece and chisel is calculated from 
the contact kinematics between the previous contour and the position of the cut-
ting edge. Using the contour parameter s , the current chip depth is estimated and 
the current contour radius is stored. Also, the current position of the cutting edge, 
the angle κ  and the chip width in radial direction 
rad
b
are calculated using the ra-
dius of the initialized contour. The chip width in axial direction, 
ax
b
 results from 
the length of the workpiece minus the cutting edge position. The values 
rad
b
 and 
ax
b
 are compared and the smaller one is used to calculate the actual chip width b  
in the current state. 
16.2.7.2   Kinematics of the Cutting Process 
The model for the contact between turning tool and workpiece introduces the inte-
raction between the cutting process and the machine: one of the important pheno-
mena in process-structure-interaction is the separation of turning tool and  
workpiece during the cutting process. The theory presented in the preceding sec-
tions allows the description of this behavior. The contours of the bodies are de-
scribed by a point (turning tool) and an oval contour (workpiece). For modeling 
the cutting process, the gap between turning tool and workpiece is needed, which 
is calculated from  (16.3). With the achieved contour parameter s , the distance or  
penetration results from
1n
r
g
WS
S
N =
. In addition, if penetration is detected with the 
known position vector r , the new surface is calculated and recorded at every time 
step. The values of the radius are recorded in a table and interpolated during the 
next revolution. The solver needs to detect transitions and distinguish between the 
possible configurations; see [19]. For this purpose, three operation states are de-
fined according to Figure 16.10: 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
373
 
a) Open contact: turning tool and workpiece are separated and the gap is positive. 
b) Closed contact, no cutting: the turning tool contacts the workpiece without cut-
ting. Thereby, no chip is taken from the workpiece. At the point of contact, 
normal and tangential forces are exchanged as for a standard frictional con-
tact. The penetration is smaller than a defined minimal penetration ε. 
c) Closed contact, cutting: the penetration exceeds ε. Cutting starts and the contact 
forces are overlaid by the cutting forces. During the cutting process, the new 
surface resulting from the process needs to be recorded. 
 
a) Open contact  
b) Closed contact  
c) Cutting 
Fig. 16.10 Contact situations [19] 
The numerical simulation accurately detects the transition times between the 
operation states by event-based integration. It uses a root function to monitor the 
contact states of the cutting model. This includes any overruns and drops below 
the minimal penetration level, which describes the beginning and end of cutting. 
16.3   Optimization 
The aim of the project is to determine the optimal parameter set for an operation, 
i. e. detect a set, which satisfies the economic aspect of the production. The com-
prehensive model of process and structure is used to predict the result of the ma-
chining; see [20]. With this information, the optimization algorithm is able to  
determine the best parameter set. 
16.3.1   Analysis of the Optimization Problem 
In the following, the mathematical description of the optimization problem needed 
for process optimization is introduced. Based on this mathematical formulation, a 
suitable optimization algorithm is selected. An objective function is defined de-
pending on given optimization parameters p , which quantify the optimization 
target: 
))
(
),
(
),
(
(
)
(
p
p
u
p
q
g
p
g
λ
=
.                                   (16.23) 
The objective is to minimize the target function g by finding optimal parameters 
p  limited by upper and lower bounds for each component of p . This leads to a 
constrained optimization problem: 

374 
R. Britz et al.
 
),
(
min
p
g
B
p∈
   
}
,...,
1
:
{
m
i
u
p
l
R
p
B
i
i
i
m
=
∀
≤
≤
∈
=
.               (16.24) 
The work of [16] shows that even optimization problems concerning rather simple 
mechanical systems can result in target functions, which are non-smooth, have 
many local minima and may chaotically depend on the optimization parameters. 
Based on these experiences, the optimization algorithm IFFCO [17] is chosen, an 
implementation of the implicit filtering method [18] for problems with bound  
constraints. 
16.3.2    Optimization Process 
Finally, manufacturing has to satisfy economic objectives as well as the necessary 
quality standards. This simple assertion defines the objective function for process 
optimization - a compromise between productivity and quality. Therefore, the time 
base simulation results have to be interpreted and weighted. In this work, only one 
cut is optimized by changing setting values, e. g. the feed per revolution. Con-
versely, environmental conditions, including the structure of the machine, the 
length of the workpiece and the workpiece clamping are not part of the optimiza-
tion. With these restrictions, the material removal rate Q expresses the productivi-
ty of the process. Using the parameters, the feed per revolution f , cutting depth 
p
a , and cutting velocity 
cv  obtained from the simulation results, material remov-
al rate is evaluated with:  
f
a
v
Q
p
c
=
.                                              (16.25) 
On the other hand, the assessment of quality is not straight forward since it de-
pends on forces, deflections, vibrations, geometry of the tool, etc. In this work, the 
objective function considers only deflections and the tool geometry to assess the 
new surface and forces to value the tool wear. 
The simulation records contact and cutting forces as well as the trace of the 
turning tool on the workpiece. The objective function evaluates some specific val-
ues: first, the mean offset 
z
Δ of the turning tool path from the desired path, 
representing the static deflection during the cut. Another important factor is the 
theoretical roughness of the produced surface. Using the trace upon the workpiece 
and the radius of corner it can be calculated as follows: a set of points in radial di-
rection is chosen within a small region around the x  axis and used as supporting 
points, see Figure 16.11a. Using the radius R  and feed per revolution f , the 
piecewise surface contour in radial direction is calculated, see Figure 16.11b: 
;
1
1
)
(
2
0














−
−
+
=
R
r
R
z
x
z
i
i
    for    
2
2
f
r
f
<
<
−
.                    (16.26) 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
375
 
Next, we calculate the commonly-known center line average 
a
R  and average sur-
face roughness 
z
R along this contour. Note that these values are only theoretical 
estimates of surface quality. In real processes, surface roughness is also influenced 
by other effects like abrasion thermal stress and so on. However, the trend of qual-
ity is determinable and adequate for optimization. 
 
 
 
 
      (a) Points of turning tool trace 
 
        (b) Piece-wise surface calculation 
 
 
Fig. 16.11 Calculation of the theoretical roughness [20]  
The cutting force indicates the stress on the turning tool tip and the workpiece 
surface. The ratio of the mean values of cutting force 
C
F  and normal force 
N
F  on 
the cutting edge gives an advice of the abrasion. The objective function is eva-
luated using the simulation results. Using factor a  we are able to weight produc-
tivity and quality:  






+






+
Δ
Δ
+
+
−
=
Q
Q
a
F
F
z
z
R
R
R
R
a
g
C
N
z
z
a
a
0
0
0
0
)
1(
.                      (16.27) 
While the chosen objective function was successfully applied to find parameter 
settings, which guarantee a good compromise, the real target is different: we want 
to determine a parameter setting, which realizes the maximum productivity at a 
minimum quality necessary to satisfy our technical requirements. Hence, factor a  
would have to be known a priori. However, by introducing penalty terms, if the 
surface quality is below a certain boarder, the optimizer can be utilized in a differ-
ent way: We want to get a minimum quality, therefore, the best parameters for the 
maximum productivity have to be generated by the optimizer. At first, the virtual-
ly-produced surface is interpreted. If the minimum quality boarder is crossed, a 
penalty is added to the objective function. If not, the objective function is calcu-
lated as given in (16.27). 

376 
R. Britz et al.
 
16.4   Optimization Results 
To demonstrate the potential of the introduced method a facing process is opti-
mized using the simulation of a combined milling and turning machine with con-
ventional features. The cutting force model is qualified for the machining of work 
material AISI 1045 with TiN-coated carbide reversing [7]. A continuous chip is 
adopted. The plate has a tool cutting edge angle of 45° and a rake angle of 0°. The 
cutting rate is 160 m/min. We searched for the optimal parameter of feed per revo-
lution f  and cutting depth 
p
a to finish a workpiece. Starting from the values 
rev
mm
f
1.0
=
, 
mm
ap
2.0
=
, We obtained the optimized parameters 
rev
mm
f
081
.0
=
, 
mm
p
a
46
.0
=
 after 53 steps. While theoretical surface roughness is preserved 
during the optimization process, the productivity increases by about 70 % and the 
ratio of normal and cutting force decreases by about 60 %, see Figure 16.12.  
 
 
Fig. 16.12 Change of quality, force ratio and productivity during the optimization process 
These results show that the simulation tool is able to find an optimal setup for 
smooth finishing, regarding the used model.  
These results are compared with measurements on the machine unit. Since the 
number of experiments is limited only certain machine settings could be realized. 
Therefore, some parameters, which strongly affect surface roughness, tool stress or 
productivity, were chosen, e. g. the settings for the cut at the beginning and at the 
end of the optimization. Table 16.1 lists parameter values used in the experiments. 
In Figure 16.13, the theoretical roughness is compared to the measured rough-
ness during the optimization process. The difference between simulation and ex-
periment increases with a decreasing feed per revolution because the influence of 
the chisel geometry decreases and the influence of the abrasion on the workpiece 
increases. The abrasion effect is not modeled; the lower boarder of the box con-
straint must be modified. The failure increases rapidly, if both cutting parameters 
go to zero.  

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
377
 
Table 16.1 Parameter values for experimental verification 
Step 
1 
2 
5 
7 
8 
9 
11 
30 
40 
52 
Infeed 
[mm] 
2.15 
0.2 
0.2 
0.68 
0.2 
0.34 
0.34 
0.49 
0.43 
0.46 
Feed 
[mm/rev] 
0.1 
0.57 
0.34 
0.10 
0.21 
0.06 
0.18 
0.07 
0.07 
0.08 
 
 
 
As mentioned in Sub-section 16.3.2, the predicted quality is better than the 
measured one. However, the trend of predicted roughness is close to the measured 
trend and this is sufficient for the optimization.  
 
Fig. 16.13 Comparison of the measured roughness and the theoretical roughness. The trend 
of the produced roughness is predictable.  
The predicted and the measured forces are shown in Figure 16.14. The mean 
value of the predicted force is also close to the measured force.  
 
Fig. 16.14 Comparison of the mean values of the measured forces and the predicted forces 
The comparison shows that the simulation sufficiently predicts product quality 
and tool stress. This allows the determination of an optimal cut setting, which sa-
tisfies the demands on productivity and quality. 

378 
R. Britz et al.
 
In general, the result is influenced by the machine. The developed tool is able 
to optimize the process with respect to the machine. This is figured out in [20]. In 
this article, two virtual machines with different stiffnesses are used. A rough ma-
chining process is optimized for both machines. The optimization tool finds dif-
ferent parameter settings on the machines, indicating that the optimization tool 
figures out a parameter setting with respect to the process-structure interaction.  
16.5   Conclusion 
A tool for the optimization of turning processes has been introduced, which in-
cludes the model of the turning machine, the process and the target function. The 
capability of the optimization environment is illustrated by means of examples. The 
tool obtains the optimal parameter settings for a smooth finishing process with the 
results of the simulation having been successfully verified by experiments. 
References 
[1] Pfeiffer, F., Glocker, C.: Multi-body Dynamics with Unilateral Contacts. John Wiley 
& Sons, New York (1996) 
[2] Britz, R., Ulbrich, H.: Lathe: Modeling and Coupling of process and structure. In: 
Proccedings of the 1st International Conference on Process Machine Interactions, pp. 
231–238 (2008) 
[3] Förg, M., Zander, R., Ulbrich, H.: A framework for efficient simulation of spatial 
contact problems. In: ECCOMAS (2007) 
[4] Shabana, A.A.: Dynamics of Multi-body Systems. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge (1998) 
[5] Ulbrich, H.: Maschinendynamik. Teubner Verlag, Wiesbaden (1996) 
[6] Zaeh, M.F., Schwarz, F.: Consideration of Tool and Workpiece Temperatures in a 
Modular Cutting Force Model. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on 
Process Machine Interactions, pp. 353–360 (2008) 
[7] Zaeh, M.F., Schwarz, F.: Modeling and Simulation of Process and Structure Interac-
tions Considering Turning Operations. In: Proceedings of the ASME International 
Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (2009) 
[8] Oxley, P.L.: The mechanics of machining: an analytical approach to assessing machi-
nability, Chichester u.a., Horwood (1989) 
[9] Altintas, Y.: Manufacturing Automation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 
(2000) 
[10] Schwarz, F.: Simulation der Wechselwirkungen zwischen Prozess und Struktur bei 
der Drehbearbeitung. iwb-Forschungsberichte Nr. 242. Herbert Utz Verlag, München 
(2010) 
[11] Yen, Y., Jain, A., Altan, T.: A finite element analysis of orthogonal machining using 
different tool edge geometries. J. Mat. Proc. Technol. 146, 72–81 (2004) 
[12] Zerilli, F., Armstrong, R.: Dislocation-mechanics-based constitutive relations for ma-
terial dynamics calculations. J. Appl. Phys. 61, 1816–1825 (1987) 
[13] Zerilli, F.: Dislocation-mechanics-based constitutive equations. Metallurgical and 
Material Transactions 35A, 2547–2555 (2004) 

16   Modeling and Simulation-Based Optimization of a Turning Process 
379
 
[14] Sartkulvanich, P., Koppka, F., Altan, T.: Determination of flow stress for metal cut-
ting simulation – a progress report. J. Mat. Proc. Technol. 146, 61–71 (2004) 
[15] Özel, T.: The influence of friction models on finite element simulations of machining. 
Int. J. Machine Tools and Manufacture 46, 518–530 
[16] Neumann, L., Ulbirch, H.: Optimisation of a CVT-Chain. In: Proceedings of the 6th 
World Congresses of Sturctural and Multidisciplinary (2005) 
[17] Choi, T.D., Eslinger, O.J., Gilmore, P.A., Kelly, C.T.: User’s Guide to IFFCO. Center 
for Research in Scientific Computation, North Carolina State University (2001) 
[18] Kelley, T.C.: Iterative Methods for Optimization. Frontiers in Applied Mathematics. 
SIAM, Philadelphia (1999) 
[19] Britz, R., Ulbrich, H.: Simulation of Facing Processes of Profiles with Hexagon Cross 
Section. In: Proceedings of the ASME International Manufacturing Science and En-
gineering Conference (2010) 
[20] Britz, R., Ulbrich, H.: Modeling and Simulation-based Optimization of a Facing 
Process. In: Proceedings of the 2ndt International Conference on Process Machine  
Interactions (2010) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part IV 
Forming 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 383–401. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 17  
Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
K. Großmann, A. Hardtmann, H. Wiemer, L. Penter, and S. Kriechenbauer  
Abstract. This chapter discusses methods of modeling and simulating metal form-
ing processes and explains their application in product design, production and 
process planning. In today’s Finite Element (FE)-based forming analysis, major 
effects on the forming process are being neglected. Based on the analysis of the 
elastostatic press and tool properties, a conventional FE process model was ex-
tended with the most dominant elastostatic influences. It is shown that complex 
elastic systems, such as die cushions and tool guidance, are quite easily imple-
mented in FE process simulations by using discrete elements and other reduction 
methods, recently introduced in commercial simulation software. The benefit of 
the Advanced Forming Process Model (AFPM) is demonstrated by an experimen-
tal verification. Servo mechanical presses enable the manufacturers to establish 
high-speed processes in sheet metal forming. There, the dynamic press behavior 
has a much larger influence on the forming process than it has in the relatively 
static conventional deep drawing. As an example, a highly dynamic forming 
process is simulated and explained in the following.  
17.1   Introduction 
Established as a powerful tool for designing sheet metal processes, the Finite Ele-
ment Method (FEM) supports product development as well as the planning of 
production process and tool manufacturing. 
Current process models merely contain the blank and the interface between 
blank and tool, the so-called die-workpiece interface [1]. Commonly, the blank is 
meshed with shell elements with simple constitutive equations. The die-workpiece 
interface is usually represented by the Coulomb friction law and a contact algo-
rithm with constant coefficients. In present FE-simulations, the forming tool and 
machine are modeled as rigid, i. e. the effects of their elastic properties on the 
forming process are ignored. In reality, both forming tool and press clearly affect 
the forming process as the requirement of die spotting during the tool try-out de-
monstrates. One way to minimize time and effort in tool try-outs is using more ac-
curate simulation methods during the tool planning stage. 
New press technologies, such as servo-mechanical presses, enable faster 
processes with remarkable accelerations. Higher accelerations require light parts 
in motion. Lighter tools and press parts are less stiff and would therefore deform 

384 
K. Großmann et al.
 
stronger under process load. Conversely, these elastic deformations influence the 
process conditions and therefore the final part shape significantly. Conventional 
FE process simulations do not show the impact of elastic deformation on the 
process.  
Therefore, process simulations are required, which take elastic tool and press 
properties into account and enable manufacturers and press designers to compute 
the process-machine interactions. A better quality and efficiency control of metal-
forming processes already during the tool’s planning stage require interactions be-
tween the subsystems machine, tool and workpiece to be included in a complete 
forming model. 
The objectives of this chapter are  
• introducing a holistic yet simple approach to address elastostatic deformations 
of press and tool in FE process simulation and  
• showing a way to simulate highly dynamic forming processes. 
17.2   Ways of Model Advancement 
Holistic process modeling of forming operations entails the coupling of the three 
subsystems, press, tool and workpiece. Concepts as to how to connect the “work-
piece” model (the common metal forming model) to the press model are presented 
in [4, 14]. The approaches are differentiated according to their way of integration: 
• Offline coupling (non-reactive) is process characterization within the machine 
model based on process force progressions. The force curve is calculated by 
means of an FE-workpiece model. The data are transferred to the press model 
via an ASCII-file [5]. Among others, this coupling method is applicable to ana-
lyze the operating performance of the machine and to detect the load on assem-
blies. In [5, 6], the ram deflections of a multi ram press were estimated. In [7], 
the effects of ram tilting on the deep drawing process were analyzed. 
• Integrated coupling stands for the extension of the workpiece model with a 
press model in the FEA-environment. The integrated FE-model realizes direct 
interaction between the process load and tool position as a result of the press 
behavior. The concept describing the press by a reduced structure representing 
process relevant effects is exemplified in [2, 3]. 
• By coupling discrete models (co-simulation) the machine effects are depicted 
in independent press models. Advantageously, the complex influences of the 
machine behavior (drive, guidance system, frame, etc. [9]) are modeled in de-
tail by Multi-Body-Simulation (MBS) while the workpiece description is made 
by FEM. Thus, two simulation tools (MBS and FEM) connected by simulator 
coupling are to be applied. The simulator coupling organizes the exchange of 
data and synchronizes the different solution algorithms. A complete forming 
model by coupling discrete simulation models is exemplified in [8]  
 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
385
 
To design the forming process only the press behavior directly affecting the 
process is relevant. Interactions between assemblies inside the press are less im-
portant. Hence, the integrated solution realized in [2, 3] is adequate. Furthermore, 
applying the integrated approach avoids the independent major problem of coupl-
ing different simulation software. 
17.3   Development of Advanced Forming Process Model  
The acting loads during the process cause misalignments of the tool components 
depending on the machine stiffness. The consequences are 
• Form deviations of the sheet metal part, 
• Surface quality variations, 
• Change of adjusted blank holder forces, 
• Increasing tool wear. 
In conventional models of the forming process, the press influence is neglected. 
Here, forming process models enhanced by implementing elastic properties of 
machine and tool are called Advanced Forming Process Models (AFPM). 
17.3.1   Press Model 
The elastostatic behavior of the press is important when comparing different ma-
chines. The operational accuracy of the press results from the total deformations 
of all mechanical parts. Accuracy defining properties of the press based on its de-
formation and deflection have significant influence on the sheet metal forming 
process. In German standard DIN 55189 [10], these properties are determined as 
accuracy parameters of presses. For the time being, only static properties are inte-
grated in the model: 
• vertical total stiffness ctotZ, 
• horizontal total stiffness ctotX and ctotY, 
• resistances against tilting (tilting stiffness) cα and cβ. 
The resulting stiffness parameters combine all static properties of the press assem-
blies each with regard to one degree of freedom in the press’ coordinate system. 
In the following, the above-mentioned press properties are added to the AFPM 
step by step. Currently, tool components are handled as rigid bodies. In a first step, 
it is therefore sufficient to fix the tool model on a rigid model of ram. A rigid ram 
model has the advantage of allowing principle stiffnesses of the press to be direct-
ly attached to the centre of gravity of the ram, as shown in Figure 17.1a. The prin-
ciple stiffness describes the elastostatic force-displacement behavior of the press 
in X, Y or Z-direction or around the corresponding axis. 

386 
K. Großmann et al.
 
 
Fig. 17.1 Advanced Forming Process Model (AFPM) a) extended by a press model consi-
dering elastic mounting of the rigid ram in the COG, b) extended by a press model sepa-
rated in drive and guidance springs for the application of an elastic ram (example: O-frame 
press with 4-point configuration) 
In the next step, the forming process model is enhanced by modeling the tools 
as elastic. This approach demands the tool to be elastically embedded into the ma-
chine model. The press ram and the table of the press have to be modeled as elas-
tic. As in real press structures, the elastic ram model’s joints to the press structure 
are positioned at the locations of press drive and ram guidance. 
Figure 17.1b illustrates the AFPM upgraded with spring elements, which act in 
horizontal (X and Y) direction and in vertical (Z) direction. According to the real 
press drive system, they are connected to the corner nodes of the ram model. The 
following properties, which influence the press behavior, define the position and 
parameterization of the spring elements: 
• total stiffnesses of presses, 
• type of drive system (1, 2, and 4-point configuration),  
• press structure (C-frame and O-frame, ram, table of the press), 
• guidance (with and without clearance).  
Models of different press structures are shown in Figure 17.2. The stiffness val-
ues of the horizontal and vertical springs are derived from force-displacement 
curves measured as stated by standard DIN 55189 [10]. The measuring proce-
dure to determine the deflection of the press under static load is explained in 
Section 1.2.1. 
 
 
 
 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
387
 
 
 
Fig. 17.2 Scheme of models for different press structures 
The principle of moments enables the conversion of the measured values of tilt-
ing stiffnesses cα, cβ and total vertical stiffness ctotZ to spring constants cX, cY and 
cZ. For this purpose, geometrical parameters as ram size zram and the distances xdr 
and ydr between force transmitting drive elements are necessary.  
Following this principle, the tilting stiffnesses and the vertical total stiffness 
were converted to stiffness parameters of the horizontal and vertical spring ele-
ments for all model structures in Figure 17.2. The transformation functions have 
been summarized in Figure 17.3.  
 
 
Fig. 17.3 Transformation functions 
 In case there are no measured values for the total stiffnesses available, refer-
ence values from [11] could be used alternatively. There typical ranges of vertical 
total stiffnesses and tilting stiffnesses, classified by the press’ nominal force, can 
be found. The ram height zram can be deduced from characteristic dimensions of 
the press’ workspace. In the following example, the parameters for a press with a 
nominal force of 1000 kN are used. 

388 
K. Großmann et al.
 
17.3.2   Die Cushion Model 
An elementary influence on contact and friction conditions in the interface be-
tween die and blank holder results from the blank holder itself. According to the 
usual practice, the blank holder is represented by a constant load applied to the 
center of the rigid blank holder surface. However, in reality, the distributed load 
on the blank holder surface results from the equilibrium between process load, 
which is variable in time and location, and blank holder deflection/deformation. 
Demonstrating this essential effect on drawn parts in the forming simulations de-
mands the extension of the model by the deformation and deflection of the blank 
holder. Preliminary investigations [12] have led to the following approach. 
The blank holder shape under process load depends on its elastic properties. Its 
position is determined by the elastic properties of: 
• the press (drive, blank holder ram, ram guidance, frame) in case of a double-
action press or 
• the die cushion (drive, die cushion plate, guidance) in case of a single-action 
press and 
• the tool guidance. 
To model the blank holder bearing in case of a double-action press the prefixed 
press models are applicable. In order to realize the blank holder bearing of a die 
cushion the model structures were successively developed, first to apply rigid and 
then elastic blank holders.  
 
 
Fig. 17.4 Model structure of the die cushion for applying an elastic blank holder 
The die cushion model for an elastic blank holder is shown in Figure 17.4. The 
stiffnesses of die cushion drive, guidance, pressure pin and pin guidance are 
represented by substitutional springs. These spring elements are arranged on the 
coupling nodes of the elastic blank holder as they are in the real structure. The 
stiffness of the spring element was parameterized according to [13].  

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
389
 
17.3.3   Demonstration Example 
The following example visualizes how die cushion and blank holder affect the 
deep drawing process of a rectangular tub. The simulation results of the process 
models with integrated die cushion model are shown in Figure 17.5. It illustrates 
sheet thickness and flow in forming process models with different levels of ab-
straction. For comparison, in Figure 17.5, the conventional forming process model 
(rigid machine, tool and die cushion model) is displayed. Due to a constantly dis-
tributed load across the contact surface the tub possesses a symmetric sheet thick-
ness distribution and a symmetric sheet metal flow. In contrast, applying the 
AFPMs the eccentric tool location results in ram tilting (see Figure 17.5b) or in 
ram and blank holder tilting (see Figure 17.5c) respectively. Tilting leads to 
asymmetric thickness distribution and asymmetric sheet metal flow. In this exam-
ple, the effect of the blank holder deflection to the drawn part is stronger than the 
tilting of the ram.  
 
 
Fig. 17.5 Sheet thickness reduction and material flow, O-frame press with 1-point  
configuration a) Rigid press and tool, die cushion supported rigidly, b) Elastic press, die cu-
shion supported rigidly, rigid tool, c) Elastic press, die cushion supported elastically, rigid 
tool 
The deformations and surface pressures on the blank-holder according to the 
results in Figure 17.5 show different distributions corresponding to the interac-
tions between the die cushion, machine and process and justify the sheet metal 
flow as shown. In all calculations, the resulting blank holder force was the same. 
17.3.4   Modeling Effect of Tool Guidance 
The tool guidance has a substantial influence on the deflection behavior of the 
tool-active elements. The exclusive consideration of the machine stiffnesses in the 
advanced forming processing model is not sufficient to improve the quality of  

390 
K. Großmann et al.
 
the simulation results. Without considering the reinforcing effect of the tool guid-
ance the production of sheet metal parts cannot be guaranteed simulatively so that 
the design of the parts would have to be changed unnecessarily at this. 
The tool guidance can also be modeled with discrete elements. Figure 17.6 
shows the reduction of the tool guidance (a) to a beam model (b) and further into a 
discrete model with spring elements (c).  
The stiffness of the tool guidance in x and y-direction has the characteristic of a 
beam and is dependent on the free length of the tool guidance post (lTG). Since lTG 
depends on the current press stroke the stiffness of the spring element is coupled 
with the z-coordinate of the ram.  
During the entire process, nodes N1, N2, N3 and N4, used to couple ram, BH 
and bolster plate on the tool guidance, stay aligned along an axis perpendicular to 
the surface of the bolster plate. The change of the ram’s instantaneous center of 
rotation with stroke is automatically implemented in the FE simulation. 
 
 
Fig. 17.6 Implementation the elastic behavior of tool guidance into FE process simulation:  
a) section view press, b) tool guidance as beam model, c) tool guidance modeled with 
spring elements 
The path-dependent stiffnesses of spring elements can be calculated from the 
bending stiffness of the pillars and contact stiffness of the guide bushing, which 
are to be gathered from the catalogue data of the manufacturers [9]. Therefore, a 
special material model for (discrete) beam models has to be developed to imple-
ment this reduced model of tool-guidance in the AFPM. 
17.4   Experimental Verification 
The experimental device was developed to demonstrate the effects of the tool’s 
and press’ deflections on the deep-drawing process. Tool and press deflections 
were required to be adjustable without any constructional changes of the press, i. 
e. the variation of tool and press deflection had to be realized only by changing the 
tool design. 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
391
 
17.4.1   Experimental Equipment 
The experimental validation of the modeling concept was conducted on the single-
action hydraulic press Wanzke HPV 160, which is available at the IWM. In order 
to determine the static tilting behavior and stiffness behavior of the press, defined 
moment was applied by using a press-testing device. The curves obtained in the 
test, see Figure 17.7, represent the tilting behavior of the ram about the X-axis and 
Y-axis. These characteristic tilting curves result in the tilting stiffness cα, and cβ as 
well as in the vertical total stiffness ctotZ. These values were converted into the 
stiffness parameters of the horizontal springs cX±B and cY±A as well as the vertical 
spring cZ into the FE model of an O-frame press with a 1-point driving system. 
 
 
Fig. 17.7 Tilting behavior and press model with non-linear compression springs 
Since the approach to using linear-elastic springs did not correspond to the real 
tilting and stiffness behavior of the examined press, the press model is refined 
with non-linear spring characteristics. In order to correctly consider the tilting be-
havior, which is dependent on the direction of the rotation, only non-linear com-
pression springs were attached to the corner nodes of the ram, see Figure 17.7. 
The stiffness properties of the experimental tool were modified by implement-
ing disc springs in the die to be able to vary the total stiffnesses in the press-tool 
system (Fig. 17.8). 
In order to determine the relevant process characteristics it is necessary to in-
stall appropriate sensors. For recording the deflection, behavior incremental dis-
placement encoders with a measuring resolution of 1µm were attached to the ram 
guidance. Furthermore, inductive displacement sensors were attached to the tool to 
measure the distance between die and die bearing plate. Thus, the tilting of the die 
provoked by using different disc spring configurations was measurable. Magneto-
strictive displacement sensors were used to determine the tilting and the vertical 
resilience of the blank holder. 

392 
K. Großmann et al.
 
 
Fig. 17.8 Modification of the total stiffness and the tilting stiffnesses in the experimental 
tool by means of variable disc springs 
 
 
Fig. 17.9 Measurement system 
The punch force was measured with four load-cells placed under the punch. 
The press control systems delivered blank holder and ram forces. All input signals 
were recorded with PC measuring boards. The measuring results were visualized 
using the software Diadem 8.0 by National Instruments. An overview of the mea-
suring system is shown in Figure 17.9. 
17.4.2   AFPM of the Experimental Equipment 
In the initial FE simulation setup with non-linear springs, the rigid blank holder 
was not allowed to tilt. In the simulation, a different tilting behavior was observed 
due to an asymmetrical tool installation in the press  but no correlations with the 
deep drawing failures in the experiment were found. Therefore, it was necessary to 
set up a more comprehensive forming process model (Figure 17.10) in LS-DYNA 
containing the elastic properties of the HPV 160 press including die cushion, 
forming tool, and disc springs.  
Chapter 17.4.1 describes how to parameterize the horizontal and vertical 
springs, which are attached to the ram corners (cx±B, cy±A, cz). Decoupling the die 
from the ram by means of disc springs causes the ram stiffness to have only little 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
393
 
influence on the total stiffness of the experimental set-up. The elastostatic proper-
ties of both die cushion and tool guidance were included by modifying the spring 
characteristics of the blank holder model (cx±B,NH; cy±A,NH; cz,NH)  
 
 
Fig. 17.10 Advanced Forming Process Model considering the elastic properties of the expe-
rimental equipment.  
The blank was meshed with shell elements with 5 integration-points over the 
thickness. Adaptive meshing was applied. The elastic-plastic material behavior of 
DC04 and H260B was modeled using Reihle’s law and parameters from [15] to 
describe the flow stress curve. The friction between sheet metal and tool compo-
nents was modeled with the classical Coulomb-Friction-Model and a constant fric-
tion coefficient of 0.1. In order to improve performance and stability of the  
simulation the relative tool travel was realized by moving the punch, which is 
fixed in reality, instead of the ram. 
17.4.3   Comparative Assessment of the Simulation Results 
The predictions of the simulation and the experimental results match fairly well, 
as indicated by the correlating material draw-in at the four edges of the remaining 
flange, see Figure 17.11. 
By including non-linear stiffness of machine and tool guidance into the simula-
tion model, the blank holder and the die can deflect according to the applied load 
(tilting, resilience). This has a direct impact on the acting normal forces and there-
fore on the frictional forces as well as their distribution on the interface between 
sheet and tool. 

394 
K. Großmann et al.
 
 
Fig. 17.11 Comparison of the simulation results with the experimental results - remaining 
flange widths for different blank holder forces  
Comparing the flange widths MP1 and MP3 on the long sides of the rectangular 
cup indicates an asymmetric material draw-in. Due to ram tilting about the x-axis 
the material draw-in at MP1 is more strongly restrained than at MP3. Figure 17.11 
shows a good agreement between simulation and experiment for these particular 
measuring points. This demonstrates that the advanced process model obtains 
closer-to-reality results than the classical deep-drawing simulation. 
The sheet metal thickness distribution, for example, at bottom corners of the 
rectangular cup, reflects the different conditions in the contact surfaces between 
sheet metal and tool. There, the substantially larger blank holder pressure (here at 
the left flange side) causes a larger thickness reduction. 
In order to avoid critical states in workpiece and tool as well as to achieve the 
desired workpiece quality, it is important to be aware of the accurate state of de-
formation and stress during the forming process. The state of deformation and  
tensile stress was experimentally determined for selected specimens in order to 
evaluate the FE simulation results. Therefore, a square line grid was applied on the 
blank surface and then scanned by means of photogrammetry. The image 
processing returns the xyz-coordinates of the grid nodes.  
The deformation and stress analysis as well as the data visualization and the 
date storage were realized with the PC software AutoGrid® [16]. 
The simulation results can be examined based on the determined total or equiv-
alent strains. Computed results and experimentally determined results show a 
good agreement. The state of stress for this particular case can be modeled with 
high accuracy. This is the pre-condition for an identification of deep-drawing fail-
ures by analyzing the plane strain state with a Forming Limit Diagram (FLD)  
Furthermore, the prediction of the wrinkles and cracks using an FLD was con-
firmed by the experimental results. The Forming Limit Curve (FLC) was generat-
ed according to the European standard ISO 12004 [17].  
 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
395
 
 
Fig. 17.12 Comparison between the results of the simulation and the experiment - analysis of the 
drawing failures using a FLD 
 
The results obtained with the advanced forming process model (Fig. 17.12) 
show that the computation of wrinkling and the prediction of cracks match the ex-
perimental test results. Comparing these findings to the results of a classical deep-
drawing simulation clearly shows that experimentally observed deep-drawing  
failures could not be predicted without including elastic properties of machine and 
cushion into the FE-process model. 

396 
K. Großmann et al.
 
17.5   Software Prototype for FE Simulation Set-Up 
Setting up a holistic process model with elastic press and tool properties is not an 
easy thing to do. The presented methods to obtain an advanced process model 
were developed with the open FEM software LS-DYNA. For modeling elastic 
boundary conditions given by the machine, discrete elements, such as springs and 
dampers were applied. These element types are usually not available for sheet 
metal process models in commercial user-friendly software packages, such as  
AutoForm, eta/DYNAFORM or PAM STAMP. 
In order to facilitate the set-up for the user a software prototype “xForm” was 
developed. The software concept enables the user to choose from a selection of 
press and drawing cushion structures to implement them into the FE forming  
analysis. 
Figure 17.13 shows the set-up interface for a new press configuration in xForm. 
The process model was divided into three components: blank, tool and machine 
(press including die cushion), which are stored to the database of the program. At 
present, the geometries of these components can only be loaded directly from  
already existing LS-DYNA keyword files.  
The data base editor allows the user to define necessary component-specific in-
formation, e. g. frame design and drive configuration as well as the vertical and 
tilting stiffness of the press and die cushion. 
An interpreter obtains material properties from keyword files and assigns them 
to the components in the database. The component “tool” contains all the geome-
try and material data of the die, blank holder and punch. The non-linear material 
parameters, such as flow curve or anisotropic values, are assigned to the meshed 
blank.  
In the modeling module, the three components of the database are linked with 
each other. While auto-positioning the components the contact formulations are 
defined. Subsequently, boundary conditions, such as ram stroke (drawing path) 
and blank holder force as well as simulation-specific parameters such as time-
step-size control or adaptive mesh refinement, need to be assigned to the model. 
The model editor facilitates the change of model components. Once the advanced 
process model is set-up the program translates the model into an LS-DYNA key-
word file. Finally, the file is sent to the LS-DYNA-solver for computation. 
The software prototype xForm shows that extending the FE process model with 
machine properties can be realized comfortably. xForm demonstrates how a com-
mercial pre-processor should be arranged to make the methods available to a 
broader user group. In further development - then based on a higher programming 
language – the following extensions have to be implemented: 
- 
CAD interface,  
- 
mesh generator to mesh-imported CAD structures, 
- 
spring-back compensation module including the tool elasticity,  
- 
post-processor module for visualization and evaluation of the simulation 
results,  
- 
users’ help. 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
397
 
 
Fig. 17.13 GUI of xForm for an easy FE simulation set-up 
17.6   Compensation for Elastic-Static Deformations 
In order to account for elastic tool deformations in FE forming analysis, [18] discusses 
four different approaches, namely static condensation, flexible rigid bodies, tied coarse 
and fine meshes and full 3D discretization. Due to its simplicity, coupling coarse brick 
elements with fine shell mesh on the surface was used for the investigations.  
 
Fig. 17.14 Methodology to compensate for elastic deformations 

398 
K. Großmann et al.
 
Since the simulation of the elastostatic machine and tool behavior is feasible, 
error compensation for these effects seems to be the next logical step. Therefore, a 
methodology was developed counteracting elastostatic press and tool deformations 
by rectifying the tool’s surface before it is built. The surfaces of the tooling after 
springback compensation are fed into the FE simulation. The FE model, enhanced 
with important elastic properties, calculates the elastic deformation of the tool’s 
surface. In the next step, the deformed surface is extracted and the deviation is 
added as offset to the original surface (Fig. 17.14) 
The experiments were conducted on an experimental set-up with allows for ex-
tensive die deformation [19]. Figure 17.15 displays experimental and simulation 
results for deep drawing with and without compensated die surface. The flange 
outline (dashed line) shows that the material draw-in with compensated die sur-
face is very close to the draw-in predicted for deep drawing with an ideally stiff 
ram. This indicates that the compensation for elastic press and tool deformations is 
feasible. 
 
 
Fig. 17.15 Application of compensation method to S-Rail tooling  
17.7   Approach for Elasto-Dynamic FE Process Modeling 
Spindle-driven servo presses enable the manufacturers to establish high-speed 
processes in sheet metal forming. Furthermore, the advantage of complete free-
dom of press stroke opens doors to perfectly adjust the stroke to the process or to 
establish completely new processes in sheet forming, such as so-called “Synchro” 
deep drawing [20].   
Conversely, high dynamical processes result in new requirements for the design 
of the press drive and the structural components in the force flow. Conventional 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
399
 
quasi-static process simulations are obviously not suitable to calculate process pa-
rameters and reaction forces under dynamic conditions. Therefore, new methods 
to simulate and predict process conditions for dynamic operations need to be es-
tablished [9].  
The principle of “Synchro“ deep drawing was developed at the IWU-Chemnitz-
Dresden and is explained in [20]. In this process, the blank holder (BH) is sub-
jected to a blank holder force (BHF) oscillating between zero and the maximum 
value. The die is attached to the ram, which follows a pre-defined displacement 
curve in such a way that the part is drawn, when no BHF is applied. When the die 
stops, the BHF rises and the wrinkles in the flange area of the part are flattened 
out. Preliminary experiments have shown that the process has potential to achieve 
larger drawing depths. The synchronization and optimization of the individual 
displacement and force curves is a task for the FE process simulation. 
 
 
Fig. 17.16 FE simulation of “Synchro” deep drawing [20] 
Figure 17.16 shows the FE simulation of “Synchro” deep drawing. The die dis-
placement curve and the BHF oscillation serve as input parameters. Since it is not 
possible to apply both displacement and force boundary condition to one rigid 
body simultaneously, the BHF movement away from the sheet is realized by ap-
plying a negative BHF. The resulting BH displacement is limited to the desired 
maximum distance between BH and sheet by using the option of a rigid body 
stopper [21]. The rigid body stopper is synchronized with the die displacement. 
Mass scaling is common practice in quasi-static FE simulations to achieve reason-
able CPU times [21].  
When simulating “Synchro” deep drawing with explicit FE codes, mass scaling 
is not an appropriate measure. Since the dynamic behavior is dependent on the 
moved masses and their accelerations, the parts in motion must be modeled with 
real masses, which are exposed to the real accelerations. Even selective mass scal-
ing of the sheet metal, which is very light compared with the press ram, is  
not feasible since the oscillation of the BH excites the blank to vibrate. The  

400 
K. Großmann et al.
 
combination of a long process and high-frequency oscillations leads to extremely 
long CPU times. Nevertheless, simulations and experiment with a simple round 
cup were in good agreement. 
17.8   Conclusion and Outlook 
Based on conventional FE process modeling and on an analysis of the relevant ef-
fects of the press, tool and die cushion properties on the forming process an ad-
vanced modeling method was developed. 
The simulation results obtained by applying the AFPM and a conventional 
model of forming process (without elastic press, tool and die cushion properties) 
were compared. The comparison shows that relevant elastostatic effects of the 
press, tool and die cushion on the forming process can be visualized with the ad-
vanced process model. 
It is shown that the simulation matches the experimental results obtained on an 
example tool-press configuration for drawing rectangular cups. 
A complete forming process model is available to consider different configura-
tions of presses and die cushions already in the process-planning stage. Now, it 
seems to be possible to reduce the effort of tool try-out and ramp-up by using FE 
simulations.  
In order to facilitate the set-up of an AFPM for the user the software-prototype 
xForm was developed. xForm enables the user to choose from a selection of press 
and die cushion structures to implement them into the FE forming analysis. 
In the field of elastostatic process simulation, the experimental validation of the 
tool guidance model will be part of further investigations. An asymmetric tooling 
will be used to show the effect of the tool guidance on the final part shape by 
means of FE simulation and experiment.  
Regarding dynamical responses of the press to a certain process a modal analy-
sis of the press structure without the process model will be conducted. From natu-
ral frequencies and mode shapes of the press parts, reduced dynamical sub-models 
will be derived. Subsequently, the sub-models will be connected and appropriate 
damping parameters need to be determined. 
References 
[1] Roll, K., Wiegand, K.: Eine Möglichkeit zur Berücksichtigung der Werkzeugelasti-
zität bei der Blechformsimulation. In: Proceedings of Neuere Entwicklungen in der 
Blechumformung Leinefelden-Echterdingen (Stuttgart), MAT INFO Werkstoff-
Informationsgesellschaft mbH, Frankfurt (2006) 
[2] Großmann, K., Hardtmann, A., Wiemer, H.: Simulation des Blechumformprozesses 
unter Berücksichtigung des statischen Verhaltens der Pressmaschine. ZWF Zeitschrift 
für wirtschaftlichen Fabrikbetrieb 101(10), 600–605 (2006) 
[3] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H., Hardtmann, A., Penter, L.: Stand der Simulation von 
Umformprozessen mit den elastischen Einflüssen aus Maschine und Werkzeug. In: 
Proceedings of EFB-Colloquia Neue Wege zum wirtschaftlichen Leichtbau, pp. 185–
198. EFB, Hannover (2007) (in Fellbach) 

17   Advanced Forming Process Model - AFPM 
401
 
[4] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H.: Maschine, Werkzeug und Prozess – ein ganzheitliches 
System. In: Proceedings of 6th Sächsische Fachtagung Umformtechnik, TU Dresden 
(1999) 
[5] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H., Thoms, V., Schirmacher, F.: Modellierung des Blechum-
formprozesses in der Anlagensimulation auf Grundlage von Ergebnissen der FEM-
Prozeßsimulation. EFB-Forschungsbericht No. 178. EFB, Hannover (2001) 
[6] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H.: Simulation of the Process Influencing Behaviour of 
Forming Machines. In: Steel Research International, vol. 76(2/3), pp. 205–210. Ver-
lag Stahleisen GmbH, Düsseldorf (2005) 
[7] Schirmacher, F., Wiemer, H.: Kopplung von Prozess- und Anlagensimulation – ein 
wesentlicher Teilschritt auf dem Weg zum Virtuellen Umformen. In: Proceedings of 
EFB-Colloquia Prozessoptimierung in der Blechverarbeitung, pp. 11.1–11.18. EFB, 
Hannover (2001) 
[8] Brecher, C., Schapp, L., Paepenmüller, F.: Gekoppelte Simulation von Presse und 
Massivumformprozess. Werkstattstechnik Online 96(7/8), 526–529 (2006) 
[9] Wiemer, H.: Stand und Möglichkeiten der Systemsimulation von mechanischen 
Pressmaschinen. State and Potentials of Forming Press Simulation. Dissertation, TU 
Dresden (2004) 
[10] German Standard DIN 55189, Ermittlung von Kennwerten für Pressen der Blechve-
rarbeitung bei statischer Belastung. Beuth Verlag, Berlin (1988) 
[11] VDI-Guideline VDI 3145, Pressen zum Kaltmassivumformen. Blatt 1: Mechanische 
und hydraulische Pressen. VDI-Verlag, Düsseldorf (1985) 
[12] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H., Hardtmann, A., Penter, L.: Faster to Sound Parts by Ad-
vanced Forming Process Simulation - Advanced Forming Process Model Including 
the Elastic Effects of the Forming Press and Tool. In: Steel Research International, 
vol. 78(10/11), pp. 825–830. Verlag Stahleisen GmbH, Düsseldorf (2007) 
[13] Pahl, K.J.: Elastische Wechselwirkungen im Ziehapparat einfach wirkender Pressen. 
VDI Verlag, Düsseldorf (1994) 
[14] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H.: Möglichkeiten der erweiterten Modellierung von Um-
formprozessen zur Berücksichtigung der Wechselwirkungen mit Werkzeugen und 
Maschine. In: Proceedings of Neuere Entwicklungen in der Blechumformung. MAT 
INFO Werkstoff-Informationsgesellschaft mbH, Frankfurt (2008) 
[15] Thoms, V., Voelkner, W., Süße, D.: Methoden zur Kennwertermittlung für Blech-
werkstoffe. EFB-Forschungsbericht No. 187. EFB, Hannover (2002) 
[16] Feldmann, P.: Application of strain analysis system AutoGrid® for evaluation of 
formability tests and for strain analysis on deformed parts. In: Proceedings of the 
IDDRG Conference Györ, Hungary, pp. 21–23 (2007) 
[17] European Standard, EI 12004, Metallic materials - Sheet and strip - Determination of 
forming limit curves. CEN European Committee for Standardization, Brussels (2007) 
[18] Haufe, A., Roll, K., Bogon, P.: Sheet metal forming simulation with elastic tools in 
Ls-Dyna. In: Proceedings of Numisheet, pp. 743–748 (2008) 
[19] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H., Hardtmann, A., Penter, L., Kriechenbauer, S.: Static 
Compensation for Elastic Tool and Press Deformations during Deep Drawing. Prod. 
Eng. Res. Devel. 4(2-3), 157–164 (2010), doi:10.1007/s11740-010-0216-7 
[20] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H., Neugebauer, R., Mauermann, R.: Simulationsun-
terstützung für das Tiefziehen auf Servospindelpressen. In: Proceedings of EFB-
Colloquia: Bauteile der Zukunft. EFB, Hannover (2010) 
[21] Hallquist, J.O., et al.: LS-DYNA Keyword User’s Manual, vol. I, Version 971, Li-
vermore Software Technology Corporation, Livermore California (2007) 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 403–417. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 18  
Consideration of the Machine Influence  
on Multistage Sheet Metal Forming Processes 
B.-A. Behrens, A. Bouguecha, R. Krimm, T. Matthias, and M. Czora 
Abstract. Metal forming processes are highly affected by the properties of the 
forming machine. In multistage processes, the force path curve of each stage is in-
fluenced by the surrounding stages. This research focuses on the interaction be-
tween the forming machine and multistage processes with respect to the quality of 
the workpiece. The accuracy of the numerical results could be increased by coupl-
ing the process simulation with the machine simulation. Further influencing fac-
tors, such as different friction conditions during forming and the elasticity of the 
tool, were considered in the simulation. In addition, the thermal properties of the 
press were investigated and considered in the machine simulation. Hence, a better 
correlation between the numerical results and the experiment could be achieved. 
18.1   Introduction 
Metal forming processes, such as deep drawing, place high demands on the prop-
erties of the forming machine. Even slight scatters or inaccuracies in the ram mo-
tion can lead to imperfections of the workpiece. The characteristic deformation of 
the forming machine and the tool system under load has a crucial influence on the 
result. To simulate forming processes, the use of the finite elements method 
(FEM), where local influences on the process (e. g. the lubrication or inhomoge-
neous material properties) can be included in the simulation, is state of the art. In-
fluences between the machine and the forming process have not been taken into 
account yet. In metal forming simulations, an ideal rigid forming machine is as-
sumed. Thus, differences between simulation and reality occur. Hence, for many 
applications it is not possible to manufacture parts with the required accuracy right 
from the beginning so tools have to be set up for each machine in a try-out phase. 
In order to reduce the start-up time for new metal forming tools it is necessary 
to consider the properties of the forming machine in the FE process simulation. 
Different approaches for a coupled simulation to consider the interaction between 
forming machine and forming process are known. A classification is drawn be-
tween offline-coupling, model integration and co-simulation.  
In offline-coupling, the process simulation and the machine simulation are cal-
culated separately. After calculating the process, the resulting force path curve is 

404 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
transferred into the machine simulation as input data for a new calculation. Subse-
quently, the correction of the ram movement as a result of the machine simulation 
serves as a boundary condition for the FEM simulation, if a new calculation by the 
two models is performed by means of an iterative loop. In several loops, an ap-
proximation to the real workpiece dimensions can be achieved [1]. The most im-
portant advantage of offline coupled simulations is that both simulations are  
implemented in their common software environment. Due to this, both simulations 
can benefit from the tools, which are available in the typical software environ-
ment. The disadvantage of this approach is the fact that no dynamic interaction 
can be simulated and that the calculation time increases due to the repeated  
calculation. 
An approach, where the machine and the forming process are simulated in a 
common simulation environment, is called model integration [2, 3]. In [4], the 
machine structure was reduced and integrated into the FEM process model by 
means of elasticity conditions. The tilt and the vertical deflection as well as the de-
formation of the die cushion and the ram were taken into consideration by means 
of spring elements. This approach resulted in an improvement of the accuracy of 
the forming simulation. However, if the machine properties and the drive control 
are examined, this method is limited.  
In co-simulation two independent, sufficiently detailed models for the forming 
machine and the forming process, which exist in different simulation environ-
ments, are used [5, 6]. These models exchange data after each time-step. Thus, it 
is possible to consider dynamic influences within the simulation, which occur dur-
ing the forming process. In [7], a coupled simulation for bulk metal forming 
processes was realized. Due to the consideration of the machine properties the ac-
curacy of the forming simulation could be increased. Furthermore, the results of 
the forming simulation were compared using machine models with different de-
grees of detail. Even with the least detailed machine model the simulation results 
of the workpiece dimensions could be approximated to reality by means of a co-
simulation in comparison to a separate process simulation.  
Within this project, an offline-coupling was implemented. The machine model 
is based on a phenomenological approach. The process simulation is modeled in a 
classic FEM environment. The simulation of single processes is state of the art. 
This project deals with the simulation of multistage processes, where interactions 
between each stage have to be considered additionally.  
18.2   Machine 
Experimental investigations were carried out on a high-speed press with a space 
rod drive (fig. 18.1). The advantage of a space rod drive is the independent ad-
justment of the ram position and the length of the stroke. The connection rods of a 
conventional mechanical press can only be moved in two directions. The connec-
tion rods of a space rod drive have one more degree of freedom. Thus, the kine-
matics of the press result in a slower course of motion shortly before reaching the 
bottom dead centre (bdc). This is especially advantageous for deep drawing 
processes. The bdc marks the reversal point of the ram. 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
405
 
 
Fig. 18.1 High-speed press Wanzke STA63  
18.2.1   Approach 
The method to describe the elastic properties of forming machines is based on the 
results of experimental tests using a phenomenological approach. The deflections 
of the forming machine under process load are measured and reproduced using an 
elasticity matrix with variable elements as machine model. The required informa-
tion for the model is provided by means of a single measurement of the press, 
based on a static press measurement similar to the standard DIN 55189 [8]. Due to 
this fact the model is applicable for many metal forming machines after carrying 
out this measurement.  
The relative total shift between the ram and the bolster plate results from de-
formations of the connection rods, the ram guide, the press frame, the bolster plate 
and the ram as well as the partially non-linear elastical characteristics of bearings 
and guidances. This leads to a shift of the position of the bottom dead centre. The 
deformations of the press components, except the ram and the bolster plate, can be 
summed up as deflection of the ram in relation to the bolster plate including the 
tilting. The deflection and the tilting are first calculated in the machine simulation 
assuming a rigid bolster plate and ram. The relative total shift is calculated in a 
further step by superposing the deflection with the deformation of the bolster plate 
and the ram (Fig. 18.2). For employing the principle of superposition it has to be 
assumed that superposed loads cause summable deformations. This principle is 
applicable as long as there is a linear correlation between the loads and the result-
ing deformations [9]. This approval is valid for very stiff bodies as the ram and the 
bolster plate. 

406 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
Unloaded
Loaded
Deformation
Bolster plate
Ram
Tilting
{
Deflection per stage
Bolster plate
Ram
Deflection
+
=
Stages
Tilting and deflection
Stages
Cumulative deformation
Stages
Clamping plates
elastic
Clamping plates
rigid
Superposition 
Modelling:
Relative total shift/
displacement
Unloaded
Loaded
Deformation
Bolster plate
Ram
Tilting
{
Deflection per stage
Bolster plate
Ram
Deflection
+
=
Stages
Tilting and deflection
Stages
Cumulative deformation
Stages
Clamping plates
elastic
Clamping plates
elastic
Clamping plates
rigid
Clamping plates
rigid
Superposition 
Modelling:
Relative total shift/
displacement
 
Fig. 18.2 Superposition of deflection and deformation  
The number of stages of multistage forming processes is an adjustable parame-
ter in the machine model. A load at a single stage not only causes a shift at the 
stage itself but also at all other stages.  
18.2.2   The Parameterization of the Machine Simulation 
18.2.2.1   Press Measurement 
The machine model requires the properties of the press as input data. In order to 
provide these data it is necessary to determine the properties under a defined load. 
The measurement procedure is based on a static press measurement similar to 
DIN 55189. Therefore, a load is applied between the ram and the bolster plate via 
a hydraulic cylinder. The hydraulic cylinder is placed at the position, where the 
stages will be mounted. The total shift of the press is determined at the positions 
of the stages by means of displacement transducers. Fig. 18.3 shows the measure-
ment setup of the press for a three-stage process, where the first stage is loaded. 
Stage 1 is loaded first. The shift due to the load occurring at the stage itself and 
at the other stages is recorded. Afterwards, the procedure for the second and the 
third stage is executed in the same way.  
The results of each measurement are path-force curves of the ram at each stage. 
These are the input data for the machine model, which describe the properties of 
the press. Fig. 18.4 exemplarily illustrates the total shift at stage 1 in relation to the 
position of the application of load. The figure shows that a load at stage 1 causes 
the highest total shift at stage 1, whereas a load at stage 2 of the same amplitude 
causes a smaller total shift at stage 1. Correspondingly, a load at stage 3 causes an 
even smaller total shift at stage 1. By means of this data the influences of the stag-
es are described. These influences decrease with an increasing distance to the  
related stage. 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
407
 
1. Load in stage 1
Loading unit
Measurement
of the total shift
in all stages
Hydr. cylinder
Pressure 
measurement 
Hand pump
1. Load in stage 1
Loading unit
Measurement
of the total shift
in all stages
Hydr. cylinder
Pressure 
measurement 
Hand pump
 
Fig. 18.3 Measurement setup  
 
Load position
0.3
150
0.5
0.1
0.0
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0
50
100
200
250
300
Load [kN]
Total shift at stage 1 [mm]
Stage 3 
F
Stage 2 
F
Stage 1
F
0.6
0.2
Load position
0.3
150
0.5
0.1
0.0
0.4
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0
50
100
200
250
300
Load [kN]
Total shift at stage 1 [mm]
Stage 3 
F
Stage 2 
F
Stage 1
F
0.6
0.2
 
Fig. 18.4 Total shift at stage 1 dependent on a load at stage 1, stage 2 and stage 3  
18.2.2.2   Investigation of the Temperature-Influence 
During the start-up period of a metal forming production line, temperature 
changes arise on the components of the press as well as on the metal forming 
tools. Changes in the temperature of the press components have an influence on 

408 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
the properties of the press and therefore on the quality of the manufactured prod-
ucts. To predict such effects by means of a coupled simulation it is essential to ex-
tend the machine model with respect to temperature effects. Hence, the influence 
on the static properties of the press due to changes of the temperature was ex-
amined. It could be shown that the position of the bdc is affected by temperature 
changes. 
To determine the temperature curve of the press, temperature measurements 
were executed during the operating time of the press up to a nearly steady thermal 
condition. Apart from the temperature curve of the press, its influence on process 
parameters, such as forming force and the position of the bottom dead centre, was 
investigated. In order to quantify and consider the thermal influence in the ma-
chine model, parts were formed after different operating intervals and the force 
path curve of these metal forming processes was captured for the different thermal 
conditions at each operating interval. Therefore, piezo-electric load cells were in-
tegrated into the tool stages and thermocouples were applied to relevant press 
components (Fig. 18.5). According to Fig. 18.5, for a permanent number of 
strokes of 90 rpm the system reaches a nearly steady thermal condition after eight 
hours of operation. 
 
Temperature [°C]
38.0
35.3
32.7
30.0
27.3
24,7
22.0
Press operating time [h]
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature course
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ram
Con-rod left
Con-rod right
Oil tank left
Oil tank right 
Guidance left
Guidance right 
2.Stage
Contouring
3.Stage
Embossing
1.Stage
Deep drawing
Oil tank left
Oil tank left
Oil tank right
Oil tank right
Con-rod left
Con-rod left
Con-rod right
Con-rod right
Ram
Ram
Guidance left
Guidance left
Reference
Reference
Guidance right
Guidance right
Stroke rate: 
90 rpm
Press operating time:
8 hours
Workpiece:
axisymmetric / material DC04
Measuring equipment:
- Temperature
thermocouples
- Stage forces
piezoelectric load cells
- Ram stroke
incremental displ. transducers
Temperature [°C]
38.0
35.3
32.7
30.0
27.3
24,7
22.0
Press operating time [h]
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature profile
Results: Temperature course
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Ram
Con-rod left
Con-rod right
Oil tank left
Oil tank right 
Guidance left
Guidance right 
2.Stage
Contouring
3.Stage
Embossing
1.Stage
Deep drawing
Oil tank left
Oil tank left
Oil tank right
Oil tank right
Con-rod left
Con-rod left
Con-rod right
Con-rod right
Ram
Ram
Guidance left
Guidance left
Reference
Reference
Guidance right
Guidance right
2.Stage
Contouring
3.Stage
Embossing
1.Stage
Deep drawing
Oil tank left
Oil tank left
Oil tank right
Oil tank right
Con-rod left
Con-rod left
Con-rod right
Con-rod right
Ram
Ram
Guidance left
Guidance left
Reference
Reference
Guidance right
Guidance right
Stroke rate: 
90 rpm
Press operating time:
8 hours
Workpiece:
axisymmetric / material DC04
Measuring equipment:
- Temperature
thermocouples
- Stage forces
piezoelectric load cells
- Ram stroke
incremental displ. transducers
 
Fig. 18.5 Experimental setup and temperature curve 
 
In order to provide a general comparison between the force-time curve and the 
temperature-time curve, the temperature of the right connection rod is shown in 
Figure 18.6. The right connection rod has a direct influence on the embossing 
stage as the process force at the embossing stage is mainly transferred by the right 
connection rod. Between the temperature-time curve at the right connection rod 
and the curve of the embossing force at different operating times correlations can 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
409
 
be identified. Both measurement curves have a high gradient at the beginning, 
which decreases with time. Thus, the curves converge towards a certain steady 
state. This is related to the fact that the punch not only forms the sheet metal but it 
also pushes against the bottom of the die. Thus, the force at stage 3 increases as 
the expansion of the connection rod leads to a higher force on the bottom of the 
die, which possesses a high stiffness and a correlation can be seen (Fig. 18.6, bot-
tom right).The values of the process force at different operating times at the deep 
drawing stage and at the contouring stage do not change with the measured in-
crease of temperature (Fig. 18.6). These values mainly depend on the material 
characteristics of the sheet metal. The increase of the temperature for the deep 
drawing stage and the contouring stage results in a shift of the bdc since the dies 
are open in forming direction. As a consequence, the forming path increases and 
affects the workpiece geometry. 
 
Deep-drawing
Deep-drawing
Contouring
Contouring
Embossing
Embossing
Contouring force
Deep-drawing force
Deep drawing force [kN]
Press operating time [h]
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
61.00
61.75
59.50
60.25
58.75
58.00
62.50
76.6
76.8
77.0
77.2
77.4
76.4
77.6
Contouring force [kN]
Embossing force
Temperature of the right con-rod
5
36.75
35.50
34.25
33.00
31.75
30.50
38.00
Embossing force [kN]
24.2
26.3
28.5
30.7
32.8
22.0
35.0
Temperature [°C]
Press operating time [h]
1
3
2
4
6
7
8
9
0
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Deep-drawing
Deep-drawing
Deep-drawing
Deep-drawing
Contouring
Contouring
Contouring
Contouring
Embossing
Embossing
Embossing
Embossing
Contouring force
Deep-drawing force
Contouring force
Deep-drawing force
Contouring force
Deep-drawing force
Deep drawing force [kN]
Press operating time [h]
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
61.00
61.75
59.50
60.25
58.75
58.00
61.00
61.75
61.00
61.75
59.50
60.25
58.75
58.00
59.50
60.25
59.50
60.25
58.75
58.00
58.75
58.00
62.50
76.6
76.8
77.0
77.2
77.4
76.4
77.6
76.6
76.8
77.0
77.2
77.4
76.4
77.6
Contouring force [kN]
Embossing force
Temperature of the right con-rod
Embossing force
Temperature of the right con-rod
Embossing force
Temperature of the right con-rod
5
36.75
35.50
34.25
33.00
31.75
30.50
38.00
36.75
35.50
34.25
33.00
31.75
30.50
36.75
35.50
34.25
33.00
31.75
30.50
35.50
34.25
33.00
31.75
30.50
34.25
33.00
31.75
30.50
33.00
31.75
30.50
31.75
30.50
38.00
Embossing force [kN]
24.2
26.3
28.5
30.7
32.8
22.0
35.0
24.2
26.3
28.5
30.7
32.8
22.0
35.0
Temperature [°C]
Press operating time [h]
1
3
2
4
6
7
8
9
0
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
 
Fig. 18.6 Maximum forces at the forming stages with increasing operating time  
The differences of the position of the bdc due to the increase of the temperature 
of the press can be measured by means of displacement transducers. The changes 
of the bdc are affected by the expansion of the press components due to the in-
creased temperatures. The initial condition of the “cold” operating state is taken as 
a reference. The difference between the bdc and the reference bdc defines the total 
shift caused by changes in the temperature profile of the machine. Fig. 18.7 illu-
strates the position of the bdc with respect to the operating time for the stages deep 
drawing, contouring and embossing. It was measured by incremental displacement 
transducers. 

410 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
22.5°C
22.5°C
27°C
34.5°C
36°C
36°C 38°C
a
Embossing stage
Contouring stage
Deep drawing stage
76.00
1
2
3
5
4
6
7
9
Press operating time [h]
a
b
8
Position of the bdc [mm]
76.05
76.10
76.15
76.20
76.25
76.30
0
b
22.5°C
22.5°C
22.5°C
22.5°C
27°C
34.5°C
36°C
36°C 38°C
a
Embossing stage
Contouring stage
Deep drawing stage
Embossing stage
Contouring stage
Deep drawing stage
76.00
1
2
3
5
4
6
7
9
Press operating time [h]
a
b
8
Position of the bdc [mm]
76.05
76.10
76.15
76.20
76.25
76.30
0
b
 
Fig. 18.7 Development of the shift of the bottom dead centre (bdc) related to the operating 
time of the press  
Fig. 18.7 shows that the shift of the bdc of all three stages is similar and con-
verges exponentially with time. The highest gradients of the shift curve in position 
of the bdc occur during the start-up period of the press. As the operation time in-
creases the gradients of the shift curve in position of the bdc decrease until a near-
ly steady thermal condition is reached. This result corresponds to the temperature 
measurements at the press components (Fig. 18.5). Thus, for each stage a shift of 
the position of the bdc in forming direction occurs and converges towards a cer-
tain value with increased operating time.  
Differences in the position of the bdc between initial condition at the start-up 
and the steady thermal condition of the press after eight hours occur at all three 
stages. At the deep drawing stage, the difference is 0.08 mm, 0.05 mm at the con-
touring stage and 0.03 mm at the embossing stage. Although these differences 
mainly result from the temperature increase they also depend on the process. The 
differences in the shift of the position of each bdc in relation to the position of the 
bdc in “cold condition” are 0.1 % (deep drawing), 0.06 % (contouring), 0.04 % 
(embossing). Thus, for the machine model a temperature coefficient of 0.04 % for 
the steady thermal condition of the press was implemented. This value improves 
the accuracy of the simulation of the press for all investigated processes by use of 
the minimal requirements for the embossing stage. Therefore, no further settings 
are required by the user.  
18.3   Modeling of a Three-Stage Process 
For the experiments, a modular tool set for a three-stage forming process was de-
signed. The three single tools contain forming processes, which are common in 
multistage sheet metal forming: these are deep drawing, contouring and emboss-
ing (Fig. 18.8). For the deep drawing stage and the contouring stage spring-
actuated blank holders are applied. For the final forming of the part all forming 
stages have to be run through. Every single stage causes a characteristic force path 
curve. If several individual tools are mounted under one ram, the curves change 
for each stage since the press deforms and the single stage gets influenced due to  
 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
411
 
 
Fig. 18.8 Design of the examined forming stages deep drawing, contouring and embossing  
 
forces of other stages, which are applied simultaneously. The stages can be 
mounted into the press and operated individually as well as together.  
The design of the three-stage tool system was supported by a process simula-
tion. Therefore, simulation models based on the CAD data of the tools were gen-
erated and numerical experiments by means of the finite elements method were 
executed. Fig. 18.9 illustrates the three simulation models for the forming stages 
deep drawing, contouring and embossing. 
 
 
Fig. 18.9 Finite elements models of the three forming stages  

412 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
The tools are designed to form sheet metals with a thickness of 1.0 mm. The re-
sults of the simulation show that this design leads to the required utilization of 80 
% of the nominal press force, if a DC 04 deep drawing steel is used. Within the 
simulation, the friction was set to a constant value of μ = 0.16. In the progression 
of the project, a new friction law to consider the dependency of the friction on the 
smoothing pressure and the contact pressure was applied. 
In a further step, the drawing die was modeled elastically. The deep drawing 
stage is illustrated in Fig. 18.10. The punch and the blank holder were still mod-
eled with rigid shell elements. Only the die was modeled with elastically-solid 
elements to prevent an increasing simulation time. The elastic properties of the die 
were taken into account in order to simulate the varying local contact conditions. 
This allows an accurate calculation of the contact pressure. 
 
 
 
Fig. 18.10 Finite elements model of the deep drawing stage with the elastic die  
For an improved description of the friction between the tool and the workpiece 
during a sheet metal forming process the evolution of the surface conditions of the 
workpiece has to be considered. The influence of the changing surface topology 
on friction conditions has to be included in the FE simulation. The contact pres-
sure leads to a smoothing of the surface topology. The smoothed surface results in 
a reduced friction coefficient. For this reason, a concept for the description of a 
technical surface structure was used [11]. A workpiece with different smoothed 
regions is shown in Fig. 18.11. 
 
Punch  
(rigid) 
Blank holder 
(rigid) 
Die 
(elastic) 
y 
x 
z 
Forming  
direction 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
413
 
 
 
Fig. 18.11 Drawn cup with different degree of smoothed regions  
A friction law µ = (PE, PK), where the friction coefficient µ is a function of the 
smoothing pressure PE and the contact pressure PK, is implemented in 
ABAQUS/Explicit via a user subroutine. This friction law considers the local sur-
face pressure as well as the transformation history of the sheet metal surface. 
The difference in contact pressure at the contact surface leads to a different 
component smoothing. The high pressures at the die radius (Fig. 18.12) contribute 
to different friction conditions during the forming process. 
 
 
Fig. 18.12 Contact pressure distribution at the die 
18.4   Coupling of the Machine Simulation and the Process 
Simulation 
The “offline-coupling” method mentioned above was applied to couple the ma-
chine simulation and the process simulation. The two simulation environments run 
  0.0 
35.0 
15.0 
Strong smoothing 
Weak smoothing 
Contact pressure [MPa] 

414 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
sequentially and the entire cycle iterates. Fig. 18.13 illustrates the progression of 
the coupled simulation between the process simulation in ABAQUS and the ma-
chine simulation in Matlab. 
 
New
cycle
1. Step
Process
simulation
Time-depending
course of the
forming force
2. Step
Convergence
criterion 
reached?
4. Step
Abaqus
3. Step 
Machine
simulation
Matlab
Correction of 
the ram stroke
Break
Initial condition 
Approximated 
time-depending
course of motion 
of the ram 
(forming machine 
ideal rigid)
New
cycle
1. Step
Process
simulation
Time-depending
course of the
forming force
2. Step
Convergence
criterion 
reached?
4. Step
Abaqus
3. Step 
Machine
simulation
Matlab
3. Step 
Machine
simulation
Matlab
Correction of 
the ram stroke
Break
Initial condition 
Approximated 
time-depending
course of motion 
of the ram 
(forming machine 
ideal rigid)
 
Fig. 18.13 Progression of the coupled simulation  
A cycle of the coupled simulation contains four sequentially running steps. The 
ram motion at each stage, which is necessary for the required part depth assuming 
an ideal rigid press, serves at first as boundary condition for the process simula-
tion. The process simulation calculates each forming stage one by one and then 
provides the related coordinates for the nodes of the mesh of the tool punch, the 
applied node forces and the related forming times in a text file (ASCII format). 
The text file with the information about the force-time curves of the punch is sent 
to the machine simulation in Matlab in a second step. By means of this input data 
the relative shift between the bolster plate and the ram can be determined by the 
machine simulation. The output of the machine simulation consists of way-time 
curves for the process simulation, considering the deflection and the deformation 
of the machine components. This result is then sent back to the process simulation 
and serves as new input data for the process simulation. This process is repeated 
until a certain convergence criterion is reached. The convergence criterion consists 
of the comparison of the difference between the forming paths of two succeeded 
iterations. This value was set to 0.01 mm. Fig. 18.14 illustrates a simulation, 
where the convergence criterion was reached after three iteration cycles. 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
415
 
Convergence criterion: |Un+1-Un |≤0,01 mm
Iterations
25,00 mm
24,61 mm
24,62 mm
24,61 mm
26,85 mm
26,23 mm
26,01 mm
26,01 mm
0
1
2
3
Calculated part height U [mm]
26,75 mm
26,20 mm
26,00 mm
25,99 mm
Deep drawing
Contouring
Embossing
Convergence criterion: |Un+1-Un |≤0,01 mm
Iterations
25,00 mm
24,61 mm
24,62 mm
24,61 mm
26,85 mm
26,23 mm
26,01 mm
26,01 mm
0
1
2
3
Calculated part height U [mm]
26,75 mm
26,20 mm
26,00 mm
25,99 mm
Deep drawing
Contouring
Embossing
 
Fig. 18.14 Results after each iteration cycle of a coupled simulation  
 
The data exchange is executed by means of a Matlab function and an external, 
self-running file. The calculation time of the coupled simulation with ABAQUS 
6.7 and Matlab on an Intel Xeon 3.4 GHz processor with 2 GB RAM takes about 
20 hours including the enhancements mentioned above (friction model, elastic die 
model, temperature factor) of the enhanced coupled simulation. 
18.5   Validation of the Coupled Simulation 
In order to verify the results of the coupled enhanced simulation they were com-
pared with experimental results (Fig. 18.15) and the results of the previous 
coupled simulation regarding geometrical properties (Table 18.1). In contrast to to 
the previous simulation, the enhanced coupled simulation considers the elastic die, 
the improved friction law and the temperature influence of the machine. The re-
sults of the previous coupled simulation model are presented in [12]. 
 
 
Fig. 18.15 Experimental and simulated height of the part after the deep drawing stage  
The height of the formed parts was measured with the optical measurement sys-
tem GOM ATOS II. In Table I, the results are compared and it is shown that the 
results of the coupled enhanced simulation could be improved in comparison with 
the enhanced decoupled and the previous coupled simulation. Using an elastic tool 

416 
B.-A. Behrens et al.
 
model, an improved friction law and the temperature factor leads to a more realis-
tic simulation but the simulation time is more than six times higher than the pre-
vious coupled simulation. 
Table 18.1 Comparison of the experimental and the simulated results  
– 
 
– 
Simulation 
time 
– 
[min] 
– 
Part height  
– 
[mm] 
– 
 
– 
 
– 
Stage1 – 
Stage2 – 
Stage3 
– 
Experiment 
– 
 
– 
24.44 
– 
25.92 
– 
25.86 
– 
Previous coupled 
simulation 
– 
170 
– 
24.61 
– 
26.01 
– 
25.99 
– 
Decoupled 
en-
hanced simulation 
– 
390 
– 
24.90 
– 
26.10 
– 
26.10 
– 
Coupled enhanced 
simulation 
– 
1240 
– 
24.55 
– 
25.98 
– 
25.92 
18.6   Conclusion 
The numerical simulation of forming processes is an established method for the 
analysis of common metal forming processes. By this method, the interactions be-
tween the process and the machine are not taken into consideration. Within the 
experiments in the frameworks of this project it was shown that the machine has 
an impact on the process and that this impact also affects the geometry and the 
quality of the manufactured parts. 
By means of the described coupling of the process simulation with a machine 
simulation it became possible to take into consideration the influences of the ma-
chine. These influences mainly result in the shift of the bottom dead centre caused 
by the deformation and the deflection of the ram as well as the tilting of the ram. 
To improve the accuracy of the dimensions of the simulated workpieces these  
influences have to be considered in the boundary conditions of the process simula-
tion. Therefore, an offline-coupling was used and validated by the results of expe-
rimental data. It was shown that by means of this offline-coupling the simulation 
results approached the real geometrical dimensions of the workpieces.  
With an increasing degree of detail of the models and an enhancement by fur-
ther influencing parameters, more realistic results with a higher compliance were 
reached. However, these lead to higher calculation times and to the necessity of 
further computing resources. It could be shown that the total shift of the bottom 
dead centre for the analyzed workpiece is less than 1 mm. Particularly the thermal 
influence of the machine on the process is very small. The differences of the posi-
tion of the bottom dead centre concerning a change in the temperature profile of 
the machine range around a few hundredths of a millimeter. 
Due to the fact that the influence of a forming machine on a forming process is 
nominal, the coupled simulation has especially advantages for the tool set-up in 

18   Consideration of the Machine Influence  
417
 
forming machines for tools including embossing processes. The tolerances of the 
height of an embossing punch are often limited to hundredths of a millimeter. 
References 
[1] Bäcker, V., Klocke, F., Wegner, H., Timmer, A., Grzhibovskis, R., Rjasanow, S.: 
Analysis of the Deep Rolling Process on Turbine Blades using the FEM/BEM-
Coupling. In: IOP Conf. Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol. 10 (2010) 
[2] Großmann, K., Hardtmann, A., Wiemer, H., Penter, L.: An Advanced Forming 
Process Model including the Interactions between Machine, Tool and Process. In: 
Proceedings of 1st International Conference on PMI, Hannover, Germany, pp. 125–
132 (2008) 
[3] Bogon, P., Roll, K.: Ein Ansatz zur Berechnung und Kompensation der elastischen 
Werkzeugdeformation bei Ziehwerkzeugen. In: 30. EFB-Kolloquium Blechverarbei-
tung 02./03. März, Bad Boll (2010) 
[4] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H.: Feasibilities of Advanced Forming Process Modelling 
Considering the Interactions with Dies and Machines. In: Proceedings of Conference 
New Developments in Sheet Metal Forming Technology, Fellbach bei Stuttgart, 
Germany, pp. 311–350 (2008) 
[5] Lohse, H., Marthiens, O., Helduser, S., Matthias, T., Behrens, B.-A.: Reglerauslegung 
für hydraulische Tiefziehpressen. In: Ölhydraulik und Pneumatik. 3/2010/März, pp. 
S.2–9. Vereinigte Fachverlage GmbH, Mainz (2010) 
[6] Behrens, B.-A., Marthiens, O., Matthias, T., Helduser, S., Lohse, H.: Antriebs- und 
Prozessoptimierung hydraulischer Tiefziehpressen mit Hilfe der gekoppelten Simula-
tion. EFB-Forschungsbericht NR. 291, Europäische Forschungsgesellschaft für 
Blechverarbeitung (2009) ISBN 978-3-86776-325-7 
[7] Schapp, O.: Gekoppelte Simulation von Maschine und Prozess in der Massivumfor-
mung. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen (2008) 
[8] NN, DIN 55189, Ermittlung von Kennwerten für Pressen der Blechverarbeitung bei 
statischer Belastung. Beuth-Verlag, Berlin (1988) 
[9] Pestel, E.: Technische Mechanik. Band 1. BI Wissenschaftsverlag (1988) ISBN: 3-
411-03153-0 
[10] Krimm, R.: Berechnung der lastabhängigen Maschinenauffederung zur Verkürzung 
der Anlaufzeit neuer Transferwerkzeugsätze. Dissertation, Leibniz Universität Han-
nover (2006) ISBN: 3-939026-07-7 
[11] Behrens, B.-A., Sabitovic, A.: Modelling of friction in deep drawing considering re-
versible sheet changes. In: Proceedings of the IDDRG Conference, Olofström, Swe-
den, pp. 125–132 (2008) 
[12] Behrens, B.-A., Matthias, T., Czora, M., Poelmeyer, J., Ahrens, M.: Improving the 
accuracy of numerical investigations of multistage sheet metal processes by coupling 
a process FE analysis with the machine simulation. In: Proceedings of 1st Interna-
tional Conference on Process Machine Interaction, Hannover, Germany, pp. 133–138 
(2008) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 419–437. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 19  
Optimization of Tool and Process Design for the 
Cold Forging of Net-Shape Parts by Simulation 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel 
Abstract. As a result of the research work in this project, a comprehensive ap-
proach is presented for the consideration of the interactions between process, tool 
and machine in the FE-based design of cold forging tools and processes: The ap-
proach comprises an efficient determination of the deflection characteristic of 
press and tooling system and its subsequent condensed modeling in combination 
with the FE simulation of a cold forging process. Then, based on a set of simula-
tions, a parametric process model is developed. It permits an optimization of the 
values of influencing parameters to achieve high workpiece accuracy considering 
the interactions. By acquiring and, afterwards, applying knowledge on the process 
behavior, the required number of simulations for the parametric process model and 
the optimization can be reduced considerably. The approach can be completed by 
using the parametric process model for estimating scatter and uncertainties of tar-
get values depending on those of the influencing parameters. 
19.1   Introduction 
Cold forging offers the potential to manufacture, in large quantities, parts with a 
high dimensional accuracy and surface quality as well as high strength due to 
work hardening. Thus, the industry increasingly demands high strength cold 
forged parts, which need no machining after the forming process. This kind of net-
shape production can help to save machining resources and material costs. For this 
reason, achieving Net-shape accuracy has been an important target in recent re-
search activities on cold forging [1]. 
However, the high flow stress of the workpiece materials results in high form-
ing loads. As a consequence, the whole system, which consists of press and tool-
ing system, is subjected to considerable displacements and elastic deflections, 
which can cause deviations in the workpiece dimensions. These interactions be-
tween process, press and tooling system make it difficult to achieve a high work-
piece accuracy solely based on process simulation [2]. Hence, achieving high 
workpiece accuracy without extensive adjustment at the production start requires 
the consideration of the elastic behavior of the whole system at an early stage, i. e. 
within the phase of laying out the process in the FE simulation. 

420 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
This can be done with a combined FE modeling of the cold forging process and 
the characteristic of press and tooling system. Based on such a comprehensive, in-
tegrated simulation model, it would be possible to determine an adjusted process 
and tool design so that the displacements and deflections of press and tooling sys-
tem are compensated. However, to permit a systematical determination of the ap-
propriate influencing parameters without try-out on the level of FE simulation, the 
simulation model should be transformed into a parametric model of the entire 
process behavior. This can be the base for a computer-aided optimization of the 
values of parameters with influence on the workpiece dimensions so that high 
workpiece accuracy can be achieved considering the interactions. 
In the following, an approach is presented for the consideration of the men-
tioned interactions in the tool and process design by FE simulation through a 
combined modeling of process, press and tooling system. To obtain a quick and, at 
the same time, exactly enough combined modeling, tailored methods for the de-
termination and modeling of the entire deflection characteristic were developed in 
a comprehensive approach. Built up on a set of simulations with the integrated 
model under variation of several influencing parameters, a parametric process 
model including an optimization algorithm was developed. To reduce the neces-
sary number of simulations for the generation of the parametric process model, 
process knowledge was acquired with regard to the specific behavior of common-
ly used cold forging processes. The approach was developed for cold forging 
processes in combination with stroke-controlled and force-controlled presses  
respectively. 
19.2   Characteristics of Press and Tooling System 
For the production of cold forging parts, stroke-controlled as well as force-
controlled presses are commonly used. Apart from the deflection of the tooling 
system under process load, the elastic behavior of the press frame itself can have 
an influence on the accuracy of the cold forging process. The modeling of these 
deflections and their influence on the workpiece dimensions has been subject of 
several recent research projects in bulk and sheet metal forming [2-5]. On a 
stroke-controlled press, these deflections lead directly to a reduced actual punch 
stroke and, in turn, to deviations in the workpiece dimensions. In contrast, the def-
lection of the frame of a hydraulic press in force-controlled mode can be compen-
sated by the hydraulic control. However, the deflections of the tooling system  
itself affect the workpiece dimensions in both cases. On force-controlled presses, 
mechanical end stops additionally influence the effective punch position and thus 
the workpiece dimensions. The press parameter tilting stiffness is neglected in the 
following investigations as the presses are loaded centrically and a pillar die set is 
used, which avoids tilting. 
The measurement of the deflection characteristic of a press can be carried out 
according to DIN 55189 [6]. This standardized measurement is carried out with a 
static load and the ram of the stroke-controlled press at the bottom dead center 
(BDC). Apart from this method, further approaches for measuring the press  

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
421
 
behavior were developed [7, 8]. Stroke-controlled presses usually show a non-
linear behavior with a clearance due to initial effects of the presses’ drive system 
and a nearly constant stiffness at higher load. However, the deflection not only  
affects the press itself but also the tooling system up to the punch and the pre-
stressed die. The deflection of these components leads to a change of the punch 
position influencing the workpiece dimensions. To represent this behavior in the 
FE process simulation, the deflection of all these mentioned press and tool com-
ponents has to be modeled. 
19.3   Methodical Approaches for the Determination and 
Modeling of Deflection Characteristics 
19.3.1   Tooling System with Stroke-Controlled Press 
To determine the deflection characteristic of the whole system consisting of tool-
ing system and stroke-controlled press and to integrate it into the FE process simu-
lation, the following methodical approach was developed. As a basic condition it 
is known that actually only the axial stiffness is relevant as the press is loaded cen-
trically and a pillar die set is used to avoid tilting. The two major elements sub-
jected to deflection are the stroke-controlled press and the tooling system. The 
press characteristic is determined once only in an experiment as it remains nearly 
constant over the time, apart from wear, etc. The characteristic of several available 
presses can be stored in a data base. In contrast, the tooling system mounted on the 
press can change frequently. To avoid experimental investigations on various tool-
ing systems and to consider the tooling system characteristic anyhow before its 
production in the phase of laying out the forming process, its deflection characte-
ristic is determined by simulation. For this purpose, the tooling system is split up 
into assemblies. These components are modeled with elastic bodies in the FE si-
mulation and then loaded according to the real forming process. In the case study 
in Section 19.4.1, the components of the tooling system are reduced to 2D axially-
symmetric models in the FE simulation program simufact.forming. Based on the 
simulation results, load-deflection curves, which usually show a nearly linear cha-
racteristic, are generated. Their gradient represents the constant stiffness of the re-
spective assembly. A single value as substitute quantity can then be calculated for 
the whole tooling system from the stiffnesses of the assemblies. The stiffness of 
the press and the whole tooling system can also be combined to an equivalent 
stiffness. This stiffness is incorporated into the FE process simulation as a spring 
element. The press clearance is considered as a constant shift of the punch. Thus, 
the combined modeling is implemented in one single simulation environment. The 
condensed modeling by spring elements only causes a negligible increase in com-
putation time. In Section 19.4.1, the approach is carried out for a full forward ex-
trusion process on a stroke-controlled press. 

422 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
19.3.2   Tooling System on Force-Controlled Press 
For the determination of the deflection characteristic of the tooling system with 
mechanical end stops on a force-controlled press and its modeling in the FE 
process simulation, a methodical approach, similar to the FE-based analysis of the 
tool assemblies on a stroke-controlled press, was developed. To be independent of 
experimental investigations the deflection characteristic is also determined by FE 
simulation. However, the setup is different: 
The tooling system investigated in the case study in Section 19.4.2 is illustrated 
in Figure 19.1. It is based on a pillar die-set. The BDC of the press is limited with 
two steel end stops. At the end of the forging process, the top plate of the die-set 
touches the end stops with a certain force depending on press force and forming 
load. Modeling the tooling system characteristic requires the consideration of two 
different stiffnesses for the end stops and the components in the flow of the punch 
force respectively. Hence, the tooling system is split up into two superior assem-
blies, which are investigated separately: the mechanical end stops loaded by the 
entire press force and the tool components loaded by the forming force. 
 
load cell
die
bottom tool plate
top tool plate
punch
end stop
end stop
 
Fig. 19.1 Tooling system with steel end stops on force-controlled press [9] 
 
Furthermore, the tool components affected by the forming load are split up into 
the top and the bottom tool plate. Again, modeling the mentioned components in 
the FE simulation and loading them according to the real forming process leads to 
a constant stiffness for each assembly. Both a reduced 2D axially-symmetric mod-
el and two 3D models were built in the case study in Section 19.4.2 using the FE 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
423
 
simulation program simufact.forming. The stiffness of the end stops can be direct-
ly incorporated into the FE process simulation as a spring element. For the tool 
components in the flow of the forming force, an equivalent value as substitute 
quantity is calculated based on the stiffnesses of the top and bottom assemblies. 
This substitute stiffness is incorporated into the FE process simulation as a spring 
element, too. In Section 19.4.2, the approach is carried out for a backward can ex-
trusion process on a force-controlled press. 
19.4   Case Studies 
19.4.1   Full Forward Extrusion on Stroke-Controlled Press 
Experimental Determination of Press Characteristic 
The investigations were carried out on a stroke-controlled press Komatsu-
Maypress MKN 63/6A. The press stroke is 60 mm, the cycle time is 0.75 s. The 
press has an open C-frame. The load-deflection curve of the press in axial direc-
tion was determined according to DIN 55189-1 [6]. Load and deflection were 
measured with a load cell and a travel sensor respectively. The maximum test load 
was 375 kN. Six load cycles were performed. The resulting curve is illustrated in 
Figure 19.2 a. It has a non-linear behavior with an initial clearance due to the 
presses’ drive system and a nearly constant stiffness at higher load. The Figure 
contains all six measurements showing a very low scatter. The press stiffness is 
Cpress = 265 kN/mm. An extrapolation of the linear behavior at high loads to the 
intersection with the ordinate results in a clearance of 0.4 mm [10]. 
 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
mm
2.0
0
50
100
150
200 250 300
kN
400
C
= 265 kN/mm
clearance = 0.4 mm
press
Vertical deflection
Force
top tool plate
load cell
bottom tool plate
Experimental
setup
FE simulation
models
adapter for
load cell
support ring
insulating plate
prestressed die
punch
a.
b.
 
Fig. 19.2 Deflection characteristic of Komatsu-Maypress MKN 63/6A (a); Tooling system 
– Experimental setup / FE simulation models of top and bottom assembly (b) [10] 
FE Modeling of Tooling System Characteristic 
The tooling system for the full forward extrusion process in consideration is illu-
strated in Figure 19.2 b. The left side of the figure shows the experimental setup. 

424 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
The tooling system is supported by two bars and a ring at the center. The support 
ring avoids deflection of the bottom tool plate. The pillar die-set contains a load 
cell to get the forming loads in the experimental investigations. The die for the full 
forward extrusion process, pre-stressed by two shrink rings, has a nominal initial 
diameter of 12 mm, which is reduced to 6 mm after the shoulder. The die shoulder 
has an angle of 45°. To determine the load-deflection curves in simulation, the 
system is divided into two assemblies, which include the parts mounted on the top 
and the bottom plate of the tooling system. Figure 19.2 b right shows the elements 
of the simulation models. The two FE models contain all parts of the tooling sys-
tem in the flow of the forming force. 
The simulation model of the top includes the tool plate, the load cell and the 
adapter for the load cell. The model at the bottom contains the tool plate, the sup-
port ring, the support for the ejector and an insulating plate (E = 2,550 N/mm2). 
The simulation models are 2D axially-symmetric. This simplification is feasible as 
the plates are solely compressed due to contact with axially-symmetric parts with-
out bending. The two assemblies are loaded through rigid bodies, which have the 
shape of the punch head (top) and the pre-stressed die (bottom). 
The stiffnesses of the punch and the pre-stressed die are not included in this 
calculation as they are considered as elastic bodies in the FE process simulation. 
The gradient of the displacement of the rigid contact bodies vs. the load represents 
the stiffness of the respective assembly. The resulting linear load-displacement 
curves are shown in Figure 19.3. The assembly of the top tool plate has  
a stiffness of Ctool_top = 1,851 kN/mm, the bottom plate a stiffness of 
Ctool_bottom = 5,336 kN/mm. As the two stiffnesses behave like two serially ar-
ranged spring elements, their reciprocals add up. This leads to a stiffness of 
Ctool = 1,374 kN/mm for the whole tooling system. 
 
 
0
100
200
300
400
kN
600
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
mm
0.30
Deflection
Force
C
= 5336 kN/mm
tool_bottom
C
= 1851 kN/mm
tool_top
C
= 1374 kN/mm
tool
 
Fig. 19.3 Determination of stiffness of tooling system on stroke-controlled press 
by load-displacement curves [10] 
The stiffnesses of the tooling system and the press are serially arranged as well. 
Hence, the reciprocals of Ctool = 1,374 kN/mm and Cpress = 265 kN/mm add up to 
the reciprocal of the whole system. This leads to a stiffness for the whole system 
of Cpress_tool = 222 kN/mm [10]. 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
425
 
Integrated FE Simulation Model 
The deflection characteristic was incorporated into the FE simulation of the full 
forward extrusion process (Fig. 19.4 a). The full forward extrusion process was 
modeled 2D axially-symmetric in the FE simulation program simufact.forming. It 
is a combined simulation of workpiece, die and the pre-stressing system of the die. 
Thus, the model includes the influence of the radial deflection of the die on the 
workpiece dimensions. The punch is also an elastic body. Its stroke (60 mm) is 
applied by a rigid body at the top of the elastic punch. 
 
 
  
Fig. 19.4 Full forward extrusion on stroke-controlled press – Integrated FE simulation 
model (a); photo of workpiece with specified target values (b) [10] 
Cpress_tool was incorporated into the FE process simulation as a spring element. It 
is located at the bottom of the pre-stressed die reducing the actual punch position 
when loaded. The press clearance is considered with a constant shift of 0.4 mm. 
The punch is moved away from the die by this value [10]. 
Experimental Validation 
To validate the integrated FE model, full forward extrusion experiments on the 
Komatsu press were compared with simulation results regarding the workpiece 
length (Fig. 19.4 b). The length directly depends on the actual punch position. In 
addition, simulations were performed with a rigid FE process simulation model 
without the characteristic of press and tooling system. To evaluate the influence of 
different forming loads and, as a consequence, different deflections on the work-
piece lengths, the experiments were carried out with the two steels C35 (1.0501) 
and 20MnB4 (1.5525), which noticeably differ in their flow stresses. C35 has an 
about 20 % higher flow stress than 20MnB4. In the FE simulations, the flow stress 
data of the two workpiece materials was used, too. The friction factor for the si-
mulation was identified numerically with the help of the measured forming loads 
in BDC. The cylindric specimens have a length of 12 mm and a diameter of 
11.6 mm. In the experiments, 16 specimens of 20MnB4 and 20 of C35 were 
formed at room temperature. They were coated with zinc phosphate and molybde-
num disulfide. 

426 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
The workpiece lengths for the experiments and simulations are shown in  
Figure 19.5. The average lengths of the experiments are 22.81 mm (+0.11 mm,  
-0.15 mm) for 20MnB4 and 21.73 mm (+0.18 mm, -0.21 mm) for C35. The differ-
ence in length between 20MnB4 and C35 is 1.08 mm. The workpiece lengths re-
sulting from the integrated FE simulation model are 22.83 mm for 20MnB4 and 
21.75 mm for C35. Hence, the difference in length between the two workpiece 
materials is also 1.08 mm. The deviation compared to the experiments is only 0.02 
mm for both materials. Only a small difference in average forming loads in the 
BDC of 3 kN (20MnB4) and 6 kN (C35) can be observed compared to the expe-
riments. The process simulations with the rigid model lead to similar forming 
loads. However, the resulting workpiece lengths of 25.90 mm (20MnB4) and 
25.57 mm (C35) differ considerably from the experiments. The respective devia-
tions in length are 3.09 mm (20MnB4) and 3.84 mm (C35). The pure process si-
mulation (0.33 mm) cannot sufficiently represent the difference in length between 
the workpiece materials compared to the real process (1.08 mm). The integrated 
FE simulation model is able to accurately represent the interactions between forg-
ing process, tool and machine with influence on the workpiece dimensions. The 
modeling of the whole characteristic with a shift and a substitute stiffness leads to 
a reduction of the deviation between experiment and simulation from up to 3.84 
mm (17.7 %) to 0.02 mm (0.1 %) compared to the rigid simulation [10]. 
 
 
22.81
21.73
22.83
21.75
25.90
0
21
22
23
24
25
mm
27
20MnB4
C35
Experiment
Integrated FE
simulation model
FE process simulation
Workpiece length
˜˜ 149 kN 146 kN 152 kN
205 kN 199 kN
25.57
208 kN
 
Fig. 19.5 Workpiece lengths depending on workpiece materials and forming force in BDC; 
comparison of experiments to Integrated FE model and pure process simulation [11] 
19.4.2   Backward Can Extrusion on Force-Controlled Press 
The tool and punch layout as well as the resulting workpiece geometry of the 
backward can extrusion example process are shown in Figure 19.6 a. The punch 
has an undercut so that the workpiece does not touch the punch behind the form-
ing zone. The punch diameter in the forming zone is 8.5 mm. The die consists of 
the full forward extrusion die with a backing device. 
 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
427
 
  
Fig. 19.6 Backward can extrusion process (a); Integrated FE simulation model of backward 
can extrusion process on force-controlled press (b) [9] 
FE Modeling of Tooling System Characteristic 
For the determination of the load-deflection curves in simulation, the investigated 
tooling system is divided into three assemblies, which include the parts mounted 
on the top and the bottom plate of the tooling system, respectively, as well as the 
end stops. The FE simulations were performed in simufact.forming. The two FE 
models of top and bottom tool plate contain the parts of the tooling system in the 
flow of the forming force. The simulation model at the top (Fig. 19.7 a) includes 
tool plate, load cell, load cell adapter and spacer plates. To reduce the simulation 
effort, a 2D axially-symmetric FE model was used. The model at the bottom con-
tains tool plate, spacer plate and two bars, which the tool plate is mounted on 
(Fig. 19.7 b). The bolted joints between tool plate and bars are considered with 
boundary conditions in simulation. As the bars cause a bending of the bottom tool 
plaste when loaded, a 3D FE model was created for this assembly. The 3D model 
of the end stops consists of top and bottom tool plate, end stops and the bars as 
well (Fig. 19.7 c). The three assemblies are loaded through rigid bodies with the 
shape of the punch head (top), the pre-stressed die (bottom) and the press ram re-
spectively (end stops) in the effective direction of the press. 
The stiffness of punch and die is not included in the simulations as they are 
considered as elastic bodies in the FE process simulation. The gradients of the 
load versus the displacements of the rigid contact bodies in press direction lead to 
the following stiffnesses for the three assemblies. The stiffness of the end stops re-
sulting from the gradient of the linear curve is Cstop = 2,970 kN/mm. Figure 19.8 
shows the stiffness of the assemblies of top and bottom tool plate. The top  
tool plate has a stiffness of Ctool_top = 2,189 kN/mm, the bottom plate a stiffness  
of Ctool_bottom = 4,218 kN/mm (curve bent at one increment due to contact determi-
nation issues). The two latter stiffnesses behave like serially-arranged spring  
 
 

428 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
  
  
Fig. 19.7 FE models of top tool plate (a), bottom tool plate (b) and end stops (c) [9] 
 
elements. Therefore, their reciprocals add up. The resulting stiffness is 
Ctool = 1,441 kN/mm for top and bottom tool plate. Ctool and Cstop, describing the 
deflection characteristic of the whole tooling system, can be incorporated into the 
FE simulation of the backward can extrusion process [9]. 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
kN
1400
0
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.35
mm
Force
Deflection
C
= 4218 kN/mm
tool_bottom
C
= 2189 kN/mm
tool_top
C
= 1441 kN/mm
tool
 
Fig. 19.8 Determination of stiffness of tooling system on force-controlled press by 
load-displacement curves [9] 
Integrated FE Simulation Model 
The backward can extrusion process was modeled 2D axially-symmetric in the FE 
simulation program simufact.forming according to the full forward extrusion 
process. The punch is modeled as an elastic body. Its stroke is applied by a rigid 
body at the top of the punch. Ctool was incorporated into the FE process simulation 
as a spring element, located at the bottom of the die. The end stop (Cstop) is mod-
eled with a spring element and a rigid contact body. The rigid punch hits the end 
stops at the end of the forming process. After reaching a certain force limit when 
compressing the end stops, the simulation is stopped and the workpiece is ejected. 
The integrated FE simulation model is shown in Figure 19.6 b [9]. 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
429
 
Experimental Validation 
The results from the integrated FE simulation model were compared to backward 
can extrusion experiments. To be able to check the correctness of both stiffnesses 
Cstop and Ctool of the FE simulation model, the influencing parameters press force 
(force on end stops) and forming force were varied in the experiment as well as in 
the simulation. In the experiment, the press force is varied by the press control. 
The forming force is varied by using two different workpiece materials 100Cr6 
(1.3505) and 16MnCr5 (1.7131). Both materials noticeably differ in their flow 
stresses, which leads to different punch forces. In the simulation, the forming 
force is varied using flow stress data of the two workpiece materials. The punch 
force in experiments is measured with a piezo-electric load cell Kistler 9091A. 
The experimental investigations on the backward can extrusion process were 
carried out on the hydraulic press Lasco TSP 100. Five workpieces were formed at 
each parameter setting. The press was used in force-controlled mode at a punch 
velocity of 50 mm/s. The press forces were set to 391, 612 and 867 kN for 
16MnCr5 (potentiometer settings of 50, 75 and 100 %). The experiments with 
100Cr6 were carried out at a press force of 612 kN. In the simulation, the press 
forces were set as termination condition, too. The workpieces in the experiments 
were coated with a phosphate conversion layer as lubricant carrier, which soap 
was applied on for lubrication. The friction factor in the FE simulation was identi-
fied numerically. The experiments were carried out with tool and workpieces at 
room temperature. The four parameter settings were also assigned to the integrated 
FE simulation model. To show the improvement in simulation accuracy, addition-
al FE simulations with rigid tool (Ctool → ∞) and end stops (Cstop → ∞) / elastic 
punch and rigid tool and end stops / rigid punch, respectively, were run. The pre-
stressed die remained elastic in all simulations. The accuracy of the simulation 
models is evaluated using the workpiece dimension thickness at bottom 
(Fig. 19.9). It is a characteristic for the actual punch position including the  
deflections. 
Figure 19.9 shows the workpiece dimensions resulting from the experiments 
and the FE simulations. The integrated FE simulation model, considering the 
whole deflection characteristic, achieves the highest accuracy compared to the ex-
periments for almost all parameter settings. However, at a press force of 867 kN 
(16MnCr5), the simulation model with rigid tool and elastic punch shows a similar 
deviation from the experiments (0.03 mm) compared to the entirely elastic model 
(0.04 mm). The reason for this is the compensation of the tool deflection in the 
flow of punch force by the increasing compression of the end stops at high press 
forces. At low forces on the end stops due to low press forces, mainly the elastici-
ty of the tool in the flow of the forming force is crucial for the total deflection. 
Hence, the deviation of the rigid models compared to the experiments is consider-
able at a low press force of 391 kN (0.20 and 0.31 mm). The entirely elastic model 
shows a significantly lower deviation in this case (0.03 mm). The simulation mod-
els with rigid tool or additionally rigid punch lead to the same workpiece dimen-
sions at different press forces because the increasing compression of the end stops 
at higher press forces is not represented. 
 

430 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
0
3.6
3.8
4.0
mm
4.2
Thickness at bottom
Experiment
Tool elastic, punch elastic
Tool rigid, punch elastic
16MnCr5
16MnCr5
16MnCr5
100Cr6
Tool rigid, punch rigid
391 kN
612 kN
867 kN
612 kN
Simulation
 
Fig. 19.9 Thickness at bottom of backward can extruded part – comparison between expe-
riment and simulation models depending on workpiece material and press force [9] 
The high flow stress of 100Cr6 leads to a higher forming force, a higher punch 
deflection and thus to a higher remaining thickness at bottom and a smaller depth 
of can. The integrated FE simulation model shows the highest accuracy for this pa-
rameter setting, too (0.05 mm of deviation). However, even the simulation with ri-
gid tool and punch results in a bigger thickness at the bottom for 100Cr6 compared 
to 16MnCr5 due to the radial elastic deformation of the pre-stressed die. An elastic 
modeling of the punch already helps to increase the simulation accuracy compared 
to a rigid punch as its long and thin shape contains a high compliance [9]. 
19.5   Process Modeling and Optimization 
The basic approach for the calculation and analysis of the parametric process 
model is presented using the case study full forward extrusion on the stroke-
controlled press. Based on the presented integrated FE simulation model, a set of 
simulations varying influencing parameters, such as the die dimensions, is run. 
Data points are generated as the base for an analysis of the parameter interactions 
and the calculation of a parametric model of the entire process behavior. The 
process behavior is modeled for several target values depending on different in-
fluencing parameters. It can be used to determine an adjusted combination of val-
ues of influencing parameters in a subsequent optimization step to achieve the 
specified target values. 
Table 19.1 Variation levels of influencing parameters related to center point; linear primary 
effects on target values, calculated by parameter variation from low to high level 
Influencing 
parameters 
Variation levels 
related to 
center point 
Effect on 
DT1 
in mm 
Effect on 
DT2 
in mm 
Effect on 
LT 
in mm 
DI1 
± 0.30 mm 
0.60 
0.00 
-2.55 
DI2 
± 0.30 mm 
0.00 
0.60 
-2.27 
II 
± 50 % 
-0.12 
-0.08 
0.96 
SI 
± 0.50 mm 
0.00 
0.00 
2.97 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
431
 
The following three target values were defined to specify the dimensions of the 
full forward extruded part (Fig. 19.4 b): workpiece length LT = 22 mm, starting di-
ameter DT1 = 12 mm and final diameter DT2 = 6 mm. Four influencing parameters 
with considerable influence on these target values were identified. These are 
available for the following optimization of the target values: The die diameters 
above (DI1) and below (DI2) the die shoulder, the punch position SI and the relative 
interference fit II of the pre-stress rings of the die. The dimensions of the billet are 
constant. To be able to consider quadratic process behavior each of the influencing 
parameters was varied on three levels based on a center point. To detect all poten-
tial interactions a full factorial experimental design was applied. This leads  
to an amount of 34 = 81 different parameter combinations and, thus, 81 simula-
tions with the integrated FE model. The spring stiffness in the model is 
Cpress_tool = 222 kN/mm. The press clearance of 0.4 mm is included as a constant 
shift of the punch. The friction factor is m = 0.08. Based on a sensitivity analysis, 
the variation range for the influencing parameters was determined as shown in  
Table 19.1. 
The data points for the three target values permit the calculation of the linear 
primary effects and interactions. Only the low and high variation levels of the pa-
rameters are required for these calculations. The primary effects (Table 19.1) 
show a dependency of the final workpiece length LT on all influencing parameters. 
A change of the die diameters affects LT due to the constancy of volume. II also 
contributes to all target values by influencing the effective die diameters. The pri-
mary effects of the die diameters (DI1,2) on the workpiece diameters (DT1,2) nearly 
agree with the variation range of the influencing parameters from the low to the 
high level (0.6 mm). Varying one die diameter has no visible influence on the oth-
er one. SI shows no noticeable influence on the workpiece diameters in the inves-
tigated variation range. 
 
D *D
D *I D *S D *I D *S
I*S
D
D
L
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
mm
0.5
Interaction
T1
T2
T
I1
I2
I
I1
I
I
I
I
I
I1
I2
I2
0.33
0.25
0.20
0.09
0.42
0.01
 
Fig. 19.10 Absolute values of the interactions between two influencing parameters related 
to the target values; calculation based on parameter variation on low and high level [10] 
The dependency of an influencing parameter effect on a target value on the lev-
el of one or several other influencing parameters is called interaction. Interactions 
between two influencing parameters are shown in Figure 19.10 for the three target 
values. The interacting parameters are marked with an “*”. No distinct  

432 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
interactions can be observed concerning the workpiece diameters DT1,2. In con-
trast, considerable interactions can be found regarding the workpiece length. In 
addition to the interactions, the workpiece length LT is influenced quadratically by 
the die diameters via the cross-sectional areas. Hence, a quadratic relation was 
chosen for the approximation of the full factorial design. Thus, to consider the in-
teractions and the quadratic process behavior without specific process knowledge, 
a comprehensive full factorial design with three variation levels is necessary: 
Based on the data points resulting from 81 simulation runs, the calculation of the 
process model as well as the parameter optimization are realized with the Leven-
berg-Marquardt algorithm, a method, which combines the Gauss-Newton algo-
rithm and the method of gradient descent [12]. The function of the process model 
is adjusted to data points according to a least squares fitting problem. For the op-
timization, the fitted process model is used. The algorithm is implemented in 
MATLAB 7.3 [10]. 
19.5.1   Full Factorial Experimental Design 
The quadratic process model reaches high accuracy. The relative maximum errors 
are 0.06 % for DT1, 0.02 % for DT2 and 0.93 % for LT compared to the 81 data 
points calculated with the integrated FE simulation model. Based on this quadratic 
process model, the influencing parameters were optimized. A deviation of 10-10 
mm between the specified workpiece dimensions and the target values resulting 
from the optimized process model parameters was set as a stop criterion. As both 
the die diameters DI1,2 and the relative interference fit II influence the resulting 
workpiece diameter, several parameter combinations can lead to the same work-
piece diameters. To get a unique solution II was kept constant. The accuracy of the 
optimized influencing parameters was validated in a FE simulation with the opti-
mized combinations. A comparison of its results with the specified workpiece di-
mensions shows a good correlation and deviations in the range of 0.5 % for LT and 
smaller than 0.05 % for the workpiece diameters DT1,2 [10]. 
19.5.2   Process Modeling with Reduced Number of Simulations 
Despite its high accuracy, the parametric process model based on a full factorial 
design requires many simulation runs. A reduced number of variant simulations 
are desirable. The discussion of effects and interactions already showed the poten-
tial for a process modeling with less data points. Thus, the process modeling and 
optimization with a reduced number of simulations makes use of the following 
process knowledge, found in the investigations on the full forward extrusion 
process: 
 
• 
With respect to the workpiece diameters, the die diameters and the in-
terference fit show an almost linear behavior without any interactions 
• 
The workpiece diameters are almost independent of the punch position 
in the limited variation range of the punch stroke 
 
Based on these conclusions, the following two approaches were developed. 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
433
 
Sequential Approach 
The first approach is a sequential optimization of workpiece diameters and work-
piece length respectively. In a first step, a linear process model for the workpiece 
diameters is created depending on the die diameters DI1,2 and the interference fit II. 
The influencing parameters are varied in a sensitivity analysis (only one parameter 
varied at the same time) based on a center point and two variation levels. In an op-
timization, the parameter settings to achieve the specified workpiece diameters are 
calculated. DI1,2 and II are adjusted in the integrated FE simulation model accord-
ing to the optimization results. Then, based on this model, the punch position is 
varied on a low and a high level. Finally, the value for the punch position is calcu-
lated to reach the specified target value for LT. 
Compared to the full factorial investigation with 34 = 81 variant simulations, 
the computational effort could be reduced to 7 + 3 = 10 simulations. Seven simu-
lations are needed for the modeling of the diameters, the remaining three simula-
tions refer to the variation of the punch position. Leaving out the center point of 
the variation levels would permit a further reduction by 2 simulations. To validate 
the approach it was carried out for the full forward extrusion process. In the opti-
mization step, II was again kept constant. The workpiece dimensions resulting 
from the subsequent FE simulation with optimized parameter settings show a high 
accuracy. The deviations range from 0.01 % for the workpiece diameters DT1,2 to 
0.06 % for the length LT. Despite its high accuracy, this sequential procedure with 
a separate consideration of workpiece diameters and length does not lead to a 
comprehensive model of the process behavior. This, for example, makes it diffi-
cult to investigate the influence of the scatter of influencing parameters on the tar-
get values. To permit a comprehensive modeling with a reduced number of  
simulation runs the following approach was developed [10]. 
Standardized Length 
The approach uses the specific process characteristics found above. In addition, 
process knowledge concerning the geometric relations of the workpiece dimen-
sions is applied. The objective of this analytic approach is the elimination of the 
influence of the die diameters (DI1,2) and the interference fit II on the workpiece 
length LT, related to a reference point. This corresponds to the calculation of a 
standardized workpiece length, which only depends on the punch position SI. Af-
ter this, according to the independency of the workpiece diameters of the punch 
position, the required punch position to achieve the specified workpiece length can 
be determined by linear interpolation. In Figure 19.5.2, the resulting lengths of the 
81 simulation runs are plotted. The systematic permutation of the influencing pa-
rameters in this full factorial experimental design leads to a periodic behavior of 
the workpiece lengths. In the full factorial investigation, the punch position is va-
ried every 27 simulations. Hence, the 81 single standardized lengths should form a 
step function with the steps at the changes in the punch position. 
According to the observed linear behavior without interactions concerning the 
workpiece diameters, the required die diameters DI1,2 and interference fit II to 
achieve the specified workpiece diameters can be determined by means of their  

434 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
linear combination. In the investigated quasi-stationary cold forging process, the 
effect of the die diameters and the interference fit on the length is almost entirely 
caused by the displacement of a certain workpiece volume depending on the 
change in the actual die diameters. Via the cross-sectional areas, this leads to a qu-
adratic influence on the workpiece length. In a previous realization of this ap-
proach, the quadratic behavior was considered by an iterative smoothing [11]. In 
this actual implementation, the quadratic influence of cross-sectional areas is con-
sidered from the beginning. 
Thus, the basic approach is to identify the workpiece volume affected, related 
to a reference point and depending on the value of the respective influencing pa-
rameter (DI1,2, II). Subsequently, depending on the actual values for die diameters 
and interference fit, the actually affected workpiece volumes and, thereafter, the 
change in workpiece length resulting from the parameter values can be deter-
mined. This change in length is subtracted from the specified target value of the 
workpiece length. The remaining difference between the length of the reference 
point and this standardized length is caused by the punch position. This permits a 
determination of the required punch position to achieve the specified workpiece 
length LT. 
 
mm
Consecutive numbering of FE simulations
Length
Ls_high
Ls
Punch pos. = 0 mm
-0.5 mm
Calculation of standardized
length Ls with 7 data points
FE simulation results
0.5 mm
0
18
20
22
26
1
9
18
27
36
45
54
63
72
81
Ls_low
 
Fig. 19.11 Workpiece lengths resulting from FE simulations based on full factorial experi-
mental design; standardized length Ls calculated based on 7 data points 
Seven data points marked with grey dots in Figure 19.11 are required as the ba-
sis for the analytic approach: Based on a reference point at the low punch level 
(No. 9), the interference fit II and the two die diameters DI1,2 are varied separately 
between the minimum and the maximum variation level. The influenced work-
piece volume is calculated using the change in workpiece length and the actual 
workpiece diameter below the die shoulder. The die diameters are then also varied 
on the high punch level (reference point No. 63) because the workpiece volume 
affected by the diameters depends on the proportionate length above and below 
the die shoulder and, with that, on the punch position. 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
435
 
In the present case study, the 81 workpiece lengths resulting from the simula-
tion runs with of the full factorial design are the specified target values for LT. De-
pending on the respective values of die diameters and interference fit, a back  
calculation from the influenced workpiece volume to the change in workpiece 
length is made for each of the 81 lengths. The change is subtracted from the target 
length for the high and low punch level. This leads to Ls_high and Ls_low respec-
tively (Fig. 19.11). To consider the dependency of the influenced workpiece vo-
lume on the punch position the two curves are weighted depending on the punch 
position. The resulting standardized length Ls in Figure 19.11 clearly shows the 
required step characteristic. The die diameters and the interference fit to reach the 
specified workpiece diameters are determined by adding up the effects, since no 
relevant interactions were observed concerning the diameters. 
To assess the accuracy of the presented approach it is compared to the simula-
tion results of the full factorial experimental design. The workpiece lengths 
represent the target values. The application of the standardized length leads to the 
corresponding approximated values for the punch position. Ideally, the resulting 
punch position should match the values set in the FE model. However, there are 
some deviations. The workpiece lengths corresponding to the respective punch 
position were calculated in a reverse calculation for comparison with the 81 simu-
lation results. In addition, for a comprehensive evaluation, the full factorial  
approximation and a linear process model neglecting the interactions are also 
compared. The linear model is based on a single variation of each influencing pa-
rameter on a low and a high level from a center point. It requires eight simulation 
runs compared to seven needed for the standardized length. The function values of 
the process models are compared to the workpiece lengths resulting from the si-
mulation. Accuracy is evaluated using the absolute value of the maximum error 
and the sum of squared errors. 
 
Absolute value
of max. error
Sum of squared errors
2
Linear model (8 simulations)
Quadratic approximation
(81 simulations)
Standardized length
(7 simulations)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
mm
0.6
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
3.0
0.03
0.26
0.06
0.50
0.19
mm
2.96
 
Fig. 19.12 Errors of the three process models compared to the FE simulation results based 
on the full factorial experimental design for target value workpiece length 
Figure 19.12 shows the results of this comparison. As expected, the full factori-
al approach (81 points) has the lowest deviations from the original data points. 
The maximum error is 0.06 mm, the sum of squared errors is 0.03 mm2. The linear 
process model based on the addition of effects has considerably higher error  

436 
T. Kroiß and U. Engel
 
values of 0.50 mm and 2.96 mm2. Obviously, neglecting the interactions is not va-
lid. The standardized length represents the real behavior in a much better way. 
Here, the maximum error is 0.19 mm, the sum of squared errors is 0.26 mm2. This 
means a reduction by 62 % and 91 %, respectively, compared to the linear process 
model, which even requires one more simulation run. Thus, the presented ap-
proach includes a comprehensive modeling of the entire process behavior with an 
extremely reduced number of required simulation runs. It has the potential to be 
applied to further quasi-stationary cold forging processes. 
19.6   Conclusions and Outlook 
The presented approach provides a comprehensive procedure for an optimized FE-
based tool and process design considering the interactions between process, tool 
and machine in cold forging. The approach includes the entire sequence from the 
determination of the deflection characteristic to the calculation of a parametric 
process model including an optimization of the values of influencing parameters 
to achieve high workpiece accuracy. Approaches for the determination of the def-
lection characteristic consisting of tooling system and stroke-controlled press as 
well as a tooling system on a force-controlled press were developed. The tooling 
system characteristic was determined by FE simulations of tool assemblies to 
avoid experimental investigations. The deflection characteristics were incorpo-
rated into the FE simulations of cold forging processes as spring elements and a 
constant shift of the punch to consider non-linear press effects. The experimental 
validation by two case studies, a full forward extrusion on a stroke-controlled and 
a backward can extrusion process on a force-controlled press, shows a significant 
increase in simulation accuracy. Concerning the full forward extrusion process, 
the deviations in length are reduced from up to 17.7 % with the rigid simulation to 
0.1 %. Thus, the integrated FE simulation model is able to represent the entire 
process behavior including the interactions between process, press and the tooling 
system. With the help of a set of simulations varying the influencing parameters, 
such as the die dimensions, data points were generated as the basis for a parame-
tric model of the process behavior and a subsequent optimization. A quadratic  
approximation based on a full factorial investigation then lead to maximum devia-
tions below 1 %. To reduce the required number of simulations for the process 
model compared to a full factorial experimental design, two approaches were de-
veloped using process knowledge from an analysis of process behavior including 
effects and interactions. A sequential procedure helps to reduce the number of va-
riant simulations from 81 to 10 for the example process full forward extrusion 
without affecting the accuracy. In a second approach, an analytic back calculation 
was developed to determine the punch position required for the specified work-
piece length depending on the die dimensions. With this standardized length, the 
number of simulations could be reduced from 81 to 7 for the example process full 
forward extrusion. Compared to a simple linear process model the sum of squared 
errors was reduced by 91 %. This comprehensive description of the process beha-
vior, like the parametric process model based on the full factorial design, permits a 
consideration of the scatter of influencing parameters to predict the achievable 

19   Optimization of Tool and Process Design  
437
 
workpiece tolerances as well as the required tolerances in the whole system. By 
means of Monte-Carlo simulations, for example, the frequency density of target 
values can be estimated depending on the scatter of influencing parameters. 
Moreover, in future, a closed-die lateral cold extrusion process will be investi-
gated. Due to a severely growing forming force with increasing die filling, differ-
ent deflection characteristics and interactions are expected. The developed  
comprehensive procedure is the basis for these supplemental investigations. 
References 
[1] Balendra, R.: Net-Shape-Forming: State of the Art. J. Mater. Process Technol. 115, 
172–179 (2001), doi:10.1016/S0924-0136(01)00812-3 
[2] Kroiss, T., Völkl, R., Engel, U., Geiger, M.: Modeling of Process-Tool-Machine Inte-
ractions in Cold Forging. In: Proc. 1st Int. Conf. on PMI, Hannover, Germany, pp. 
125–132 (2008) 
[3] Behrens, B.A., Matthias, T., Czora, M., et al.: Improving the accuracy of numerical 
investigations of multi-stage sheet metal processes by coupling a process FE analysis 
with the machine simulation. In: Proc. 1st Int. Conf. on PMI, Hannover, Germany, 
pp. 133–139 (2008) 
[4] Brecher, C., Schapp, L., Paepenmüller, F.: Gekoppelte Simulation von Presse und 
Massivumformprozess. Berücksichtigung (nicht-)linearen Maschinenverhaltens in der 
Umformsimulation. wt Werkstattstechnik Online 96, 526–529 (2006) 
[5] Großmann, K., Wiemer, H., Hardtmann, A., Penter, L.: Faster to sound parts by ad-
vanced forming process simulation – advanced forming process model including the 
elastic effects of the forming press and tool. Steel Res. Int. 78, 825–830 (2007) 
[6] DIN 55189, Machine tools – determination of the ratings of presses for sheet metal 
working under static load. Beuth, Berlin (1988) 
[7] Chodnikiewicz, K., Balendra, R., Wanheim, T.: A new concept for the measurement 
of press stiffness. J. Mater. Process Technol. 44, 293–299 (1994), doi:10.1016/0924-
0136(94)90442-1 
[8] Arentoft, M., Wanheim, T.: A new Approach to determine Press Stiffness. CIRP 
Ann. 54(1), 265–268 (2005), doi:10.1016/S0007-8506(07)60099-7 
[9] Kroiß, T., Engel, U., Merklein, M.: Simulation-Based Determination of Deflection 
Characteristic of Tooling System and its Modeling in FE Simulation of Cold Forging 
Process. Steel Res. Int (special ed. Met. Form 2010) 81, 318–321 (2010) 
[10] Kroiß, T., Engel, U., Merklein, M.: Process Modeling In Cold Forging Considering 
The Process-Tool-Machine Interactions. In: Proc. 10th Int. Conf. Numer. Methods 
Ind. Form Process, AIP Conf. Proc., vol. 1252, pp. 312–319 (2010) 
[11] Kroiß, T., Engel, U., Merklein, M.: Modeling of the Behavior of a Cold Forging 
Process Considering the Deflection of Tooling System and Press. In: Proc. 2nd Int. 
Conf. on PMI (2010) ISBN: 978-0-9866331-0-2 
[12] Spellucci, P.: Numerische Verfahren der nichtlinearen Optimierung. Birkhäuser, Ba-
sel (1993) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 439–458. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 20  
Interaction Effects between Strip and Work 
Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt 
Abstract. During the flat rolling process (cold or hot), the strip flatness and  
thickness profile are highly influenced by the interaction effects between strip and 
work rolls. To understand and analyze these effects a new modeling concept was 
developed. Within this concept, the tool simulations are separated from the 
process simulation. With the help of an automatic coupling module, the influences 
of the tool effects are realized within the process simulation. With this modeling 
concept, three types of interaction phenomena are studied and validated using ex-
periments: elastic roll effects during the cold rolling process, work roll thermal ef-
fects during the hot rolling process and tribological effects (abrasive wear) on the 
process simulation. It was also shown that, compared to the single FE model,  
this modeling concept is relatively faster and suitable for large 3D models without 
losing the quality of the predicted results. 
20.1   Introduction 
During the flat rolling process, the dimensional tolerances and the mechanical-
metallurgical properties of the rolled products become more stringent. Therefore, 
computational models are being used to investigate the physical aspects, such as 
thermo-mechanical events of the strip, mechanical deformation and thermal evolu-
tion of the work rolls, and tribological effects, such as wear. Conventional numer-
ical modeling of such processes assuming plane strain conditions (2D) may not be 
sufficient since the contact pressure distribution along the strip width may have a 
non-uniform profile due to the elastic deformation of the work rolls. Depending on 
the roll elastic deformation, strip flatness profile changes, i. e. crowns, will origi-
nate (see Fig. 20.1). The modeling of such processes using a conventional single 
FE model and considering all the above-mentioned effects, will not only compli-
cate the computation (deformable – deformable contact situation has to be  
handled) but also affect the computation time. This situation is even more compli-
cated when contact between elastic tools (in the case of backup rolls) has to be 
considered. 
Significant effort was devoted to the study of mechanical and thermo-
mechanical effects in the strip and work rolls using the numerical methods.  
Particularly, A. Kainz [1] simulated a skin pass cold rolling process (in 2D) consi-
dering elastic effects of the work rolls using the commercial FE program 

440 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
ABAQUS/EXPLICIT. He stated that, for the computation of 22 ms (150 mm strip 
length) of real process time, simulation required several days. On the other hand, 
T.H.Kim, S.M.LEE [2] presented an integrated FE process model, where the strip 
profile was analyzed using 3D implicit simulations. However, the mechanical con-
tact computations (at strip-work roll and work roll-backup roll interface) are han-
dled using analytical models and coupled with individual FE simulation models. 
Several other researchers [3, 4, and 5] have presented the modeling of cold rolling 
processes considering elastic work rolls using single FE models in 2D configura-
tions. A fully-coupled 3D FE simulation of the cold rolling process (considering 
the roll flattening and bending effects) is yet to be realized. 
 
Fig. 20. 1 Strip profile quality problems during cold rolling process 
For the modeling of a hot rolling process, Tseng [6] simulated steady state heat 
transfer in the work roll using a two-dimensional Finite Difference Method. Using 
an empirical approach, he included the heat generation term due to plastic defor-
mation and friction between roll and strip. On the other hand, Hsu and Evans [7] 
conducted a two-dimensional FE analysis of the rolling process considering a 
steady state heat transfer condition. C.G.SUN and S.M.HWANG [8,9] presented 
integrated models considering the thermo-mechanical effects both in roll and strip 
for 2D and 3D. They presented a coupled model for the hot rolling simulation, 
where they considered the steady state heat transfer using 2D models for the rolls. 
They also considered the elastic deformation of the work rolls. LEE and Hwang 
[10] presented a similar model for the computation of the thermal effects for the 
work rolls. These models have been validated with the experimental results and 
are good for the estimation of the thermal behavior of the rolls during a hot rolling 
process. The only untouched area in those models is the analysis of bi-directional 
interaction effects between strip and rolls.  
At the same time, during cold and hot rolling processes, the tribological events, 
particularly abrasive wear of the work rolls, directly affect the rolled strip surface 
quality and may hinder the flatness profile [11, 12]. Many investigations have 
been carried out to understand the wear mechanism of the rolls during rolling 
processes [13,14,15,16]. All of these studies are related to the modeling of wear 
using analytical methods or empirical models. As far as we know, offline calcula-
tions of precise local work roll wear during hot or cold rolling have not yet been 
noticed.  

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
441
 
The objective of this work is to develop a validated simulation tool for the 
analysis of the interaction effects between the work rolls and the strip during a flat 
rolling process. For that, a novel FE modeling concept was developed considering 
three different aspects, which influence the strip quality, i. e. elastic effects of the 
work rolls during a cold rolling process, thermo-mechanical effects of the work 
rolls during a hot rolling process and work roll tribological effects (mainly abra-
sive wear) during cold and hot rolling processes. In the following sections, each of 
these aspects is discussed in detail. In the next section, a detailed description of the 
de-coupled modeling concept (applicable for the modeling of all three aspects 
mentioned above) is explained. The details of abrasive wear models and their im-
plementation are also discussed within the next section. In the section “modeling 
and analysis of a cold rolling process with elastic rolls”, the cold rolling experi-
mental setup and the optical deformation measuring method is explained. Later, 
the FE modeling of the cold rolling process using the new modeling concept is de-
scribed; and the simulation and experimental results are given in a sub-section. In 
the section “modeling and analysis of hot rolling process”, an identical structure as 
mentioned above is maintained. In the following section, the modeling of work 
roll wear is described. At the end, a detailed discussion on the overall work (mod-
eling concept and the results) is given. 
20.2   Concept and Implementation 
A numerical simulation strategy was developed using FEM to analyze the interac-
tion effects during rolling processes. Within this concept, the computation of the 
flat rolling process simulation is separated into two simulation models. In this con-
text, the process simulation model consists of the workpiece (modeled using elas-
tic-plastic material description for cold rolling and thermo-mechanical description 
for hot rolling) and the work rolls were modeled as rigid bodies (see Fig. 20.2). On 
the other hand, a different simulation model is considered for the tools (pure elas-
tic model in case of cold rolling and thermo-mechanical model in case of hot roll-
ing). These two separate models are coupled using an automatic-update module. 
This module uses a mapping table (where the FE surface mesh information of both 
rigid and elastic tools is saved) to update the geometrical information in both si-
mulation models. For the communication and compatibility between two simula-
tion models, an identical surface mesh is to be used in both models. Further details 
of the concept, such as data transfer, tool activation and mesh compatibility (Do 
Elastic Tool Simulation DOELTOSIM module), are described in the [19].  
Based on this modeling concept, two other technical aspects were implemented: 
thermo-mechanical tool effects and wear prediction. For the modeling of a hot 
rolling process, consideration of the tool thermo-mechanical effects are very im-
portant since a large amount of the energy is conducted into the work rolls, when 
they come in contact with the hot strip. Here, the computation of roll thermo-
mechanical effects is separated from the process simulation model. At each  
pre-defined time step, the computation of tool effects is activated. In case of 10 
Sec total simulation time, if the pre-defined time step size is 2 Sec, the tool simu-
lation is activated 5 times. As the thermal effects are transient, unlike the elastic 

442 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
simulation model, the thermo-mechanical tool computation is carried out simulta-
neously until the next activation takes place. As the process and tool simulation 
models run concurrently, the tool simulation results should be readily available 
once the process simulation reaches the activation time-step. For that, a novel con-
cept of rotating boundary conditions was developed to avoid the accumulation of 
large rotations of the Lagrange mesh of the work roll. 
Contact-pressure
Deformation*
damping
DOELTOSIM
Mapping table
LARSTRAN/SHAPE
Increment
Elastic-plastic
material model
FE-Model for
process simulation
(With rigid tool)
LARSTRAN/SHAPE
Pure elastic
material model
FE-Model for 
elastic tool simulation
Contact-pressure
Deformation*
damping
DOELTOSIM
Mapping table
LARSTRAN/SHAPE
Increment
Elastic-plastic
material model
FE-Model for
process simulation
(With rigid tool)
LARSTRAN/SHAPE
Pure elastic
material model
FE-Model for 
elastic tool simulation
 
Fig. 20. 2 FEM-FEM coupling concept 
Within this concept, the work roll is fixed in all DOF (Degrees Of Freedom) 
and the boundary conditions, such as heat flux at roll-strip contact, cooling  
zones are defined as rotating (with the rolling velocity) boundary conditions (see 
Fig. 20.3).  
 
Fig. 20.3 Concept of rotating boundary condition 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
443
 
The conductive heat flux (at roll - strip contact zone) is calculated using the 
state variables (contact pressure and strip temperature) provided by process simu-
lation (Eq. 20.1).  
)
(
roll
strip
gap
T
T
h
q
−
=
 
(20.1) 
The gap conductance hgap is defined as a function of contact pressure, roll rough-
ness and roll hardness. Detailed explanation of this model is given in the section 
“modeling and analysis of hot rolling”. In the same way, the convective heat  
fluxes (due to water cooling and air cooling) are calculated using Equations 20.2 
and 20.3.  
)
(
water
roll
water
T
T
h
q
−
=
 
(20.2) 
)
(
air
roll
air
T
T
h
q
−
=
 
(20.3) 
For the application of conductive heat flux, the contact angle θ is necessary and 
approximated using the contact length ( dl′ ) and deformed roll radius ( r′ ) as 
shown in Equation 4.  
r
ld
′
′
=
θ
tan
 with  
h
b
F
C
r
r
H
Δ
+
=
′
1(
and 
h
r
ld
Δ′
=
 
(20.4) 
The last aspect considered to analyze the interaction effects is work roll wear. It is 
known that the rolled strip profile will have the roll gap contour, i. e. if the work 
rolls are worn, the roll gap contour will no longer be uniform. Hence, it is impor-
tant to analyze the wear progress of the work rolls during the rolling process. To 
analyze the local abrasive wear of the work rolls, three different wear models were 
selected and are coupled to the FE process simulation similar to the concept 
shown in Figure 20.2. The first model is the basic Archard model [15], where the 
wear depth is a function of normal forces FN, hardness of the softer surface H , the 
sliding distance s and wear coefficient k (Eq. 20.5). The basic assumption of this 
model is that the wear rate is independent of the apparent contact area; and it also 
makes no considerations of variations with time. Moreover, this model is  
widely used since it provides a good estimation for the order of magnitude with 
less effort. 
H
F
k
s
V
N
=
 
(20.5) 
The second model is an empirical model, which is a modified version of Oike’s 
equation [18], which is tailored for the hot rolling process (Eq. 20.6). This model 
was developed and is being used for the on-line observation of wear for the finish-
ing stands of a hot strip mill at TATA steel, India. Within the equation, the most 
important process parameter is the contact pressure P and other parameters, e. g. 
wstrip is strip width, ld is contact length, ∆h is the thickness reduction, Lstrip is the 
length of the rolled strip and R is the radius of the work roll. The empirical  
constants α, β and γ were determined using a stochastic optimization technique,  

444 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
i. e. the summation of wear error (difference between maximum measured wear 
and predicted wear) should be minimum. For the rolling of high carbon steels with 
30 % thickness reduction, the wear coefficients were predicted as 1.0E-10, 0.188 
and 0.11 respectively. 
(
)γ
β
π
α
h
l
l
w
P
R
L
x
W
d
d
strip
strip
Δ






=
2
)
(
 
(20.6) 
Within the last wear model, energy dissipation is introduced into the Archard’s 
wear model (K.E. Nürnberg [14]) leading to reasonable qualitative wear predic-
tion. By applying the Coulomb law to the Archard equation (Eq. 20.7) the dissipa-
tion rate is defined as the product of shear stress τ (MPa) to the sliding velocity ν 
(mm/s). From Equation 20.8, the rate of wear and wear work Z can be directly re-
lated to the frictional dissipation rate. At the same time, the accumulated wear 
work is directly proportional to the dissipated energy. Finally, the wear model at 
element level can be written as a function of the accumulated wear work Zacc and 
the contact pressure (as shown in Eq. 20.9).  


=
=
dt
v
H
k
dt
pv
H
k
w
t
t
t
μτ
 
(20.7) 
– 
t
tv
D
τ
=

                      

=
D
Z

μ
 
(20.8) 
– 
( )
(
)
(
)
(
)


=
=
=
n
r
e
acc
slid
e
e
acc
e
Z
  Z
   where
dt
t
r
v
t
r
p
H
Z
k
r
w
1
,
,
,
 
(20.9) 
20.3   Modeling and Analysis of Cold Rolling Process 
In general, the cold rolling process is carried out at the final stages of the rolling 
process, i. e. no other forming process step is conducted, which has an impact on 
the thickness profile in a corrective manner. On the other hand, the thickness pro-
file has a substantial influence on the following forming processes, i. e. deep 
drawing process. The thickness profile directly depends on the contact pressure 
distribution along the roll gap. Due to elastic deformation of the work rolls an in-
homogeneous contact pressure distribution may develop.  
Table 20.1 Process and geometric parameters for the cold rolling process  
Parameter 
Value 
Initial strip thickness 
1.67 mm 
Exit strip thickness 
1.65, 1.48, 1.22, 1.20 mm 
Work roll radius 
300 mm 
Work roll velocity 
200 mm/sec 
Friction coefficient 
0.3 
Strip tension (front and back) 
30 kN 
 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
445
 
To obtain a deep understanding of the plastic flow of the strip and elastic de-
formation of the work rolls, implicit FE simulations were performed utilizing the 
newly-developed concept. As described in the implementation section, the process 
simulation model consists of a strip with elastic-plastic material description; and 
the rolls are considered as rigid bodies. Four different thickness reduction cases 
were simulated. Since the contact length for each case is not higher than 10 mm, at 
least 20 elements (with 0.5 mm length for both strip and roll) are necessary for the 
detailed analysis of plastic flow within the roll gap (Fig. 20.4).  
 
Fig. 20.4 FE mesh of the strip and work rolls for cold rolling simulations 
To validate the simulation results obtained by the new modeling concept and to 
understand the underlying elastic-plastic strip material flow and elastic work roll 
deformation, cold rolling experiments were conducted on the rolling mill installed 
at IBF (Fig. 20.5 left). High-strength steel strips (ZStE340) with initial thicknesses 
of 1.67 mm were rolled to four different thickness reductions (Tab. 1). 
 
Fig. 20.5 Rolling mill installed at IBF (left), rolling mill deformation in rolling direction 
(top right) and in thickness direction (bottom right) 

446 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
The rolling was conducted at a relatively low velocity 500 mm/s (conventional 
cold rolling velocity ranges 5 m/s up to 10 m/s) as the rolling mill limit is reached. 
For each case, the rolling force and the exit-strip thickness were measured. Fur-
thermore, the elastic deformation of the whole mill was also measured using an 
optical measuring method TRITOP [38]. As shown in Figure 20.5, coded (fixed 
reference marks) and uncoded marks were placed on the rolling mill. At static 
loading conditions, free-form photographs were taken using a high resolution 
camera. With the help of the TRITOP software, the deformation of the uncoded 
marks was measured (see Fig. 20.5). As expected, the maximum deformation 
(0.12 mm) was observed in thickness direction whereas in the rolling direction the 
maximum deformation was observed as 0.08 mm. 
20.3.1   Experimental and Simulation Results of Cold Rolling 
Process 
The cold rolling process under consideration was simulated in 3D configuration 
using a non-linear implicit FE solver LARSTRAN/SHAPE. To obtain reliable 
steady state results, at least 150 mm strip length (~15 contact lengths) was simu-
lated. As expected, the rolling force predicted using an elastic work rolls model is 
very close to the measurement (see Fig. 20.6). At the same time, the measured exit 
strip thickness also matches the simulated results very well. For the analysis of the 
strip thickness profile, the contact pressure distribution along the strip width was 
examined. It is clear from Figure 20.6 (bottom left) that the contact pressure dis-
tribution has a non-uniform profile in the elastic work roll model, which may lead 
to a non-uniform stress distribution within the roll gap. This directly influences the 
exit strip thickness. As shown in Figure 20.6 (bottom right), the equivalent plastic  
 
 
Fig. 20.6 Comparison of rolling force and exit strip thickness 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
447
 
strain along the strip width is not uniform (for high thickness reduction case), 
which confirms the non-uniform exit strip thickness for a 28.2 % thickness reduc-
tion case. Whereas for a low thickness reduction case, the plastic strain along the 
strip width is relatively uniform, this will lead to a uniform thickness reduction.  
For the analysis of the plastic flow of the strip the comprehension of the shear 
stress distribution is very important. As shown in Figure 20.7 (left), there is a small 
“no-slip-zone” in the 28.2 % thickness reduction case. This means that there will be 
no significant thickness reduction in that region, whereas in a 14 % thickness re-
duction case (Fig. 20.7 - right) there is no such zone. From the Figures, it is clear 
that the plastic flow using the new modeling concept is identical to the single FE 
model. It can also be observed that the rolling force in the new model is smaller 
than in the single FE model, which may be due to a lower contact length in the new 
model. This directly depends on the frequency of the activation of the elastic roll 
model. This situation can be improved by increasing the activation of the tool simu-
lation model, which may lead to a higher computation time. A compromise has to 
be found between these two phenomena to achieve reliable results. Detailed expla-
nation regarding the frequency of the activation of tool simulation is given in [20]. 
 
Fig. 20.7 Comparison of shear stress distribution (28.2 %, 11.3 %) 
Any change in the work roll profile will directly affect the end strip quality. In 
order to control the required output strip specifications a careful analysis of the 
roll deformation is the key. Figure 20.8 shows the stress distribution in the strip 
thickness direction for a 23 % thickness reduction case predicted using 
LARSTRAN and ABAQUS [36].  
 
Fig. 20.8 Comparison of elastic stress distribution in work rolls 

448 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
In both cases, the maximum compressive stress is about 360 N/mm², which is 
considerably lower than the yield stress of 860 MPa of the roll material. For the 
de-coupled simulation, a total of 200 coupled cycles were used and the computa-
tion time is up to 2 times faster than the single FE model. The computation time 
for the single FE model was about 614 minutes, whereas with the new concept 
(using DOELTOSIM module), it required only 316 minutes. From Figure 20.8 it 
is clear that the developed modeling concept is reliable and faster. Further details 
of the elastic roll influence on cold rolling process are explained in [19, 20]. 
20.4   Modeling and Analysis of Hot Rolling Process 
In the hot rolling process, a large amount of heat energy is conducted into the 
work rolls during the contact with the hot strip. At the same time, the temperature 
distribution of the work rolls influences the forming characteristics of the strip. To 
analyze these interdependent phenomena, lab scale experiments and numerical si-
mulations were conducted. Single-pass hot rolling experiments were conducted 
using 1.4301 stainless steel strips with an initial thickness of 1.9 mm and 150 mm 
width. The strip material flow curve was determined (using Eq. 20.10) for differ-
ent strain rates and temperature up to strip inlet temperature, i. e >1,050°C. The 
strip material properties and rolling parameters are given in Table 2.  
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
.
.
)
.
(
.
.
.
.
E
D
T
C
T
B
A
f
e
e
K
k
+
=

 
K = 7140.64 N/mm², A = -0.26, B = 0.0004 1/°C, C = -0.0033 1/°C, 
D = 0.223, E = -0.62 
(20.10) 
The strips were heated up to 1,050°C and rolled with a relatively low velocity of 
200 mm/sec to two different thickness reductions (21 % and 26 %). To get a sys-
tem level understanding, the rolling force was measured with high accuracy.  To 
understand the heat transfer phenomenon the analysis of strip temperature distri-
bution at the roll gap is an important aspect. It was not possible to measure the 
temperature distribution of the strip within the roll gap, it was, however, measured 
before and after the roll gap using pyrometers, as shown in the experimental setup 
(see Fig. 20.9).  
 
Fig. 20.9 Pyrometer setup for hot rolling experiments 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
449
 
The quality of the measured temperature using the pyrometer lies in the defini-
tion of the emission coefficient. The pyrometer was trained to obtain the precise 
coefficient using an additional experiment, where a specimen connected with a 
thermo-couple and the temperature was measured using both systems. Once both 
systems were measuring the identical temperature, the pyrometer was used in the 
real experiments. For the analysis of the strip temperature within the roll gap ex-
tensive numerical simulations were conducted. 
In order to study the effects of the transient heat transfer phenomenon at the roll 
gap a good understanding of the process parameters is critical. For that purpose, 
numerical simulations were conducted using the newly-developed modeling con-
cept. Within this concept, the process simulation was modeled using thermo-
mechanical strip and the work rolls were modeled as rigid bodies. Although the 
roll was modeled as a rigid body the solver will consider the temperature distribu-
tion of the roll for solving the heat transfer at the roll gap. The work roll tempera-
ture will be updated using an external work roll model. 
Table 20.2 Hot rolling process parameters and material properties 
Roll geometric parameters 
Strip geometric parameters 
Diameter 
300 mm 
Initial thickness 
1.9 mm 
Length 
1,000 mm 
Exit thickness 
1.5,1.4 mm 
Velocity 
200,400,1000 mm/s 
Width 
150 mm 
Roll material properties 
Strip material properties 
Units 
Elastic 
modulus 
215E3 at 20 °C 
169E3 at 600 °C 
198.340E3 at 20 °C 
117.000E3 at 1,000 °C 
N/mm² 
 
Density 
7.8E-9 at 20 °C 
7.6E-9 at 600 °C 
7.68E-9 at 500°C 
7.55E-9 at 1,000°C 
Kg/mm³ 
Conductivity 
48.0 at 20 °C 
44.3 at 600 °C 
14.85 at 20 °C 
27.35 at 1,000 °C 
W/mm K 
 
Specific heat 
4.6E8 at 20 °C 
5.9E8 at 600 °C 
4.55E8 at 20°C 
5.85E8 at 1,000 °C 
J/Kg K 
 
 
For the detailed analysis of the heat transfer phenomenon at the roll gap, the de-
finition of gap conductance is most critical. Tseng [21, 22, 23] reviewed various 
analytical models for the definition of gap conductance and mentioned two sophis-
ticated relations. The first is based on the analysis by Mikic [24] (Eq. 20.10), the 
second was semi-empirically derived by Yovanovich et. al. [25] (Eq. 20.11). In 
both Equations, kh is the harmonic mean thermal conductivity in W/mm K, Ra is 
the combined arithmetic surface roughness in mm, P is the contact pressure and M 
is the hardness of the softer material.  For hot rolling, the analysis of thermal con-
tact conductance of the interface should include the conductance of oxide scale. 
To serially link the oxide layer with interface contact conductance, the conduc-
tance in Equations 20.11 and 20.12 can be modified as shown in Equation 20.13, 
where the underline signifies the contact conductance including the oxide scale 
conductance, which equals k0/δ0. Here, k0 and δ0 are the thermal conductivity and  
 

450 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
thickness of oxide scale respectively. The properties of the oxide layer during the 
hot rolling of various grades of steels were studied in detail by the large number of 
researchers [26, 27, 28]. Conventionally, high pressure jets are used to desiccate 
between the stands so that the scale layer is kept relatively thin. A 10 μm oxide 
layer is consistent with most measurements [27, 28]; and the hardness of the oxide 
layer was observed as 980 MPa (HV100). A user sub-routine was developed (and 
implemented in a model program for PEP) to define the gap conductivity accord-
ing to Equation 20.13, where the local contact pressure is extracted from the 
process simulation. With this, a detailed analysis of heat transfer between work 
roll and strip was conducted.  
(
)
[
]
(
) unc
m
m
a
h
c
r
k
P
M
P
R
k
h
δ
/
/
3800
95
.0
257
.0
+
+
=
−
 
(20.11) 
[
]
(
) unc
m
m
a
h
c
r
k
M
P
R
k
h
δ
/
/
4200
95
.0
257
.0
+
=
−
 
(20.12) 
(
)
(
)
[
]
o
o
c
o
o
c
c
k
h
k
h
h
δ
δ
/
/
/
+
=
 
(20.13) 
Furthermore, it is important to analyze the thermo-mechanical behavior of the 
work rolls during the hot rolling process. The work rolls are heated during the 
contact with the strip by conduction, which is predominant in the hot rolling 
process [29]. The heating of the rolls is countered by the proper cooling system, 
which is normally provided by water sprinklers located at the entry and exit side 
of the stand (Fig. 20.10). The rolling velocity and the angle the cooling (on both 
sides) is provided at determine the temperature distribution and also the surface 
stresses of the work rolls. To analyze these aspects a rotating boundary concept 
was introduced. To determine steady state temperature distribution within the 
work rolls various parameter variations were tested and qualitative results will be 
presented in the next section. 
 
Fig. 20.10 Boundary conditions for work rolls during hot rolling process 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
451
 
20.4.1   Experimental and Simulation Results of Hot Rolling 
Process 
Various hot rolling experiments and simulations were conducted to analyze the 
heat transfer phenomenon between the hot strip and the work roll. Coupled ther-
mo-mechanical simulations were conducted using the non-linear implicit solver 
LARSTRAN/SHAPE [37]. The computation of roll thermal effects is conducted 
in a separate simulation model and coupled with the process simulation using the 
newly-developed module DOHOTSIM. Transient 3D thermo-mechanical simula-
tions were conducted with the rolling process data given in Table 2. The rolling 
force measured was about 750 kN and 850 kN for 21 % and 26 % thickness reduc-
tions respectively. Since the strip surface roughness was high, using a high-
friction coefficient (µ=0.6) and with the pressure-dependent gap conductance, the 
predicted rolling force was about 735 kN and 837 kN for 21 % and 26 % thickness 
reduction cases respectively. For the analysis of plastic flow in the roll gap, the 
shear stress was analyzed under two different aspects.  
 
Fig. 20.11 Strip shear stress and temperature distribution in hot rolling 
The first one is the influence of elastic tool effects and the second the definition 
of gap conductance. The shear stress as shown in Figure 20.11 (top left) is pre-
dicted for two different rolling velocities, both using rigid and elastic rolls for 21 
% thickness reduction case. For a high velocity, low shear stress is predicted and 
vice versa. This may directly depend on the strip temperature distribution. At  
the same time, the influence of the elastic work roll on the plastic deformation of  
the strip is considerably low. However, the influence of the definition of gap  
 

452 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
conductance on the plastic deformation has a considerable effect (Fig. 20.11, top 
right). On the entry side, the shear stress distribution has identical behavior in both 
models whereas on the exit side, the pressure-dependent model predicts high shear 
stresses. This may be due to the tendency in the strip temperature in both models. 
 
Fig. 20.12 Surface temperature distribution of the work roll for first rotation (left) and after 
100 sec (right) 
For the clear understanding of the heat transfer between strip and work roll, a 
pressure-dependent gap conductance was defined according to Equation 10. Fig-
ure 20.11 (bottom left) shows the predicted gap conductance (for two different 
friction coefficients) for a node as it passes through the roll gap. From the Figure, 
it is clear that the gap conductance has a profile identical to the contact pressure 
distribution and reaches its maximum at the exit side of the roll gap, where the 
normal compressive contact pressure has its maxima. Figure 20.11 (bottom right) 
makes it clear that the strip temperature predicted using both models before and 
after the roll gap matches well with the measured temperature (755 °C). An impor-
tant phenomenon can be observed here: the strip temperature along the roll gap 
has a large deviation (pressure-dependent model predicts up to 230 °C lower than 
the constant gap conductance model- see Fig. 20.11) in both models. Neglecting 
this phenomenon during the modeling of a hot rolling process may lead to serious 
problems since the metallurgical changes directly depend on the forming tempera-
ture and others [30, 31].     
 
Fig. 20.13 Temperature distribution at surface and inside the roll (left - conventional cool-
ing, right - double cooling) 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
453
 
 
Fig. 20.14 Temperature distribution at the surface and inside the roll 
A detailed analysis of the thermal evolution of the work rolls is very important 
since the life and the wear of the work rolls can be controlled by improving the 
cooling system [32, 33]. The proper cooling may reduce the induced thermal 
stresses and, from that, the abatement of the thermal fatigue may be achieved. To 
understand this phenomenon, a new rotating boundary model was developed and 
implemented within the FE program PEP [39] and LARSTRAN. For the qualita-
tive numerical analysis, the hot rolling lab experiments were modeled assuming 
different cooling strategies. Figure 20.12 shows the temperature evolution at the 
surface of the roll for the first rotation (left) and after 10 seconds of rolling (rolling 
velocity 1 m/sec) for three different cooling strategies (conventional, double cool-
ing and late cooling [33, 34]). The schematic diagram of the first two strategies is 
shown in Fig. 20.13 and the late cooling means that the cooling starts at 130°). 
From the first rotation curves for all cooling methods it can be observed that due 
to insufficient cooling a small amount of heat (about 15°C) is retained in the work 
rolls. After 100 seconds of rolling, the temperature distribution has a clear differ-
ence (up to 30 °C) between double and conventional cooling methods. The steady 
state thermal evolution (Fig. 20.13) confirms that the thermal gradient produced 
during one cycle is restricted to the surface of the roll. One more important phe-
nomenon can be observed in these figures, i. e. the temperature on the surface at 
some angular positions is cooler than the core and in other locations hotter than 
the core. This leads to tensile stresses at cooler locations and compressive stresses 
at the hotter locations, which may cause the fire-cracks on the surface of the rolls.  
 
Fig. 20.15 Penetration of temperature for different cooling methods 

454 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
To understand the cooling efficiency and the resulting thermal effects the histo-
ry of the temperature penetration for various cooling strategies has to be ex-
amined. Figure 20.14 and 20.15 show the thermal evolution of the work rolls for 
four different cooling methods at two different locations (9 and 16 mm inside). 
From the Figures it is clear that the double cooling phenomenon slows down the 
penetration of the thermal gradient and less heat is retained in the rolls after each 
rotation. 
20.5   Work Roll Wear Modeling and Simulation Results 
The most important tribological effect, which influences the exit strip thickness 
profile is work roll wear. During a cold rolling process, due to very high quality 
tolerances, macroscopic wear of the work rolls may not be observed since the rolls 
are changed frequently after a defined roll surface roughness. During hot rolling 
process (particularly the continuous strip casting mill), however, the work roll 
wear is more significant and mostly not uniform along the strip width [12,13]. 
Figure 20.16 shows a typical wear profile of a work roll [35], where the wear at 
the edges of the strip is considerably higher than the middle. This might be be-
cause of the non-uniform temperature (particularly cooled edges) of the incoming 
strip [34], which results in high contact pressure at the edges. The middle wear, 
however, is relatively homogeneous. For the analysis of the wear profile, various 
analytical wear models have been developed and are also being used for on-line 
observations [11, 12, 13]. The major drawback of most of the models is that they 
are not suitable for the prediction of local effects but useful to get the average val-
ue (along the strip width direction) of the wear [13, 14]. It is also necessary to un-
derstand the phenomenon of local wear for the better planning of the scheduling 
and roll change.  
 
Fig. 20.16 Typical work roll wear profile during hot rolling process (Stand 5) 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
455
 
Within this work, a decoupled modeling concept was introduced for the predic-
tion of local work roll wear during cold and hot rolling process. As described in 
the concept and implementation section, three different wear models were imple-
mented to analyze the work roll wear effects on the rolling process. The models 
were validated by the published data [13, 18]. In particular, Sikdar [18] published 
hot rolling process information and the measured work roll wear for the finishing 
stands. Within their work, the roll surface profile was measured before and after a 
rolling schedule using a contact type profile gauge with a measuring accuracy of ± 
1 μm. After rolling a selected number of strips (for the published case, 56 strips), 
the worn work rolls were removed from the finishing mill and subjected to 2h of 
water cooling followed by 3h of air cooling. This cooling schedule eliminated any 
effects of thermal expansion on the work rolls. The other source used for the vali-
dation was published by Mohammed Tahir [13], where the wear of the work rolls 
was evaluated for different roll materials for hot rolling finishing mills. According 
to this input, various simulations were conducted to understand the work roll wear 
using three different wear models and compared with the published data. The 
work roll wear of the finishing stand (stand 4, top roll) of a tandem rolling mill 
was further analyzed. The process conditions at this stand are provided in [18]. 
Three different strip widths (900, 700 and 500 mm) were simulated for the strip 
length of 100 km each. The average simulated rolling force (for three strips) was 
about 13.5 MN whereas the measured force ranges at about 12.5 MN [18].  
For the analysis of wear using the empirical model (Eq. 6), the coefficients α, β 
and γ were 1.0E-10, 0.188 and 0.11 respectively. To predict wear the normal pres-
sure is obtained from the process simulation and Equation 6 solved for each  
surface element. As shown in Figure 20.17, for the work roll wear profile at the 
centre, i. e. up to 500 mm, the wear is higher and uniform. The reason is that, for 
all strip widths, the work roll is loaded at the centre. When using an empirical 
wear model, the wear along the strip width is uniform; the reason for this could be 
that the model considers only the normal contact pressure. Another cause may be 
the inlet strip temperature, which is assumed to be uniform over the width, and 
there is no considerable elastic deformation of the work rolls, which influence the 
contact pressure profile. Figure 20.17 (right) shows the contact pressure distribu-
tion (for 700 mm strip width) before and after updating the worn roll profile with-
in the process simulation.   
 
Fig. 20.17 Comparison of work roll wear for roll stand 4 

456 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
Since the stresses due to friction are relatively high during the rolling process 
any prediction neglecting these may lead to undesired results [17]. For that, an 
energy-based wear model was implemented, which considers the frictional dissi-
pation rate. For each element, the accumulated wear work is estimated. The  
required shear stress and the normal stresses are extracted from the process simu-
lation. The relative velocity in rolling direction is the difference of the roll velocity 
and the strip velocity within the roll gap. Using this information, wear Equation 10 
is solved for each surface element. As shown in Figure 20.17, the wear predicted 
by the energy model is relatively local and higher than empirically estimated at the 
middle, where high shear stresses may occur. The order of magnitude from both 
models is very close to the measured wear profile. Further analysis and the valida-
tion of these models have to be conducted with real experimental data.   
20.6   Conclusion and Outlook 
A new FE modeling concept was developed for the analysis of interaction effects 
during the flat rolling process. Within this concept, the tool simulation is separated 
from the process simulation and, using an automatic coupling module, the com-
munication between these two models was realized. The advantages of this model-
ing concept includes a short computation time (up to 2 times faster than a single 
FE model in the case of an elastic tool model) compared to the single FE model, 
suitable for the analysis of flatness problems (modeling of 3D), easy to handle 
thermo-mechanical effects during the modeling of a hot rolling process and the in-
fluence of tribological effects (particularly abrasive wear of the work rolls) on the 
strip quality can be analyzed. The simulation results of the cold rolling process 
(with the careful selection of frequency of activation of the tool computation) 
show good agreement with the single FE model and also the experiments. At the 
same time, the modeling of the hot rolling process was also validated with the help 
of lab experiments. The rolling force was clearly underestimated using a constant 
gap conductance model, even with a high friction coefficient. When using the 
pressure-dependent model, however, the predicted rolling force is very close to the 
measured value. At the same time, the exit strip temperature and strip exit thick-
ness also matches well with the measurements. For the analysis of roll thermal 
events for different cooling strategies, extensive numerical analysis was conducted 
using the rotating boundary model. It was shown that the model is suitable and 
easy to handle for the prediction of steady state thermal gradients within the work 
rolls. 
At the end, wear models were validated using published data. Since the history 
of the rolled strip width is not mentioned within the publication, further analysis 
and validation of the simulated results are necessary. Future work will consider 
obtaining precise wear data from the industry to validate the developed models. 

20   Interaction Effects between Strip and Work Roll during Flat Rolling Process 
457
 
References 
[1] Kainz, A., Krimplelstätter, K., Zemen, K.: FE Simulation of thin strip and temper 
rolling processes. In: ABAQUS Austria User Conference (2003) 
[2] Kim, T.H., Lee, W.H.: An integrated FE process model for the prediction of strip pro-
file in flat rolling. ISIJ 43, 1947–1956 (2003) 
[3] Ohe, K., Kajiura, S., Simada, S., Mizuta, A., Morimoto, Y., Fujino, T., Anraku, K.: 
Development of shape control in plate rolling. In: METEC Conference proceedings, 
vol. 2, pp. 78–85 (1994) 
[4] Buessler, P., Montmitonnent, P.: A review on theoretical analysis of rolling in Eu-
rope. ISIJ 31, 525–538 (1991) 
[5] Guo, R.-M.: Development, verification and application of an optimal crown shape 
control model for rolling mills with multiple control devices. In: AISE Conference 
(1995) 
[6] Tseng, A.A.: A numerical heat transfer analysis of strip rolling. ASME 106, 512–517 
(1984) 
[7] Hsu, C.T., Evans, R.W.: Finite element analysis on the hot rolling of steel. Adv. Tech. 
Plasticity 2, 587–593 (1990) 
[8] Sun, C.G., Hwang, S.M.: Prediction of roll thermal profile in hot strip rolling by the 
Finite element method. ISIJ 40, 794–801 (2000) 
[9] Sun, C.G., Hwang, S.M., Ryoo, S.R., Kwak, W.J.: An integrated FE process model 
for precision analysis of thermo-mechanical behaviour of the rolls and strip in hot 
strip rolling. Comp. Methods. Appl. Mech. Engg. 191, 4015–4033 (2002) 
[10] Lee, J.H., Hwang, S.M., Park, H.D.: FE-based on-line model for the prediction of roll 
force and roll power in hot strip rolling. ISIJ 40, 1013–1018 (2000) 
[11] Jiang, Z.Y., Tieu, A.K.: Contact mechanics and work roll wear in cold rolling of thin 
strip. Wear Journal 263, 1447–1453 (2007) 
[12] Magne, A., Gaspard, C., Gabriel, M.: Wear behaviour of steels for hot working roll-
ing-mill rolls. CRM 57, 25–39 (1980) 
[13] Mohammed, T., Widell, B.: Roll wear evaluation of HSS, HiCr and IC work rolls in 
hot strip mill. Steel Research 74, 624–630 (2003) 
[14] Kivilcim, E.N., Nürnberg, G., Golle, M., Hoffmann, H.: Simulation of wear on sheet 
metal forming tools—An energy approach. Journal of Wear, 357–363 (2008) 
[15] Archard, J.F., Hirst, W.: Wear of metals under un-lubricated conditions. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London 236, 397–410 (1956) 
[16] Byon, S.M., Kim, S.I., Lee, Y.: A semi-analytical model for predicting the wear con-
tour in rod rolling process. Journal of Materials Processing Technology 191, 306–309 
(2007) 
[17] Bowden, F.P., Tabor, D.: Friction, lubrication and wear: a survey of work during the 
last decade. British Journal of App. Physics 17, 1521–1544 (1966) 
[18] John, S., Sikdar, S., Mukhopadhyay, A.: Roll wear prediction model for finishing 
stands of hot strip mill. Iron and Steel Making 33, 169–175 (2006) 
[19] Franzke, M., Puchhala, S., Dackweiler, H.: Modeling of interaction effects between 
strip and roll during flat rolling process. In: NUMIFORM Conference Proceedings, 
vol. 908, pp. 1489–1494 (2007) 
[20] Franzke, M., Puchhala, S., Dackweiler, H.: Modeling of interaction effects between 
process and machine during flat rolling process. In: PMI Conference Proceedings 
(2008) 

458 
S. Puchhala, M. Franzke, and G. Hirt
 
[21] Tseng, A.A., Huang, C.H.: The estimation of surface thermal behavior of the working 
roll in hot rolling process. Heat and Mass Transfer 18, 1019–1031 (1995) 
[22] Tseng, A.: Thermal modeling of roll and strip interface in rolling process: part 1 – re-
view. Numerical Heat Transfer 35, 115–135 (1999) 
[23] Tseng, A.: Thermal modeling of roll and strip interface in rolling process: part 2 – re-
view. Numerical Heat Transfer 35, 135–154 (1999) 
[24] Mikic, B.B.: Thermal contact conductance: Theoretical considerations. International 
Heat Transfer 17, 205–214 (1974) 
[25] Yovanovich, M.M., De Vaal, J., Hegazy, A.: A statistical model to predict thermal 
gap conductance between conforming rough surfaces. AIAA Paper No: 82-0888 
(1998) 
[26] Colas, R., Torres, M.: Modeling heat conduction through an oxide layer during hot 
rolling of steel. ASME Manufacturing Science Engineering 68(2), 577–582 (1994) 
[27] Browne, K.M., Dryden, J., Assefpour, M.: Modeling scaling and de-scaling in hot 
strip mills. Recent Advances in Heat Transfer and Micro Structure Modeling for Met-
al Processing 67, 187–201 (1995) 
[28] Ranta, H., Larkoila, J., Korhonen, A.S.: A study of scale effects during accelerated 
cooling. In: Modeling of Metal Rolling Process Conference Proceedings, pp. 638–647 
(1993) 
[29] Tseng, A.A.: A numerical heat transfer analysis of strip rolling. ASME Journal of 
Heat Transfer 106, 512–517 (1984) 
[30] Sellars, C.M., McLaern, A.J.: Modeling distribution of microstructure during hot roll-
ing of stainless steel. Materials Science and Technology 8, 1090–1095 (1975) 
[31] Militzer, M., Nakata, N.: Modeling of microstructure evolution during hot rolling of a 
780 MPa high strength steel. ISIJ 45, 82–90 (2005) 
[32] Tseng, A.A., Lin, F.H., Gunderia, A.S., Ni, D.S.: Roll cooling and its relationship to 
roll life. Metallurgical Transactions 20A, 2305–2320 (1988) 
[33] Sun, C.G., Hwang, S.M.: Prediction of roll thermal profile in hot strip rolling by the 
FE Method. ISIJ 40, 794–801 (2000) 
[34] Azene, Y.T., Roy, R., Farrugia, D., Onisa, C., Trumann, M.H.: Work roll cooling sys-
tem design optimization in presence of uncertainty. In: CIRP Design Conference Pro-
ceedings, pp. 57–65 (2009) 
[35] Partender, E., Mitter, S.: Ein Modell zur Prognose des Arbeitswalzenverschleiß der 
Breibandstraße in Linz. In: XXII Verformungskundlisches Kolloquium (2003) 
[36] Simulia, http://www.simulia.com/products/abaqus_fea.html 
[37] Lasso GmBh, http://www.lasso.de/index.php?id=28 
[38] GOM, Optische 3D-Koordinatenmessmaschine  
http://www.gom.com/de/messsysteme/ 
systemuebersicht/tritop.html 
[39] Franzke, M.: Zielgrößenadaptierte Netzdiagnose und -generierung zur Anwendung 
der Finite Elemente Methode in der Umformtechnik. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen 
University (1999) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 459–473. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 21 
Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet 
Metal Parts Utilizing a Model-Based Path 
Planning for Robot-Based Incremental Forming 
H. Meier, S. Reese, Y. Kiliclar, and R. Laurischkat     
Abstract. The principle of robot-based incremental sheet metal forming is based 
on flexible shaping by means of a freely programmable path-synchronous move-
ment of two tools, which are operated by two industrial robots. The final shape is 
produced by the incremental infeed of the forming tool in depth direction and its 
movement along the geometry’s contour in lateral direction. The main problem 
during the forming process is the influence on the dimensional accuracy resulting 
from the compliance of the involved machine structures and the spring-back ef-
fects of the workpiece. The project aims to predict these deviations caused by 
compliances and carry out a compensative path planning based on this prediction. 
Finite element analysis using a material model developed at the Institute of Ap-
plied Mechanics (IFAM) [1] has been used for the simulation of the forming 
process. 
21.1   Introduction 
In the field of sheet metal forming, the production of prototypes or parts in low 
batch sizes is being realized by high-priced conventional forming processes. The 
lack of flexibility as well as high investment costs clearly point out the limits of 
conventional sheet metal forming for these parts. Recently, different kinematics-
based sheet metal forming processes have been developed. In most cases, these 
methods only require simple dies or supports ([2], [3]). 
In this regard, the Chair of Production Systems (LPS) at the Ruhr-University of 
Bochum has developed a robot-based incremental sheet metal forming process 
(Roboforming) [4]. The Roboforming principle is based on flexible shaping by 
means of freely programmable path-synchronous movements of two industrial 6-
axis robots driving universal workpiece-independent forming tools. Figure 21.1a 
shows the machine setup, which consists of two KUKA KR360 robots and a frame 
with a blank holder. The final shape is produced by the incremental inward motion 
of the forming tool in depth direction and its movement along the contour in later-
al direction by driving either on parallel layers or on a helical path. The supporting 
tool, also being realized with a simple geometry, holds the sheet on the backside 
by moving synchronously along the outer contour, constantly on the same level or 

460 
H. Meier et al.
 
directly opposed to the forming tool. Thereby, a pre-defined gap between the two 
hemispherical tools is being generated (Figure 21.1b). 
Due to the high flexibility regarding the reachable geometries due to the robots’ 
kinematics and the tools’ simplicity, Roboforming provides a rather interesting 
method for industrial prototyping and low batch size production. Apart from free-
form surfaces (Figure 21.1c), it is possible to form undercuts in a multi-step strat-
egy in a single clamping with the two 6-axis kinematics (Figure 21.1d). 
 
Fig. 21.1 a) Roboforming setup, b) basic forming strategies, c) free-form surface and d) cy-
linder with undercut (97° wall angle) [5] 
Nevertheless, up to now, the resultant geometries are showing significant dev-
iations from the planned geometries, especially when the tool path is planned on 
the CAD model without any adaptations. 
The forming strategy with its forming parameters has a main influence on the 
process result. Depending on the material and the geometry being formed, para-
meters like the infeed, the forming velocity or the tool path especially affect the 
part’s accuracy. Additionally, the sheet is subject to springback. While these two 
effects emerge in the context of all incremental sheet metal forming processes, 
Roboforming is furthermore subject to robot influences.  
Since traditional applications of industrial robots consist of repetitive opera-
tions such as spot welding, the robot development of the last years has been fo-
cused on increasing the repeat accuracy, which nowadays is better than 0.1 mm 
for certain robots. However, the absolute positioning accuracy of such a robot is 
not better than several tenth of a millimeter. Furthermore, this accuracy is only 
guaranteed under the condition that no external forces act on the robot effector. 
For this reason, in Roboforming, process forces near the payload of the robot lead 
to tool deviations of up to 3 mm. 
Figure 21.2 exemplarily shows the process forces and tool deviations for the 
forming of a frustum geometry. The forces show circumferential homogeneous 
characteristics in all directions (radial, tangential and infeed) during the whole 
forming process and are highly reproducible, as several tests have shown. The tool 
deviation shows a contrary behavior (Figure 21.2d). While the absolute tool path 
deviation for angles φ about 170 deg amounts to 1.1 to 1.3 mm, deviations of more 
than 2.2 mm are measured in the opposite area (angle φ about 330 deg). This non-
linear stiffness of the robot structure is mainly caused by the interaction of the 

21   Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
461
 
serial kinematic posture and the elasticities of its six joints. Each joint elasticity is 
composed of elasticities and clearances in the gears and bearings, which are not 
detected by the rotary encoders of the motors and therefore not compensated by 
the cascaded control structure. To handle these deviations an entire model-based 
method is developed, where no additional sensors or other modifications to the ro-
bot hardware are necessary. The implementation and experimental validation of 
this model-based compensation method are described in this chapter. 
 
Fig. 21.2 Measured process forces in a) radial, b) tangential, c) infeed direction and d) re-
sulting absolute tool path deviation for a frustum geometry (Ø90x40mm x 60°) produced 
by roboforming with an incremental infeed of 1 mm. (material: DC06, thickness: 0.8 mm) 
21.2   Coupled Process Structure Model 
The objective of the current work is the prediction and compensation of the path 
deviations in Roboforming resulting from the low stiffness behavior of industrial 
robots. Therefore, the resulting forming forces in the sheet metal have to be com-
puted and applied to the robots’ kinematics. The reaction forces in the sheet metal 
are currently determined using a finite element (FE) approach, while the simula-
tion of the robots’ kinematics is carried out by means of a multi-body system 
(MBS) simulation. Figure 21.3 shows the general idea of the procedure. 
In a first step, the process forces are computed in the finite element model as-
suming an ideal stiff robot by moving the tool along the planned reference path. 
These forces, combined with the reference path, build the input for the multi-body 

462 
H. Meier et al.
 
system modeling the robot. Here, the actual tool path and the robot compliance is 
obtained due to the previously computed forces. Once the actual path is known, 
the path correction compensating the force-dependent deviations is executed and 
the correction data-set is derived. It contains the path, which has to be driven to 
reach the reference path. When compiled and transferred to the robot control unit, 
the corrected tool path allows the production of a workpiece without robot-
influenced errors. 
 
Fig. 21.3 Path generation concept including robot compliance compensation [5] 
21.2.1   Process Model 
With increasing availability of fast computer hardware, the finite element method 
is used more and more efficiently to predict and simulate material and structural 
behavior. First of all, the use of a purely isotropic hardening model (expansion of 
the yield surface) is not sufficient. Therefore, a finite strain constitutive model, 
which combines non-linear kinematic and isotropic hardening, based on the mul-
tiplicative split of the deformation gradient, developed in a recent work by Vladi-
mirov et al. [6], is used in this work. The papers Choi et al. [7], Dettmer & Reese 
[8], Hakansson et al. [9], Menzel et al. [10], Svendsen et al. [11] and Wallin et al. 
[12] are dealing with this subject. In order to reduce computational time a new ef-
ficient finite element technology is developed. Nevertheless, the simulation of Ro-
boforming remains a difficult task. The computation time is extremely high for 
implicit simulations due to the complex contact behavior. 
21.2.1.1   Material Modeling 
The constitutive model is based on the multiplicative split 
 
p
pe
pi
F
F F
=
of the plas-
tic deformation gradient into “elastic” and “inelastic” parts, 
 e
p
F
F F
=
being the 
classical multiplicative split of F . As a result, a continuum mechanical extension 
of the classical rheological model of Armstrong-Frederick kinematic hardening 
[13] can be achieved. The Helmholtz free energy per unit of undeformed volume 

21   Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
463
 
ψ  is additively decomposed into the three parts 
(
)
(
)
( )
e
e
kin
pe
iso
C
C
ψ
ψ
ψ
ψ
κ
=
+
+
. 
The first part 
e
ψ  describes the macroscopic elastic material properties. The 
second term 
kin
ψ
corresponds to the elastic energy stored in dislocation fields due 
to kinematic hardening and vanishes, if the kinematic hardening is zero. The third 
term represents elastic energy due to isotropic hardening, where ߢ is the isotropic 
hardening variable. The Helmholtz free energy is a function of the elastic right 
Cauchy-Green tensor 
1
T
T
e
e
e
p
p
C
F F
F
C F
−
−
=
=
 and the elastic part of the plastic 
right Cauchy-Green tensor is defined as 
1
T
T
pe
pe
pe
pi
pi
C
F F
F
C F
−
−
=
=
. Inserting this 
into the Clausius-Duhem inequality 
(
)
1/ 2
0
S
C
ψ
−
+
⋅
≥


results in a relation for 
the second Piola-Kirchhoff stress tensor S . The derivation of the material model 
is suitably carried out in the intermediate configuration. For the numerical imple-
mentation of the constitutive equations it is, however, more appropriate to work in 
the undeformed or reference configuration. 
The set of constitutive equations of the model in the reference configuration is 
summarized below [1]: 
 
Stress tensors 
1
1
 
2
,   
2
,   
,  
T
T
e
kin
p
p
pi
pi
P
kin
p
e
pe
S
F
F
X
F
F
Y
C S
C X Y
C X
C
C
ψ
ψ
−
−
−
−
∂
∂
=
=
=
−
=
∂
∂
  
(21.1) 
Evolution equations 
2
2
,   
2
 
,  
3
(
)
D
p
D
p
pi
kin
pi
D
D T
Y C
b
C
C
Y
C
c
Y
Y
λ
λ
κ
λ
=
=
⋅
=





           (21.2) 
Yield function 
(
)
2
(
)
,   
(1
)
3
D
D
T
y
Y
Y
R
R
Q
e βκ
σ
−
Φ =
−
−
⋅
−
= −
                
(21.3) 
Kuhn-Tucker conditions 
0,  
0,   
0
λ
λ
≥
Φ ≤
Φ =


                                            (21.4) 
21.2.1.2   Finite Element Technology 
Recent research has been focusing on the large deformation version of a new 
eight-node solid-shell finite element based on reduced integration with hourglass 
stabilization [14]. The major problem of low-order finite-elements, used to simu-
late thin structures as the sheet metal, is locking, a non-physical stiffening effect. 
Therefore, in our recent solid-shell formulation the enhanced assumed strain 
(EAS) as well as the assumed natural strain (ANS) concepts are implemented to 
circumvent locking. To cure transverse shear-locking, the corresponding trans-
verse shear terms evaluated at locking-free sampling points are interpolated within 

464 
H. Meier et al.
 
the element domain. The same procedure applied to the transverse normal strain 
cures curvature thickness locking. For the EAS concept, the derivation is based on 
the well-established two-field variational functional 

0
1( ,
)
( ) :
0
e
c
ext
B
g u E
S E
E dV
g
δ
=
+
=

                   (21.5) 

0
2( ,
)
( ) :
0
e
e
B
g
u E
S E
E dV
δ
=
=

                             (21.6) 
which depends on the displacement vector u and the enhanced Green-Lagrange 
strain tensor ܧ௘. In this enhanced strain tensor, the strain in thickness direction is 
enriched linearly. ܧ௖ is the compatible Green-Lagrange strain tensor. Hence, the 
EAS concept simplifies to a scalar equation, which leads to an efficient and robust 
element formulation in combination with the ANS concept. Further important key 
points to improve the efficiency of the hourglass stabilization are different Taylor 
expansions with respect to the shell director. The hourglass kernel ܥ௛௚ depends on 
the material behavior in the integration point. This new finite element technology 
has been implemented into ABAQUS as user element sub-routine (UEL). 
21.2.2   Robot Model including Compliance Compensation 
Figure 21.4 shows the model structure for compensating the tool path deflections 
caused by the process forces occurring at the tool. It consists of several specific 
robot sub-models in combination with a controller. In a first step, the reference 
position and reference orientation (xr, yr, zr, Ar, Br, Cr) of the tool are transformed 
from the local workpiece coordinate system to the robot coordinate system (angles 
ϕ1 … ϕ6 of the six axes) via an inverse rigid robot model. These robot coordinates 
in combination with the process forces (Fx, Fy, Fz) build the input of the compliant 
robot forward model, which computes the deflected position and orientation of the 
tool (xd, yd, zd, Ad, Bd, Cd). The error between the reference and the deflected posi-
tion is minimized by a controller affecting the robot coordinates. Using these 
coordinates (ϕ1`… ϕ6`) as the input of a rigid robot forward model allows the cal-
culation of the position and orientation, which compensate the process force-
dependent deflection. 
 
Fig. 21.4 Simplified structure of the robot model including compliance compensation 
Compliant Robot
Forward Model
Rigid Robot
Forward Model
Controller
Rigid Robot
Inverse Model
xr, yr, zr,
Ar, Br, Cr
∑
∑
’
’
xd, yd, zd,
Ad, Bd, Cd
Fx, Fy, Fz
xc, yc, zc,
Ac, Bc, Cc

21   Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
465
 
The complete model is set up in SimMechanics, which is a toolbox completely 
integrated into the Matlab/Simulink environment. The design and implementation 
of each sub-model is described in the following section. 
21.2.2.1   Rigid Robot Inverse Model 
The calculation of the joint angles necessary to reach a specified end-effector posi-
tion requires an inverse kinematic solution. In the implemented model, a numeri-
cal solution based on the Denavit-Hartenberg convention [15] for the description 
of the kinematical structure is used. It makes use of the pseudo-inverse of the ma-
nipulator Jakobian to iteratively calculate the six joint angles of the robot for a 
given position and orientation of the TCP. [16] 
21.2.2.2   Compliant Robot Forward Model     
The examined serial robot KUKA KR360 is an open-ended structure consisting of 
six links, which are connected by rotational joints in series. The parts of the robot 
with the largest impact on overall positioning accuracy have been identified to be 
the elasticities in the joints and gears (compare [17], [18]). As the robot links can 
be assumed to be stiff the mechanical behavior of the forming tool driving robot is 
simulated by means of a multi-body system. The goal of the MBS simulation is to 
calculate the deviation of the tool center point depending on the process forces at 
the tool tip and the robots’ posture. The basic robot model is a tree-structured 
MBS built up in SimMechanics. All kinematic and kinetic parameters of the robot 
– such as lengths, masses, centers of masses and inertias of the links – are taken 
from manufacturer data sheets or estimated. As the forming velocity is low a qua-
si-static computation is used and therefore motor-rotor inertias are not taken into 
account. 
To consider the robot’s compliance the standard stiff-joint model for the robot 
is extended to flexible joints. The first five joints are each added by two  
tilting elasticity elements and one elasticity element in the driven rotational direc-
tion. For joint six, only elasticity in tilting direction is considered because the  
rotation-symmetric tool is not exposed to any torque in rotational direction. Thus, 
the complete compliant robot model is described by 17 separate joint-stiffness 
characteristics.  
Figure 21.5 shows a sample joint able to simulate its forced motion as well as 
its specific compliance characteristics, as modeled in SimMechanics. Therefore, a 
massless dummy is added, which allows the division into a driven part and a com-
pliant part. The driven part connects the dummy with the previous robot link i 
through the specified link-connecting revolute joint Joint_i_rigid. The angular 
motion, which drives this joint, is calculated by the inverse model of the rigid ro-
bot. There is no spring stiffness on this part and its motion is not influenced by 
forces. The compliant part consists of a spherical joint (Joint_i_flex) connecting 
the dummy to the next link i+1. While the spherical joint allows rotations in all 
three rotational degrees of freedom (DOF) a restoring torque is generated depend-
ing on the torsion angle and torsion velocity of the spherical joint for each of the  
 

466 
H. Meier et al.
 
 
Fig. 21.5 Compliant joint model 
three DOF. The detail in Figure 21.5 exemplarily shows the design of the steady 
damping and the torsion angle-dependent stiffness function for one tilting direc-
tion. Element Joint_i_stiffness_R3 considers the required stiffness characteristic as 
shown exemplarily in Figure 21.6. All 17 stiffness characteristics were identified 
through appropriate experiments described in chapter 21.2.2.4. 
21.2.2.3   Rigid Robot Forward Model 
The rigid forward model of the robot is the same as the compliant forward model 
but without the compliant part of the joints and the required dummies. 
21.2.2.4   Experimental Identification of Stiffness Parameters  
In order to measure the stiffness characteristics of all six joints in the 3 rotational 
DOF an optical 3-D motion and position measurement system was used. The Me-
tris K600 system measures a position and orientation of a marker, which is  
attached to at least 3 infrared ray emitting LEDs by use of 3 CCD cameras at an 
volumetric accuracy (+/-2σ) of 90 μm. The system also allows the measurement 
of relative movements between two objects by preparing both objects with LEDs. 
This feature was used to measure the torsion angle of each robot joint under a de-
fined load by measuring the relative movement between the previous and the fol-
lowing link. The load was applied by a pneumatic cylinder, which was mounted 
on the effector of the measured robot. Supporting the pressurized cylinder by the 
second robot, a defined static force with varying amplitudes was applied to the 
measured robot. To apply high torques in a defined direction to each joint opti-
mized postures of the robot were used. This procedure has been significantly  

21   Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
467
 
assuaged due to the use of the second robot as the support can easily be located in 
the workspace. The cylinder force was measured by means of a force torque sen-
sor (accuracy: ~5 % of full-scale load) mounted between the cylinder and the ro-
bots’ effector. The relevant torque was computed considering the distance  
between the cylinder and the analyzed joint. 
 
Fig. 21.6 Identification of the stiffness characteristic of axis 1 in rotational direction: Expe-
rimental setup and resulting stiffness characteristic Torque vs. Torsion Angle  
Figure 21.6 exemplarily shows the experimental setup to identify the stiffness 
characteristic of the first axis in rotational direction. The robot was set to its initial 
posture to maximize the arm lever and therefore the applied torque and to realize 
an exclusive deflection in the DOF of interest. Three LEDs were attached to the 
carrousel to measure its deflection against the ground. Therefore, there was no 
need for additional LEDs. At steps of 100 N, the force was increased up to a max-
imum of 1,400 N, decreased to 0 N, furthermore decreased up to -1,600 N and  
increased up to 0 N again. Special care was taken to ensure that the brakes of the 
robot remain unclamped during the experiment. The simplified characteristic 
shown in Figure 21.6 was derived considering the arm lever of about 3,300 mm. 
21.3   Experimental Model Validation 
The validation of the entire process structure model was carried out separately for 
each sub-model. To evaluate the accuracy of each model one typical forming 
process was performed in an experiment, which provides all required measure-
ment data. 
21.3.1   Experimental Setup  
To validate the process structure model and the compensation approach an  
experiment was executed to form the frustum geometry shown in Figure 21.7 
(geometry: Ø90 mm x 40 mm x 60°, material: DC06, thickness: 0.8 mm). On the 
a)
b)

468 
H. Meier et al.
 
one hand, this geometry can be simply described analytical and allows an easy in-
terpretation of the experimental results. On the other hand, it represents the typical 
forming strategy of geometries with Roboforming, where the effector mostly 
moves with ring-like paths. As shown in Figure 21.7b, in the experiment, the ef-
fector moves along a helical path from outside to inside and at the same time 
gradually increases the processing depth. The tool velocity v is set to 25 mm/s. 
During the forming process, the actual TCP path was measured by an optical mea-
suring device, which detects the position of LEDs applied to the robot’s effector 
(volumetric accuracy (+/-2σ): 90 μm). The process forces were measured using a 
force-torque sensor located between robot effector and tool (accuracy: ~5 % of 
full-scale load) (Figure 21.7a). Furthermore, the interpolated reference path and 
the motion of each robot joint, measured by the rotary encoders and therefore not 
including the elasticities of the axes, were logged by the robots’ control unit. 
 
Fig. 21.7 a) Experimental setup, b) Helical tool path  
The description of the tool path for the programming of the robot and for the 
simulation model as well as the tool position measurement are based on the local 
Cartesian coordinate system CS located in the centre of the geometry, as shown in 
Figure 21.7b. For a better presentation of the results, the measured and simulated 
paths were transformed to the basis ϕ, which describes the angle between each 
point of the path and the starting point of the forming process. ϕ is set to 0° at the 
starting point of the forming process and continuously increases along the helical 
tool path. The total rotation of the path during the whole forming process was 
about 19,000°, which equals to about 53 revolutions. Based on the independent 
variable ϕ, the vectors z, 
2
2
y
x +
, and 
2
2
2
z
y
x
+
+
 can be used to describe the 
tool position.  
21.3.2   Process Model Validation  
The Roboforming process is simulated by means of a finite element analysis per-
formed in ABAQUS/Standard. In order to estimate the performance of the model 
an experiment was conducted using a 220x220 mm² fully-clamped DC06 metal 
sheet with a thickness of 0.8 mm. The forming tool has a tool tip radius of 6 mm. 
The Young’s Modulus is 206,000 MPa and the Poisson’s ratio is 0.3. We used a 
path obtained from the real-time path (optical measuring device Metris K600) of 

21   Increase of the Dimensio
 
the robots. The x and y-ax
the thickness direction. 
The time-dependent pa
time are translated into a
tion (DISP). At this, the i
simulation of a complicat
description of the materia
to-plastic material model
dening is used to handle 
Bauschinger and ratchetin
nomena of the hardening 
the fact that straining in o
rection, while ratcheting 
result of unsymmetrical s
very complex the solution
which is relatively high in
important aspect. Here, th
dies. The interaction betw
a penalty surface-to-surfa
cient is 0.05. The results
continuum-shell element 
strain of the deformed s
Figures 21.8a and b. 
Fig. 21.8 a) Equivalent plast
The process forces from
measured tool path of the
by the experiment. Due to
rameters differences are to
forming process of up to 
A more efficient way is r
simulation. 
onal Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
46
xes describe the plane of the sheet. The z-axis is used fo
ath is given by x(t), y(t) and z(t). These coordinates ove
a user sub-routine to specify prescribed boundary cond
influence of acceleration and velocity are neglected. Th
ted forming process like Roboforming requires a realist
al behavior. As presented above, a large deformation ela
 with combined non-linear kinematic and isotropic ha
the springback effect of the sheet. It should describe th
ng effect, which belongs to the most characteristic phe
behavior of metals. The Bauschinger effect is defined b
one direction reduces the yield stress in the opposite d
denotes the progressive increase of the mean strain as 
tress cycles. Due to the fact that the contact behaviour 
n time is dominated by the number of contact iteration
n this simulation. Therefore, the contact formulation is a
he forming and supporting tools are modeled as rigid bo
ween them and the deformable sheet metal is defined b
ace contact method with finite sliding. The friction coeff
s shown in this chapter are computed using an 8-nod
with reduced integration (SC8R). The equivalent plast
heet metal for an infeed of 20.04 mm can be seen i
 
tic strain (FE-Simulation) b) Maximum infeed 
m the simulation of the sheet metal forming applying th
e experiment are compared to the process forces provide
o the lack of available experiments to fit the material p
o be expected. Moreover, the simulation of one comple
 20 mm in the infeed direction is very time-consumin
required to apply the correct material parameters for th
69
or 
er 
di-
he 
tic 
as-
ar-
he 
e-
by 
di-
a 
is 
ns, 
an 
o-
by  
fi-
de  
tic 
in  
he 
ed 
a-
ete 
g.  
he 

470 
H. Meier et al.
 
21.3.3   Robot Model Validation     
The validation of the robot model and the compensation approach was conducted 
by use of the experiment described in Chapter 21.3.1. Furthermore, it was vali-
dated step-wise along its sub-models shown in Figure 21.4.  
In the first step, the inverse model of the rigid robot was validated by compar-
ing the results of the axis-angle calculations of the simulation model and the robot 
controller for arbitrary tool paths. It could be determined that the accuracy of the 
simulation results only depends on the accuracy and properties of the selected ite-
ration and solver parameters. The simulation model agrees with the robot control-
ler at an accuracy of 1e-4 degrees or better. 
In the next step, the accuracy of the unloaded robot was analyzed to obtain a 
reference for the following validation steps. Therefore, the robot effector was 
moved along the given helical tool path but without a sheet metal in the clamping 
device. Figure 21.9 shows the experimental results as the position of the TCP ex-
pressed as vector 
2
2
2
z
y
x
+
+
 vs. ϕ. Whenomparing the measured path (dashed 
green) with the reference path (solid black), periodical oscillations with a maximal 
amplitude of about 0.6 mm and a period of 360° can be detected. These deviations 
are within the absolute path accuracy specification of the robot manufacturer. 
They are caused by several reasons, as described in [19]. For example, the unstea-
dy course of the reference path, which is logged by the robot’s control unit, shows 
errors occurring during the interpolation.  
 
Fig. 21.9 Comparison of the reference path and the unloaded measured path to evaluate the 
robots’ path accuracy. Comparison of the simulation results and experimental results for the 
loaded robot to evaluate the robot model accuracy. 

21   Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
471
 
To validate the compliant robot model the experiment was repeated with the 
same tool path but with a sheet metal placed in the clamping device. Based on the 
measured process forces (Figure 21.2) during this experiment, a simulation was 
executed to calculate the deviated path. Figure 21.9 shows the results of both the 
loaded robot experiment (dotted blue) and the simulation of the loaded robot (dash 
dotted red). Considering the result of the real robot, in the first half of the experi-
ment, the average deviation increases up to 1.1 mm and the oscillation amplitude 
enlarges up to 1.4 mm for the loaded robot. During the second half of the experi-
ment, these deviations stay constant. These characteristics are caused by the 
process forces in all directions, which increase up to the middle of the experiment 
and the rotation of the forces in radial and tangential direction about Z at a fre-
quency of ϕ = 360°. Further investigations of the results (not shown in the  
diagram) have shown that the portion of the deviation in radial and tangential  
direction is noticeably higher than in infeed direction, which is caused by the 
higher stiffness characteristics of the robot in infeed direction. In conclusion, the 
comparison of the simulated path and the experimental path shows a very good 
qualitative and quantitative agreement. The maximal difference is about 0.3 mm. 
Hence, the compliant robot model shows a behavior close to reality. 
For the validation of the compensation approach, the compensation path al-
ready calculated in the previous simulation was used in another forming experi-
ment. Figure 21.10 shows the calculated compensation path (dashed green) and 
the resulting measured path of the experiment (dash dotted red). With reference to  
 
 
Fig. 21.10 Comparison of the resulting tool path before and after compensation to evaluate 
the performance of the compensation approach 

472 
H. Meier et al.
 
the reference path (solid black), the compensation path is nearly symmetrical to 
the uncompensated path of the loaded robot (dotted blue). Considering the meas-
ured tool path of the final experiment it can be noticed that it matches the refer-
ence path very well. Not only the average deviations but also the oscillations have 
been reduced in all directions. A decrease from 1.1 mm to 0.1 mm for the average 
deviation and from 1.4 mm to 0.8 mm for the oscillation amplitude can be ob-
served. These remaining oscillations are mostly the results of the robot´s inaccura-
cy itself, as already shown in Figure 21.9. 
21.5   Conclusion 
The chapter shows that the presented model-based approach has a high potential to 
significantly increase the geometrical accuracy in Roboforming. The demonstrated 
experimental results document a high efficiency of the compensation method. In 
order to complete the model-based approach further optimization and the integra-
tion of the FEM model are necessary. Due to the fact that the computation time is 
still very high and path deviations still exist, different investigations still have to 
be carried out.  With the presented material model we can further investigate the 
influence of the kinematic hardening on the compliance of the sheet metal and the 
springback. This is expected to provide significant impact on the simulation re-
sults. Additionally, the contact algorithms have to be improved. Finally, the ap-
proach has to be tested with complex geometries. 
References  
[1] Vladimirov, I.N., Pietryga, M.P., Reese, S.: On the modelling of nonlinear-kinematic 
hardening at finite strains with application to springback – comparison of time inte-
gration algorithms. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 75, 
1–28 (2008) 
[2] Douflou, J., Szekeres, A., Vanherck, P.: Force Measurements for Single Point Incre-
mental Forming: A Experimental Study. In: Proceedings of the 11th Int. Conference 
on Sheet Metal, pp. 441–448 (2005) 
[3] Jeswiet, J., Micari, F., Hirt, G., Bramley, A., Douflou, J., Allwood, J.: Asymmetric 
Single Point Forming of Sheet Metal. In: Proceedings of the 55th CIRP General As-
sembly in Antalya, pp. 88–114 (2005) (in Antalya) 
[4] Meier, H., Smukala, V., Dewald, O., Zhang, J.: Two Point Incremental Forming with 
Two Moving Forming Tools. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on 
Sheet Metal, pp. 599–605 (2007) 
[5] Meier, H., Laurischkat, R., Zhu, J.: A Model Based Approach to Increase the Part 
Accuracy in Robot based Incremental Sheet Metal Forming. In: AIP Conference Pro-
ceedings, vol. 1315, pp. 1407–1412 (2010) 
[6] Vladimirov, I.N.: Anisotropic material modelling with application to sheet metal 
forming RWTH Aachen, Institut für Angewandte Mechanik, Technische Universität 
Braunschweig, Dissertation (2009) 

21   Increase of the Dimensional Accuracy of Sheet Metal Parts  
473
 
[7] Choi, Y., Han, C.S., Lee, J.K., Wagoner, R.: Modeling multi-axial deformation of 
planar anisotropic elasto-plastic materials. part I: Theory, International Journal of 
Plasticity 22, 1745–1764 (2006) 
[8] Dettmer, W., Reese, S.: On the theoretical and numerical modelling ofArmstrong-
Frederick kinematic hardening in the finite strain regime. Computer Methods in Ap-
plied Mechanics and Engineering 193, 87–116 (2004) 
[9] Hakansson, P., Wallin, M., Ristinmaa, M.: Comparison of isotropic hardening and ki-
nematic hardening in thermoplasticity. International Journal of Plasticity 21, 1435–
1460 (2005) 
[10] Menzel, A., Ekh, M., Runesson, K., Steinmann, P.: A framework for multiplicative 
elastoplasticity with kinematic hardering coupled to anisotropic damage. International 
Journal of Plasticity 21, 397–434 (2005) 
[11] Svendsen, B., Levkovitch, V., Wang, J., Reusch, F., Reese, S.: Application of the 
concept of evolving structure tensors to the modeling of initial and induced anisotro-
py at large deformation. Computers & Structures 84, 1077–1085 (2006) 
[12] Wallin, M., Ristinmaa, M.: Deformation gradient based kinematic hardening model. 
International Journal of Plasticity 21, 2025–2050 (2005) 
[13] Armstrong, F., PJ, CO: A mathematical representation of the multiaxial Bauschinger 
effect, C.E.G.B. Report RD/B/N731, Berkeley Nuclear Laboratories, Berkeley, U.K 
(1966) 
[14] Schwarze, M., Reese, S.: A reduced integration solid-shell finite element based on the 
EAS and the ANS concept – geometrically linear problems. International Journal for 
Numerical Methods in Engineering 80, 1322–1355 (2009) 
[15] Hartenberg, R.S., Denavit, J.: A kinematic notation for lower pair mechanisms based 
on matrices. Journal of Applied Mechanics 77, 215–221 (1955) 
[16] Corke, P.I.: A Robotics Toolbox for MATLAB. IEEE Robotics and Automation 
Magazine 3(1), 24–32 (1996) 
[17] Gerstmann, U.: Robotergenauigkeit: Der Getriebeeinfluss auf die Arbeits- und Posi-
tionsgenauigkeit, Dissertation, Universität Hannover (1997) 
[18] Pham, M.T., Gautier, M., Poignet, P.: Identification of Joint Stiffness with Bandpass 
Filtering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics & Automation, pp. 
2867–2872 (2001) 
[19] Beyer, L.: Genauigkeitssteigerung von Industrierobotern, Dissertation, Universität der 
Bundeswehr Hamburg (2004) 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 475–490. 
springerlink.com                                               © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 22  
Gear Rolling Process 
R. Neugebauer, U. Hellfritzsch, M. Lahl,  
M. Milbrandt, S. Schiller, and T. Druwe  
Abstract. The rolling process is an efficient alternative to currently exclusively 
applied cut-ting processes for the production of high gears, particularly regarding 
economic and ecological aspects. The manufacturing of involute gear profiles by 
forming, specifically by rolling, has several advantages in comparison to cutting 
methods, e. g. significantly shorter process times, no material loss and subsequent-
ly no chip disposal, strength increase in the forming zone and a high surface quali-
ty. Due to these characteristics gear forming will continue to gain relevance in  
future gear manufacturing. The Chapter presents the efforts being made at the 
Fraunhofer IWU Chemnitz to reach an advancement of the high gear rolling 
process by improving the gearing qualities. It presents the investigation and analy-
sis of the interaction between tools, machine and forming process in gear rolling. 
The results of measurements on the displacements of workpiece, tools and clamp-
ing device during the rolling process of a high gearing are displayed. The setup 
and results of accompanying simulation of the forming process are also given. 
22.1   Introduction 
The gear rolling process with round tools is one example of cold bulk metal  
forming technologies. Cold rolling of high gearings is a new technique with new 
requirements on the rolling equipment and process. Initially, pitch-related ques-
tions are of primary importance. The profile depth and the pitch size of high gear-
ings are larger than those of stub tooth and normal gearings. This results in the 
displacement extent of the rolling tool by about half of the initial pitch value and a 
changing pitch value during the process (initial and calibration pitch). Due to the 
occurring strain hardening during cold forming the material is characterized by an 
enormous flow stress that generates high stress rates during the forming process. 
Resulting effects are elastic deformations of the rolling tools and a significant dis-
placement of machine components. The process forces affect the structure of the 
machine, cause deviations in the rolling kinematics and influence the forming 
forces that need to be generated by the machine. This complex interaction thus re-
quires a combined consideration of the forming process and structure of the ma-
chine in terms of rolling process cause-and-effect relationships as well as reactions 
of involved machine components. The forming result largely depends on these 
factors (Figure 22.1). 

476 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
 
Fig. 22.1 Influencing factors on the gear quality 
Existing machine and process design procedures applied to high gearings insuf-
ficiently comply with the rolling standards DIN 3960, 3961 and 3962. The main 
reason is the inadequate understanding of interactions and relations between ma-
chine structure / components and forming process [1]. The aim of the presented 
investigations was to determine the influence of machine components and tool 
displacements in the rolling process on the gear quality of rolled high gearings. 
The results lead to a better understanding of the system machine-process-tool and 
can be used to enhance the quality of rolled high gears by implanting them in the 
tool, process and machine design operations. 
22.2   Experimental Investigation 
22.2.1   Gear Rolling Technique 
The gear rolling technique, used by the IWU Chemnitz, is a cross rolling method 
applied for profile or thread geometries. The two round tools are toothed outside 
with a symmetric contour. The forming process starts by reducing the distance of 
the axes of the two tools, which rotate synchronously. The forming of the gear 
geometry is realized by the rolling kinematic between the tool profile and the gen-
erated evolvent flanks of the gear. As is typical for the rolling of gears, the initia-
tion of rolling forces occurs in tangential direction, resulting in different states of 
stress on the left and right flank. The difference also causes asymmetric material 
flow results (Figure 22.2). 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
477
 
 
Fig. 22.2 Asymmetric stress conditions during the rolling process 
The process of gear rolling with round tools is divided into three phases: 
 
• Initial rolling phase: rolling of tool tip pitches into the pre-form-diameter of the 
workpiece (WP) 
• Penetration phase: penetration of the round tools into the workpiece until de-
manded parameters of gearing are reached (tip diameter and root diameter) 
• Calibrating phase: calibration of the finished rolled gearing to achieve complete 
and uniform tooth form filling and circularity (Fig. 22.3) 
 
 
Fig. 22.3 Phases of the rolling process 
By setting up a rolling process with controlled points of reversion (changing 
rolling direction of both tools) it is possible to position the tip fold of each tooth 
centrally and allow a calibration forming of the tip, thus realizing the complete 
tooth form filling in the final calibrating phase. However, the optimized closing of 
the tip fold has no influence on the load capacity of the gearing. By controlling the 
rolling process in this way an asymmetric forming of flank areas can be avoided.  
 

478 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
The round rolling technique allows a repeated over-rolling of the workpiece. 
There is no limit to the number of revolutions, which theoretically can be regarded 
as a forming process with infinite tool length. The complexity of the process con-
trol consists in the fine tuning of the adjustment of the workpiece pre-diameter, 
tool and workpiece material, tool evolvent profile and the penetration stage. 
Process results can produce gear qualities according to DIN 3960 [2], DIN 3961 
[3] and DIN 3962 [4] with limited remaining variations of profile, tooth trace, 
pitch and concentricity. 
22.2.2   Range of Currently Rolled Gears and Achieved Qualities 
The industrial manufacturing of high gearings, mainly for automotive gears, is 
currently realized exclusively by cutting technologies. The manufacture by form-
ing, i. e. rolling methods, represents a scientific novelty in the international tech-
nological development. Figure 22.4 illustrates the current and future development 
of profile cross rolling with round, outside-toothed tools. 
 
Fig. 22.4 State of research for rolling of high gearings 
The gear qualities are measured according to DIN 3962. This standard defines a 
range of quality measures based on dimensions and accuracies for each relevant 
gear variable. The technological limits in gear forming have been considerably ex-
tended. Ranges of gear types, formerly impossible to form, have been produced by 
the round rolling technique. State of the art qualities for the rolling of stub tooth 
gearings are qualities 7 to 8. First experimental investigations resulted in rolled 
high gearings for automotive components with tooth height coefficient y > 2.7  
 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
479
 
with quality 9 to 10. The tooth height coefficient is defined by the following rela-
tion, where da and df are the tip and root diameters, mn is the normal module and hz 
is the tooth height: 
n
z
n
f
a
m
h
m
d
d
y
=
−
=
2
                                              (22.1) 
In order to be industrially applicable quality levels 7 to 8 have to be achieved for 
the rolling of high gearings as well. The innovative character of manufacturing 
high gearings by the cold rolling of massive billet requires the adaptation and im-
provement of machine concepts, the analysis of the interactions and reactions in 
the system machine - tool - gear profile and the development of scientifically 
based means and methods for the prediction of gear qualities. In Figure 22.5, an 
example of a cold rolled gear (y = 2.47) with front area finishing is illustrated. The 
right side column in Figure 22.5 shows the measurement curves of the relevant pa-
rameters profile, tooth trace and pitch. The qualities of the gear according to DIN 
3962 are also given. 
 
Fig. 22.5 Quality parameters of a rolled high gearing 
In the past, the accuracy of the rolled gear wheels depended to a large extent on 
the quality of the tools. Nowadays, conventional manufacturing processes can 
produce gear qualities 5 or 6. Even quality 4 can be reached by profile grinding. 
These qualities are sufficient for reaching gear qualities 7 or 8 in the rolling 
process. 

480 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
22.2.3   Interaction of Machine and Process 
The rolling of high gearings at the Fraunhofer IWU Chemnitz is performed  
with the rolling machine ‘PWZ Spezial’ (Fig. 22.6). The machine is conceptually 
designed for applications in technical research and for the manufacturing of small 
series in the sector of rolling worm geometries, special profiles and stub tooth 
gearings. The PWZ consists of the machine base combined with two rolling slides, 
which are supported and guided by needle roller bearing tracks. Two hydraulic cy-
linders inside the rolling slides generate the movement of feed and return stroke. 
The motion control of both slides is based on an incremental length measurement 
system. 
 
Fig. 22.6 Components of the rolling machine 
The presented investigation aimed at attaining knowledge about the machine 
behavior during the rolling process. The machine concept was designed without 
the consideration of manufacturing cold rolled high gears. The specific demands 
of rolling high gears require the analysis of the behavior of this machine type. 
Based on these insights the research and development of interactions between the 
machinery, process and rolled part can be continued. The initial task in the expe-
riments consisted of the analysis of pitch relations in combination with the axial 
positions of both tools at the process beginning. In Figure 22.7, the variation of 
critical axial positions and tool displacement are shown. 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
481
 
 
Fig. 22.7 Tool displacement 
Uneven numbers of teeth on the tool and gearing cause an unsymmetrical dis-
tribution of force impact points on the left and right side of the workpiece. In con-
sequence, left and right tool are horizontally displaced by about half pitch at the 
tool tip diameter. The parameters of the gear used in the experiments are listed in 
Table 22.1.  
Table 22.1 Gear parameters 
number of teeth 
zpart 
20 
 
normal module 
mn 
3.45 mm 
helix angle 
β 
20° 
pressure angle 
αn 
24° 
tip diameter 
da 
84.2 mm 
root diameter 
df 
69.0 mm 
tooth height 
hz 
7.6 mm 
tooth height coefficient 
y 
2.2 
material 
- 
16MnCr5 
 

482 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
Based on the value of the pitch at the tool tip diameter ptool,A,  the initial pitch pa 
is calculated from the billet pre-form diameter dV and tooth number zpart according 
to the equation (22.2). The pre-form diameter results from the cross-section area 
of the gearing with the parameters given in Table 22.1. 
mm
π
mm
z
π
d
p
p
part
V
tool,A
a
 
11.5
20
 
73.2
=
⋅
=
⋅
=
=
                      
(22.2) 
Subsequently, the initial tool displacement can be calculated: 
mm
pa
 
5.75
2
mm
 
11.5
2
=
=
                                         (22.3) 
In addition to the problem of tool displacement the problem of an inconstant pitch 
is a significant factor. The pitch value changes during the rolling process in a non-
linear progression (Fig. 22.8).  
 
Fig. 22.8 Pitch variable process [1] 
The initial pitch pa is calculated by using the pre-form diameter dv, while the 
calibration pitch pk is calculated by using the target root diameter df: 
mm
π
mm
z
π
d
p
part
f
k
 
10.84
20
 
69
=
⋅
=
⋅
=
                              (22.4) 
Due to the pitch difference between initial pitch (pa = 11.5 mm) and calibration 
pitch (pk = 10.84 mm) the tool teeth are subjected to bending stress. This stress 
furthermore affects machine components and the rolling kinematic. The aim of  
the investigations was the identification of the character and magnitude of the  
described problems. The displacements and elastic deformations of machine com-
ponents were measured. The ‘Faro Laser Tracker’ was used to detect and record 
displacement and deformation. This 3D portable laser measuring system is used 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
483
 
for the measurement of devices and machinery. Hereby, a laser beam from the 
tracker is focused onto a mirror reflector and projected back by this mirror. The 
reflected light waves allow the determination of distances as well as horizontal 
and vertical angles. Using the obtained data the exact 3D positions can be calcu-
lated. Another advantage of the laser tracker system is the ability to measure mo-
tion. The mirrors rotate and the tracker, driven by a highly sensitive servomotor, 
follows the mirror movement [5]. Seven rotating mirrors were mounted on specif-
ic points of the machine for the tests (Fig. 22.9). 
 
Fig. 22.9 Placement of the measuring points in the machine 
Measuring points 1 and 2 were installed on the bearing blocks in front and be-
hind the tool to record the movement of the left tool axis under load. Furthermore, 
the interaction effect with the left carriage could be analyzed by the rotating mir-
rors 6 and 7. To determine the tool displacement during the rolling process mirrors 
were mounted in front of and behind the round rolling tools (1, 2 and 4). The inte-
raction between tool holder and rolling carriage could be measured by the rotating 
mirrors installed parallel to the tool measuring points (5, 6 and 7). At the tips of 
each clamping device a measuring point (3) was fixed in axial workpiece position 

484 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
to determine the interaction between tools, workpiece, and workpiece holder. The 
measuring points on the tool axes (measuring points 1 and 4) were used to detect 
the relative positions between tools and workpiece during the rolling process. The 
experiments were carried out with the tool rotation speed set of 12 revolutions per 
minute and 4 reversion points. The graph in Figure 22.10 displays the progress of 
the rolling force and tool path during the rolling process. The maximum recorded 
force was 99.2 kN, which corresponds to a machine load of about 25 % (maxi-
mum load capacity 400 kN). 
 
Fig. 22.10 Penetration and force path 
22.2.4   Results 
The following diagrams show the displacement of the measuring points (MP) dur-
ing the rolling process recorded by the laser tracker system. The beginning of the 
process represents the zero-situation, i. e. the unloaded initial position of the ma-
chine system. During the rolling process the direction of the tool revolution re-
versed four times. At the points of reversion during the penetration phase the  
entire machine system is briefly unloaded. Such reversion points correspond to the 
points of sharp amplitude changes of the measurement curves. 
Displacements in x-y plane (Fig. 22.11 and 22.12) 
The measurement points on the tool axis as well as on the rolling slides were dis-
placed under load into negative y-direction. At the front bearing block (measuring 
point 1 (MP 1) a higher load was detected. In consequence, the rolling carriage 
(points 6 and 7) tilted around the z-axis. 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
485
 
 
Fig. 22.11 Displacement in the x-y plane (left: tool axle; right: rolling slide) 
 
Fig. 22.12 Displacement in the x-y plane (left: initiation; right: displacement) 
Displacements in x-z plane (Fig. 22.13 and 22.14) 
The entire system was displaced in positive x-direction during the rolling process. 
Both rolling slides and the tool holders (measurement points 1, 2 and 4) moved 
parallel to each other. A strong displacement of the left rear-bearing block could 
be noticed. 
 
Fig. 22.13 Displacement in the x-z plane (left: tools; right: rolling slides) 

486 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
 
Fig. 22.14 Displacement in the x-z plane (left: initiation; right: displacement) 
Displacements in y-z plane (Fig. 22.15 and 22.16) 
Both tools as well as the tips of the clamping devices were displaced out of the ini-
tial position in negative y-direction. Measuring points 1 and 3 were moving paral-
lel to each other during the forming process. The right tool (measurement point 4) 
showed a stronger displacement from the axial position during the forming [6]. 
 
Fig. 22.15 Displacement in the y-z plane (both tools und clamping tips) 
 
Fig. 22.16 Displacement in the y-z plane (left: initiation; right: displacement) 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
487
 
22.3   Modeling and Simulation 
Because of the increase of available computing capacities and the latest findings in 
the FEM simulation of incremental forming technologies an illustration of the de-
manding process kinematics became possible. For the selected reference gearing 
of module mn = 3.45 mm and zpart = 20 a regular process containment with tools as 
deformable geometries, the workpiece, the rolling kinematic and the boundary pa-
rameters was defined. The aim of simulating the rolling process was to calculate 
the three-dimensional component material flow, the maximum achievable defor-
mation, the extent of workpiece strain hardening, the resulting orientation of ma-
terial fiber and the occurring tool and workpiece loads. The simulation was carried 
out using the Transvalor Software Forge. The rolling machine itself was defined 
as non-deformable. The measured displacements of tools, workpiece and machine 
components shall be included into the simulation model in further projects. The 
process was computed in an acceptable calculating time and could be verified by 
practical investigations. The following tables provide an overview of setting pa-
rameters of the simulation. 
Table 22.2 Parameters of simulated workpiece 
numeric simulation of rolling process – workpiece 
material 
- C15/16MnCr5, soft annealed 
- Young’s modulus: 200 kN/mm²  
- Poisson ratio: 0.3 
- cold forming according to Hansel-Spittel  
meshing 
- 4-knots tetrahedron-shaped elements 
- element size in forming zone: 1 mm 
- element size in core zone: 9 mm 
discretization 
contact conditions 
tools – workpiece 
- µ = 0.2 (friction coefficient) 
- m = 0.4 (friction factor) 
thermal conditions 
- not defined 
manipulator 
- defined to limit axial material flow 
 
 
 

488 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
Table 22.3 Parameters of simulated round tools 
numeric simulation of rolling process – rolling tools 
material 
- pure elastic material behavior 
- Young’s modulus: 200 kN/mm² 
- Poisson ratio: 0.3 
meshing 
- deformable geometry 
- 4-knots tetrahedron-shaped elements 
- element size in contact zone :4 mm 
- element size in core zone: 20 mm 
- approx. 1.9·10
5 elements 
discretization 
numeric simulation of rolling process –  tool holders / drive 
contact to 
tools 
- spindle diameter: 120 mm  
- fixed connection 
kinematics 
- feed 0.07 mm/s 
- rotation speed 12 rpm with changes of direction 
- reversion points after 11, 17, 23 and 28 workpiece revolutions 
Figure 22.17 shows the stress distribution on the tool and deformed workpiece 
in the normal section at the end of the penetration phase (left figure) and a picture 
of the rolled component (right figure). A detailed validation and evaluation of the 
quantitative simulation resulting in verifiability is intended to provide a compari-
son with the practice tests or with the experimental-numerical method for the de-
termination of the tool loads. The equivalent stress by v. Mises was used to 
represent the three-dimensional stress state, showing high values of equivalent 
stress. The results of the simulation lead to the selection of high performance 
powder metallurgical steel with high strength and toughness as rolling tool materi-
al. Compared to the real material behavior the simulation shows a rotation kine-
matics-related volume increase in the forming simulation process in spite of 
Runge-Kutta interpolation (RK2), which results in a faster "form filling" of the 
tool gap with workpiece material in the simulation than in the real process. 

22   Gear Rolling Process 
489
 
 
Fig. 22.17 Stress distribution during calibration according to v. Mises 
22.4   Evaluation of Interactions 
The forces occurring during the rolling process, including the additional load  
induced by changing pitch values, cause a displacement of rolling tools and sup-
porting components. The consequence is a deviation from the optimum rolling  
kinematics resulting in profile, tooth trace and pitch deviations and thus in a di-
vergence from the geometrical workpiece contour defined by DIN 3962. As a con-
sequence of the tangential contact of the tool teeth and the workpiece as well as 
the asymmetrical displacements of the rolling tools, the tool bearings and the 
workpiece fixture, the tool tooth in the contact zone is subjected to a bending load. 
This causes an elastic deformation of the tool tooth and an interference with the 
next tooth, such that the following tool tooth pushes against the next workpiece 
tooth too early. The rolling tools are highly stressed by dynamically oscillating 
loads on the tool tooth during contact with the workpiece. Particularly the asym-
metrical displacements of the two rolling tools and the workpiece fixture cause a 
high load on the tips of the clamping system. Consequently, the displacements and 
deformations reduce gearing quality as well as tool life. 
22.5   Conclusion 
The demand for manufacturing methods, which ensure a high utilization of ma-
terial with a high quality of the final products and short production times, conti-
nuously pushes the improvement of existing and the development of new process 
technologies. The manufacturing of transmission-typical gears by cold forming is 
one new approach. Current industrial applications of gear rolling are in the range 
of stub tooth gearing, tappet gearings and pinions in defined limits to maximum 
module 1.6. First investigations demonstrated that a forming capacity of high 
gearings can be obtained by adapting and optimizing the rolling process to the 
specific gear parameters. The results of the trial series proved that tooth heights 
can be manufactured, which so far have not been producible by cold cross rolling 

490 
R. Neugebauer et al.
 
processes. The main tasks of future research are to improve the tool and process 
design regarding the accuracy of the rolling kinematic and the precision of the 
pitch. The machine concepts of future rolling machines have to be adapted to and 
optimized for high gear rolling as currently available machines are derived from 
guidelines for the rolling of stub tooth gearings. Especially the stiffness and/or de-
sign of the workpiece holder and rolling tool axles have to be enhanced, regarding 
the high loads in the process of high gear rolling. The first steps into the field of 
cold forming of high gears have been taken but major research work on the analy-
sis of the interaction between process, machine and part is needed in order to de-
velop the technology to a reliable level for industrial application. From a scientific 
point of view the detection of tool stresses within the process boundary conditions 
provided the basis for further steps in a technology research and process optimiza-
tion. The knowledge of load parameters as well as their local and temporal occur-
rence allows the performance of direct discharges for parameter-adjusted tool and 
process dimensioning. Adequate tool materials and heat treatments become select-
able. Thus, the FEM simulation is an implementation for shortening development 
times and product innovations while maintaining the product quality requirements. 
References 
[1] Neugebauer, R., Hellfritzsch, U., Lahl, M.: Advanced process limits by rolling of heli-
cal gears. In: 11th ESAFORM Conference on Material Forming, Lyon (2008) 
[2] DIN 3960, Definitions, parameters and equations for involute cylindrical gears and 
gear pairs. Beuth Verlag GmbH, Berlin (1987) 
[3] DIN 3961, Tolerance for cylindrical gear teeth, bases. Beuth Verlag GmbH, Berlin 
(1978) 
[4] DIN 3962, Tolerance for cylindrical gear teeth. Beuth Verlag GmbH, Berlin (1978) 
[5] Neugebauer, R., Klug, D., Hellfritzsch, U.: Description of the interactions during gear 
rolling as a basis for a method for the prognosis of the attainable quality parameters. 
Prod. Eng. 1(3), 253–257 (2007), doi:10.1007/s11740-007-0041-9 
[6] Neugebauer, R., Hellfritzsch, U., Lahl, M.: Interaction of Machine, Tool and Process 
by Rolling of High Gears. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on 
Process Machine Interactions, Hannover (2008) 
 
 

B. Denkena and F. Hollmann (Eds.): Process Machine Interactions, LNPE, pp. 491–511. 
springerlink.com                                              © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 
Chapter 23 
Investigation of the Complex Interactions 
during Impulse Forming of Tubular Parts 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya 
Abstract. The expansion of tubes by direct application of gas detonation waves or 
electromagnetic forming (EMF) is an alternative forming method for hollow-
section workpieces. In particular, the process can be used for typical hydro-formed 
parts, car body or exhaust elements in the automotive industry, for example. The 
introduced processes belong to the category of high speed forming methods and 
provide typical advantages, such as higher achievable strains, compared to quasi-
static methods using high water pressure. Another advantage of these processes is 
the avoidance of high contact forces by employing an “inertia-locked tool” system 
due to the extremely short process time. To develop a controllable process it is es-
sential to gain a good knowledge of the interactions in the system. This can be 
achieved by using simulations in combination with experimental investigations; 
their results are the topic of this paper. Also included are special investigations of 
the material behavior at high strain rates. 
23.1   Introduction 
Implementing lightweight construction concepts has been becoming more and 
more important over the last years. Thereby, material as well as design aspects 
have to be considered. The application of space frame structures from hollow pro-
files made of the typical lightweight metals as aluminum and magnesium alloys is 
a common approach. However, to gain maximum weight reduction, it is necessary 
to apply the most suitable material for each separate component [1]. Consequent-
ly, a material mix including high strength steels, (fiber-reinforced) polymers and 
the already mentioned lightweight alloys results. Further weight reduction can be 
achieved by combining the functions of different parts and thus eliminating sever-
al components completely. This constructive approach usually leads to a higher 
complexity of the remaining components, which have to fulfill different and some-
times contradictory functions [2]. This concerns the geometry and material as-
pects. It could be necessary to combine the corrosion resistance and strength of 
aluminum, steel or titanium with the high electrical and thermal conductivity of 
aluminum or copper, for example, guaranteeing a thin-walled but stiff geometry at 
the same time. Consequently, highly complex forming and joining tasks have to be 
performed in modern production processes so that conventional technologies fre-
quently reach their limits. Considering conventional forming operations, such as 

492 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
quasi-static hydroforming alone, the formability might be too low to realize the 
complex part geometry without wrinkling, buckling and/or cracking. When think-
ing of thermal joining technologies, problems might arise due to the high affinity 
of aluminium, steel and titanium to the atmospheric gases oxygen, nitrogen  
and hydrogen. Especially at elevated temperatures in the range of 300°C and 
more, brittle intermetallic phases can be formed, which decrease the joint quality 
significantly. 
Here, high speed or impulse-forming technologies, such as explosive forming 
by a gas detonation and electromagnetic forming (EMF), offer a high potential. 
They can be applied for forming with and without a form defining tool as well as 
for joining by forming, where the connections can be based on force-fit, form-fit 
and impact-welded material joints. The processes use the energy density of a de-
tonating gas (forming by gas detonation) or pulsed magnetic fields (EMF) to acce-
lerate and form tubular workpieces without any mechanical contact to the tools 
and machines, for example. Although the principle and the advantages of both 
technologies have already been known for several decades no wide implementa-
tion into industrial series production has been realizable up to now. One important 
reason for this deficit is the lack of a deep understanding of the process and, based 
upon this, the lack of general and easily applicable design strategies for the 
process dimensioning [3]. To fill these gap fundamental investigations considering 
the complex interdependencies occurring during high-speed forming and the join-
ing of tubes by gas detonation and EMF, respectively, were carried out bearing in 
mind aspects of forming technology, material science and process technology. The 
results of this work are presented in this article, structured according to two differ-
ent sub-systems: 
• Sub-system 1 deals with the acceleration and the free forming of a workpiece. 
Here, the investigations focus on the interdependencies between the pressure 
pulse and the workpiece deformation, which, in turn, retroact on the temporary 
and local development of the pressure. These investigations were carried out 
disregarding the special application (forming or joining) but considering the 
two different acceleration technologies separately. In the case of forming by 
gas detonation, the interdependencies between the reactive gas, the energy 
source, and the working medium at the same time and the workpiece is rele-
vant, while in the case of EMF, the interdependencies between the tool coil, the 
magnetic field and pressure, and the workpiece are considered. 
• Sub-system 2 deals with interdependencies during the impact of the workpiece 
and an according obstacle, which can be a form-defining tool or a joining part-
ner. Here, the impacting parameters (e. g. impacting velocity and angle), the 
properties of the two components (workpiece and obstacle) and the formation 
of the contact are analyzed. The evaluation of the result is carried out consider-
ing the special application. While in the case of forming against a form defining 
tool, the form filling and the accuracy of the deformed part are decisive,  
the formation of the joint and the transferable load are relevant in the case of 
joining. 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
493
 
23.2   Sub-system 1: Acceleration and Free Forming of a 
Workpiece 
23.2.1   Electro-Magnetic Forming 
In the EMF of tubular components, the energy density of pulsed magnetic fields is 
used to exert radial forces to workpieces made of an electrically highly conductive 
material and deform them within a few micro-seconds. The principle can be ap-
plied in two different variants depending on the setup of the tool coil and the 
workpiece. In electromagnetic compression, the tube is positioned in a cylindrical 
coil while in electromagnetic expansion the coil is surrounded by the workpiece. 
23.2.1.1   Setup and Process Principle 
In both variants, the setup can be represented by an oscillating circuit, where the 
forming machine serves as the energy supply while the tool coil and the workpiece 
represent the consumer load.  
 
Fig. 23.1 Principle sketch of the electro-magnetic tube compression and expansion 
In Figure 23.1, the forming machine is represented by its equivalent circuit dia-
gram consisting of the capacitor C, the inner resistance Ri and the inner inductance 
Li. Closing the high current switch causes a sudden discharge of the capacitor and 
thus a damped sinusoidal current I(t) flows through the tool coil so that a corres-
ponding magnetic field H(r,z,t) results. The time-dependent field induces a current 
in the workpiece, which flows opposed to the coil current and shields the magnetic 
field. Consequently, radial Lorentz’s forces act on the workpiece and deform it in 
the direction away from the tool coil. These volume forces can be mathematically 
transferred to virtual surface forces, the so-called magnetic pressure p(r,z,t).  
Due to the short process times in the range of 100 µs or less in impulse forming 
and joining, high demands have to be made on the measurement technique. During 
EMF, the coil current is measured via a Rogowski probe; on this basis, the mag-
netic pressure can be calculated analytically or via a coupled structural mechanic  
 

494 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
and electro-magnetic simulation [4]. The workpiece deformation can be measured 
online using e. g. optical measurement techniques. To quantify the displacement 
of particular surface points as a function of the time, a laser shadowing method 
was applied. Depending on the regarded process variant the setup is adapted. In 
tube compression, a linear laser shines axially through the workpiece. In case of 
expansion, the laser beam is directed rectangularly to the tube axis and the tube 
radius. In both cases, the transmitted light is received and transferred to an accord-
ing voltage signal by a position sensitive device (PSD) at the other side of the 
workpiece. Due to the deformation of the tube the light is partly shadowed and the 
voltage signal of the PSD changes accordingly. However, due to geometric restric-
tions in case of compression, only the deformation of the tube’s smallest cross-
section, typically located in the center of the coil, can be observed. Details about 
this measurement method are described in [4]. 
23.2.1.2   Acting Loads and Workpiece Deformation 
In EMF, significant interdependencies between the acting loads and the workpiece 
deformation were identified. These become evident when comparing current 
courses measured during a forming process and during experiments with the same 
process parameters but with prevented workpiece deformation. Figure 23.2 
presents such curves together with the pressure curves and the radial displacement 
of the smallest cross-section measured during a tube compression.  
The diagrams clearly indicate that, at the beginning of the process, the coil  
current and the magnetic pressure increase accordingly while the workpiece re-
mains undeformed. Plastic deformation occurs as soon as the inertia is overcome 
and the stresses in the workpiece reach the flowstress of the material. It is corre-
lated to an increasing gap width between tool coil and workpiece; consequently, 
the inductivity of the consumer load (tool coil and workpiece) steadily increases. 
Therefore, the amplitude and the frequency of the coil current are lower compared 
to the reference experiment with prevented workpiece deformation. Thus, consi-
dering the direct comparison of the current measurements the beginning of the 
workpiece deformation is indicated by the point of time, where the curves are no 
longer collinear. After the saddle point in the current curve measured during the 
forming experiment, the inductivity of the oscillating current remains constant. 
This can indicate that the forming is completed. In the displacement curve, an 
elastic radial oscillation of the tube can be recognized because the high kinetic 
energy resulting from the high forming velocity cannot be dissipated spontaneous-
ly. [4] Under certain circumstances, the increasing gap volume between coil and 
tube can cause the magnetic pressure to decrease faster than the current. Moreo-
ver, with time, the magnetic field penetrates the workpiece causing a further pres-
sure diminution. This penetration is faster, the lower the discharging frequency, 
the thinner the workpiece wall and the lower the electrical conductivity of the 
workpiece [5]. 
 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
495
 
 
Fig. 23. 2 Interdependency of current course, magnetic pressure and radial displacement in 
electromagnetic tube compression 
23.2.2   Forming by Gas Detonation 
23.2.2.1   Setup and Process Principle 
The experimental setup used for investigation forming by gas detonation is illu-
strated in Figure 23.3 and explained in the following: A tube, which is fixed in the 
testing apparatus designed by the SWL1 and located in the explosion-protected 
area of the SWL, is filled with a stoichiometric mixture of hydrogen and oxygen 
using a filling connector via mass flow controllers. The gas is then detonated ex-
ternally using a wire, which is ignited by a high voltage discharge. The detonation 
wave, which is immediately formed, travels through the pipework, which bifur-
cates and then enters the detonation tube from two sides. The gas mixture in the 
apparatus is now ignited, which a homogeneous conflagration produces over the 
entire cross-section. A tubular-shaped probe, located in the middle of the appara-
tus, is installed co-axially to the workpiece and fixed at both ends of the testing  
 
                                                           
1 Stoßwellenlabor RWTH Aachen. 

496 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
apparatus. Two pressure sensors, located at different positions in this probe, are 
connected to the gas-filled space by radial holes and shielded from direct contact 
with both the active components as well as the combustion gases by high tempera-
ture grease. 
 
Fig. 23.3 Experimental setup used in forming by gas detonation [6] 
To keep the apparatus' design simple, all the tested workpieces have an initial 
diameter of 40 mm. In the course of the test setup, the tubes are slid to the right 
end onto a sealing ring and fixed by means of a split sleeve. The tube's axial 
movement is prevented by an O-ring seal at the left end. Four planar tool compo-
nents, which constrain the forming but still permit the formed region to be directly 
observed, can be arranged around the workpiece. Moreover, the workpiece can be 
replaced by a thick-walled tube and thereby enable pressure profiles to be meas-
ured without influencing the volume changes due to the forming process [6]. 
The optically accessible forming section can be photographed during the 
process by a high-speed (HS) camera. The camera enables the workpiece's contour 
to be investigated at different times during the forming. The DRELLO type HS 
camera has a framing frequency of 10 MHz for 24 images. It is triggered by the 
first pressure sensor due to the travelling pressure wave [6]. 
23.2.2.2   Acting Loads and Workpiece Deformation 
The two typical, measured pressure profiles depicted in Figure 23.4 were recorded 
during free and constrained expansion tests using Al 99.5 and thick-walled tubes 
respectively. 
 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
497
 
 
Fig. 23.4 Pressure courses during free tube expansion and reference experiments with pre-
vented workpiece deformation [6] 
An initial pressure p0 of 8.5 MPa was used for the tests. Owing to the strong 
oscillations the measured pressure signals required smoothing. The zero point on 
the time axis is defined by the initial signal of the first pressure sensor. The initial-
ly measured signal deflection of the pressure curve cannot be resolved in detail 
due to the smoothing or the sensor signal's strong vibrational behavior. The theo-
retical maximum value for this initial pressure is 17 MPa. In the diagrams of the 
first and second pressure sensors, the second, smaller rise in pressure is explained 
by the partial reflection of the detonation wave at the sealing ring depicted in Fig-
ure 23.3. The third noticeable pressure rise after approx. 280 µs and 180 µs, re-
spectively, is generated by the reflection of the detonation wave at the end wall. 
Consequently, the expansion of the tube leads to a faster and earlier drop in the 
pressure profile based on the position of the detonation wave [6]. 
To characterize the forming sequence high-speed photographs were taken dur-
ing selected free expansion tests. The initial gas mixture's pressure, which deter-
mines the maximum pressure operating in the process, is limited to p0 ≈ 0.9 MPa 
for the 40 x 2 mm Al 99.5 tubes. Exceeding this value leads to the specimen's fail-
ure by crack formation during the expansion process. The forming sequence is de-
picted in Figure 23.5 with the simultaneous reference to the pressure profiles. In 
Figure 23.5a), an original HS-camera image showing the process status 121 µs af-
ter triggering by means of the first pressure sensor using the arrival of the detona-
tion wave is depicted. This geometry can be seen as the form's final contour. The 
diagram in Figure 23.5b) shows various stages of the tube's expansion. Additional-
ly, the position of the wave front at 21 µs and 41 µs is plotted. The tube wall's 
highest radial speed of 45 m/s is attained at the right hand end of the free-region 
shortly before the second pressure sensor indicates the second large rise in pres-
sure (compare Fig. 23.4), which is explained by the waves’ reflections [6]. 
Further elevating the initial pressure p0 produces a still larger expansion, which 
continues beyond the observation time (Fig. 23.5, experiment no. 33)). The final 
diameter obtained is plotted on the graph's right ordinate.  
 

498 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
 
Fig. 23.5 Results of online measurements of the expansion during forming by gas detonation 
[6] 
To be able to also track the effect of the higher pressures, the four planar tool 
components are employed. In Figure 23.5c, the commencing phase of the expan-
sion is shown for the initial pressure of p0 = 1.13 MPa. The maximum radial speed 
amounted to 65 m/s at this pressure. This value approximately corresponds to a 
strain rate of 3,000 s-1[6]. 
By supplementing the described experimental investigations a numerical analy-
sis of the forming by gas detonation was realized. As a first step, an uncoupled 
simulation strategy was applied in order to avoid problems due to changing boun-
dary conditions resulting from the displacement of the tube wall. Such problems 
typically occur in fluid mechanical calculations, which are usually based on Euler 
formulations. The shock tube simulation program Kasimir, developed by SWL, 
was employed to determine the pressure-time profile [7]. With the aid of a Rie-
mann solver, this software solves the thermo-dynamic equations for shock waves 
taking into account the chemical reaction. The results obtained using this program 
were employed as time-dependent input parameters for the structural mechanical 
simulation in Msc.Marc in combination with various user sub-routines developed 
at the IUL2. In order to take into account the influence of the inertial masses dur-
ing the forming, an implicit Newmark time-integration scheme was employed to 
solve the equations of motion, ignoring the damping effects [8]. An ALE strategy 
using a second FE mesh was developed and implemented for interpolating the im-
ported data. In this way, the forces' time and spatially-dependent boundary condi-
tions were introduced into the structurally dynamic model. This mesh, which is 
only necessary for the time and spatial interpolations in the first step of the  
modeling, is simultaneously distorted by the tube's forming. For this purpose, an  
 
                                                           
2 Institut für Umformtechnik und Leichtbau, Technische Universität Dortmund. 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
499
 
implicit, quasi-static simulation is performed, based on the structural-mechanical 
equations of motion, using a tim-saving, iterative sparse-matrix equation solver. In 
Figure 23.6a, the meshing and the according boundary conditions are illustrated. 
 
Fig. 23.6 Results of numerical investigations according to [6] 
Figure 23.6c shows the results achieved by applying this simulation strategy to 
a free tube expansion. After initiating the detonation wave, the tube's wall remains 
in its initial position for about 20 µs until the forming begins. The reason for this 
is the effect of the inertial masses and their associated forces, which counteract the 
acceleration. The elastic-plastic deformation of the initially accelerated tube re-
gion ceases when the detonation wave reaches the end of the tube. It was also 
possible to experimentally verify this time delay between the detonation wave and 
the tube wall's movement. 
The reflected wave re-accelerates the tube's wall, which is already moving. Fol-
lowing the wave's second reflection, the deformation process has terminated and 
the final form has been obtained. The entire process lasts for approx. 200 µs, whe-
reby the quantitative data for the process sequence depends to a large extent on the 
starting parameters. The numerically determined contour fits the measurement 
well qualitatively (compare Figure 23.6 and Figure 23.8). The suggested modeling 
including the simplification employed here, such as the decoupling strategy, can 
therefore be considered as permissible. 
A completely coupled simulation, possessing simultaneous and step-wise solu-
tions of both field problems, is necessary for a mathematically correct model of 
the process and, in particular, of the interactions. However, the required effort for  
 

500 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
this is disproportionate to the gain in knowledge with respect to the state of the 
current investigations. For this reason, the fall in gas pressure due to the increase 
in volume was also simply modeled by means of an exponential pressure drop. 
However, the results obtained using this strategy showed no substantial influence 
of the deformation process. 
23.2.3   Comparison of the Workpiece Properties  
to Quasi-Statically-Formed Reference Parts 
In order to generate a reference for the investigated impulse forming processes, 
apparatus for quasi-static forming were developed and constructed at the IUL in 
Dortmund. For this purpose, a testing rig for internal high-pressure joining was 
modified to be able to carry out the appropriate burst tests on the semi-finished 
products used. During the testing, the specimen's expansion and internal pressure 
can be continuously recorded via diametrically located inductive displacement 
transducers and an appropriate pressure sensor respectively. Another method was 
developed, which uses an elastomeric tool to quasi-statically expand tubes. This 
tool enables tubular specimens to be radially expanded by means of axially com-
pressing a polyurethane mandrel (hardness Shore 90 A). This tool was developed 
to minimize a possible influence on the thermographs, which are necessary to cha-
racterize the process and described in more detail below, by the cooling effect, 
which could be noticeable due to the application of water pressure (hydroforming) 
to the tube. The experiments for die-forming the tubular semi-finished products 
were carried out in a Müller-Weingarten BZE 1000-30.1.1 type 10 MN hydraulic 
press, available at the IUL, by using a hydro-forming tool with identical die-
inserts as those used for the gas detonation tests. The geometry of the quasi-
statically expanded tubes and of the specimens formed by gas detonation  
was quantified by tactile measurements using the 3-dimensional coordinate mea-
surement machine Zeiss Prismo VAST HTG. Thereby, the roundness as well as 
the wall thickness and the contour were determined (compare Figure 23.7 and 
Figure 23.8). 
Here, it is noticeable that for the gas detonation forming, the profile of the wall 
thickness distribution can be recognized in the roundness measurements. This 
phenomenon is already known from electromagnetically compressed tubes [9]. 
One explanation is the influence of the inertial forces as a consequence of the 
process' high energy. This symmetric expansion of the specimen can also, at least 
partially, explain the high strains attained. In contrast to this, the quasi-statically 
formed workpiece shows a non-uniform distribution of wall thicknesses, which 
indicates premature failure of flaws, such as the protruding tube's seam in the 
semi-finished product. The roundness measurements also point to this effect since 
bulging occurs in the sections, where the wall thickness has thinned out.  
 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
501
 
 
Fig. 23.7 Roundness and wall thickness profiles of free expansion tests a) gas detonation, b) 
quasi-static water pressure (according to 6) 
Figure 23.8 shows the contour and the according distribution of the hardness 
measured for a specimen expanded by gas detonation.  
It can be clearly recognized that the hardness increases with increasing defor-
mation. This effect corresponds to the strain hardening known from conventional 
forming processes. Comparing the hardness values to according measurements for 
a quasi-statically expanded tube shows good qualitative and quantitative agree-
ment. This indicates that the high strain rates occurring during forming by gas  
detonation do not significantly influence the strain hardening behavior of this ma-
terial. This tendency again corresponds to similar experiments comparing quasi-
statically formed and electromagnetically compressed tubes [10]. 
 
Fig. 23.8 Workpiece contour and hardness increase [6] 
However, the temperature gradient, the impulsive forces and the accordingly 
high forming velocities lead to a specific deformation of the workpiece during 
forming by gas detonation; consequently, the corresponding forming mechanisms 
are expected to differ from conventional ones. Therefore, more fundamental ma-
terial investigations were carried out to provide more comprehensive knowledge 
about the process specific influences on the material behavior. 

502 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
High-speed tensile tests were carried out in a drop tower testing-rig at the IW3 
to determine the influence of the strain rate on the material properties. By using 
this drop tower it was possible to investigate high strain rates in round-bar speci-
mens. In this test, the specimen is accelerated using various falling test weights in 
a 4 m high drop tower testing-rig with a maximum falling speed of 6.3 m/s. A test 
weight impacts the anvil; and the resulting impulse is transmitted to the lower spe-
cimen's grips via four rods. In this way, the specimen is subjected to straining at a 
high speed. The installed load cell (Hottinger 50kN, type U3) detects the resulting 
load. In addition to this, specimens were successfully prepared in an appropriately 
equipped metallurgical laboratory for subsequent investigations in scanning elec-
tron and light microscopes (see below). 
Moreover, in collaboration with the IUL and SWL, it was possible to success-
fully carry out thermographic investigations of both the gas denotation procedure 
as well as the comparative static procedures. This enabled the investigation of the 
effects of the heat, generated during the method and forming. The thermal camera 
employed for this purpose, ThermaCAM SC 3000 made by the company FLIR, 
incorporated a high-speed facility. 
To investigate these influences metallographic investigations were carried out 
by the IW. The micro-structural changes as a result of deformation can be de-
scribed by a multiplicity of structure-relevant parameters. Dislocations and grain 
boundaries have a substantial influence on the dynamics of the forming process 
[11, 12]. For example, dislocations within a grain show a different behavior than 
at or near grain boundaries. These differences are caused by the structure and type 
of the dislocations [13]. Previous analyses of the dislocation movement and the 
dislocation density changes as well as the analyses of grain boundary migration 
took place under thermal activation or at low strain and strain rates. The present 
results of the conducted analyses can serve as the basis for the description of the 
plastic deformation mechanisms at high strain rates in the finite element simula-
tion. The structural changes were examined using aluminum samples. The 
processes during plastic deformation are related to different dislocation-drag me-
chanisms [14]. These are influenced by the following factors: - thermally activated 
dislocation movement energy of dislocation drag - impurity viscosity - phonon 
viscosity - electron viscosity. The first three mechanisms are particularly relevant 
in static tensile tests with the conventional universal testing machines (tension 
speed of 2 µm/s to 1,000 mm/min). It is well-known from literature that the  
mechanism of phonon viscosity is very important at tension speeds of 1 m/s to 
1,500 m/s [15].  
The processes at the grain boundaries are extraordinarily important as well as 
the dislocation drag in grains for the measured characteristics of the process of gas 
detonation. The mobility of grain boundary and its driving strength are the funda-
mental parameters of the grain boundary slip [16]. The origin of this driving 
strength has different causes. For most cases, the strength results from the differ-
ences in the free energy of the adjacent grains. This difference can be caused by 
the different surface energies, permeabilities and disorientations of the adjacent 
grains or by different dislocation densities on both sides of the grain boundary 
                                                           
3 Institut für Werkstoffkunde, Leibniz Universität Hannover. 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
503
 
[17]. A grain boundary slip sets the deformation energy stored in the dislocations 
free; and the energy of the complete system is minimized. One of the most impor-
tant procedures for the analysis of the dislocation and the grain boundary structure 
is the light-microscope etching pit method. Numerous methods have already been 
suggested for the determination of the defect structure in aluminum. At the IW, a 
new etching agent and a special procedure were developed on the basis of an etch-
ing agent, recommended by Barret and Levenson [18]. When using this procedure 
the dissolution speed does not depend on the crystallographic orientation so that 
the etching speed is evenly distributed on specific crystal faces. This procedure 
can be used for the determination of changes in the defect structure after the de-
formation of poly-crystalline aluminum. A further application is to simultaneously 
corrode grain boundaries, inner-grain dislocation pits and grain boundary disloca-
tion pits, using the described etching agent in combination with a certain parame-
ter set for electrolytic polishing. The reproducibility of the metallographically  
determined etching pit density can be determined by comparison with trans-
electron-microscopy (TEM) measurements of the dislocation density. The sample 
material was poly-crystalline aluminum (99.5 %), which was tested in the form of 
rolled strips of 1 to 4 mm thickness and 70 mm width and of cast slabs of 7 mm 
thickness and 70 mm width. The samples for the tension tests were prepared from 
strips and slabs, homogenized for 72 hours at a temperature of 580°C and cooled 
down along with the furnace. 
After the tension tests with different test speeds, the samples were examined by 
light-microscopy parallel to the tension direction (longitudinal axis). The samples 
for the etching pit method were electro-polished in electrolytes (20 % perchloric 
acid, 10 % butylglycol and 70 % ethyl alcohol) by using a voltage of 25 V and a 
flow rate of 5 for a duration of 10 s. The etching agent for this corrosion con-
tained: 10 % HF, 30 % H20, 45 % HCI and 15 % HNO3. 
 
Fig. 23.9 Light optical and SEM investigations of the dislocation structure. The specimens 
are pulled with different velocities 

504 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
In Figure 23.9, examples of the etched micro-structure are shown. Different test 
speeds were used for that. The etching pit arrangement corresponds to a disloca-
tion structure after deformation whereas the original grain boundaries are marked 
by pit-free seams. The light microscopic and the REM investigations of the spe-
cimens of the tension tests show that two processes influence the microstructure of 
the material. On the one hand, the dynamics of the grain boundaries cause an in-
crease of the grains and a frequency movement of the grain boundaries. On the 
other hand, dislocation structures were formed, which, on their part, are able to 
cause the development of a new structure. Both processes influence each other. A 
selection of the results of the investigations according to this effect is shown in 
Figure 23.9. Increasing pulling velocities cause a higher density of dislocations at 
the grain boundaries and a growing deformation of the grains. Smaller pulling ve-
locities (2 mm/s) cause so-called dislocation fringes at the grain boundaries. An 
accumulation of dislocations can be detected near this phenomenon. This causes a 
significantly higher density of dislocations in this area than in the middle of the 
grains. A further increase of the pulling velocity causes higher lengths at first and 
then continuous devolutions of the walls of dislocations. The density of the dislo-
cations in those walls increases in relation to the degree of forming.  
23.3   Sub-system 2: Impact of the Accelerated Workpiece  
with an Obstacle 
23.3.1   Model Experiment for High-Speed Joining 
To provide a basic understanding regarding the significance and influence of sepa-
rate parameters describing the collision, a model experiment was built up by IW. 
The setup is shown in Figure 23.10 and consists of a joining unit and a pneumati-
cally-driven acceleration unit. The principle is briefly described in the following: 
To initiate the process the pressure chamber (10) is pressurized and a mass (7) is 
positioned at the end of the acceleration tube (6), which is connected to the accele-
ration chamber (8). Opening a high-speed valve (9) pressurizes the acceleration 
chamber and a section of the acceleration tube so that the mass is speeded up 
through the tube and bounds to the dynamic support (5) carrying the dynamic join-
ing partner (4). The impact leads to a sudden relative movement (x) in the magni-
tude of some millimeters between the joining partners, resulting in a welding 
process, provided that the chosen process parameters are suitable. Thereby, the 
impact velocity of the mass, which is expected to be a decisive aspect, can be in-
fluenced via the dimensioning of the mass and/or via an adaptation of the initial 
pressure in the pressure chamber. [19] 
 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
505
 
 
Fig. 23.10 Setup of the high-speed joining device [19]  
The joining quality was evaluated using metallographic methods. The investi-
gations have shown that for velocities up to 25 m/s no metallic bonding resulted 
whereas higher impact velocities led to local impact welding. Figure 23.11 shows 
the contact area of specimens, joint with an impact velocity of approximately 
30 m/s, approximately 100 m/s and approximately 130 m/s in representative mi-
crographs. It can be observed that increasing the impact velocity results in larger 
welded areas. Statistic interpretations of the micro-structural data suggest a linear 
correlation between this ratio of welded area and contact surface and the impact 
velocity in the regarded span of values. [19] 
 
Fig. 23.11 Influence of different impact velocities on the contact area of joined specimens 
[19] 

506 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
However, also the intactness of the microstructure in the contact area has to be 
considered when evaluating the welding quality. As shown in Figure 23.14, micro-
fractures occur in the aluminum parallel to the contact surface, indicating a deteri-
oration of the joining quality, if a critical value of the impact velocity is exceeded. 
Here, this is shown for an exemplary impacting velocity of 130 m/s. In conclusion, 
it can be said that an optimum value for the impact velocity exists. It has to be 
high enough to maximize the ratio of the welded area and the contact surface but 
low enough to avoid micro-fractures. For the regarded material combination and 
setup, this optimum lies between 100 m/s and 130 m/s. [19] 
To identify the resulting phases in the joining area, polished and etched speci-
mens were analyzed by an energy dispersive x-ray (EDX) and micro-analysis; and 
the element distribution in the welding area was quantified. It was shown in [19] 
that in-between the titanium and the aluminum base material an extremely thin 
(thickness < 1 µm) titanium-rich transition area is located, however, according to 
[20], intersection layers of such small thickness can be regarded as uncritical. 
23.3.2   Joining by Electromagnetic Forming 
As already mentioned, the joints produced by EMF can be based on a dominating 
interference-fit, a dominating form-fit or a metallic bonding. The resulting joining 
mechanism depends on the properties of the joining partners and the process pa-
rameters. Provided that the joint is thoroughly designed, in principle, all three 
joining mechanisms are suitable to achieve a transferable load comparable to the 
strength of the parent material of the components to be connected. However, the 
investigations presented here, focus on the manufacturing of magnetic pulse 
welded joints, i. e. connections based on metallic bonding. 
Experimental investigations considering the joining of aluminum tubes (materi-
al: Al99.9; Ø20 x 1 mm) to solid mandrels (material: TiAl6V4; Ø17 mm) were 
carried out at the IUL using a forming machine (SMU1500) with a capacitance of 
80 µF, an inner inductance of 75 nH, an inner resistance of 6.8 mΩ and a tool coil 
with a nominal diameter of 20 mm, a length of 30 mm and a number of turns of 
12. Considering the results of the experiments performed with the model experi-
ment described above, in the first tests, a capacitor charging energy of 500 J was 
chosen because velocity measurements had proved that, in this case, an impacting 
velocity in the range of 100 m/s is reached (see [19]). However, the resulting joint 
was merely based on force-fit, i. e. an elastic plastic bracing of tube and mandrel; 
and no welding occurred. Consequently, the charging energy was increased to 
1,000 J and 1,500 J. Provided that the same gap width between the joining part-
ners is given, a higher charging energy will directly lead to a higher impacting ve-
locity and this, in turn, causes local welding of tube and mandrel. 
The achieved weld quality was evaluated by means of micrographic investiga-
tions carried out by IW. As shown in Figure 23.12, the weld quality differs along 
the axis of the tube. For both charging energies, in the middle of the compression 
area (z≈0 mm), gaps between the joining partners can be identified although small 
adhesions of material particles welded on each other can be found. With an in-
creasing charging energy, the length of this zone was reduced. A zone of high 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
507
 
welding quality is located adjacent to this area. For the charging energy of 1,500 J, 
this zone continues up to the axial end of the joining area. Contrarily, in the case 
of the specimen welded with a charging energy of 1,000 J, another region charac-
terized by a strongly inhomogeneous layer between the aluminum and the titanium 
was found. This area extends to the end of the compression zone and, again, indi-
cates an inadequate joining quality. 
 
Fig. 23.12 Micro-structural state of joints produced by EMF [19] 
A possible explanation for the different required impacting velocities in case of 
the model experiment and in case of EMF is the influence of the impacting angle. 
In the model experiment, this angle is 5°. Contrarily, in EMF, the angle is much 
higher and varies along the axis during the forming as indicated in Figure 23.13.  
 
Fig. 23.13 Distribution of impact velocity and angle along the workpiece axis [19] 
In the center (z = 0 mm) of the compression area, the highest workpiece  
velocity (>> 100 m/s) occurs but the extremely high impact angle (90°) prevents 
welding because the velocity is directed perpendicularly to the contact surface 
without any parallel component. This combination seems to be unsuitable for the 
generation of proper welds. For higher z-values, the absolute value of the velocity 
and especially the perpendicular component decreases while the parallel compo-
nent of the velocity increases due to the decreasing impact angle. In the region, 

508 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
where the high welding quality can be observed, favorable combinations of the 
impacting velocity and the impacting angle were reached. This approach suggests 
that not only high workpiece velocities are required for the generation of good 
welding properties but matching conditions of local impact velocity and angle also 
have to be granted. In order to determine such parameter constellations the model 
experimental setup can be used as it allows a separate modification of the impact 
velocity and impact angle. 
23.3.3   Forming by Gas Detonation into a Die 
To investigate the forming by gas detonation into a form defining tool a die was 
installed in the fixture, as shown in Figure 23.14. Using the tooling components, 
larger local strains are generated due to the local constraints of the tube's expan-
sion, where the formed part's corner sections are developed. Tests were carried out 
with semi-finished products, which were furnished with a dot-matrix. This enabled 
the strain distribution to be more precisely investigated. Following these tests, an 
evaluation of the geometric changes was performed with the aid of the Argus  
analytical optical system made by the company GOM, Braunschweig. These 
achievable high strains (of approx. 30 % in the free sections) indicate a favorable 
influence of the high forming speeds on the attainable formability during the gas 
detonation. Based on these promising results, a more sophisticated die concept 
was realized considering the process limits. The tool geometry can be varied by 
means of different die inserts. Furthermore, the volume between the tube's wall 
and the tool's contour can be evacuated using a vacuum pump in order to avoid the 
influence of trapped air on the forming or diesel effects. 
 
Fig. 23.14 Testing apparatus for die-forming tests 
The tooling system employed permits reference tests to be carried out using 
identical tool geometries in the technically comparable procedure of hydro-
forming (IHU). For the die-forming tests, the aluminum alloy (AlMgSi1) was se-
lected as the material. During the testing, the tool's internal contour was modified 
by means of exchangeable tool inserts. The inserts' internal contour exhibited a cy-
lindrical form, whose diameter was increased step-by-step. It is shown that using 
AlMgSi1, a maximum diameter of 48 mm can be obtained without cracking.  

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
509
 
Assuming a homogeneous tangential strain, this increase in diameter represents a 
strain of 20 %, which is a high value for this material. For this test, the workpiece 
was subjected to an initial pressure of p0 = 4 MPa leading to a theoretical maxi-
mum pressure of approx. 80 MPa during the detonation. 
During the tests, it was possible to detect a significant influence of the initial 
pressure used on the form's quality and its surface finish. For the 47 mm diameter 
die-insert at an initial pressure of p0 = 3.0 MPa, a coarse grain-like structure is vis-
ible at three locations on the workpiece's surface. This suggests incipient failure at 
the extruded tube's weld seam. Elevating the initial pressure to p0 = 3.5 MPa con-
siderably improves the workpiece's entire surface quality. In these tests, it was  
also possible to slightly improve the forming. Figure 23.15 shows a residual devia-
tion from the die-tool's contour, which can be attributed to spring-back and to the 
different pressure ratios due to the formation of the detonation wave. 
 
Fig. 23.15 Effect of initial pressure on the workpiece surface (left) and quality of the form-
ing for increasing initial pressure (right) 
During the tests, failures also occurred due to crack formation when using the 
large die-inserts. Owing to the cracking, the detonation gases escape into the eva-
cuated tool space and then leak out through the tool's mating surfaces. This pro-
duces combustion marks of up to 3 mm deep in the steel inserts or, as may be the 
case, in the tool's mating surfaces. 
During the static reference tests using the hydroforming test tool, it was not 
possible to successfully carry out experiments using even the smallest tool-insert 
with a 44 mm diameter. By using an Al 99.5 tube, it was possible to form a  
workpiece to this maximum diameter although, here, failure had also been ob-
served already for slightly larger die-inserts. To guarantee comparability, no axial 
forces were applied during the hydro-forming tests. The die-force was only used 
for sealing. 
23.4   Conclusions 
To investigate the complex interdependencies during the impulse forming of tubu-
lar parts, complementary experimental and numerical investigations were carried 
out considering two different sub-systems. Sub-system 1 considers the workpiece 

510 
Fr.-W. Bach, M. Kleiner, and A.E. Tekkaya
 
acceleration. Here, electromagnetic forming and forming by gas detonation were 
regarded as acceleration mechanisms. In sub-system 2, the impact of the work-
piece and an obstacle, i. e. a joining partner or a form-defining tool, is analyzed.  
Focusing on sub-system 1 for the electromagnetic forming of tubes, the inter-
dependencies between the acting loads, characterized by the time-dependent 
course of the coil current, and the magnetic pressure were characterized. Regard-
ing the gas detonation process, the general feasibility of this method as a forming 
process was shown. Most notable are the extended reachable strains in tubular 
profiles made of aluminum alloys AlMgSi1and Al99.5, compared to conventional 
forming processes. Microscopic investigations of the crystallographic structure 
have delivered first indications regarding the reasons for the observed effect. To 
enable a process planning for this innovative process, further experimental and 
metallurgical investigations have to be carried out to deduce concrete laws for the 
material behavior. Further investigations will focus on the identification of process 
limits for different alloys, the adaptation of tool construction to the process and the 
advancement of numerical tools for a reliable virtual process design. 
Considering sub-system 2, the investigations about EMF were focused on join-
ing and especially on impact welding. It was proven that, for the feasibility of this 
special application, the adjustment of the impacting velocity and angle are deci-
sive. To determine suitable values for these process parameters a model high-
velocity joining setup was realized and the potential of welding specimens with 
this device was proven. To transfer the results from these investigations to the 
electromagnetic welding process the investigation results considering sub-system 
1 can be used. Thus, both approaches will be exploited complementarily in order 
to allow a target-oriented process dimensioning for the electromagnetic welding 
technology. 
References 
[1] Lesemann, M., Sahr, C., Hart, S., Taylor, R.: SuperLIGHT-CAR – the Multi-Material 
Car Body. In: Proceedings of the 7th LS-DYNA Anwenderforum, Bamberg (2008) 
[2] Kleiner, M., Geiger, M., Klaus, A.: Manufacturing of Lightweight Components by 
Metal Forming. In: Annals of the CIRP Manufacturing Technology, 53rd General As-
sembly of CIRP, vol. 52(2), pp. 521–542 (2003) 
[3] Psyk, V., Risch, D., Kinsey, B.L., Tekkaya, A.E., Kleiner, M.: Electromagnetic form-
ing – A review. J. Mater. Process. Tech (2011),  
doi: 10.1016/j.jmatproctec.2010.12.012 
[4] Beerwald, C.: Grundlagen der Prozessauslegung und –gestaltung bei der elektromag-
netischen Umformung. Dr. Ing. Dissertation, TU Dortmund (2005) 
[5] Kaden, H.: Wirbelströme und Schirmung in der Nachrichtentechnik. Springer, Berlin 
(1959) 
[6] Weber, M., Hermes, M., Brosius, A., Beerwald, C., Gersthteyn, G., Olivier, H., 
Kleiner, M., Bach, F.-W.: Process Investigation of Tube Expansion by Gas Detona-
tion. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on High Speed Forming 
(ICHSF) 2006, pp. 161–174 (2006) ISBN 3-00-018432-5 

23   Investigation of the Complex Interactions during Impulse Forming  
511
 
[7] Esser, B.: Die Zustandsgrößen im Stoßwellenkanal als Ergebnisse eines exakten Rie-
mannlösers. Dissertation, RWTH Aachen (1991) 
[8] Bathe, K.J.: Finite Elemente Methoden, 2nd edn. Springer, Berlin (2002) 
[9] Psyk, V., Beerwald, C., Homberg, W., Kleiner, M.: Extension of Forming Limits by 
Using a Process Combination of Electromagnetic Forming and Hydroforming. In: 
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Technology of Plasticity, ICTP 
(2005) ISBN 88-87331-74-X 
[10] Psyk, V.: Prozesskette Krümmen – Elektromagnetisch Komprimieren – Innenhoch-
druckumformen für Rohre und profilförmige Bauteile. Dr. Ing. Dissertation, TU 
Dortmund (2010) ISBN 978-3-8322-9026-9 
[11] Gottstein, G., Shvindlerman, L.S.: Grain boundary migration in metals: thermody-
namics, kinetics, applications, vol. 385. CRC Press, Boca Raton (1999) 
[12] Johnston, W.G., Gilman, J.J.: Dislocation Velocities, Dislocation Densities and Plas-
tic Flow in Lithium Fluoride Crystals. Journal of Applied Physics 30(2), 129 (1959) 
[13] Gottstein, G.: Physik. Grundlagen der Materialkunde. Springer, Berlin (2001) 
[14] Roos, A.: Fast-moving dislocations in high strain rate deformation. Groningen Uni-
versity Press (1999) 
[15] Alshitz, V.I., Indenbom, V.L.: Dynamic dragging of dislocations. Soviet Physics Us-
pekhi 18(1) (1975) 
[16] Mattissen, D.: Insitu Untersuchung des Einflusses der Tripelpunkte auf die Korngren-
zenbewegung in Aluminium, Dissertation, RWTH Aachen (2004) 
[17] Czubayko, M.: Korngrenzenbewegung in Aluminium und Zink, Dissertation, RWTH 
Aachen (1998) 
[18] Vovk, V.T.: Gasexplosion als Werkzeug in der Fertigungstechnik. Habilitation, Mag-
deburg, Univ. (1999) 
[19] Psyk, V., Gershteyn, G., Demir, O.K., Brosius, A., Tekkaya, A.E., Schaper, M., Bach, 
F.-W.: Process Analysis and Physical Simulation of Electromagnetic Joining of Thin-
Walled Parts. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on High Speed Form-
ing, pp. 181–190 (2008) ISBN: 3-9809535-3-X 
[20] Kreimeyer, M., Wagner, F., Zerner, I., Sepold, G.: Laser beam joining of aluminium 
with titanium with the use of an adapted working head. In: DVS-Berichte, vol. 212, 
pp. 317–321. DVS-Verlag, Düsseldorf (2001) 
 

Author Index 
Abele, E.    3, 245 
Andres, M.    53, 285 
Aurich, J.C.    3, 81 
 
Bach, Fr.-W.    491 
Bauer, J.    245 
Behrens, B.-A.    3, 403 
Biermann, D.    3, 121 
Blum, H.    53, 121 
Bouabid, A.    29, 81 
Bouguecha, A.    403 
Brandt, C.    53, 329 
Brecher, C.    3, 29, 179 
Brinksmeier, E.    3, 329 
Britz, R.    361 
 
Carstensen, C.    53, 143 
Czora, M.    3, 403 
 
Deichmueller, M.    29, 143 
Denkena, B.    3, 29, 143, 285 
de Payrebrune, K.M.    143 
Druwe, T.    475 
 
Eberhard, P.    309 
Engel, U.    3, 419 
Esser, M.    179 
 
Franzke, M.    439 
Friedmann, M.    245 
 
Gaugele, T.    309 
Großmann, K.    3, 29, 225, 383 
 
Hardtmann, A.    29, 383 
Heinisch, D.    3, 285 
Heisel, U.    3, 309 
Hellfritzsch, U.    475 
Hemker, T.    245 
Hermes, R.    3, 29, 179 
Hirt, G.    439 
Hömberg, D.    29, 203 
 
Kiliclar, Y.    459 
Kirsch, B.   3, 81 
Kleiner, M.    491 
Klocke, F.    3, 29, 101 
Krause, A.    3, 329 
Kriechenbauer, S.    383 
Krimm, R.    403 
Kröger, M.    143 
Kroiß, T.    3, 419 
 
Lahl, M.    475 
Laurischkat, R.    3, 459 
Löser, M.    3, 29, 225 
 
Maaß, P.    53, 329 
Mahr, F.    3, 265 
Maier, T.    361 
Maischak, M.    285 
Matthias, T.    403 
Meier, H.    3, 459 
Milbrandt, M.    475 
 
Neugebauer, R.    475 
Niebsch, J.    53, 329 
 
Penter, L.    383 
Pischan, M.    3, 245 
Puchhala, S.    439 
 
Rademacher, A.    53, 121 
Ramlau, R.    53, 329 
Rasper, P.    3, 203 
Reese, S.    459 
Reinl, C.    245 
Rott, O.    29, 203 
 
Scheidler, A.V.    3, 121 
Schiller, S.    475 

514 
Author Index
 
Schröder, A.    53, 143 
Schwarz, F.    361 
Shi, Y.    265 
Steinmann, P.    29, 81 
Stephan, E.-P.    53, 285 
Storchak, M.    3, 309 
 
Tekkaya, A.E.    491 
 
Uhlmann, E.    3, 203, 265 
Ulbrich, H.    361 
 
Vehmeyer, J.    329 
von Stryk, O.    245 
von Wagner, U.    265 
 
Wegner, H.    101 
Weinert, K.    121 
Weiß, M.    3, 29, 101 
Wiedemann, S.    53, 143 
Wiemer, H.    383 
 
Zaeh, M.F.    361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Subject Index 
a posteriori error estimate   54, 61, 64, 
132 
residual  58 
abrasive machining   39 
acoustic emission   19, 104 
adaptive finite element method   132 
additional stability lobes   238 
AE sensor   19 
AFPM   385 
analogous models   35 
analytical-empirical process model   110 
arbitrary lagrangian eulerian approach   
31 
axes 
elasticities   248 
 
back-step test   11 
backward can extrusion   426 
balance quality grad  330, 331 
balancing  72, 74, 330, 352 
dual-plane balancing  332, 334 
single-plane balancing  331, 332,  
358 
balancing plane  331, 332, 334 
bending vibration   184 
blank holder   388 
bulk forming   40 
 
Campbell diagram   279 
chatter   47, 179 
chatter criterion   206, 278 
chatter detection  206 
chatter frequencies   278 
chip longitudinal section   113 
chip thickness modulation   189 
chisel 
orientation   371 
circularity test   10 
cold forging   419, 420 
cold forming   475, 487, 489 
 
cold rolling   475, 479 
compensation   398 
geometrical approach   259 
model based   258 
compliance   246 
compliance simulation   185 
comprehensive spatial multiple degrees 
of freedom (MDOF) model   265 
contact 
bilateral   364 
contact length   114 
contact pressure   452 
contact problem  54 
dynamic   64 
elasticity   54 
friction   54 
frictional   60 
control system   111 
convergence criterion   414 
coolant forces   106 
cooling system   450 
coulomb's Law   125, 131 
coupled model   110 
coupled simulations   48 
coupling  345 
coupling of models   44 
coupling of the models   302 
critical chip thickness   272 
critical depth of cut,  232 
cross rolling   476, 478, 489 
cutting edge radius   273 
cutting force   253 
action reaction law  216 
assumptions  217 
comparison   369 
modular model   366 
process structure interaction  215 
spectrum  221 
temperature  210 
uncut chip thickness  215 
cutting force coefficients   36 
 

516 
Subject Index
 
cutting force model   36, 301 
cutting force variations   45 
cutting tool   143 
 
damage cases   288 
dampening   108 
deflection characteristic   420, 422, 425, 
428 
deformation efficiency   42 
deforming forces   42 
delay differential equation   47 
design   411 
device’s eigenfrequency   18 
Dexel model   129, 218 
diamond machining  329 
die cushion   388 
direction cosine matrix   271 
directional coefficients   228 
displacement development   5 
dynamic compliance behavior   180 
dynamic cutting force   188 
dynamic cutting force model   196 
dynamic cutting forces   38 
dynamic force model   191 
dynamic machine tool behavior   7 
dynamic Machine Tool Behavior   7 
dynamic process behavior   187 
dynamic Process Modeling   399 
dynamic weak points   197 
dynamical loads   18 
 
eigenfrequencies   103 
eigenfrequency   124 
eigenmode   112 
elastic work roll   445 
elasticity   249 
elasto-plasticity  60 
multi yield  61 
Euler-Bernoulli beam   268 
excitation frequencies   277 
experimental modal analysis   9 
exponential cutting force models   37 
 
facing process 
optimization   376 
face turning  334, 340 
fast-fourier-transform  206 
FEM 
metal cutting simulation   367 
FEM simulation   404, 487, 490 
finite element mode   112 
finite element models   31 
finite element simulation   128 
finite elements (FE)   268 
finite element method   43, 54, 336 
adaptive  54, 57, 60, 63 
mixed  56 
fixed frame   272 
flank face contact   194 
flexible multi-body simulation   30 
force 
cutting   253, 366 
nonlinear law   364 
ploughing   366 
set-valued   365 
shearing   366 
force coefficients   36 
force measurements  357 
force model  340 
force ratio factor   116 
force transducer   16 
force-controlled press   422, 426, 429 
forces in cold extrusion processes   18 
form deviation   354, 355 
formed parts   415 
forming limit curve   394 
forming process model   386 
fourier series   229 
frequency response function   8, 103, 
241, 266 
friction coefficient   125 
friction law   413 
full forward extrusion   423, 430, 432 
full immersion cutting   277 
 
gap conductance   449 
gear 
backlash   249 
gear qualities   476, 478, 479 
gear rolling   475, 476, 477, 489, 490 
geometric model   10 
geometric-kinematical simulation   128 
geometry assessment   24 
grinding forces   113 
grinding models   39 
grinding wheel 
toroid   121 
grinding wheel contours   137 
 
heat sources   12 
helicoidal mills   234 
helix angle   233, 274 

Subject Index 
517
 
high gearing   475, 476, 478, 479, 480, 
489 
high performance cutting   179 
high-speed press   404 
Hopf instability   277 
hot rolling experiments   448 
hydrodynamic pressure   107 
hysteresis   6 
 
inconel  718, 109 
incremental forming   487 
infrared radiatio   21 
instability islands   238 
integrated FE simulation model   425, 
426, 428, 429, 432 
interacting system   45 
interaction effects   441 
interferometry   23 
inverse problem  54, 67, 69 
 
joint 
actuated   248 
virtual   248 
 
kinematics   10 
 
lagrange multiplier  60 
laser interferometer measurement   12 
laser tracker system   483, 484 
light fringe projection   24 
linear cutting force models   37 
 
machine behavior   480 
machine concept   479, 480, 490 
machine tool behavior   123 
machining tests  204 
macroscopic approaches for grinding 
models   40 
main spindle systems   180 
mass spring damper systems   35 
material behavior   488 
material flow   476, 487 
material laws 
metal cutting simulation   367 
material removal   114 
calculation   245 
material removal model  217 
material removal process  348 
measurement 
temperature   369 
measurement errors  208 
mechanical (tactile) techniques   24 
mechanistic cutting force models   36 
meshing   487, 488 
metal cutting simulation 
FEM   367 
friction conditions   368 
material laws   367 
metal forming   40 
metal forming processes   403 
metrological acquisition   188 
micro cutting   265 
micro force model  342 
micro milling machine tool   266 
micro sensors   21 
micro turning  341 
mixed formulation  60 
microscopic approaches for grinding 
models   40 
milled surfaces   280 
milling   227, 245 
milling system   45 
modal analysis   182, 183, 266 
robot   254 
modal analysis   9, 124 
modal models   237 
modal parameters   36 
mode shapes   269 
model coupling   384 
model integration   48 
multi body simulation   110 
multi degree of freedom system   229 
multi frequency solution   226 
multi body models   30 
multi body simulation   30 
multi body system  213 
multi body system 
contact   363 
MBSim   362 
multi body system 
dynamics   245 
multi dexel model   251 
 
NC-shape grinding   121 
Neo-Hookean model   33 
net-shape production   419 
newmark-scheme   34 
nonholonomic constrain   271 
nozzle   114 
numerical simulation  218 
nyquist criterion   227 

518 
Subject Index
 
objective   373 
offline-coupling   403 
operation state   372 
optical techniques   24 
optimization   373 
comparison   376 
facing process   376 
forces   377 
implicit filtering   361 
material removal rate   374 
product quality   378 
productivity   374 
ordinary differential equation  344 
oscillator chains   268 
 
parameter identification   54, 67, 133, 
205, 218 
parametric process model   430, 432 
path deviation   246 
path planning   137 
phenomenological approach   405 
piezo ceramic actuators   281 
piezoelectric Elements   16 
piola-stress tensor   32 
pitch difference   482 
plastic flow of the strip   445 
positioning accuracy   123 
prediction 
surface contour   374 
workpiece contour   372 
press measurement   406 
process analysis   15 
process force   333, 409 
calculation   251 
process force model   130, 237 
process forces   16, 125, 246 
process knowledge   432, 433 
process models   36, 44, 340 
process optimization   432 
process parameter  343 
process stability 
machine effects  220 
supple workpiece structure  221 
thermal effects  210 
uncut chip thickness  221 
workpiece dynamics  209 
workpiece temperature  211 
process temperatures   126 
pyrometry   20 
 
 
radial immersion   242 
regenerative chatter   225 
regenerative vibrations   179 
regularization  68, 353 
removal predictor   128 
residual stresses   290 
robot 
industrial   245 
stiffness   255 
rolling force   446, 484 
rolling machine   480, 487 
rolling process. See Introduction 
rolling velocitiy   451 
rotating boundary conditions   442 
rotating frame   272 
rotor-dynamics   181 
roughness of technical surfaces   22 
runout   281 
 
SEM measurements   291 
shear stress   447 
sheet-metal forming   40 
signorini problem   65, 129, 131 
simulated stability chart   194 
simulated surface   118 
simulated surface structure   197 
simulation  349 
simulation 
dynamics   250 
milling robot   257 
simulation strategy   441 
simulation techniques   48 
single degree of freedom system   237 
solution algorithm 
uzawa  56 
specific force constants   275 
speed-stroke grinding   101 
spindle dynamics   299 
spindle-tool holder-tool  
system (STT)   267 
splitting of resonance peaks   184 
stability   45 
stability boundaries   225 
stability lobe diagram   225, 265 
stability prediction    277 
stability simulation   38 
static machine compliance   5 
static machine tool behavior   4 
stiffnesses   6 
 
 

Subject Index 
519
 
straight fluted   234 
strain gauges   16 
strip profile   440 
stroke-controlled press   421, 423 
structural analysis   3 
structure models   44 
surface assessment   22 
surface conditions   412 
surface generation  333 
surface profile   198 
surface roughness  330, 354, 356 
surface topography  333, 334, 345, 354 
surface visualization  345, 353 
system matrices  336 
 
temperature 
measurement   369 
temperature distribution   20 
temperature profile   15 
temperature-Influence   407 
test rig   182, 292 
the process dynamics   16 
theoretical methods   41 
theoretical surface roughness   273 
thermal damage   20 
thermal evolution   453 
thermal shrink-fit tool holders   285 
thermocouples   13, 20 
thermocouples and thermographic  
cameras   21 
thermoelectric and radiation  
measurement methods   20 
thermo-elastic workpiece  213 
thermography   20 
thermomechanical contact problem   131 
thermo-mechanical effects   440 
thermo-mechanical tool computation. 
siehe 
thickness profile   446 
three-stage tool system   411 
Tikhonov-functional  69, 72 
time domain simulations   48, 212 
tool centre point   240 
tool clamping   268 
tool displacement   480, 482, 483 
tool extraction   285, 286 
tool grinding   143 
tool guidance   389 
tool loads   488 
tool trajectories  346 
tool-workpiece-thermal element method   
20 
tooth height coefficient   478, 479, 481 
tooth passing frequency   232 
total deformation energy   42 
transient heat transfer   449 
tribological effects   441 
turning   334, 361 
 
ultra-precision machining   17, 341 
ultraprecision  333 
ultraprecision turning  70 
unbalance  329, 339 
dynamic unbalance  332 
moment unbalance  331 
uncut chip thickness    46 
 
variational inequality  56 
vibration Equation  70, 336, 339 
vibration model  336 
vibrations  329 
v. Mises   488, 489 
vitrified bonded CBN   117 
 
waviness   22 
wear   454 
wear models   443 
wear work   444 
white light interferometry   23 
workpiece 
orientation   371 
workpiece analysis   22 
workpiece material   109 
 
xForm   396 
 
zeroth order approximation   226 
zeroth-order-approximation method   
277
 
 

