Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671
Rahul Kher
Nikhil Gondaliya
Mukesh Bhesaniya
Latif Ladid
Mohammed Atiquzzaman    Editors 
Proceedings of 
the International 
Conference on 
Intelligent Systems 
and Signal Processing
ISSP 2017

Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing
Volume 671
Series editor
Janusz Kacprzyk, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: kacprzyk@ibspan.waw.pl

The series “Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing” contains publications on theory,
applications, and design methods of Intelligent Systems and Intelligent Computing. Virtually
all disciplines such as engineering, natural sciences, computer and information science, ICT,
economics, business, e-commerce, environment, healthcare, life science are covered. The list
of topics spans all the areas of modern intelligent systems and computing.
The publications within “Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing” are primarily
textbooks and proceedings of important conferences, symposia and congresses. They cover
signiﬁcant recent developments in the ﬁeld, both of a foundational and applicable character.
An important characteristic feature of the series is the short publication time and world-wide
distribution. This permits a rapid and broad dissemination of research results.
Advisory Board
Chairman
Nikhil R. Pal, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India
e-mail: nikhil@isical.ac.in
Members
Rafael Bello Perez, Universidad Central “Marta Abreu” de Las Villas, Santa Clara, Cuba
e-mail: rbellop@uclv.edu.cu
Emilio S. Corchado, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
e-mail: escorchado@usal.es
Hani Hagras, University of Essex, Colchester, UK
e-mail: hani@essex.ac.uk
László T. Kóczy, Széchenyi István University, Győr, Hungary
e-mail: koczy@sze.hu
Vladik Kreinovich, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, USA
e-mail: vladik@utep.edu
Chin-Teng Lin, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan
e-mail: ctlin@mail.nctu.edu.tw
Jie Lu, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
e-mail: Jie.Lu@uts.edu.au
Patricia Melin, Tijuana Institute of Technology, Tijuana, Mexico
e-mail: epmelin@hafsamx.org
Nadia Nedjah, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
e-mail: nadia@eng.uerj.br
Ngoc Thanh Nguyen, Wroclaw University of Technology, Wroclaw, Poland
e-mail: Ngoc-Thanh.Nguyen@pwr.edu.pl
Jun Wang, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong
e-mail: jwang@mae.cuhk.edu.hk
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/11156

Rahul Kher
• Nikhil Gondaliya
Mukesh Bhesaniya
• Latif Ladid
Mohammed Atiquzzaman
Editors
Proceedings
of the International
Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Signal
Processing
ISSP 2017
123

Editors
Rahul Kher
Department of Electronics
and Communication Engineering
G.H. Patel College of Engineering
and Technology
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat
India
Nikhil Gondaliya
Department of Information Technology
G.H. Patel College of Engineering
and Technology
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat
India
Mukesh Bhesaniya
Department of Electrical Engineering
G.H. Patel College of Engineering
and Technology
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat
India
Latif Ladid
SnT
University of Luxembourg
Esch-sur-Alzette
Luxembourg
Mohammed Atiquzzaman
University of Oklahoma
Norman, OK
USA
ISSN 2194-5357
ISSN 2194-5365
(electronic)
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing
ISBN 978-981-10-6976-5
ISBN 978-981-10-6977-2
(eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017956309
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd.
The registered company address is: 152 Beach Road, #21-01/04 Gateway East, Singapore 189721, Singapore

Preface
International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Signal Processing (ISSP 2017)
aims to spread awareness in the research and academic community regarding the
cutting-edge technological advancements revolutionizing the world. The main
emphasis of this conference is on dissemination of information, experience, and
research results on the current topics of interest through in-depth discussions and
participation of researchers from all over the world. The objective is to provide a
platform to the scientists, research scholars, and industrialist to interact and
exchange ideas in a number of research areas. This will facilitate communication
among researchers in different ﬁelds of Electrical Engineering, Electronics and
Communication Engineering as well as Information Technology. The conference
aims to address the following major research areas: Signal Processing and
Communication Engineering; Applied Electronics and Emerging Technologies;
Computer Vision and Machine Learning; Big Data and Cloud Computing; Power
Electronics and Power Systems; and Automation, Control and Electrical Drives.
ISSP 2017 is facilitated with Pre-conference Workshops on March 23, 2017.
Pre-conference Workshops aim to discuss theoretical and practical aspects of
emerging technologies by renowned technocrats in the ﬁeld of Communication and
Information Technology and Electrical Engineering.
Vallabh Vidyanagar, India
Rahul Kher
Vallabh Vidyanagar, India
Nikhil Gondaliya
Vallabh Vidyanagar, India
Mukesh Bhesaniya
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Latif Ladid
Norman, USA
Mohammed Atiquzzaman
v

About the Book
The book provides insights into International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing (ISSP 2017) held at G.H. Patel College of Engineering and
Technology, Gujarat, India, during March 24–25, 2017. The book comprises
contributions by the research scholars and academicians covering the topics in
Signal Processing and Communication Engineering, Applied Electronics and
Emerging Technologies, Computer Vision and Machine Learning, Big Data and
Cloud Computing, and Advanced Intelligent Power Electronics and Drives
Systems. The main emphasis of the book is on dissemination of information,
experience, and research results on the current topics of interest through in-depth
discussions and contribution of researchers from all over the world. The book is
useful for research community, academicians, industrialists, and postgraduate stu-
dents across the globe.
vii

Contents
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive Sensing (CS)
Theory for Various Biometric Data and Biomedical Data . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Rohit Thanki, Vedvyas Dwivedi and Komal Borisagar
Design, Implementation and Testing of Signal Processing Module
for an Impact Ionization Dust Detector . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
J. P. Pabari, A. D. Jadav and U. Y. Kakaiya
Automatic Fire Detection Using Combination of Color Cue
and Flame Flicker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Ripal Patel, Kashyap Mandaliya, Pushkar Shelar, Rushi Savani
and Chirag I. Patel
Performance Analysis of Supervised & Unsupervised Techniques
for Brain Tumor Detection and Segmentation from MR Images . . . . . .
35
Brijesha D. Rao and Mukesh M. Goswami
EEG Signal Classiﬁcation for Epileptogenic Zone
and Seizure Zone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
Hardika B. Gabani and Chirag N. Paunwala
Design and Development of DAQ and Processing System
for FMCW RADAR . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
Rucha Joshi, Amit Patel, Keyur Mahant and Hiren Mewada
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA
Based Cognitive Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
65
Bhumika D. Kavaiya and Vinay M. Thumar
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network State
Classiﬁcation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Dipali Shah, Purvang Dalal, Mohanchur Sarkar and Sejal Dalal
ix

CMOS Image Sensor Parameter Conﬁguration Using LabVIEW . . . . .
93
Dhvani R. Patel, Brijesh N. Shah and Karan Jasani
Bridge Software Between Zigbee and CAN Protocols
for Distributed Embedded System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
Hiteshkumar J. Lad and Vibhutikumar G. Joshi
A New Global Shutter 8T CIS Architecture with CDS Operation . . . . .
113
Kishankumar Suthar and Rajesh Thakker
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters
Over the Last Century for Cotton Crop. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
125
Riddhi Patel and Geetali Saha
Enhancement of Data Streaming in Clustering for
Uncertain Data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
155
Jeny Ganatra and Chintan Thacker
Performance Analysis of Word Spotting Techniques
Using HOG and Shape Descriptor on Gujarati Script . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
163
Himanshu M. Kathiriya and Mukesh M. Goswami
Investigation of Surface Degradation in Polymer
Dielectrics with Micro-ﬁllers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
169
Nitin V. Nair and R. R. Patel
Characterization of Power Cable Using Various
Diagnostic Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
177
R. R. Patel and Vidushi Badmera
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay . . . . . . .
185
Param Mehta and Vijay H. Makwana
Conditional Analysis of Dust Accumulated
on Solar Photovoltaic Panel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
199
Kaushal B. Jani and Jatinkumar J. Patel
Modeling of Three-Phase Distribution Transformer
for Analysis of Core and Ohmic Losses Using FEM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
211
Priyal V. Patel and Sameer B. Patel
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed
Forward Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
221
Ankitkumar M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi
To Find Parameters of Transformer Using Open-Circuit
and Short-Circuit Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
235
Pooja N. Upadhyaya and Vijay H. Makwana
Parametric Study of Virgin and Aged Transformer Oil . . . . . . . . . . . . .
245
Nikita Rajda and R. R. Patel
x
Contents

Optimal Placement of Capacitor Using Backward/Forward
Sweep Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
255
Priyanka Parmar and Chintan Patel
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
263
Rushikesh Chakubhai Kalariya and Mukesh Bhesaniya
Closed-Loop Control of Flow Under the Inﬂuence of Varying
Temperature in Air Blower System Using PLC and VFD . . . . . . . . . . .
279
Hiren G. Patel and Mihir Raval
Harmonic Analysis and Simulation of a Chemical
Plant—A Case Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
287
Vidhi D. Patel and Sumit K. Rathor
Computational Analysis and Intelligent Control
of Load Forecasting Using Time Series Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
297
Parth A. Joshi and Jatinkumar J. Patel
Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter Operating
Under Faulty H-Cell Condition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
307
Soniya V. Atodaria and Nilesh V. Shah
Author Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
319
Contents
xi

About the Editors
Dr. Rahul Kher received B.E. (Electronics) from Sardar Patel University in 1997,
M.Tech. (Electrical Engineering) from Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee in
2006, and Ph.D. (Electronics and Communication Engineering) from Sardar Patel
University in 2014. He has a teaching and research experience of over 18 years. His
research interests include Biomedical Signal and Image Processing, Medical Image
Analysis, and Healthcare Monitoring Systems. He has published four books and
more than 60 research papers in various international journals and conferences. He
is a Senior Member of IEEE and was the founder Secretary of Signal Processing
Society (SPS) Chapter of IEEE Gujarat Section during 2013–2015. He has been on
the Reviewer Panel/TPC member of many international journals and conferences
including the IEEE Communication Society Magazine; Journal of Biomedical
Signal Processing and Control (Elsevier); Journal of Computer Networks
(Elsevier);
International
Journal
of
Advanced
Intelligence
Paradigms
(InderScience); Biomedical Engineering: Application, Basis and Communication
(World Scientiﬁc); 1st Global IoT Summit (GIoTS ‘17), Geneva, Switzerland; 3rd
Global IoT Innovation Forum, Barcelona, Spain; 3rd Annual Int. Conf. on Wireless
Comm. and Sensor Networks (WCSN 2016); 2016 IEEE World Forum on Internet
of Things (WF-IoT), Virginia, USA; and many more.
Dr. Nikhil Gondaliya is working as Associate Professor and Head in the
Department of Information Technology. He obtained Doctor of Philosophy in
Computer Engineering from Gujarat Technological University and master’s degree
in Computer Engineering from Sardar Patel University. He is having about 14 years
of experience in teaching at undergraduate level and 6 years in postgraduate level.
He has published more than 20 papers in various national/international conferences
and journals. He has guided more than 40 projects at undergraduate level and more
than 12 dissertations at postgraduate level. His areas of interest are Ad hoc Wireless
Networks, Data Mining, and Internet of Things (IoT).
Prof. Mukesh Bhesaniya has received the B.E. degree in Electrical Engineering
from Sardar Patel University, Gujarat, India, in 2000 and the M.Tech. degree in
Electrical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India, in
xiii

2009, and is currently pursuing Ph.D. degree in Electrical Engineering from Indian
Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, India. He has received ‘Academic
Excellence Award’ for the best academic performance during masters in Electrical
Engineering from Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur. In 2003, he joined G.H.
Patel College of Engineering and Technology, where he is currently an Associate
Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering. He has published/presented
number of research papers at national and international journals/conferences, and he
has also ﬁled one national patent and one international patent for invention in power
electronic converters. He is a reviewer of IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery.
His
research
interests
include
Power
Electronic
Converters,
HVDC,
and
Flexible AC Transmission Systems.
Dr. Latif Ladid is a Senior Researcher at Interdisciplinary Centre for Security,
Reliability and Trust, SnT, Université du Luxembourg. He works on multiple
European Commission Next Generation Technologies IST Projects: 6WINIT, First
Pioneer IPv6 Research Project; 6WINIT, Euro6IX, Eurov6, NGNi, Project initiator
of SEINIT, and SecurIST. Dr. Ladid initiated the new EU project u-2010 to
research Emergency & Disaster and Crisis Management, re-launched the Public
Safety Communication Forum, supported the new IPv6++ EU Research Project
called EFIPSANS and the new safety & Security Project using IPv6 called
Secricom, and co-initiated the new EU Coordination of the European Future
Internet Forum for Member States called CeFIMS. He holds the following posi-
tions: President, IPv6 FORUM; Chair, European IPv6 Task Force; Emeritus
Trustee, Internet Society; Board Member, IPv6 Ready & Enabled Logos Program;
and Board Member, World Summit Award. Dr. Ladid is also a member of 3GPP
PCG, 3GPP2 PCG; Vice Chair, IEEE ComSoc EntNET; member of UN Strategy
Council; member of IEC Executive Committee; Board Member of AW2I; Board
Member of Nii Quaynor Institute for Research in Africa; and member of the Future
Internet Forum EU Member States, representing Luxembourg.
Dr. Mohammed Atiquzzaman is a Professor in Computer Science Department at
The University of Oklahoma, USA. There, he teaches courses in Data Networks
and
Computer
Architecture.
His
research
interests
and
publications are
in Next-Generation Computer Networks, Wireless and Mobile Networks, Satellite
Networks, Switching and Routing, Optical Communications, and Multimedia over
networks. Many of the current research activities are supported by the National
Science Foundation (NSF), National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), and the US Air Force. He serves as the Editor-in-Chief of Journal of
Network and Computer Applications and Vehicular Communications; associate
editor of IEEE Communications Magazine, Journal of Wireless and Optical
Communications, International Journal of Communication Systems, International
Journal of Sensor Networks, International Journal of Communication Networks and
Distributed Systems, and Journal of Real-Time Image Processing.
xiv
About the Editors

Hybrid Compression Method Using
Compressive Sensing (CS) Theory
for Various Biometric Data
and Biomedical Data
Rohit Thanki, Vedvyas Dwivedi and Komal Borisagar
Abstract A
hybrid
compression
method
based
on
compressive
sensing
(CS) theory proposed for various biometric data and biomedical data in this paper.
The data compression method is designed using CS theory, discrete cosine trans-
form (DCT), discrete wavelet transform (DWT), and singular value decomposition
(SVD). In this method, ﬁrst DCT and then DWT are applied on data to get hybrid
coefﬁcients of data (which is a combination of wavelet coefﬁcients and frequency
coefﬁcients). Then, hybrid measurement is produced by application of CS theory on
these coefﬁcients. The SVD is applied to the hybrid measurement of data to get
S matrix, U matrix, and V matrix of the data. Then, low-rank approximation is
applied on these matrices to get compressed matrices. The inverse SVD is applied
on these compressed matrices to get a compressed hybrid measurement of the data.
After getting compressed hybrid measurement at the receiver side, CS theory
reconstruction is applied on it to get compressed hybrid coefﬁcients of the data.
Then, ﬁrst inverse DWT and then inverse DCT are applied on compressed hybrid
coefﬁcients to get reconstructed and compressed data. This method is tested and
analyzed for various biometric and biomedical data such as speech signal and ECG
signal. The experimental results show that this method is equally performed for all
types of biometric and biomedical data. This method is also tested and analyzed for
color biometric images such as face image and biomedical image such as magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) image.
Keywords Biomedical  Biometric  CS theory  Data compression
ECG signal  Face image  Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) image
Speech signal
R. Thanki (&)  V. Dwivedi
C. U. Shah University, Wadhwan City, Gujarat, India
e-mail: rohitthanki9@gmail.com
K. Borisagar
Atmiya Institute of Technology and Science, Rajkot, Gujarat, India
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_1
1

1
Introduction
The research on biometric and the biometric system is increased nowadays because
biometric characteristics are used for personal identiﬁcation and veriﬁcation. The
meaning of biometric is “life to measure” and is divided into two types such as
behavioral characteristics and physiological characteristics. So nowadays, a bio-
metric characteristic of a person is acquired and stored at various organizations and
institutions for easy veriﬁcation. The biometric characteristics such as ﬁngerprint,
face, speech, iris, retina, and signature are widely used for person veriﬁcation [1].
There is a lot of biometric data available at system database. One of the examples is
ﬁngerprint and iris data of Aadhaar project of India. In medical science, the
biomedical data such as images and signals are used for better health treatment.
These biomedical data are observed physiological activities of a human organ. The
biomedical data such computed tomography (CT) image, magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) image, ECG signal, and EEG signal are used for treatment related to
a heart problem and brain problem, respectively. There is a lot of biomedical data
available at large hospital. This creates problem related to storage of biometric data
and biomedical data at system database of biometric system and storage of hospital,
respectively.
So in this paper, we have discussed new compression method based on com-
pressive sensing (CS) [2–4] theory for various biometric data and biomedical data.
This method is applied and analyzed on biometric data like speech signal and color
face image and biomedical data like ECG signal and color MRI image. The rest of
paper is organized as follows: In Sect. 1.1, information of related work is given.
The information of compressive sensing (CS) theory is given in Sect. 2. The
information of implementation of proposed signal compression method is given in
Sect. 3. The results and discussion of proposed compression method for biometric
data and biomedical data are given in Sect. 4. Finally, the conclusion of the paper is
given in Sect. 5.
1.1
Related Work
The many researchers are proposed various compression methods using CS theory
for biometric data and biomedical data. Authors in [5] represented CS theory for
audio signal compression. Authors gathered audio data from multiple sensors, and
then CS theory is applied on it to get compressed audio data. Authors in [6]
proposed DCT and CS theory-based compression method for the audio signal.
Authors have applied CS theory on DCT coefﬁcients of the audio signal and
generate a compressed audio signal. Authors in [7, 8] proposed wavelet transform
and CS theory-based compression method for ECG signal. In these methods, CS
theory is applied on wavelet coefﬁcients of ECG signal to get compressed ECG
signal. Authors in [9] proposed K-SVD adaptive dictionary and CS-based
2
R. Thanki et al.

compression method for the speech signal. In this method, K-SVD algorithm and
CS theory process are combined to get compressed speech signal. Authors in [10]
proposed wavelet transform and CS-based compression method for CT image and
MRI image.
After reviewing research papers, it is clearly indicated that most methods are
designed and proposed using single transform. These methods are applied to one
type of data or information. So in this paper, various signal processing transforms
and CS theory-based compression method are proposed and analyzed for various
types of biometric data and biomedical data. In this paper, ﬁrst DCT and after that
DWT is applied on data to get hybrid coefﬁcients of the data. The CS measurement
of the data is generated using compressive sensing (CS) theory process. Then, SVD
and low-rank approximation are applied to CS measurement of the data to get
compressed CS measurement of the data. The compressed hybrid coefﬁcients of the
data are recovered from compressed CS measurement using CS recovery algorithm
such as OMP algorithm [4]. Finally, IDWT and then IDCT are applied on com-
pressed hybrid coefﬁcients to get a reconstructed and compressed data. The com-
plete process for compression of the data is given in Sect. 4.
2
Information on Compressive Sensing (CS) Theory
A signal S can become sparse signal when only a few nonzero elements are pre-
sented in the signal. The signal S can be converted into a sparse signal by applying
signal transform basis matrix on it. The signal has x nonzero coefﬁcients (sparse
coefﬁcients) which are represented as follows:
x ¼ W  S  W0
ð1Þ
where x is the sparse coefﬁcients of signal and W is the transform basis matrix.
The CS measurement of the signal using compressive sensing (CS) theory can be
represented by using following equation [2, 3]:
y ¼ A  x
ð2Þ
where y is the CS measurement with dimension M  N, A is known as measure-
ment matrix with dimension M  N, x is known as sparse coefﬁcients with
dimension N  N. Here, the value of M is deciding the size of CS measurement
which is providing compression to the signal.
To reconstruct a signal from CS measurement, various CS recovery algorithms
are available in the literature [2–4]. A greedy algorithm such as orthogonal
matching pursuit (OMP) is used in this paper. This algorithm is proposed and
designed by Tropp and Gilbert [4]. It is used in this paper for the extraction of
sparse coefﬁcients from CS measurement. This algorithm is deﬁned by three basic
steps which are matching, orthogonal projection and residual update and recovering
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive …
3

one nonzero sparse coefﬁcient in each iteration. It can be mathematically explained
by using below equation:
x ¼ OMPðy; AÞ
ð3Þ
where x* is extracted sparse coefﬁcients which provide the extracted from the CS
measurement y.
3
Proposed Hybrid Compression Method
The most of the existing data compression method based on CS theory are designed
using single transform. So in this proposed method, different transforms such as
DCT, DWT, and SVD are used along with CS theory for data compression method.
The framework for proposed data compression method is shown in Fig. 1, and the
mathematical steps for signal compression are given below. This proposed data
compression method is analogous to conventional compression method [11]. In the
proposed method, source encoding and source decoding are performed by CS
theory, while channel encoding and channel decoding are performed by SVD-based
low-rank approximation method.
• Take data and calculate the size of data. If data is signal, then it is converted into
the matrix for easy processing in MATLAB software. The discrete cosine
transform (DCT) is applied to data to get DCT coefﬁcients of the data.
D ¼ DCTðSÞ
ð4Þ
Fig. 1 Framework of proposed hybrid compression method
4
R. Thanki et al.

where D is DCT coefﬁcients of the data and S is any biometric data or
biomedical data.
• The wavelet basis matrix and its inverse basis matrix are multiplied with DCT
coefﬁcients to get hybrid coefﬁcients (wavelet coefﬁcients of DCT coefﬁcients)
of the data. The wavelet basis matrix is generated using the wavmat function in
MATLAB [12–14].
W ¼ W  D  W0
ð5Þ
where W is hybrid coefﬁcients (wavelet coefﬁcients of DCT coefﬁcients) of the
data and W is a wavelet basis matrix.
• The CS measurement of the data is generated using hybrid coefﬁcients and
Gaussian measurement matrix. The Gaussian measurement matrix is generated
using zero mean and one variance.
y ¼ A  W
ð6Þ
where y is a CS measurement of the data and A is Gaussian measurement matrix
with a size of M  N.
• Apply singular value decomposition (SVD) on CS measurement of data to get
U matrix, S matrix, and V matrix of CS measurement of the data.
U; S; V
½
 ¼ SVDðyÞ
ð7Þ
• The low-rank approximation using M value of measurement matrix A is applied
on U matrix, S matrix, and V matrix to get compressed matrices.
U ¼ ð:; 1; MÞ
S ¼ ð1 : M; 1 : MÞ
V ¼ ð:; 1 : MÞ
ð8Þ
where U*, S*, and V* are compressed U matrix, S matrix, and V matrix of CS
measurement of the data, respectively.
• Inverse SVD is applied on compressed matrices to get compressed CS mea-
surement of the data.
y ¼ U  S  V
ð9Þ
where y* is compressed CS measurement of the data.
• After getting compressed CS measurement, compressed hybrid coefﬁcients of
the data are recovered by CS recovery algorithm [4].
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive …
5

W ¼ OMPðy; AÞ
ð10Þ
where W* is compressed hybrid coefﬁcients (wavelet coefﬁcients of DCT
coefﬁcients) of the data and OMP is orthogonal matching pursuit.
• Then, inverse wavelet basis matrix and its original basis matrix are multiplied
with compressed hybrid coefﬁcients of the data to get compressed DCT coef-
ﬁcients of the data.
D ¼ W0  W  W
ð11Þ
where D* is compressed DCT coefﬁcients of data.
• Inverse DCT is applied on compressed DCT coefﬁcients to get a reconstructed
and compressed data. If the data is signal, then matrix is converted into a vector
to get a reconstructed and compressed data.
S ¼ IDCTðDÞ
ð12Þ
where S* is a reconstructed and compressed data.
4
Results and Discussion
The testing and analysis of proposed hybrid compression method are performed
using different biometric data such as face image and speech signal and biomedical
data such as MRI image and ECG signal. The test biometric data and biomedical
data are discussed in Sect. 4.1. The quality measures for proposed compression
method are given in Sect. 4.2. The performance of proposed compression method
for speech signal and ECG signal is discussed in Sect. 4.3. The performance of
proposed compression method for color face image and color MRI image is dis-
cussed in Sect. 4.4.
4.1
Test Biometric Data and Biomedical Data
The performance of any data compression method varies with different types of
data. Therefore, in this paper, biometric data such as face image and speech signal
and biomedical data such as MRI image and ECG signal are taken for analysis of
proposed compression method. In Fig. 2, speech signal has a size of 62,500 sam-
ples and it is taken from the Freesound Web site [15]; ECG signal has a size of 3600
samples, and it is taken from the Physionet Web site [16]. The size of the face and
MRI image is 256  256 pixels. The face image is taken from FEI face database
[17, 18]. The FEI face database is Brazilian face database for research which is
6
R. Thanki et al.

created by Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory of FEI in Sao Bernardo do Campo, Sao
Paulo, Brazil [19]. The MRI image is taken from the on line course on Probability
Theory and Mathematical Statistics of Pennsylvania State University, example of
Lesson 31 [21]. The performance of proposed method is carried out for different CS
measurements which are given in Sects. 4.2 and 4.3. In this method, wavelet basis
matrix is generated using Haar wavelet.
4.2
Quality Measures for Proposed Hybrid Compression
Method
The quality of the compressed signal is measured by root-mean-square error
(RMSE) [7], signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [20], and correlation coefﬁcients
(CoC) [8]. The quality of the compressed image is measured by RMSE, peak
signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) [20], and structural similarity index measure (SSIM)
[21]. The high value of CoC and SSIM indicated that compressed signal and the
compressed color image are more similar to the original signal and original color
image, respectively. The value of CoC and SSIM lies in 0–1. The compression ratio
of proposed compression method is calculated using below equation:
CR ¼ SizeOriginal
Data
SizeCS
Measurement
ð13Þ
Fig. 2 Test biometric data and biomedical data a ECG signal. b Speech signal. c Face image
[17, 18]. d MRI image [19]
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive …
7

4.3
Performance Analysis of Proposed Compression Method
for Speech Signal and ECG Signal
In the proposed method, hybrid coefﬁcients of the signal are generated using DCT
and DWT. The CS theory is applied on it to get CS measurement of the signal.
The SVD and the low-rank approximation are applied to CS measurement to get
compressed CS measurement of the signal. The compressed sparse coefﬁcients of
the signal are extracted using OMP algorithm. Finally, IDCT and IDWT are applied
on compressed sparse coefﬁcients to get reconstructed and compressed signal. For
analysis of proposed method, different sizes of CS measurements of the signal are
generated. Then, reconstructed and compressed signal is generated using these CS
measurements. The proposed method is tested and analyzed using ECG biometric
signal and speech biometric signal. Figures 3 and 4 show the reconstructed and
compressed ECG signal and speech signal, respectively. These signals are gener-
ated using different sizes of CS measurements. Table 1 shows the RMSE, SNR, and
(a) with 70% CS Measurement
(b) with 75% CS Measurement
(c) with 80% CS Measurement
(d) with 85% CS Measurement
(e) with 90% CS Measurement
(f) with 95% CS Measurement
Fig. 3 Reconstructed and compressed ECG signal for different sizes of CS measurements
8
R. Thanki et al.

CoC values for the different sizes of CS measurement for the ECG signal and
speech signal. The results in Table 1 show that when the size of CS measurement is
increased, the quality of compressed ECG signal and speech signal is also
(a) with 70% CS Measurement
(b) with 75% CS Measurement
(c) with 80% CS Measurement
(d) with 85% CS Measurement
(e) with 90% CS Measurement
(f) with 95% CS Measurement
Fig. 4 Reconstructed and compressed speech signal for different sizes of CS measurements
Table 1 Quality measures using different sizes of CS measurements for ECG signal and speech
signal
Quality measure for ECG signal
Quality measure for speech signal
CR
Different sizes of CS
measurement
RMSE
SNR
(dB)
CoC
Different sizes of CS
measurement
RMSE
SNR
(dB)
CoC
43,750 (70%)
1.18
37.4
0.985
2520 (70%)
3.33
12.2
0.967
1.43
47,000 (75%)
2.13
37.8
0.990
2700 (75%)
2.96
12.6
0.971
1.33
50,000 (80%)
1.84
41.4
0.993
2880 (80%)
1.97
12.7
0.973
1.25
53,500 (85%)
1.57
41.9
0.995
3060 (85%)
2.09
13.0
0.975
1.17
56,250 (90%)
1.21
43.6
0.997
3240 (90%)
2.88
13.4
0.976
1.11
59,500 (95%)
1.48
44.9
0.998
3420 (95%)
1.49
13.5
0.978
1.05
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive …
9

increased. The compression ratio is decreased when the size of CS measurement is
increased.
4.4
Performance Analysis of Proposed Compression Method
for Color Face Image and Color MRI Image
The proposed method is also tested different types of data such as color face
biometric image and color MRI biomedical image. When this method is applied to
the color image, the ﬁrst color image is decomposed in three different channels like
R channel, B channel, and G channel. The proposed method is applied to the
individual channel to generated compressed data of R channel, B channel, and G
channel. Then, reconstructed and compressed color image is generated using
compressed R channel, B channel, and G channel. Figures 5 and 6 show the
(a) with 70% CS Measurement
(b) with 75% CS Measurement
(c) with 80% CS Measurement
(d) with 85% CS Measurement
(e) with 90% CS Measurement
(f) with 95% CS Measurement
Fig. 5 Reconstructed and compressed Color MRI Image for different sizes of CS measurements
10
R. Thanki et al.

(a) with 70% CS Measurement
(b) with 75% CS Measurement
(c) with 80% CS Measurement
(d) with 85% CS Measurement
(e) with 90% CS Measurement
(f) with 95% CS Measurement
Fig. 6 Reconstructed and compressed Color Face Image for different sizes of CS measurements
Table 2 Quality measures using different sizes of CS measurements for color MRI image and
color face image
Different sizes of CS
measurement
Quality measure for color
MRI image
Quality measure for color
face image
CR
RMSE
PSNR
(dB)
SSIM
RMSE
PSNR
(dB)
SSIM
137,472 (70%)
5.64
33.1
0.867
2.82
39.1
0.957
1.43
147,456 (75%)
5.69
33.2
0.882
2.78
39.2
0.965
1.33
157,440 (80%)
5.56
33.2
0.896
2.74
39.4
0.971
1.25
167,424 (85%)
5.53
33.3
0.906
2.71
39.5
0.974
1.17
177,408 (90%)
5.51
33.3
0.915
2.68
39.6
0.978
1.11
187,392 (95%)
5.48
33.4
0.927
2.66
39.7
0.982
1.05
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive …
11

reconstructed and compressed color MRI biomedical image and color face bio-
metric image. These images are generated using different sizes of CS measure-
ments. Table 2 shows the RMSE, PSNR, and SSIM values for the different sizes of
CS measurement for the face image and MRI image. The results in Table 2 show
that when the size of CS measurement is increased, the quality of compressed color
face image and color MRI image is also increased. The compression ratio is
decreased when the size of CS measurement is increased.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, a hybrid compression method using compressive sensing (CS) theory
is proposed for compression of various biometric data and biomedical data. This
proposed compression method is tested and analyzed using different types of bio-
metric data such as speech signal and color face image and biomedical data such as
ECG signal and color MRI image. The experimental results show that this proposed
compression method is equally performed for all types of biometric data and
biomedical data. The results also show that when size of CS measurements is
increased, the quality of reconstructed and compressed data is also increased. The
compression ratio up to 1.43 is achieved using this proposed compression method.
But biomedical data is used for the better treatment of a patient; then, compression
ratio up to 1.11 can be applicable for biomedical data using proposed method. In
future, advanced transforms such as curvelet and ridgelet are used to generate space
coefﬁcients of biometric data and biomedical data.
Statement on Consent The author(s) have obtained consent from the individuals for publication
who participated in this study. If any issue arises hereafter, then the authors will be solely
responsible.
References
1. Jain, A., Kumar, A.: Biometric Recognition – An Overview, Second Generation Biometrics.
The Ethical, Legal and Social Context, E. Mordini and D. Tzovaras (Eds.), Springer,
pp. 49–79 (2012).
2. Donoho, D.: Compressed Sensing. IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, 52(4),
pp. 1289–1306 (2006).
3. Candes, E.: Compressive Sampling. In: Proceedings of the International Congress of
Mathematicians, 3, pp. 1433–1452, IEEE, Madrid, Spain (2006).
4. Tropp, J., Gilbert, A.: Signal Recovery from Random Measurements via Orthogonal
Matching Pursuit. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 53(12), pp. 4655–4666 (2007).
5. Grifﬁn, A., Tsakalides, P.: Compressed Sensing of Audio Signals using Multiple Sensors. In:
Proceedings of IEEE 16th European Signal Processing Conference, pp. 1–5, IEEE (2008).
12
R. Thanki et al.

6. Moreno-Alvarado, R., Martinez-Garcia, M.: DCT-Compressive Sampling of Frequency
Sparse Audio Signals. In: Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering, 2, pp. 6–8,
IEEE (2011).
7. Abo-zahhad, M. Hussein, A., Mohamed, M.: Compression of ECG Signal based on
Compressive Sensing and the Extraction of Signiﬁcant Features. International Journal of
Communications, Network and System Sciences, 8, pp. 97–117 (2015).
8. Mishra, A., Thakkar, F., Modi, C., Kher, R.: ECG Signal Compression using Compressive
Sensing and Wavelet Transform. In: Proceedings of 2012 Annual International Conference on
the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 3404–3407, IEEE (2012).
9. Zhou, Y., Heming, Z.: Speech Signal Compressed Sensing based on KSVD Adaptive
Dictionary. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology, 48(2), pp. 1237–
1243 (2013).
10. Sevak, M., Thakkar, F., Kher, R., Modi, C.: CT Image Compression using Compressive
Sensing and Wavelet Transform. In: Proceedings of 2012 International Conference on
Communication Systems and Network Technologies (CSNT), pp. 138–142, IEEE, Rajkot
(2012).
11. Gonzales, R., Woods, R.: Digital Image Processing. pp. 422, Prentice Hall Inc., New Jersey
(2002).
12. Vidakovic, B.: Statistical Modelling by Wavelets. pp. 115–116, Wiley (1999).
13. Yan, J.: Wavelet Matrix. The University of Victoria, Canada (2009).
14. Claude, F., Navarro, G.: The Wavelet Matrix. In: International Symposium on String
Processing and Information Retrieval, pp. 167–179, Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2012).
15. For Speech Signal: https://freesound.org.
16. For ECG Signal: http://www.physionet.org/physiobank/database/nstdb/.
17. FEI Face Database (2005, 2006). Available: http://fei.edu.br/*cet/facedatabase.html.
18. Thomaz, C., Giraldi, G.: A New Ranking Method for Principal Components Analysis and its
Application to Face. Image and Vision Computing, 28(6), pp. 902–913 (2010).
19. For Color MRI Image: https://onlinecourses.science.psu.edu/stat414/node/202.
20. Mrak, M., Grgic, S., Grgic, M.: Picture Quality Measures in Image Compression Systems. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE Region 8 EUROCON 2003. The computer as a Tool, 1, pp. 233–
236, IEEE, Slovenia (2003).
21. Wang, Z., Simoncelli, E., Bovik, A.: Multiscale Structural Similarity for Image Quality
Assessment. In: Proceedings of the 37th IEEE Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and
Computers, 2, pp. 1398–1402, IEEE, Paciﬁc Grove (2003).
Hybrid Compression Method Using Compressive …
13

Design, Implementation and Testing
of Signal Processing Module for an Impact
Ionization Dust Detector
J. P. Pabari, A. D. Jadav and U. Y. Kakaiya
Abstract The study of dust at high altitudes on the Mars has been in literature for a
long time and a few sources are expected, which can contribute to it.
Recent MAVEN observations found the dust from about 150 to 1000 km height
from the Mars surface and it is expected to be interplanetary in nature. An in situ
measurement of dust at orbital altitude is needed to study the dust and a few
attempts were made in past in this direction. An impact ionization dust detector,
called Mars Orbit Dust Experiment (MODEX) has been proposed to ﬁnd the
source, abundance, ﬂux and distribution of the dust at Mars by future orbiter.
A prototype model of the dust detector is under development at PRL. The detector
principle, its electronics design, implementation, simulation and testing are pre-
sented in this article. Also, back end processing and derivation of the signal
parameters are included along with user interface for the analysis. The signal
processing module could be useful for detection of a charge pulse generated due to
dust impact.
Keywords Dust  Hyper velocity  Impact  Mars  Planet
1
Introduction and Motivation
It is known that dust devils prevailing near the Mars surface play vital role in the
background opacity on Mars and it could be one possible source of dust in Mars
atmosphere. However, no physical process can explain the transport of surface dust
to high altitudes. Other possible source of dust at orbital altitudes could be escaping
J. P. Pabari (&)
Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad, India
e-mail: jayesh@prl.res.in
A. D. Jadav
VVPEC, Rajkot, India
U. Y. Kakaiya
DDU, Nadiad, India
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_2
15

dust particles from the natural satellites of the Mars, viz. Phobos and Deimos.
Continuous bombardment of dust on Phobos and Deimos can cause the secondary
ejecta, which can easily escape the parent body due to very low escape velocity
(10 m/s for Phobos and 6 m/s for Deimos [1, 2]). Escaping dust is predicted to form
dust rings within orbits of Phobos and Deimos and therefore also around Mars.
However, no such rings have been detected to the present day [3]. The dimensions
of the dust torus could be as large as *5 Mars radii in both the planes, i.e.,
horizontal and vertical planes, as found in literature [4]. The remaining possible
source of high altitude dust could be interplanetary in nature. Igenbergs et al. [5]
have reported a Mars Dust Counter (MDC) on the Nozomi mission, which detected
*100 particles, several of interplanetary, during the cruise phase. A PADME
mission with a dust experiment has been proposed by Lee et al. [6]. Recently,
MAVEN [7] observed the dust at altitudes *150 to 1000 km by a Langmuir Probe
and Wave (LPW) instrument and it is expected to be interplanetary in nature.
A Langmuir probe is primarily used to study plasma parameters and a dedicated
dust detector is needed to understand the source of the dust particles, unambigu-
ously. To study origin, abundance, distribution and seasonal variation of Martian
dust, a Mars Orbit Dust Experiment (MODEX) has been proposed [8]. A prototype
design of an impact ionization dust detector has been initiated at PRL.
The remaining part of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
system block diagram and principle of detection. Section 3 shows design of front
end electronics, analytical derivation, simulation results and noise ﬁgure compu-
tation. Section 4 gives implementation of the electronics and its practical testing
results. Section 5 presents Graphical User Interface (GUI) and signal analysis and,
paper ends with summary.
2
Impact Ionization Dust Detector
The high altitude dust at Mars is expected to have hypervelocity, i.e., velocity
greater than 1 km/s. Whenever such a hypervelocity dust particle makes an impact
on a metal (gold) target dust detector, an impact plasma is created. The plasma
plume travels within the detector box and reach near the collection plates of the
detector. A positively biased plate will capture the plasma electrons, while a neg-
atively biased plate will attract the plasma ions. The background noise is separated
from the impact charge, using a neutral channel. A block diagram of the dust
detector is shown in Fig. 1a and a photograph of the detector box is depicted in
Fig. 1b. The detector cross-section is 150 mm  150 mm and the height is
*200 mm in the initial detector design with payload mass of about 1.5 kg. The
charge pulse generated by the impact plasma is processed by the electronics to
arrive at particle velocity and mass, using the rise time
tr
ð Þ and the maximum
charge Q
ð Þ of the impact pulse [5]
16
J. P. Pabari et al.

tr ¼ cgvg
ð1Þ
and
 Q
m ¼ crvb
ð2Þ
respectively. In the above, cg, cr, η and b are constants to be determined by cali-
bration experiments [9]. The mass-velocity distribution is useful to understand the
possible source of incoming dust particles [5].
3
Front End Electronics Design and Simulation
The front end electronics consists of a Charge Sensitive PreAmpliﬁer (CSPA) to
convert the impact charge into a voltage signal and a pulse shaper to shape the pulse
for further measurements. The rise time of incoming pulse could be few
microseconds to few tens of microseconds which is preserved in the charge sen-
sitive preampliﬁer. The pulse fall time is decided by feedback components of the
CSPA and typically, it could be a few hundred microseconds. The large fall time is
desirable for further processing by subsequent stages. The pulse shaper comprises
of a CR stage and double RC stage (RC)2 for making the pulse into semi Gaussian
shape. A compensating resistor is connected in parallel with the capacitance of the
CR stage for pole-zero cancellation. The feedback components of CR stage are
helpful for better shaping of the pulse. To accommodate possibly large dynamic
range of the input signal, a logarithmic compression is achieved using a diode in the
CR stage. The RC stage time constant should be comparable to the time constant of
Dust 
Detector
Front End 
Electronics
Back End 
Electronics
Dust 
Particles
Data
Bias
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1 a Block diagram of
dust detector (top) and b a
snapshot of detector box
(bottom)
Design, Implementation and Testing of Signal …
17

CR stage. A double integrator stage is used to achieve an improved pulse shape.
A circuit schematic of front end electronics is depicted in Fig. 2 along with the other
simulation units like signal source and oscilloscope.
In practice, the actual signal is due the dust impact on detector surface and its
repetition rate depends on the arrival of dust particles to the detector. MAVEN
measured the dust rate about 0.001 hits/s at Mars [7]. This dust impact rate could be
larger if there is any comet passing near the Mars. To simulate this scenario, we
have used a pulse source in the software and carried out optimization of the circuit.
The input signal used for simulation is in the form of an impulse train, which can be
represented by
vinðtÞ ¼
X
k¼1
k¼1
dðt  kTÞ
ð3Þ
where k is an integer and T is pulse repetition time period which depends on the
incoming dust ﬂux. The output of charge sensitive preampliﬁer is given by
vcspðtÞ ¼ 1
cf
et=s1  vinðtÞ
ð4Þ
where s1 ¼ CfRf the output of CR cum logarithmic stage is given by
v2ðtÞ ¼ 2s2  c3
c4
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2 RSI0  vcspðtÞ
q
ð5Þ
where I0 = reverse saturation current of diode and s2 ¼ C4RS ¼ CSR6 ¼ C6R7. The
output of RC2 stage is given by
v3ðtÞ ¼ s2
2e2s2tv2ðtÞ
ð6Þ
The ﬁnal output of the front end electronics is given by combination of Eqs. (3)–
(6) and representing the output in terms of input voltage. We have simulated
U1
AD8055AN
3
2
4
7
6
R1
R2
VCC
VEE
C1
C2
U2
AD8055AN
3
2
4
7
6
VCC
VEE
C3
R4
XSC1
A
B
C
D
G
T
U3
AD8055AN
3
2
4
7
6
R6
C5
VCC
VEE
U4
AD8055AN
3
2
4
7
6
C6
R7
VCC
VEE
XSC2
A
B
C
D
G
T
C4
R5
D1
R3
output
Fig. 2 Preliminary circuit design of front end electronics for dust detector
18
J. P. Pabari et al.

theoretical pulse responses of all stages in the circuit and the results are shown in
Fig. 3. In addition, circuit simulation has been carried out for the practical circuit
and the results are depicted in Figs. 4 and 5. One can observe from the theoretical
and simulation results that the pulse responses are satisfactory.
Furthermore, noise analysis was carried out to understand the noise ﬁgure of the
circuit given in Fig. 2. The noise analysis results are depicted in Fig. 6 where the
asterisk plot shows the input noise spectrum while triangle plot shows the output
noise spectrum. From the results in Figs. 4, 5 and 6, we found the circuit noise
ﬁgure of the detector electronics as 1.59 dB.
Further, we have varied the feedback components of the CSPA to understand
their effect on the noise ﬁgure. Figure 7 show variation in Noise Figure (in dB) with
respect to the feedback resistance and capacitance of CSPA. It has been found that
the noise ﬁgure remains almost constant for smaller values (a few GX) of the
feedback resistance, while it monotonically reduces for higher values of the feed-
back resistance. Also, the noise ﬁgure is found to decrease with increasing feedback
capacitance. This is due to increase in the noise for the rise in total input capacitance
of CSPA. In noise analysis, the feedback capacitance adds to the total input
capacitance [10] and hence, the feedback capacitance should be kept small (a few
pF typically). Due to increase in the output SNR, the overall noise ﬁgure is reduced.
4
Front End Electronics Implementation and Testing
The front end electronics has been implemented on a PCB as shown in Fig. 8. The
testing was carried out using the charge pulse generated by triboelectricity. The
negative charge was applied at the input and again negative signal is produced at
the output after double inversion in the circuit. Further, there is no signal inversion
and we get negative pulse as ﬁnal output. The result of the PCB testing is depicted
in Fig. 9 from which one can observe that the pulse shape is reasonably good which
may be used by back end processing to derive its parameters.
Fig. 3 Theoretical pulse
response of various stages of
front end electronics
Design, Implementation and Testing of Signal …
19

5
GUI and Signal Analysis
The pulse produced at the output of front end electronics is given to a Digital
Phosphor Oscilloscope (DPO) and data were transferred to a computer for analysis.
We made a GUI using MATLAB for the analysis of signal captured, as depicted in
Fig. 10. The parameters of interest are the pulse rise time and pulse peak value.
These two parameters are used in Eqs. (1) and (2) after overall calibration to
retrieve the physical quantity of interest. Using the rise time and peak value of the
charge pulse, one can derive the impact velocity and mass of incoming dust particle.
The mass-velocity distribution is ﬁnally used for ﬁnding the source of dust particle.
Input 
Output from 
coupling capacitor 
Output from cspa
Output from C-
R (log) stage
Fig. 4 Input pulse, CSPA output and CR (logarithmic) stage output
20
J. P. Pabari et al.

6
Summary
The front end electronics of dust detector has been designed and simulated for a
dust detector. The circuit has been optimized and pulse responses of various stages
are found satisfactory. Also, the noise analysis has been carried out to understand
noise ﬁgure of the circuit and we found that the circuit noise ﬁgure is 1.59 dB.
Furthermore, the circuit has been implemented on a PCB and its practical testing
was carried out. The pulse data were analysed using the MATLAB GUI, which can
be used to derive the parameters of incoming dust particle.
Output from 
R-C 1st stage
Output from 
R-C 2nd stage
Fig. 5 Output of ﬁrst and second RC stages
Design, Implementation and Testing of Signal …
21

Fig. 6 Input and output noise spectrum
Fig. 7 Variation in noise
ﬁgure with feedback
parameters
Fig. 8 Snapshot of front end
electronics PCB with
components mounted on it
22
J. P. Pabari et al.

Stopped
1 Acqs
24 Apr 17 16:51:05
Fig. 9 Result of PCB testing
Fig. 10 MATLAB GUI for signal analysis
Design, Implementation and Testing of Signal …
23

References
1. Anonymous a, http://solarviews.com/eng/phobos.htm, last accessed 2016/6/16.
2. Anonymous b, http://solarviews.com/eng/deimos.htm, last accessed 2016/6/16.
3. Oberst, J., Zakharov, A. and Schulz, R.: Why Study Phobos and Deimos? An Introduction to
the Special Issue, Planetary and Space Science, 102, 1 (2014).
4. Krivov, A. V. and Hamilton, D. P.: Martian dust belts: waiting for discovery, Icarus, 128,
335–353 (1997).
5. Igenbergs, E. et al.: Mars Dust Counter, Earth Planets Space, 50, pp. 241–245 (1998).
6. Lee, P. et al.: Phobos And Deimos & Mars Environment (PADME): A LADEE-Derived
Mission to Explore Mars’s Moons and the Martian Orbital Environment, 45th LPSC, #2288
(2014).
7. Andersson, L. et al.: Dust observations at orbital altitudes surrounding Mars, Science, 350
(6261), aad0398 (2015).
8. Pabari, J. P., Bhalodi, P. J. and Patel, D. K.: Mars Orbit Dust Experiment (MODEX) for
future Mars orbiter, 47th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, #1419, The Woodlands,
Texas (2016).
9. Igenbergs, E. et al.: Mars Dust Counter on Board ISAS PLANET-B, Proc. 20th Int. Sym.
Space Tech. and Space, pp. 1222–1229, Gifu, Japan (1996).
10. Spieler, H.: Front-End Electronics and Signal Processing, Physics Division, Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA (2002).
24
J. P. Pabari et al.

Automatic Fire Detection Using
Combination of Color Cue
and Flame Flicker
Ripal Patel, Kashyap Mandaliya, Pushkar Shelar,
Rushi Savani and Chirag I. Patel
Abstract This paper presents the novel algorithm for automatic ﬁre detection from
still images and video sequences. Proposed technique has been using the color cue
and ﬂame ﬂicker for detecting ﬁre. This paper proposes a combination of two
algorithms to detect ﬁre from video clips. Firstly, the algorithm deﬁnes the method
to detect ﬁre in static images which can be called as color feature technique.
Secondly, the algorithm deﬁnes to detect the ﬁre in video sequences, which can be
called as ﬂicker technique. Furthermore, the ﬁnal result is generated from the
combination of both the results to get the exact ﬁre output eliminating noise
regions. Hence, in results, exact ﬁre region is detected which satisﬁes both algo-
rithms. Lastly, the buzzer is attached to our system; it will ring when the ﬁre is
detected by our algorithm. Results have been evaluated for still images from
benchmark dataset. The overall performance of the proposed technique is
appropriate.
Keywords Flame detection  Color  Flicker detection  Fire detection in video
1
Introduction
With the development of the economy, the number of skyscrapers is increasing. By
traditional methods, major property damage and huge loss happen in these places
and result into very bad social impact which is not good for the economic growth of
a country. We are designing a module which can be able to detect the ﬁre and
smoke on early stage, and also at the same time fast processing can be there so the
R. Patel (&)  K. Mandaliya  P. Shelar  R. Savani
Electronics & Communication Department, BVM Engineering College,
Vallabh Vidyanagar 388120, Gujarat, India
e-mail: ripal.patel@bvmengineering.ac.in
C. I. Patel
Computer Science & Engineering Department, Institute of Technology,
Nirma University, Ahmedabad 382481, Gujarat, India
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_3
25

ﬁre rescue operation is done in very less time resulting in less damage. Video-based
ﬁre and smoke detection can be able to detect pinpoint ﬁre from long distances as
soon as the ﬁre starts and allowing the ﬁre to be dealt with before it gets out of
control. Furthermore, cameras can cover very large areas, and video-based ﬁre
detection even has the potential to be placed on mobile platforms planes.
2
Literature Survey
Töreyin et al. [1] proposed a completely unique technique to notice ﬁreplace and/or
ﬂames in the period by the process of the video information. A common method to
detect the ﬁre is based on some color features or motion features. However, the
author proposed the method which works based on ﬂame and ﬁre ﬂicker. This
phenomenon is evaluated using temporal wavelet analysis. Periodic behavior of
ﬂame ﬂicker is being monitored and analyzed in the wavelet domain. Different
types of features like the nonuniform boundary of the ﬁre-colored region and color
variation in ﬂame have been considered in this approach. Another technique has
been proposed by Liu and Ahuja [2] for vision-based ﬁre detection. The detection
of ﬁre region has been evaluated in three various domains. Firstly, frequency
domain analysis has been performed using probability density distribution.
Secondly, Fourier representation of the shape of ﬂames has been achieved. Thirdly,
temporal changes have been designed to build temporal signature.
Borges and Izquierdo [3] proposed low-level feature representation of ﬁre
regions. Fire ﬂicker and random behavior of ﬁre are key characteristics of ﬁre to
analyze, and based on this phenomenon, various low-level features like color, area
size, and surface coarseness are considered. Another approach is proposed for an
automatic system for ﬁre detection [4] in the sequences of videos. The method used
is the information of color and motion taken from the sequences of videos to
determine the location of the ﬁre. In earlier vision-based methods of detection of
ﬁre, this method is useful for more regions due to the insensitiveness of the motion
of the camera. Two basic methods are not proper to the earlier algorithms for the
recognizing the ﬁre in global camera motion’s presence or the site motion and the
recognizing the ﬁre in the movies and entertainment to the possibility of the use in
rating system which is automatic.
3
Proposed Approach
Block diagram of the proposed video-based ﬁre detection approach is shown in
Fig. 1. Speciﬁcally, it consists of ﬁve major steps of proposed algorithm.
26
R. Patel et al.

3.1
Color Detection
In this paper, following algorithm is evaluated for ﬁre detection using color fea-
tures. The ﬁrst step of our algorithm is to ﬁnd color values of moving pixels which
is compared with predetermined color distribution. The images are then converted
to RGB color range Matrix.
• Selection yellow color range of photograph:
In this method, conversion of the true color image into yellow color component
is taken place.
• Count to how much a binary inside the image.
Comparison of the yellow pixel value is performed using summation.
3.2
Flicker Detection
The ﬂicker detection algorithm has been designed based on two properties. Firstly,
it is observed that the ﬁre is ﬂickered between frequency ranges 1–10 Hz. Secondly,
ﬁre is typically the strongest source of a light; hence, the intensity of luminance
tends toward maximum value. In proposed system, to track moving object we had
used the time derivative of the luminance. The time derivative of the static object is
zero, and on the other side, the time derivative of moving object is nonzero. To
estimate the tendency of ﬁre to ﬂicker around a region we had used cumulative time
derivative method. Cumulative strength and luminance weight are incorporated in
above two mentioned properties.
Flicker detection algorithm [5] Each frame of video clip has been converted from
RGB color space to YUV color space.
• Time derivative of luminance (Y) (i.e., Di) has been approximated using fol-
lowing equation:
Fig. 1 Block diagram of proposed ﬁre detection system
Automatic Fire Detection Using …
27

Di x; y
ð
Þ ¼ Y
i x; y
ð
Þ  Y
i1 x; y
ð
Þ
j
j
ð1Þ
• Cumulative time derivative (CTD) computation
CTi x; y
ð
Þ ¼ a CTi1 x; y
ð
Þ þ 1  a
ð
Þwi x; y
ð
ÞDi x; y
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
where a is the cumulative strength, wi(x, y) is luminance weight, CTi(x, y) is
equal to zero. As more frames in video, more accurate the cumulative time
derivative information it carries. Then after, resetting the pixel in normalized
CTi(x, y) is used (Eq. 2). Convert CTi(x, y) to 8-bit luminance range.
• Setting all pixels in CTN, which have less than nonzero values in CTN to 0’s by
keeping strong move regions. CTN is ﬁnal image resulting ﬂame ﬂicker.
3.3
Region Merging
The observation has been made that the ﬁre in the ﬁre regions is clustered together.
Hence, the merging operation has been evaluated on ﬁre regions and results in the
elimination of another noisy region which contains no ﬁre or any motion.
Therefore, region merging of ﬁre areas from resulted images has been evaluated
using AND process of the output of color feature and ﬂicker process.
3.4
Fire Detection and Buzzer
The ﬁnal ﬁre is obtained by the combination of color and ﬂicker algorithm. After
then, the buzzer is attached at the last of our system. The main function of buzzer
here is to ring as soon as the ﬁre is detected by our algorithms.
4
Experimental Setup
Proposed approach is evaluated on the system platform of 64-bit operating system
processor—INTEL(R)
CORE(TM)i5CPU
using
MATLAB
version—R2012a
having frequency of 2.67 GHz.
28
R. Patel et al.

5
Dataset
In proposed system, the experiments are performed into two parts: (1) static images.
(2) video sequences. The proposed system of detection of ﬁre is tested with static
images using proposed color featuring algorithm, which are taken from various
sources. Later on, merging of color and ﬂicker feature is applied on video. The
proposed approach is evaluated on six different types of videos from [5], and they
include various types of ﬁre sources like nature like sun, matchstick, ﬁre caught in
the building, the ﬁre in the chimney.
6
Results and Discussions
In Fig. 2, all pictures are taken in daylight and the results which are shown above in
which some pictures contain the ﬁre and some are not containing the ﬁre. The result
of proposed color feature algorithm, applied to the still images, is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2 Results for static image using color as cue
Automatic Fire Detection Using …
29

The proposed algorithm has been evaluated on both positive case (ﬁre is pres-
ence) and negative case (ﬁre is absence) of ﬁre. Figure 3 shows the working of
proposed algorithm on the positive image. Similarly, Fig. 4 shows the result for
negative images. In Fig. 4, all pictures taken in daylight and the results in which
pictures do not contain the ﬁre. For positive cases of still images result in detection
of ﬁre properly. Moreover, the negative cases of still images do not result in any ﬁre
detection feature. Figure 5 represents the results of proposed method evaluated on
video sequences. The ﬁrst column of the result displays snapshot from video
frames. Second and third columns depict resultant ﬁre detection using color cue and
ﬂicker detection method, respectively. The last column shows the merged results
from both the binary images using proposed merging technique. Table 1 compares
Fig. 3 Positive cases of ﬁre images
30
R. Patel et al.

the ﬁre detection results by applying our proposed algorithm for all six videos. The
list of videos containing ﬁre is video 073-1, video 073-2, video 073-8, video 073-9,
and non-ﬁre videos are video 073-6 and video SUN. For video 073-1, the ﬁre
recognition rate is 83.1% which is good. On the other side, speciﬁcally, our system
detects sun as a ﬁre (video 073-6) as we are using color feature technique to detect
ﬁre. Our system correctly detects non-ﬁre video frames as shown in Table 1.
However, another system is false to detect non-ﬁre video frames.
Fig. 4 Negative cases of ﬁre images
Automatic Fire Detection Using …
31

Fig. 5 a Original video sequence. b Color output. c Flicker output. d Merged image
32
R. Patel et al.

7
Conclusion
The system proposed the automatic ﬁre detection system based on vision-based
technique for still images and video sequences. For the still image technique, the
results are superior as shown in the ﬁgure at detecting ﬁre, and for the video
sequences technique, our system is consistent and reliable at detecting all forms of
ﬁre. The proposed technique is a fusion of two features, which are color features
and ﬂame ﬂicker features. To avoid any aliasing in the decision of ﬂame detection,
we have proposed region merging technique. Experimental results show the out-
standing performance of the proposed technique. In future, frequency domain
analysis of ﬁre ﬂicker can be considered to improve the outcome of the proposed
system.
References
1. Töreyin, B.U., Dedeoğlu, Y., Güdükbay, U. and Cetin, A.E., Computer vision based method
for real-time ﬁre and ﬂame detection. Pattern recognition letters, 27(1), pp. 49–58 (2006).
2. Liu, Che-Bin, and Narendra Ahuja. “Vision based ﬁre detection.” Pattern Recognition, 2004.
ICPR 2004. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on. Vol. 4. IEEE, (2004).
3. Borges, Paulo Vinicius Koerich, and Ebroul Izquierdo. “A probabilistic approach for
vision-based ﬁre detection in videos.” IEEE transactions on circuits and systems for video
technology 20, no. 5: 721–731(2010).
4. Walter Phillips III, Mubarak Shah, and Niels da Vitoria Lobo, Flame Recognition in Video,
Pattern Recognition Letters, Vol. 23 (1–3), pp. 319–327, January, (2002).
5. Qi, Xiaojun, and Jessica Ebert. “A computer vision based method for ﬁre detection in color
videos.” International journal of imaging 2, no. S09: 22–34 (2009).
6. Patel, Chirag I., Sanjay Garg, Tanish Zaveri, Asim Banerjee, and Ripal Patel. “Human action
recognition using fusion of features for unconstrained video sequences.” Computers &
Electrical Engineering (2016).
Table 1 Detailed results of ﬁre video dataset
Sr. no.
Total no.
of frames
Frames
with ﬁre
False +ve
False −ve
Recognition
rate (%)
Description
Video 073-1
592
542
0
50
83.1
A burning house
Video 073-2
42
42
0
0
100
Fire in chimney
Video 073-6
83
0
0
83
100
A settling sun
Video 073-8
33
33
0
0
100
Burning building
Video 073-9
83
83
0
0
100
Burning paper
Video SUN
236
0
193
43
42.37
Sun in afternoon
Automatic Fire Detection Using …
33

Performance Analysis of Supervised &
Unsupervised Techniques for Brain
Tumor Detection and Segmentation
from MR Images
Brijesha D. Rao and Mukesh M. Goswami
Abstract Brain tumor detection and segmentation from the magnetic resonance
images (MRI) is a difﬁcult task as in the MR brain images, various tissues such as
white matter, gray matter, and cerebrospinal ﬂuid have complicated structures that
make it difﬁcult to segment the tumor. An automated system for brain tumor
detection and segmentation will help the patients for proper treatment planning.
Also, it will improve the diagnosis and reduce the diagnostic time. Segmentation of
brain tumor MR images is the most difﬁcult task as the tumor varies in terms of
size, shape, location, and texture. In this paper, we discuss various supervised and
unsupervised techniques for brain tumor detection and segmentation such as
K-nearest neighbor (K-NN), K-means clustering, and using morphological opera-
tors. We also review the results obtained.
Keywords Brain tumor  Magnetic resonance image (MRI)  Feature extraction
Supervised and unsupervised techniques
1
Introduction
Brain tumor is the extra cells growing in the brain, which form a mass of tissue.
Survey says that 7.6 million people die among 12.7 million cancerous people in a
year [1]. Gliomas are the primary brain tumor which found more frequent in adults
[2]. The survival rate for high-grade tumor is almost two years while several years
for low-grade tumors. If the automated system for brain tumor detection and seg-
mentation is available, then it may help to minimize the rate of diagnosis of brain
tumor abnormality which helps the patients for proper treatment planning.
B. D. Rao (&)  M. M. Goswami
Information Technology, Dharmsinh Desai University, Nadiad, India
e-mail: brijesha_056102@yahoo.co.in
M. M. Goswami
e-mail: mukesh.goswami@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_4
35

MRI is a widely used technique for tumor analysis as it provides better visu-
alization of the internal structure in detail. It also provides better contrast between
the different soft tissues of the body. The MRI scan of the patient can be taken from
three separate angles such as axial, sagittal, and coronal plane [3]. T1, T2, T1c
(Contrast Enhanced), ﬂuid attenuation inversion recovery (FLAIR), etc., are mostly
used MRI sequences for brain tumor analysis which provides different anatomical
and functional information of the brain tumor MRI images.
The brain tumor segmentation process contains the steps such as preprocessing,
extraction of features from MR images, and segmentation using supervised or unsu-
pervised techniques. Here, we will deliberate different methods for supervised and
unsupervisedlearningwhichareusefulforbrain tumor detectionfrom theMRIimages.
2
Methodology
Figure 1 shows the generalized process for brain tumor detection.
Fig. 1 Workﬂow of the
tumor detection system
36
B. D. Rao and M. M. Goswami

A. Image Acquisition and Preprocessing
In order to scale the current state-of-the-art in automated brain tumor segmen-
tation and to compare it between different methods, Multimodal BRATS challenge
is organized in conjunction with the MICCAI 2015 conference. For this purpose,
they prepared and made available a unique dataset of MR scans of low-grade and
high-grade glioma patients which is analyzed by several human experts [4]. In this
research work, we are using BRATS 2015 dataset of different high-grade and
low-grade glioma patients. The dataset contains training data of 220 HGG and 54
LGG images with ground truth and also the testing data of 110 HGG and LGG
images [5]. Basically, the dataset contains 3D images in .mha format which is a
metaﬁle used in medical domain to represent more information. Here, we will work
on axial view (with respect to the z-axis) of the image. The size of the 2D image is
240  240.
As a preprocessing step, we will normalize the image to grayscale range from 0
to 255. Mostly, we assumed that our images are already preprocessed and no need
of noise removal, skull-stripped removal, image enhancement, etc. After normal-
ization of the images, features will be extracted.
B. Feature Extraction
For the detection of the tumor region, our initial goal is to extract relevant
features from the grayscale images. Characteristics obtained from the features are
key to differentiate the tissue of the tumor region with the normal tissue of the brain.
Texture-based features are mainly used features for tumor detection purpose. The
ﬁrst-order intensity-based statistical features such as mean, variance, standard
deviation, skewness, kurtosis [6], and second-order statistical features using GLCM
can be used for segmentation purpose [6]. In the proposed work, the ﬁrst-order
statistical features are computed from the Flair and T2 MR images, considering the
window size of the 3  3 neighborhood where the center pixel is replaced by the
function applied to it.
C. Segmentation
By segmenting the image, it divides the image into subregions. In tumor
detection, we have to separate the normal tissue and abnormal tissue as a different
region. Various supervised and unsupervised techniques can be used for segmen-
tation process. Support vector machine (SVM), K-nearest neighbor (K-NN), arti-
ﬁcial neural network (ANN), decision tree (DT), etc., are the various supervised
learning technique which uses labeled information for classiﬁcation. In unsuper-
vised learning, label information is not available, so clustering using fuzzy c-means,
k-means, mixture model, as well as gray-level segmentation technique using mor-
phological and watershed segmentation can be applied for segmentation.
Performance Analysis of Supervised …
37

3
Supervised and Unsupervised Techniques
for Tumor Detection
For automatic brain tumor detection, we need to train the model using the super-
vised and unsupervised machine learning techniques. As discussed above, many
supervised and unsupervised techniques are available but, for our initial experi-
ments, we have tested supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques
using K-NN and K-means, respectively. We have also used the morphological
operator for our experiments. These techniques are described below.
A. Supervised Technique
The ﬂow of brain tumor detection using supervised learning technique is shown
in Fig. 2.
1. K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN):
K-NN is a simple classiﬁer that stores all available training samples, and the
testing samples can be classiﬁed based on a similarity measure, i.e., using distance
functions [7]. The test case is classiﬁed using majority vote taken from the
neighbors, and ﬁnally, the class label is assigned based on the class most common
among all its K-nearest neighbors. For K = 1, the class of its nearest neighbor is
assigned. To provide the optimal value of K, one should properly analyze the data.
A large number of K can be more precise as it reduces the overall noise.
K-NN-based techniques are used in [8–10].
B. Unsupervised Technique
In the unsupervised learning technique, we do not have a data with class label.
So on the basis of similarity or dissimilarity, the clusters are formed. Here, we
discuss K-means clustering and morphological operators, which work as an unsu-
pervised learning technique for brain tumor detection.
1. K-means clustering
K-means clustering is used for solving low-level segmentation task. First, the
images are taken as an input. Next, the points that have similar color are grouped
together. Euclidean distance calculates the distance between the clusters. After
Fig. 2 Supervised
technology for tumor
detection
38
B. D. Rao and M. M. Goswami

clustering, the mean of clustering is taken. Fuzzy c-means requires more compu-
tation time than K-means. The ﬂow of unsupervised learning technology using
k-means is shown in Fig. 3. This technique is used in [11, 12].
2. Using Morphological operators
Morphological image processing is a technique which uses a number of non-
linear operations associated with the shape in an image. For the processing of
binary images, morphological operations are suited because it relies on the ordering
of pixel values; morphological operations can also be applied to grayscale images
because the light transfer functions used in that are unknown so their absolute pixel
values are of less interest. Morphological techniques use various structuring ele-
ment such as disk, oval, square. The structuring element is placed at all possible
locations in the image and compared with the corresponding neighborhood which
can be “ﬁts” or can be “hits” the neighborhood [13]. The morphological operators
such as erode (for shrinking), dilate (for ﬁlling and expanding) reconstruct, and
regional max are mostly applied to the brain tumor MRI images which separate the
foreground and background objects and help to ﬁnd out the tumor region. Figure 4
shows the ﬂow for tumor segmentation using morphological operator. This tech-
nique is used in [7, 12, 14].
4
Performance Measures
The performance measures will be computed using positive predictive value (PPV),
sensitivity, and Dice score which are described here.
• Positive Predictive Value: PPV is also known as precision value. It is a
measure that gives the probability of positive prediction being correct with
respect to all positive prediction made by the system. The high value of pre-
cision gives good accuracy. It can be computed using the given formula.
Fig. 3 Unsupervised
technology for tumor
detection
Performance Analysis of Supervised …
39

PPV ¼
No: of True Positive TP
ð
Þ
No: of True Positive TP
ð
Þ þ No: of False Positive FP
ð
Þ
ð
Þ
• Sensitivity: It is also known as recall or the hit rate. It gives the probability of a
positive case being identiﬁed properly by a system. To compute the sensitivity,
we can use the following formula.
Sensitivity ¼
TP
TP þ FN
• Dice: It normalizes the number of true positives to the average size of the two
segmented areas. It is also known as F-score.
Dice Score ¼
2:TP
2:TP þ FN þ FP
ð
Þ
5
Experimental Outcomes and Analysis
For our primary experiments, we have used the MRI images of BRATS dataset
which is already labeled so we can use it for the supervised machine learning
technique, and same images have been used for the unsupervised techniques for
brain tumor detection.
A. Outcomes of K-NN, K-means, and morphological operators
Figure 5 shows the result of tumor detection using K-NN.
Figure 6 illustrates the result of tumor detection using K-means clustering
technique
Figure 7 shows the output for tumor detection using morphological operators.
Fig. 4 Tumor detection using morphological operators
40
B. D. Rao and M. M. Goswami

Fig. 5 Brain tumor detection using K-NN
Fig. 6 Brain tumor detection using K-means
Performance Analysis of Supervised …
41

Fig. 7 Brain tumor detection
using morphological
operators
42
B. D. Rao and M. M. Goswami

B. Comparison of performance of different techniques
Table 1 indicates the comparison of various techniques used for brain tumor
detection and segmentation.
From Table 1, we can say that K-NN, K-means, and morphological operators are
used for the purpose of tumor detection from MR images. As discussed earlier, the
K-NN is a supervised learning technique as it uses a data which also contains the
class label information, while other techniques such as K-means and morphological
operators are used as unsupervised learning technique, because they do not have the
class label information. So, these techniques are also used for brain tumor detection
purpose.
C. Comparison of results of different techniques
We have performed our initial experiment with 100 images of BRATS dataset.
We have used K-NN classiﬁer as a supervised method, K-means as unsupervised
methods and Morphological operators. Results that we have achieved are shown in
Table 2.
Table 1 Comparison of different technique
Technique
Learning
technique
Out come
Comments
K-NN
Supervised
technique
Gives good results
with good accuracy
Simple, classes do not have to be
linearly separable and faster than
SVM but sensitive to noisy data
K-means
Unsupervised
Clustering
Accurately
separates tumor
and non-tumor
regions
Minimize sum of the square distance
between object and centroid. But
difﬁcult to predict K with limited no
of the cluster
Morphological
operator
Unsupervised
technique
Separates
foreground and
background objects
Simple method for tumor detection.
Not work well if foreground and
background objects are not
differentiated
Table 2 Results of various techniques used
Techniques
Features used
No of
images
Results
Precision
(%)
Sensitivity
(%)
Dice
(%)
K-NN classiﬁer
Intensity-based
features
100
79
68
71
K-means
clustering
Intensity-based
features
100
68
77
69
Morphological
operator
NA
70
60
72
64
Performance Analysis of Supervised …
43

6
Conclusion
Accurate diagnosis of brain tumor is a major issue to the world. Using technology,
we can give a small contribution that directly helps the experts or doctors for
diagnosis of the tumor. Image processing concepts supervised and unsupervised
learning techniques are very much helpful for the detection and segmentation of
brain tumor region. In this phase, we have done an initial experiment for brain
tumor detection which will be further explored with other supervised and unsu-
pervised techniques to improve the results. As a future work, we can also segment
the tumor region into subtumoral structure edema, necrotic, enhanced tumor, and
non-enhanced tumor region.
References
1. Zhang, Su Ruan, Stephane Lebonvallet, Qingmin Liao and Yuemin Zhu. Kernel Feature
Selection to Fuse Multi-spectral MRI Images for Brain Tumor Segmentation. Computer
Vision and Image Understanding, 2011, 115(2):256–269.
2. Holland, Eric C. “Progenitor cells and glioma formation.” Current opinion in neurology 14.6
(2001): 683–688.
3. Al-Tamimi, Mohammed Sabbih Hamoud, and Ghazali Sulong. “Tumor brain detection
through MR images: a review of literature.” Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information
Technology 62.2 (2014): 387–403.
4. Menze, Bjoern H., et al. “The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark
(BRATS).” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 34.10 (2015): 1993–2024.
5. “Dataset” available at https://www.smir.ch/BRATS/Start2015. Accessed on: July, 17, 2016.
6. Sachdeva, Jainy, et al. “Segmentation, feature extraction, and multiclass brain tumor
classiﬁcation.” Journal of digital imaging 26.6 (2013): 1141–1150.
7. Patil, Rajesh C., and A. S. Bhalchandra. “Brain tumour extraction from MRI images using
MATLAB.” International Journal of Electronics, Communication and Soft Computing
Science & Engineering (IJECSCSE) 2.1 (2012): 1.
8. Cordier, Nicolas, et al. “Patch-based segmentation of brain tissues.” MICCAI Challenge on
Multimodal Brain Tumor Segmentation. IEEE, 2013. 6–17.
9. Chavan, Nikita V., B. D. Jadhav, and P. M. Patil. “Detection and classiﬁcation of brain
tumors.” International Journal of Computer Applications 112.8 (2015).
10. Clarke, L. P., et al. “MRI: stability of three supervised segmentation techniques.” Magnetic
Resonance Imaging 11.1 (1993): 95–106.
11. Verma, Ritu, Sujeet Tiwari, and Naazish Rahim. “Unsupervised MRI Brain Tumor Detection
Techniques with Morphological Operations.” International Journal of Science, Engineering
and Technology Research (IJSETR), Volume 4, Issue 11, November 2015.
12. Meenakshi, S. R., Arpitha B. Mahajanakatti, and Shivakumara Bheemanaik. “Morphological
Image Processing Approach Using K-Means Clustering for Detection of Tumor in Brain.”
International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR). 2319–7064.
13. “morphological
operatoe”
online
available
at
https://www.cs.auckland.ac.nz/courses/
compsci773s1c/lectures/Image Processing-html/topic4.htm, Accessed on:November, 15, 2016.
14. Joseph, Rohini Paul, C. Senthil Singh, and M. Manikandan. “Brain tumor MRI image
segmentation and detection in image processing.” International Journal of Research in
Engineering and Technology 3.1 (2014): 1–5.
44
B. D. Rao and M. M. Goswami

EEG Signal Classiﬁcation for Epileptogenic
Zone and Seizure Zone
Hardika B. Gabani and Chirag N. Paunwala
Abstract ElectroEncephaloGgram (EEG) signals play an important role to identify
epileptic disorders. Epilepsy is a neurological disorder that is an unexpected elec-
trical disruption of the brain, because the activity of nerve cells in the brain becomes
disrupted, causing people to experience “seizures.” Nowa-day, researcher works
and focuses on automatic analysis of EEG signals to classify epilepsy. The EEG
signal recording system produces very long data. Thus, the classiﬁcation of
epileptic seizures requires a time-consuming process. This paper proposes a
Support Vector Machine (SVM)-based automated seizure classiﬁcation system
using Approximation Entropy (ApEn). ApEn reduces patient data size without loss
of information. ApEn is a statistical parameter that measures the amplitude value of
an EEG signal current based on its previous amplitude value. In this paper, we
measure sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and accuracy using SVM classiﬁers. The overall
score as high as 98.62% can be achieved by using the proposed system to distin-
guish the epilepsy state (seizure class) from the normal state (non-seizure class)
using the time domain method.
Keywords ElectroEncephaloGram (EEG) signal  Classiﬁcation of epilepsy
seizure  Approximate entropy (ApEn)  Support Vector Machine (SVM)
1
Introduction
Spikes of electrical activity in different brain regions are determined by the EEG
signal, and we can determine the position and relative strength. Epilepsy is a disease
that was taken using electricity unusual EEG activity. Fifty million people suffer
H. B. Gabani (&)  C. N. Paunwala
Dr. R.K. Desai Marg, Opp. Mission Hospital,
Athwalines, Surat, Gujarat, India
e-mail: hardikagabani62@gmail.com
C. N. Paunwala
e-mail: chirag.paunwala@scet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_5
45

from epilepsy seizures [1] around the world. Factors that may cause epilepsy, brain
injury, metabolic disorders, alcohol or drug abuse, brain tumors, and genetic
disorders.
A moment in time, epilepsy is not possible to predict in most cases.
Classiﬁcation purposes, required for continuous recording of the EEG. In some
cases, EEG recording requires a very large duration of time, perhaps until a week or
two. Since the traditional method was boring and slow, an automatic epileptic
seizure classiﬁcation system was developed [2]. The proposed work is an automatic
epileptic EEG classiﬁcation system using SVM and feature extraction and reduction
by using approximate entropy (ApEn).
This is shown in the image below, and we will mark the EEG inputs. ApEn
technique [3] is used to mark features. Extracted features are then applied to the
classiﬁer to classify seizures or non-seizures data (Fig. 1).
Epilepsy since recording began in the mid-1970s, the programmer investigation
and discover EEG Signal. Epilepsy and seizures EEG analysis of the placement, the
current PC-based test and discuss two issues: Epilepsy seizure classiﬁcation and
EEG analysis. Many feature extraction techniques have been used for the classi-
ﬁcation of epilepsy seizure. SVM (Support Vector Machine) - based classiﬁcation
system for epilepsy seizure has been proposed by many researchers.
The Lyapunov exponent [4, 5] provides signiﬁcant details about changes in EEG
activity in turn facilitating early detection of epilepsy. The correlation dimension [6]
is useful to measure correlation which quantiﬁes complex neural activity of human
brain. During epileptic seizure, the value of ApEn has been found to exhibit strong
relationship with synchronous discharge of large groups of neurons. The features
obtained from complexity analysis and spectral analysis of EEG signals has been
effectively used for diagnosis of epilepsy [7]. Recently, the approximate entropy
(ApEn) [3] - based methods have been developed for analyzing linear signals for
classiﬁcation of epileptic seizures in epilepsy seizure [8, 9]. The mean frequency
parameter of IMFs has been proposed to discriminate well between seizure and
seizure-free EEG signals. For classiﬁcation between healthy and epileptic EEG
signals, weighted frequency has been found to be some parameter [10]. Analysis of
normal and epileptic seizure EEG signals by using area measured from the trace of
Fig. 1 Block diagram
46
H. B. Gabani and C. N. Paunwala

analytical signal representation of intrinsic mode function (IMF) has been proposed
in [11]. The area parameter and mean frequency of IMFs computed using Fourier–
Bessel expansion are used for epileptic seizure classiﬁcation in EEG signals [12].
Also, IMFs of EEG signals have been used for recognition of epileptic seizure [9].
In ﬁrst experiment, all 100 time series of F and S are taken for training and
testing. For frame size 173, entropy values are 690 for each time series, so if we
take 100 time series, entropy values would be 69,000 for one class and it is double
(138,000) by considering both seizure and non-seizure class. These procedures
followed for all four features. Entropy values of both classes S and F for training
and testing dataset for all frames are shown in Table 1 (Fig. 2).
For frame size N = 2048 and m = 2 and r = 0.9, gets optimum accuracy for
ApEn. From that, we get highest accuracy 95.25% of the feature ApEn with SD for
experiment and frame size N = 2048 and m = 2 and r = 0.0, gets optimum accu-
racy for ApEn. From that, we get highest accuracy 94.25% of the feature ApEn with
mean for experiment.
Table 1 Number of entropy value for testing
Sr. no
Time series
of F and S
Frame size
No. of entropy
values for training
No. of entropy
values for testing
1.
200
173
1,38,000
1,38,000
2.
200
256
96,000
96,000
3.
200
512
48,000
48,000
4.
200
1024
24,000
24,000
5.
200
2048
12,000
12,000
Fig. 2 ApEn for F and S ﬁle set for a N = 2048, m = 2, r = 0.9 with SD. b N = 2048, m = 2,
r = 0.0 with mean
EEG Signal Classiﬁcation for Epileptogenic …
47

For training purpose, all 70-time-series data for F and S and 100-time-series data
are taken for testing. Entropy values of both classes S and F for training and testing
dataset for all frames are shown in Table 2.
Figure 3 are for all optimum results of experiment feature dataset as shown in
Tables 2. The ﬁgure shows the SVM classiﬁcation for the seizure and normal class
using radial basis kernel function, where seizure is denoted by * and normal by +.
The line is describing linear classiﬁcation of the dataset. The o describes wrongly
classify data points of opposite class. Here, we measure the performance parameters
like, standard deviation (SD) [13], accuracy [14], sensitivity [14], speciﬁcity [14],
and mean [13].
Table 2 Entropy value after 70% training
Sr.
no
Frame
size
Time series of F and S
for training
Time series of F and S
for testing
No. of entropy values
for training
1.
173
140
200
96,600
2.
256
140
200
67,200
3.
512
140
200
33,600
4.
1024
140
200
16,800
5.
2048
140
200
8400
Fig. 3 ApEn for F and S ﬁle set after 70% training and testing a N = 1024, m = 1, r = 0.0 with
SD. b N = 1024, m = 1, r = 0.0 with mean
48
H. B. Gabani and C. N. Paunwala

2
Experimentation Results
In our work, we have extracted the features from the EEG signal and classiﬁcation
is done using SVM classiﬁer [15] in two class, i.e., seizure-free and seizure patient
data. ApEn values are measured in form of m, r, and N. The values of m, r, and
N are as follows [3]:
1. Number of samples (m) = 1, 2, 3;
2. Normalization ratio (r) = 0–90% of SD of the data sequence in increments of
10%;
3. Frame size (N) = 173, 256, 512, 1024, and 2048.
Approximation entropy is extracted along with SD and mean. The randomness
of EEG signal was extracted in the features, based on different size of frame (N),
number of samples values (m), and normalized ratio (k). From the set of features,
ApEn with SD and mean are used for classiﬁcation using the SVM classiﬁer.
We have used BONN dataset for EEG signals which is publicly available online
and described by Andrzejak et al. [16]. The EEG dataset contains both seizures and
non-seizures. The Bonn dataset consist of ﬁve subsets (Z, O, N, F, and S) each
containing 100 single-channel EEG signals, each signal of 23.6 s in duration with
the sampling rate of 173.61 Hz.
EEG recordings of ﬁve healthy volunteers with eyes open (Z) and closed
(O) have been recorded on the surface, using standard electrode placement scheme.
These two are recorded in seizure-free intervals from ﬁve patients in the epilep-
togenic zone (F-seizure free) and from the hippocampal formation of the opposite
hemisphere of the brain (N-seizure free). The set S contained seizures signal which
gives an ictal activity by using the same 128-channel ampliﬁer system with an
average common reference, and all EEG signals are recorded. In the proposed work,
classiﬁcation of the F (Seizure-free class) and S (Seizure class) is done by using
approximate entropy (ApEn) feature extraction and reduction and SVM as
classiﬁer.
For all 100 EEG datasets, 70 datasets are used for training and the others are
used for testing using SVM classiﬁer. SVM classiﬁer is used to classify unknown
data properly. The highest accuracy is 98.625% for the feature set ApEn with SD
for frame size N = 1024, sample value m = 1, and normalization ratio r = 0.0. In
the proposed method, accuracy is achieved up to 98.625% for the feature set ApEn
with SD. For training and testing purpose, we get different accuracy, sensitivity, and
speciﬁcity as shown in Fig. 4.
As shown in Table 3, all the papers are worked on Bonn dataset and they
achieved maximum accuracy 98.27%. In the proposed method, accuracy up to
98.625% is achieved for the feature set ApEn with SD.
EEG Signal Classiﬁcation for Epileptogenic …
49

3
Conclusion
We have extracted the features from the EEG signal, and classiﬁcation done using
SVM classiﬁer in to two class seizure and normal. Approximation entropy is
extracted along with SD and mean. The randomness of EEG signal was extracted in
the features, based on different size of frame (N), number of samples values (m), and
normalized ratio (r). From the set of features, ApEn with SD and ApEn with mean
were used for classiﬁcation using the SVM classiﬁer. The highest classiﬁcation
accuracy is 98.625% for F and S class. The main classes of the F and S that will be
an classes of the seizure data and non-seizure data.
References
1. Klaus Lehnertz, Florian Mormann, Thomas Kreuz, Ralph G. Andrzejak, Christoph Rieke,
Peter David, And Christian E. Elger, “Seizure prediction by nonlinear EEG analysis. IEE Eng
Med BiolMag”, article in IEEE engineering in medicine and biology magazine, Research gate
January 2003.
Fig. 4 Classiﬁcation accuracy, sensitivity, and speciﬁcity at before training and after 50% training
for F (seizure free) and S (seizure class)
Table 3 Comparison of methodology for same dataset
Methodology
Subset
Classiﬁcation accuracy (%)
(KNN) classiﬁer [17]
F and S
93
Clustering and support vector
machine (SVM) classiﬁer [18]
F and S
93.91
Elman neural network [19]
S and F
93.33
Multiclass SVM [20]
F and S
97.00
Thresholding [21]
F and S
96.00
ANN [22]
F and S
98.27
50
H. B. Gabani and C. N. Paunwala

2. N. Mc Grogan (1999). Neural network detection of epileptic seizures in the electroen-
cephalogram, [Online]. Available: http://www.new.ox.ac.uk/˜nmcgroga/work/transfer
3. Vairavan Srinivasan, “Approximate Entropy-Based Epileptic EEG Detection Using Artiﬁcial
Neural Networks” IEEE Transactions On Information Technology In Biomedicine, Vol. 11,
No. 3, May 2007.
4. N.F. Güler, E.D. Übeyli, I. Güler, Recurrent neural networks employing Lyapunov exponents
for EEG signal classiﬁcation, Expert Systems with Applications 29 (3) (2005) 506–514,
October 5. Foster, I., Kesselman, C., Nick, J., Tuecke, S.: The Physiology of the Grid: an
Open Grid Services Architecture for Distributed Systems Integration. Technical report, Global
Grid Forum (2002).
5. E.D. Übeyli, Lyapunov exponents/probabilistic neural networks for analysis of EEG signals,
Expert Systems with Applications 37 (2) (2010), pp. 985–992, March.
6. A. Accardo, M. Afﬁnito, M. Carrozzi, F. Bouquet, Use of the fractal dimension for the
analysis of electroencephalographic time series, Biological Cybernetics 77 (5) (1997),
pp. 339–350, November 2.
7. S.F. Liang, H.C. Wang, W.L. Chang, Combination of EEG complexity and spectral analysis
for epilepsy diagnosis and seizure detection, EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal
Processing (2010), vol. 2010, Article ID 853434.
8. R.B. Pachori, Discrimination between ictal and seizure-free EEG signals using empirical
mode decomposition, Research Letters in Signal Processing 2008 (2008), Article ID 293056.
9. S. Li, et al., Feature extraction and recognition of ictal EEG using EMD and SVM, Computers
in Biology and Medicine 43(7) (2013), pp. 807–816.
10. R.J. Oweis, E.W. Abdulhay, Seizure classiﬁcation in EEG signals utilizing Hilbert–Huang
transform, Bio Medical Engineering On Line 10 (2011) 38, December.
11. R.B. Pachori, V. Bajaj, Analysis of normal and epileptic seizure EEG signals using empirical
mode decomposition, Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 104 (3) (2011),
pp. 373–381, December 7.
12. V. Bajaj, R.B. Pachori, EEG signal classiﬁcation using empirical mode decomposition and
support vector machine, in: Proceedings International Conference on Soft Computing for
Problem Solving, AISC 131, 20–22 December, 2011, Roorkee, India, 2011, pp. 623–635.
13. Ram Bilas Pachori, Shivnarayan Patidar, “Epileptic seizure classiﬁcation in EEG signals
using second-order difference plot of intrinsic mode function,” in Elsevier Transactions on
Computer methods and programming in biometric(2014), vol. 9, pp. 494–502.
14. Varun Bajaj and Ram Bilas Pachori, “Classiﬁcation of Seizure and Non seizure EEG Signals
Using Empirical Mode Decomposition”, IEEE transactions on information technology in
biomedicine (2012), vol. 16, no. 6, November.
15. Nicoletta Nicolaou, Julius Georgiou, “Detection of epileptic electroencephalogram based on
Permutation Entropy and Support Vector Machines,” in Elsevier Transactions on Expert
Systems with Applications (2012), vol. 8, pp. 202–209.
16. R.G. Andrzejak, et al., Indications of nonlinear deterministic and ﬁnite-dimensional structures
in time series of brain electrical activity: dependence on recording region and brain state,
Physical Review E (2001), vol. 64, Article ID 061907.
17. Guohun Zhu, Yan Li, Peng (Paul) Wen, “Epileptic seizure detection in EEGs signals using a
fast weighted horizontal visibility algorithm,” in Elsevier Transactions on Computer method
in programming biometric(2014), vol. 12, pp. 64–75.
18. Siulya, Yan Li a, Peng (Paul) Wenb, “Clustering technique-based least square support vector
machine for EEG signal classiﬁcation,” in Elsevier Transactions on Computer method in
programming biometric(2011), vol. 15, pp. 358–372.
19. Giorgos Giannakakis, Vangelis Sakkalis, Matthew Pediaditis, And Manolis Tsiknakis
“Methods For Seizure Detection And Prediction: An Overview” Springer Science+business
Media New York 2014.
20. A.S. Muthanantha Murugavel And S. Ramakrishnan “Multi-class SVM For EEG Signal
Classiﬁcation Using Wavelet Based Approximate Entropy” Institute For Computer Sciences,
Social Informatics And Telecommunications Engineering 2012.
EEG Signal Classiﬁcation for Epileptogenic …
51

21. U. Rajendra Acharya “Automatic Detection Of Epileptic Eeg Signals Using Higher Order
Cumulant Features” International Journal Of Neural Systems, Vol. 21, No. 5 (2011).
22. Ling Guo, Daniel Rivero, Alejandro Pazos “Epileptic Seizure Detection Using Multiwavelet
Transform Based Approximate Entropy And Artiﬁcial Neural Networks” Journal Of
Neuroscience Methods 193 (2010) 156–163.
52
H. B. Gabani and C. N. Paunwala

Design and Development of DAQ
and Processing System for FMCW
RADAR
Rucha Joshi, Amit Patel, Keyur Mahant and Hiren Mewada
Abstract Frequency-modulated continuous wave radar is generally used for cal-
culating range and speed of any target. A research paper is intended to develop
back-end electronics for frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW) radar
with optimum usage of ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA)-based processing
unit. Sampling of the received IQ (in-phase and quadrature-phase) signals is done at
speed of 500 KSPS using 12-bit ADC128S102. Acquired data is further stored into
internal memory of FPGA for post-processing. Zero-crossing algorithm is imple-
mented on the received signal to obtain the beat frequency of the same. Moreover,
stored data and processed data are transferred to the computer using SPI protocol.
LabVIEW-based simulator is also developed to process the received data and
retrieve the beat frequency from it.
Keywords Frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW)  Field-programmable
gate array (FPGA)  Zero crossing
R. Joshi (&)
Electronics and Communication Engineering, Charotar University
of Science and Technology, Changa, India
e-mail: joshirucha27@gmail.com
A. Patel  K. Mahant  H. Mewada
Charusat Space Research and Technology Center, Charotar University
of Science and Technology, Changa, India
e-mail: amitvpatel.ec@charusat.ac.in
K. Mahant
e-mail: keyurmahant.ec@charusat.ac.in
H. Mewada
e-mail: hirenmewada.ec@charusat.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_6
53

1
Introduction
This paper describes design and development of the back-end electronics of FMCW
radar using FPGA and LabVIEW-based simulator development. In RF signal
processing, phase and frequency information is required to determine distance, for
that FMCW radar is used in this approach, so basic principle of FMCW radar is
distance measurement which is accomplished by calculating the differences in
phase or frequency between the transmitted and received signal. Some signal
processing algorithms are implemented to determine frequency and phase of signal.
Fast Fourier transform (FFT), zero-crossing algorithm and Hilbert transformation
are more likely used algorithms for phase and frequency estimation [1]. Here,
zero-crossing algorithm is used as it is more accurate than other algorithms because
of its high accuracy and low processing latency, and it is suitable for real-time
applications. Furthermore, compatibility is increased as it gives 3 (past, current and
previous)-point measurement of signal [9].
FPGA, microprocessors and DSP controllers are three main families of digital
device technology which are generally used to design RF back-end electronics.
FPGA is programmable logic device which allows parallel processing with high
speed and memory resources on FPGA is higher compared to other processing
devices [2, 3]. Thus, FPGA is utilized here. Moreover, the same FPGA is utilized to
conﬁgure the frequency synthesizer and for transferring data to computer. Here,
VHDL is chosen as software design language because it is standard language used
for describing digital system. Xilinx is used for generating VHDL code.
2
System Block Conﬁguration of Back-End Electronics
In this paper, we are focusing on FPGA implementation of back-end processing;
back-end processing consists of I/Q demodulator, ADC and memory. In proposed
system of back-end electronics, data is obtained from IQ demodulator [4].
Received IQ signals are digitized using 12-bit ADC128S102 [5] with the sampling
rate of 500 KSPS. Furthermore, acquired data are stored into the 16-k (2048  8)
block memory for the post-processing.
Here, instrument takes the data for 4096 µs, and it is stored into the block
memory of FPGA. Further, the stored data is processed for calculating the beat
frequency. FPGA takes 4096 µs to process the data and obtain the beat frequency.
Once the data is processed, the data is transferred to computer using RS232 serial
interface with the baud rate of 9600 (Fig. 1). FPGA takes 2.12 s to transfer the
stored data to computer. In the computer, data is received using LabVIEW and
stored into xls ﬁle which can be used for post-processing. In LabVIEW,
zero-crossing algorithm is implemented to obtain beat frequency and verify the
result of FPGA.
54
R. Joshi et al.

Here, ADC128s102 is selected on the basis of beat frequency. Spartan3E
(XC3S500E) FPGA [6] board is used for conﬁguration, and 16-k bits of block
memory are used for data storage.
3
Calculation of Beat Frequency
Fb ¼ TR  f 0
where,
TR ¼ 2R
C ; f 0 ¼ f1  f2
t
TR is time taken by signal to travel back from object, R is measurement of
distance to the target, and C is speed of light in medium f1 and f2 are sweep
frequency and t is sweep time [7].
R
1 m
C
3  108 m/s
t
20 ms
f1
36 GHz
f2
26 GHz
Here, the obtained value of the beat frequency as per the given speciﬁcation
is *5 kHz, and as per the Nyquist criterion for sampling, “signal must be sam-
pled at least twice as often as its highest frequency to enable correct reconstruction
of the signal”. As per that chosen analog-to-digital converter (ADC) is having the
sampling rate of 500 KSPS–1 MSPS, which provides enough sampling rate to
reconstruction the original signal from the taken samples.
Fig. 1 Block diagram of back-end electronics
Design and Development of DAQ and Processing …
55

4
Internal Memory Generation
All Spartan3 generation FPGAs are having multiple block RAM memories, which
can be utilized for storing the data. Here, Spartan3E (XC3S500E) device is used,
which contains total block RAM of 360-k bits. Table 1 shows the available block
RAM device. Each block RAM contains 18-k bits, in which 16-k bits are allocated
to data storage and 2-k bits are allocated to parity which is an optional.
Size of the generated internal memory is 16 k (2048  8) which is used to store
digitized data of ADC. As per the project requirements and beat frequency speci-
ﬁcation, 16-k memory space is enough to store data.
5
Developed Hardware for Back-End Processing
The actual developed hardware for back-end processing of FMCW RADAR using
FPGA is as shown in Fig. 2. Developed board is designed in such a way so it can be
sandwiched on the available Papilio-One FPGA board.
Here, the green board is the developed board which is sandwiched on the
available red Papilio-One FPGA board. Developed board contains 12-bit, single
channel analog-to-digital converter with the conversion throughput rates of
Table 1 Available block memory of device
FPGA device
RAM columns
RAM blocks per column
Total RAM k bits
XC3S500E
2
10
360 k
Fig. 2 Developed hardware for back-end processing
56
R. Joshi et al.

1.25 MSPS for processing data coming from IQ demodulator. Hardware also
contains
12-bit,
8-channel
analog-to-digital
converter
with
the
conversion
throughput rates of 1 MSPS for monitoring the health parameter of whole system
like temperature monitoring of DC–DC converters (ADP3336), VCO, LNA and
SRAM. It has high-speed, low-power CMOS SRAM organized as 32,768  8 bits
that operates on single 5 V power supply, which can be utilized in future for storing
the data coming from the IQ demodulator. LVDS transmitter and receiver are used
for transferring the data to control unit with high speed. The size of the developed
board is about 121 mm  62 mm [8].
6
Experimental Results
6.1
Simulation Results of Block Memory (2 k  8)
Figure 3 shows utilized the available block memory of the XC3S500E, Spartan 3E
FPGA. Available block memory into the FPGA is of 360 k. As per the project
requirement we are suppose to take 2 k samples of the incoming data, which is
sufﬁcient to determine the beat frequency of the received signal. So, we have
utilized 16-k (2048  8) bit of memory out of 360 k to store the acquired data.
Result of the generated block memory is shown in Fig. 3. Here, in Fig. 3, data of
incoming signal with the frequency of 5 kHz sampled with the sampling frequency
of 500 KSPS is shown. Signal is having the input voltage of 2 V (p–p) and sample
with 500 KSPS, so there is a change between two consecutive digital value stored
into the block memory is of 32 in decimal. In future if the requirement arises to
acquire the data for the longer time or to acquire the data with the higher sampling
frequency, then SRAM or DRAM may be utilized to store the acquired data.
Fig. 3 Result of block memory
Design and Development of DAQ and Processing …
57

6.2
Results of ADC on MDO
Figure 4a, b shows the hardware results of digitized data obtained from ADC.
Control signals required for interfacing ADC with FPGA are shown in Fig. 4a, b,
which are CLK, Chip Select (CS), SCLK and DOUT. Here, CLK deﬁnes the
operating frequency of the utilized FPGA, CS is used for the selection of the ADC
chip, and SCLK deﬁnes the conversion rate of the ADC. Utilized ADC is of 12-bit,
8-channel; for the selection of the channel, we are supposed to provide the DIN to
the ADC, and digitized output after conversion is received from the DOUT which is
shown in Fig. 4a, b. DIN is provided on the 3–5th falling edge of the SCLK, and
digitized data is received on 5–16th the falling edge of SCLK.
6.3
Simulation and Hardware Results
of Zero-Crossing Detection
Figure 5a, b shows that data coming from I/Q demodulator is digitized using
ADC128s102, acquired and processed using XC3S500E FPGA. Zero-crossing
algorithm is implemented on acquired data from ADC in XC3S500E FPGA. Result
Fig. 4 a Result of data acquired from ADC and b Result of data acquired from ADC
58
R. Joshi et al.

of the zero crossing is stored into the variables a, b and c as shown in Fig. 5b.
Count value of variables a, b and c is 49 which indicates that the beat frequency of
the received signal is of *5 kHz with sampling rate of 500 KSPS.
To determine the beat frequency, data acquired from the ADC128s102 needs to
be processed. Zero-crossing algorithm has been implemented into the FPGA to
determine the beat frequency. Result of the zero-crossing algorithm for the input
frequency of 5 and 2.5 kHz with the input voltage of 2 V (p–p) is shown into
Fig. 6a, b. Here, the acquisition is done with the sampling frequency of 500 KSPS
(2 µs) for the input signal frequency of 5 and 2.5 kHz. As per the sampling rate and
the input signal frequency successfully received count values between two
zero-cross points are 49 and 99 respectively. By multiplying the count values with
the sampling time, time period of the beat signal or the input signal has been
successfully achieved which is shown in Fig. 6a, b.
Fig. 5 a Simulation result of zero-crossing algorithm and b Received zero-cross output on
simulation
Design and Development of DAQ and Processing …
59

7
Timing Diagram
Timing diagram of the data acquisition and transfer is shown in Fig. 7a, b. In
Fig. 7a, it is shown that once the instrument received the trigger signal from the
user to turn on the system, acquisition of the data is stared and acquired data is
stored into the internal memory of FPGA. Once the process of data acquisition,
processing and storing is completed, the data is transferred to the computer using
serial interface, which is shown in Fig. 7b.
8
Results Obtained in LabVIEW Simulator
Once the data from the IQ demodulator is digitized by ADC, processed by FPGA
and stored into the block memory of the utilized FPGA, it is transferred for the
purpose of post-processing and veriﬁcation of zero-crossing algorithm on the dif-
ferent platforms like LabVIEW and MATLAB. Here, the acquisition is done with
Fig. 6 a Result of zero-crossing algorithm for 5 kHz and b Result of zero-crossing algorithms for
2.5 kHz
60
R. Joshi et al.

the sampling frequency of 37 kHz (27 µs), because here the acquisition and transfer
process is done at the same time.
As per the sampling rate of 37 KSPS and the input frequency of 1, 2.5 and
5 kHz successfully receive count values are of 37, 14 and 7 respectively, which is
shown in the Fig. 8a, b, c with the red highlighted callouts shapes. Detail of the
sampling frequency and input signal frequency is depicted into Table 2.
9
FPGA Power and Resources Utilization
Tables 3 and 4 describe the FPGA resources and power utilization. Table 2 shows
the details of FPGA resources utilization, number of slice FFs, LUTs and slices, like
16% of 4 input LUTs are utilized out of total available 4 input LUTs. Table 4
shows the power consumption of the FPGA, which is approximately 80 mW.
Fig. 7 a Timing diagram of data acquisition process and b Timing diagram of data transfer
process
Design and Development of DAQ and Processing …
61

Fig. 8 a Result of transferred data on LabVIEW for input signal of 1 kHz and b Result of
transferred data on LabVIEW for input signal of 2.5 kHz
Table 2 Count values as per the input signal frequency
Sr.
no
Input signal
frequency (kHz)
Input signal time
period (ms)
Sampling
time (µs)
Sampling
frequency (kHz)
Count
value
1
1
1
27
*37
37
2
2.5
0.4
27
*37
14
62
R. Joshi et al.

10
Conclusion
FPGA-based back-end electronics can be designed for the acquisition, processing
and transferring the data to the computers of RF-based receiver system. Here, we
have utilized the same FPGA for other purposes such as conﬁguration of frequency
synthesizer, generating the tuning voltage of the free running VCO and controlling
the SPDT switches. High-speed data processing can also be developed for data
acquisition by using high-end FPGAs. Here, we have also implemented the
zero-crossing algorithm to obtain phase and frequency information of beat signal,
and distance information can be derived from the same.
Moreover, LabVIEW and MATLAB can be used for storing and processing the
data. Obtained beat frequency from the FPGA is also veriﬁed into the developed
MATLAB- and LabVIEW-based simulators. So, by using such software and pro-
cessing unit like FPGA, a high-speed, highly reliable and powerful data acquisition
and processing system can be designed.
11
Future Scope
Data acquisition can also be implemented using high-speed ADC of 80MSPS/
100MSPS. SRAM/DRAM can be utilized for data storage. Also different signal
processing algorithms can be utilized for obtaining the beat frequency of the
reﬂected signal.
Table 4 FPGA power
consumption summary
Types of measurement
Power (W)
Quiescent
0.076
Dynamic
0.003
Total
0.080
Table 3 Resources utilization summary
Logic utilization
Used
Available
Utilization (%)
Number of slice ﬂip-ﬂops
220
9312
2
Number of 4 input LUTs
1563
9312
16
Number of occupied slices
1753
9312
18
Number of bonded IOBs
28
66
41
Number of BUFGMUXs
3
24
12
Average fan-out of non-clock nets
8.17
–
–
Design and Development of DAQ and Processing …
63

References
1. Yizheng Liao, “Phase and Frequency Estimation: High-Accuracy And Low-Complexity
Techniques”.
2. Vaughn Betz, Jonathan Rose, “Using Architectural “Families” to Increase FPGA Speed and
Density”.
3. Rodger H. Hosking “Use FPGA resources to boost radar system performance”, RF Design
Defense electronics.rfdesign.com/mag/510RFDSF2.pdf.
4. James J. Alter, Jeffrey O. Coleman, RADAR Handbook, Ch-25 Radar Digital Signal
Processing, Naval Research Laboratory 1010505.
5. Texas Instruments, Analog to Digital Converters Available: www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/
adc128s102.pdf.
6. XILINX. Spartan-3 Generation FPGA User Guide: Extended Spatan-3E, and Spartan-3 FPGA
Families
UG331,V1.8.available:
http://www.xilinx.com/support/documentation/userGuides/
ug331.pdf.
7. Yan Wu, J.P.M.G. Linnartz, “Detection Performance Improvement of FMCW Radar Using
Frequency Shift”. IEEE MAY 10–11, 2011.
8. Keyur K. Mahant, Amit V. Patel, Alpesh Vala, Riddhi Goswami “FPGA based temperature
control and monitoring system for X-ray measurement instrument”.
9. R.W.W all “simple methods for detecting zero crossing”. IEEE, proceedings of the 29th annual
conference of IEEE.
64
R. Joshi et al.

Side-Lobe Interference Minimization
in MC-CDMA Based Cognitive Radio
Bhumika D. Kavaiya and Vinay M. Thumar
Abstract Cognitive radio system is a promising technique to pull off spectrum
utilization requirements. Key feature is high data rate wireless communication
being offered to the unlicensed user on the basis of request. MC-CDMA is one of
the promising multi-carrier transmission methods to achieve this in cognitive radio
(CR) system. It is quite possible that transmission of primary and secondary users
may occur in an adjacent spectrum, interference is caused by secondary users to the
primary user (PU) band. Fourier-based transmission of such systems is having
many rewards, but there this method generates side lobes which can cause inter-
ference in PU band. This paper focuses on minimizing side-lobe interference caused
by secondary users to the PU band. Power allocation-based methods are veriﬁed to
minimize
the
interference.
Interference
is
minimized
with
the
use
of
water-ﬁlling-based power allocation method as compared to uniform power allo-
cation method. This objective is accomplishment and explained in this paper.
Keywords Cognitive radio  MC-CDMA  Power allocation  Side-lobe
interference  Water-Filling
1
Introduction
The era of wireless communication is demanding for high data rate applications to
the wide range of users. This leads to deﬁciency of spectrum availability.
To achieve high data rate over traditional single carrier transmission causes ISI due
to multipath and may increase receiver complexity. Above reason leads to need of
mechanism which can increase spectrum efﬁciency. This has initiated the idea of
cognitive radio (CR), where unlicensed users are allowed to use a portion of spectra
when licensed users are disabled, in a way that this temporary allocation should not
B. D. Kavaiya (&)  V. M. Thumar
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
DDU, Nadiad 387001, Gujarat, India
e-mail: kavaiya_b@yahoo.co.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_7
65

affect the primary transmission. Since like have been an increase among demand for
greater information degree transmission, the structures are integrating the
multi-carrier transmission techniques. The multi-carrier transmission approach
employs the by Fourier transform mechanism. The entire bandwidth will remain cut
up between numbers of tributary channels. As a result, a high information stream
will be transformed among numbers of low rate channels, who are transmitted over
distinct sub-channels. The splitting concerning high data rate channel of a range on
lower information rate channels causes expand of symbol duration, whereas a
decrease rate parallel sub-carriers reduce the relative amount of dispersion in period
prompted via multipath delay spread. Various multi-carrier transmission systems
are developed and used by many Telecom standards to fulﬁl requirements.
MC-CDMA is one of the multi-carrier transmission techniques. MC-CDMA gives
settlements of OFDM and CDMA. Earlier MC-CDMA was proposed by Linnartz in
1993 [1]. MC-CDMA has provided multi-carrier transmission with low complexity
of receiver structure. In cognitive environment also MC-CDMA is providing
suitability by fulﬁlling the criteria such as no hardware modiﬁcation required to
upgrade system, spectrum shaping and compatibility to adaptive modulation
technique. It also provides advantage of CDMA such as diversity and spreading
technique. MC-CDMA has variants which depend on spreading done in time
domain or frequency domain. MC-CDMA uses frequency domain spreading, which
has advantages of collecting energy in frequency domain at receiver side. Efﬁciency
of this system also depends upon spreading code selection. Based upon the
application in uplink or downlink, Walsh or PN codes are widely chosen for the
system. In cognitive radio system, secondary user may get non-contiguous
sub-carriers and thus the system transmission becomes non-contiguous. In this case,
Walsh code lost its orthogonal property if number of sub-carriers are not in terms of
2N, Where N indicates number of sub-carriers. The system performance gets poor in
such environment. To overcome from this problem, Carrier Interferometry
(CI) code is chosen. CI codes are introduced to mitigate the effect of losing
orthogonal property in NC transmission. They are complex-valued code having any
of the length. It also has capabilities to accommodate more number of users by
providing extra phase shifting in code, no other modiﬁcation required. In this work,
CI code is chosen for NC-MC-CDMA system-based cognitive radio. Similar to
NC-OFDM [2, 3] environment, NC-MC-CDMA also generates side lobes which
may cause interference to nearer PU band [4, 5], which should be in limited form
for any efﬁcient CR system.
The paper is methodical as follows: Sect. 2 is about cognitive radio, Sect. 3
provides system model. Section 4 detailed the MC-CDMA system, Sect. 5 entitled
power allocation and interference management. While Sect. 6 gives simulation
results and Sect. 7 provides the conclusion.
66
B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar

2
Cognitive Radio
Cognitive radio is a smart Wi-Fi communication system so much is aware on its
surrounding environment. It utilizes the methodology on understanding by building
in conformity with learn beyond the environment yet inure its inner states according
to statistical variations through two fundamental objectives, relatively reliable
communication whenever yet any place needed and efﬁcient utilization of the
spectrum. The solution for enabling technology on dynamic spectrum gets right of
entry to cognitive radio (CR) technology. CR provides the ability in accordance
with portion the wireless channel including the unlicensed users of an opportunistic
way. CRs are envisioned to stay in a position according to furnish the high
bandwidth according to mobile users via heterogeneous wireless architectures or
dynamic spectrum access techniques. The networked CRs also impose several
challenges ﬁt in imitation of the huge extent of reachable spectrum as well namely
numerous QoS necessities about applications.
To share the spectrum with licensed customers except disturbing them, and asso-
ciate the numerous quality of situation need of applications, every CR user into a CR
Network have to determine the part concerning spectrum that is available—called
spectrum sensing. To pick out the best accessible channel—referred to as spectrum
decision. Coordinate get admission to this channel together with other users called
spectrum distribution by means of following CR cycle shown in Fig. 1 [6].
3
System Model
Cognitive radio-based system model considering for this work is shown in Fig. 2.
Single primary user and multiple secondary users are considered. All SUs trans-
missions are controlled by centralized control system. Channel condition between
Fig. 1 Cognitive radio [6]
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA …
67

SU transmitter and SU receiver given by hkl, intersecondary user interference
considered by the channel gain of SU transmitter to near by SU receiver hkl,
Where l indicate path. Interference from SUs to PU gets affected via channel gain
gkp, where gain is from kth secondary user to pth PU band. Here, single PU with
single band is considered.
4
Modelling of CI/NC-MC-CDMA
Implementation of NC-MC-CDMA system follows the NC-OFDM procedure. The
difference is no serial to parallel conversion needed at input side and data bits are
converted into number of copies via copier. Number of copier depends upon
number of sub-carrier Np of the system. Each copy is multiplied with spreading
code and allocate to the sub-carrier. Thus spreading become in frequency domain
and transmitting data rate will be same as input data bit [7]. Transmitter structure is
as shown in Fig. 3. In MC-CDMA-based cognitive radio, few sub-carriers are used
by
licensed
user
and
so
that
for
secondary
users
transmission
become
non-contiguous transmission. In this case, sub-carrier under primary user band is
considering as null sub-carriers.
CI codes are chosen for spreading data bits to preserve the orthogonal property
in NC transmission and to achieve more efﬁcient system response. Over a Walsh
code whose code length is restricted to 2N having bits +1 or −1, CI codes are
complex orthogonal codes of any length of N. CI-based MC-CDMA provides the
Fig. 2 System model
68
B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar

capability of supporting U [ N users using phase shift p
N without expansion of
bandwidth. The spreading sequence for CI code is generated by Eq. 1 [9].
cuðtÞ ¼
X
Np1
i¼0
bu
i  ej2pDfit
ð1Þ
where bu
i ¼ is the uth user complex spreading sequence for i = 0, 1,…, NP  1.
bu
i ¼ bu
0; bu
1; . . .; bu
Np1
ð2Þ
Here, Df ¼ 1=Tb where Tb is symbol duration.
For Hadamard code, bu
i is −1, +1. For the case of CI codes, bu0
i are complex
phases corresponding to Eq. 2 can be written as Eq. 3
bu
i ¼ 1; ejDhu; ej2Dhu; ej3Dhu; . . .; ejðNp1ÞDhu
ð3Þ
When u ¼ 1; 2; . . .; Np  1
Dhu ¼ 2p
N u
ð4Þ
And when u ¼ Np; Np þ 1; . . .; 2Np, it is deﬁned by
Dhu ¼ 2p
N u þ p
n
ð5Þ
In this way from Eqs. 4 and 5, 2N users are supported on codes of length N with
minimal performance degradation as the number of users increase from N to
2N. The transmitted signal for the all users for CI/MC-CDMA in [10, 11]. Effect of
CI code on simulation is also veriﬁed and shown in [12]. Here, DUðtÞ is input data
bits, u = Total number of users, A = Amplitude [9].
Fig. 3 MC-CDMA
transmitter structure [8]
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA …
69

5
Power Allocation and Interference Management
Frequency response of MC-CDMA-based cognitive radio system is shown in below
Fig. 4. It is observed that because of the Fourier-based transmission of the
secondary system side-lobe power may cause interference to nearby primary user
[13–15]. This work intended to minimize the side-lobe interference caused by SUs
to PU. Here, effect is observed on whole PU band. PU band may use CDMA-based
transmission or FDMA-based transmission. Interference effect will be same on all
PU users as here only SUs to PU effect is considered.
Let total available bandwidth of secondary user is Bsu Hz which is decided by
the coherence bandwidth. B is the sub-carrier bandwidth for secondary user. Nsu are
the total number of sub-carrier allocated to secondary user. So the number of
sub-carriers is given by Nsu ¼ Bsu
B . Uniform bandwidth allocation done on each
sub-carrier for all u users. For the given power budget and allocated bandwidth
system overall throughput should be maximum, with the condition that the inter-
ference caused by SU users to PU band should be under the threshold deﬁned by
spectrum regulatory authority. The optimization problem for sub-carrier power
allocation and PU interference management is as follows:
Problem Deﬁnition:
Obj ¼ max
C;
8u
ð6Þ
Subject to,
Im6Ith
ð7Þ
pk;i>0
ð8Þ
Fig. 4 Frequency response of NC-MC-CDMA
70
B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar

X
u
k¼1
X
Nsu
i¼1
pk;i6Pt
ð9Þ
06B6Dfcu
ð10Þ
where,
C ¼
X
u
k¼1
X
Nsc
i¼1
B log2 1 þ pk;i  hkl;i
r2


ð11Þ
Im ¼
X
u
k¼1
X
Nsc
i¼1
psc  gk;p
Z
PUBand
sincððf  fk;iÞ  TsÞ2
ð12Þ
where B ¼ uth user sub-carrier bandwidth, pu;i ¼ uth user power on ith sub-carrier,
hkl;i = kth user transceiver channel gain on ith sub-carrier, r2 = AWGN variance.
Equation 6 gives the objective that system should achieve maximum overall
throughput for all the users with the constraints that interference to the PU band
should be below threshold given by authority as in Eq. 7. Power allocated to all the
secondary users should satisfy the constraint given in Eqs. 8 and 9. Sub-carrier
bandwidth should be lesser than coherence bandwidth as in Eq. 10. Overall
capacity of the system is given as Eq. 11. Interference to the PU band by each
secondary user is calculated by Eq. 12.
To fulﬁl the objective of obtaining maximum throughput with the constraint that
side-lobe interference should be below the threshold interference, algorithms are
developed using two different power allocation methods. Uniform power
allocation-based on–off method is modiﬁed using the water-ﬁlling power allocation
method to minimize the side-lobe interference. Algorithm is stated here shows that
after allocating resources to the system, power allocation is done. Interference is
calculated for allocated power and compared with threshold interference (decided
by Telecom regulatory authority). If the interference is above the threshold level,
highest interference causing sub-carrier is elected and power level to that sub-carrier
is making null. Thus, on–off method is applied here to reduce the side-lobe inter-
ference level. Uniform power allocation does not give satisﬁed performance; hence,
water-ﬁlling power allocation is applied to achieve the objective of this work.
Algorithm is as shown below.
6
Simulation Results
In this section, calculation of side-lobe interference from SUs to PU and manage-
ment of interference below threshold using different power allocation methods are
carried out. Let system having total allocated bandwidth 6 MHz out of which 1 MHz
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA …
71

uses by PU and 5 MHz used by SU users. Here, we are considering only single PU in
system but for the presence of more PU scenario is remain same. Here, we are
considering total 64 sub-carrier allocated to both of them by centralized cognitive
system. Sub-carrier allocated to the PU will be null sub-carrier for secondary user.
Threshold interference arbitrary chosen for simulation is Ith = 8e−11 W and input
power of single user is 2 W. Side-lobe interference calculation from SUs to PU is
carried out by considering PU as a single band.
72
B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar

Figure 5 shows the interference caused by each sub-carrier of SU to PU band.
We get total interference is 1.11e−9 W to PU band which is above the threshold
interference. We need to reduce this interference below threshold value. Algorithm
based upon uniform power allocation is applied to minimize interference below the
threshold value.
Figure 6 shows the interference caused by each sub-carrier after minimizing total
interference. Result gets 7.8e−11 W interference to PU which is below threshold.
To minimize this algorithm has null the 21 sub-carrier of secondary user which
causing maximum interference to PU band.
Throughput performance for single user before and after interference mini-
mization is shown in Fig. 7, where throughput is degraded as number of
sub-carriers to be null after minimizing the interference.
Another simulation carried out for such system using multi-users, as more than
single user carried by MC-CDMA system interference causing to PU is also increase.
For four users, each of having 2 W power on total 64 sub-carrier where PU having
1 MHz and SU 5 MHz and by keeping interference threshold Ith = 1e−10 W. Each
user power equals distribution on 64 sub-carrier that is 2/64 W. Before minimization
total interference to PU is carried out 3.4e−9 W to PU. Each sub-carrier interference is
Fig. 5 Interference from SU
to PU
Fig. 6 Interference after
minimization to PU band
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA …
73

showing in Fig. 8. After applying algorithm, interference reduces to PU is 9.5e−11 W
which is obtained by null 160 SU sub-carrier which causing highest interference to PU
shown in Fig. 9.
Throughput calculation for both scenarios is shown in Fig. 10.
Fig. 7 Throughput
performance for single user
Fig. 8 Interference by four
secondary users to PU band
Fig. 9 Interference by four
users after minimization
74
B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar

6.1
Interference Management and System Performance
Based upon algorithm using water-ﬁlling power allocation method as discussed in
previous section interference management is performed. For the single user having
input power range of 0.1–1 W and 64 sub-carrier system algorithm is applied to
reduce the side-lobe interference causing from SU to PU. Here interference
threshold is kept at 1e−11 W. Here, system performance analyzed based upon
throughput of the system. Throughput of the system before management and after
management using developed algorithm is shown in Fig. 11.
Out of 64 sub-carrier, 20 sub-carriers became null to reduce interference level
below threshold. After the management again power allocation done and
throughput is calculated. In Fig. 11, if we compare result with previous algorithm
Fig. 10 Throughput performance of four users
Fig. 11 Throughput versus power performance with modiﬁed algorithm
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA …
75

here throughput is (shown in yellow) increased. It proves that the new mechanism is
inferior
compare
to
conventional
on–off
method.
For
the
multi-user
NC-MC-CDMA, above algorithm is also veriﬁed. For the four user and 64
sub-carrier, each user having input power range 0.1–1 W. Interference threshold is
assumed 5e−10 W.
Figure 12 shows the result for throughput of four-user system, here also it is
veriﬁed that throughput of system is increased compare to conventional on–off
method.
7
Conclusion
From the system model and interference calculation, it is shown that SU side lobe
creates interference in PU band. The aim of this paper is to enhance the perfor-
mance of SU transmission such that SU creates interference below threshold to the
PU band. Interference calculation is carried out for Secondary users to PU band
over a range of input power. When SU’s interference to the PU band is above
threshold, different power allocation-based algorithms can be applied to manage
this interference below threshold. On–off method-based algorithm is applied with
uniform power allocation; it is observed that it minimizes interference but at the
same time throughput is degraded. To combat this limitation, on–off algorithm is
used with water-ﬁlling-based power allocation and throughput is improved. Results
are veriﬁed for single user as well as multiple users.
Fig. 12 Throughput versus power performance for multi-user MC-CDMA
76
B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar

References
1. Y. Nathan, J.-P. M. Linnartz, and G. Fettweis, “Multi-carrier cdma in indoor wireless radio
networks,” IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. 77, no. 7, pp. 900–904, 1994.
2. V. Thumar, T. Nadkar, U. B. Desai, and S. Merchant, “Distributed resource allocation for
cognitive radio networks: Sub-carrier power and bandwidth sizing,” in Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC Fall), 2013 IEEE 78th. 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
3. G. T. S. M. Taskeen Nadkar, Vinay Thumar and U. Desai, “Adaptive guard interval and
power allocation for ofdm based cognitive radio,” ICTACT Journal On Communication
Technology: Special Issue on Wireless Networks and application, vol. 2, 2011.
4. S. Zhao, “Power allocation in ofdm-based cognitive radio systems,” School of Graduate
Studies at Ryerson University, 2013.
5. Z. Yuan and A. M. Wyglinski, “On sidelobe suppression for multicarrier-based transmission
in dynamic spectrum access networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 59,
no. 4, pp. 1998–2006, 2010.
6. S. Haykin, “Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless communications,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 201–220, Feb 2005.
7. S. Hara and R. Prasad, “Overview of multicarrier cdma,” IEEE communications Magazine,
vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 126–133, 1997.
8. L. Hanzo, L. Yang, E. Kuan, and K. Yen, “Single and multi-carrier cdma: Multi-user
detection, space-time spreading, synchronisation and standards,” 2003.
9. B. Natarajan, C. R. Nassar, S. Shattil, M. Michelini, and Z. Wu, “High-performance mc-cdma
via carrier interferometry codes,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 50, no. 6,
pp. 1344–1353, 2001.
10. B. Xie, E. Like, M. Temple, and Z. Wu, “Performance of downlink mc-cdma and ci/mc-cdma
systems in the presence of narrowband interference,” in Proceedings of the 2009 International
Conference on Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing: Connecting the World
Wirelessly. 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em ACM, 2009, pp. 1121–1125.
11. C. R. Nassar, B. Natarajan, and S. Shattil, “Introduction of carrier interference to spread
spectrum multiple access,” in Wireless Communications and Systems, 2000. 1999 Emerging
Technologies Symposium. 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em IEEE, 1999, pp. 4–1.
12. B. D. Kavaiya and V. M. Thumar, “Suitability of carrier interferometry code for nc-mc-cdma
based cognitive radio,” International Journal of Current Engineering and Scientiﬁc Reaserch
(IJCESR), vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 123–129, oct 2016.
13. M. Rajabzadeh and H. Khoshbin, “A novel multicarrier cdma transmission scheme for
cognitive radios with sidelobe suppression,” International Journal of Communication
Systems, vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1485–1499, 2013.
14. L. D. H. Sampaio, T. Abrão, B. A. Angélico, M. F. Lima, M. L. Proença, and P. J. E.
Jeszensky, “Hybrid heuristic-water ﬁlling game theory approach in mc-cdma resource
allocation,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 1902–1912, 2012.
15. J. Zhu and Y. Bar-Ness, “Power allocation algorithm in mc-cdma,” in Communications, 2002.
ICC 2002. IEEE International Conference on, vol. 2. 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em IEEE,
2002, pp. 931–935.
Side-Lobe Interference Minimization in MC-CDMA …
77

Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques
for Network State Classiﬁcation
Dipali Shah, Purvang Dalal, Mohanchur Sarkar and Sejal Dalal
Abstract RTT is the only parameter available with TCP sender for estimating
network capacity. Accordingly, legacy TCP revises its sending rate for utilizing
maximum of the network capacity, without overloading. Since in wireless network,
RTT is weakly correlated to the congestion, any estimate using only the recent RTT
sample may lead to performance penalty. This paper presents a simulation-based
study of the two RTT-dependent mechanisms, targeting fair network state classi-
ﬁcation by taking RTT statistics into account. It is demonstrated that the perfor-
mance of TCP scheme equipped with one technique can be improved further by
tweaking using the other technique.
Keywords Round-trip time  Wireless network  Network state classiﬁcation
Available bandwidth  Congestion window
1
Introduction
Transmission control protocol (TCP) [1], the de facto transport protocol over
Internet, is primarily designed and turned for wired network with an initial objective
to utilize maximum of available network bandwidth without overloading the net-
work [2]. TCP believes packet loss and delay variations as the network congestion
indicators and accordingly regulates its sending rate to lessen the congestion [3].
For that it revises one of its state variables congestion window (cwnd) either on
D. Shah  P. Dalal (&)
Department of Electronic and Communication Engineering,
Dharmsinh Desai University, Nadiad, India
e-mail: pur_dalal.ec@ddu.ac.in
M. Sarkar
Space Applications Centre (ISRO), Ahmedabad, India
S. Dalal
S. V. Patel Institute of Technology, Vasad, India
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_8
79

detection of a packet loss or on arrival of a positive acknowledgment (TCP-ack)
from the receiver [4].
The advancement in wireless technology has extended Internet services to end
users equipped with wireless devices. Because more than 90% of Internet trafﬁc
(including the most popular applications like Web (HTTP), ﬁle transfer (FTP), and
e-mail (SMTP), etc.) uses TCP as transport layer protocol for reliable data transfer
[5], it is apparent that the wireless Internet segment must also use TCP for
extending similar services. In wireless domain, the quality of the radio link can
ﬂuctuate greatly in time because of channel fading, interference, shared channel
access, and mobility [5]. Consequently, a TCP ﬂow may encounter packet losses
and delay variations, despite there is no congestion. In the absence of mechanisms
for accurate and in time discrimination, TCP’s response to most of the packet losses
and delay variations is found inappropriate [3]. Consequently, TCP fails in utilizing
the available network bandwidth gracefully [6].
In order to mitigate TCP performance issues arising mostly due to its unfair
reaction to the non-congestion losses and delays, extensive research has been
carried out in last two decades [5–7]. The link layer techniques attempt to shield
TCP from wireless transmission losses [8]. However, link recovery is not guaran-
teed and has adverse impact on TCP’s RTT-dependent ﬂow control [3]. Several
attempts are made to revise TCP congestion control parameters while attempting
loss recovery. The revision is in accordance with the input from explicit or implicit
mechanisms for loss differentiations [9]. In addition to the deployment issues in the
Internet, TCP proposals with explicit mechanisms are incongruous particularly
when loss discrimination is merely indicative and information about current net-
work state is either ignored or not available. On other side, TCP schemes with
implicit mechanisms are much appreciated due to minimum changes leading to ease
of deployment in Internet. However, the efﬁciency of such TCP schemes is not
guaranteed in a shared wireless environment due to the limited ability of a TCP
sender in observing the network resource together with the fast-changing network
bandwidth availability [10]. Consequently, several techniques have been proposed
in literature for enhancing their performance by taking advantage of round-trip time
(RTT) statistics for network state classiﬁcation.
In this work, two promising techniques, proposed in recent past, are elucidated
and examined through simulations. The ﬁrst technique, presented in [11], exploits
RTT statistics over a period of data transfer and proposes a model for network state
classiﬁcation. The second technique is presented in [12], wherein the TCP sender is
modiﬁed (i.e., Adaptive TCP) to estimate the degree of congestion by observing
RTT evolution since inception of data transfer. The estimate is utilized further to
prevent undue reduction in TCP sending rate, in favorable network condition. The
results highlight the scope for further performance improvement of Adaptive TCP
by exploiting RTT variations observed over a limited period instead of entire data
transfer phase. Rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 discusses the basic
TCP mechanisms related to ﬂow control and loss recovery. In Sect. 3, two
RTT-based
techniques
stated
earlier
are
briefed.
Section 4
discusses
on
80
D. Shah et al.

performance evaluation of both techniques over an IEEE 802.11-based wireless
network. Section 5 concludes this paper.
2
TCP Mechanisms
TCP’s efﬁciency for network bandwidth utilization is attributed to its basic func-
tionality such as ﬂow control and loss recovery. While these mechanisms have a
well-presented deﬁnition of their own, in practice, they are closely coupled with
each other.
2.1
Flow Control
In the beginning of the TCP connection (or after a prolonged disconnection), the
sender is unaware of available network bandwidth. In this situation, it executes the
slow-start phase for progressive probing and quick utilization of available band-
width. In this phase, sender sets the cwnd size to initial window size (1 or 2
maximum segment size (MSS) [13]). Then after, cwnd increases by one MSS for
each arrival of a TCP-ack. In normal conditions, all sent packets are acknowledged
in RTT interval and hence in slow-start phase, growth of cwnd is exponentially over
RTT. This happens until either a packet loss event occurs or cwnd reaches the
slow-start threshold (ssthresh) [1]. Once cwnd reached the ssthresh, TCP enters the
congestion avoidance phase. In this phase, as its name implies, it tries to avoid
network congestion by restricting the growth of cwnd with an objective to utilize
additional bandwidth gradually, i.e., without overloading the network. In this phase,
growth of cwnd is linear over RTT, i.e., cwnd is increased by one segment for each
RTT. This happens until a loss event occurs. Thus, in both of the above-mentioned
phase, the growth in the size of cwnd is greatly dependent on RTT, estimated by the
TCP sender on end-to-end basis. When delay is large, then RTT value increases; so
TCP sender takes more time to utilize maximum of the available network band-
width [6].
2.2
Loss Detection and Recovery
A packet loss is assumed if the sender does not receive an acknowledgment for the
packet within a time-out interval called RTO, which is dynamically computed as the
estimated smoothed RTT plus four times its mean deviation [14]. TCP achieves
reliable data delivery by retransmitting the lost packet. Upon a time-out, the sender
ﬁrst revises ssthresh to the half of the current cwnd size (minimum two MSS [1])
and then after initiates the slow-start mechanism with the cwnd size of initial
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network …
81

window. This procedure is also called the additive increase and multiplicative
decrease (AIMD) algorithm [15]. In this way, packet loss detection using time-out
and the growth of cwnd on arrival of each TCP-ack are greatly dependent on RTT.
When the RTO value is large, waiting for a time-out event to trigger retransmission
is considered inefﬁcient [16]. Due to this, fast retransmit was proposed to provide a
timely detection of a lost packet. It triggers when the sender receives three duplicate
acknowledgments (DupAcks) from the receiver. Upon receiving these DupAcks,
TCP infers packet loss and retransmits the unacknowledged packet with smallest
sequence number. Fast recovery is executed after fast retransmit [16]. The sender
exits the fast recovery when a new TCP-ack is received and deﬂates the cwnd; that
is, the cwnd is set to half of the current ssthresh plus the number of DupAcks [1].
The said fast recovery mechanism can recover from for a single packet loss per
RTT but cannot avoid time-out action with multiple packet losses per RTT [15]. In
order to recover from multiple packet losses from a window of data, the TCP
mechanism is enhanced further, wherein the sender exploits the partial acknowl-
edgment for recovering from multiple packet losses from a single window of data.
However, for recovering from multiple packet losses, it requires multiple RTTs
[17]. Thus, like its ﬂow control mechanism, TCP’s loss detection and recovery
mechanisms are also RTT-dependent.
3
Proposals with RTT-Based Classiﬁcation
Since TCP throughput is limited by the augmentation in cwnd per RTT [18], the
efﬁciency claimed by TCP is essentially depending upon its accuracy for RTT
estimation, in addition to the size of cwnd [19]. In wireless networks, the delay
variations are in general weakly correlated with the network congestion and hence
any network state discrimination taking instantaneous value of RTT into account
leads to poor TCP performance. Therefore, the TCP sender would not regulate the
data ﬂow according to the actual state of network, especially related to congestion.
This demands for robust technique for fair network state classiﬁcation. In the
following subsection, two RTT-based proposals for the same are explained.
3.1
Model for RTT-Based Network State Classiﬁcation [11]
The model proposed in [11] operates on the long-term and short-term RTT evo-
lutions for network state classiﬁcation. Since the sampling rate of RTT is
non-uniform and mostly at lower rate particularly in wireless networks, this model
considers mean of all the RTT values pertaining to the same window as a repre-
sentative value of RTT for classiﬁcation. This model classiﬁes network into four
states: ‘00’ (no congestion, no error), ‘01’ (no congestion, high error), ‘10’ (high
82
D. Shah et al.

congestion, no error), and ‘11’ (high congestion, high error). The proposed model
uses following RTT statistics.
Normalized Rise of the mean RTT
The total duration of a TCP connection is divided into a series of windows. For a
given window (say i), there will be a series of RTT values obtained corresponding
to all packets transmitted in that window. In this context, RTTi,j is the RTT mea-
surement for the jth packet for the ith window. Accordingly, mean RTT for the ith
window (MWi) is derived using Eq. (1).
MWi ¼
Pcwndi
j¼0
RTTi;j
cwndi
ð1Þ
Here, cwndi denotes the value of cwnd for the ith window. In order to estimate
the short-term condition of the network load, the proposed model computes nor-
malized rise of the mean RTT. The normalized rise of the mean RTT for last k
windows (MRk) is obtained using Eq. (2),
MRk ¼ Mk  IRTT
IRTT
ð2Þ
where IRTT denotes the minimum RTT observed and Mk denotes the window
average of the mean values MWi for the last k windows. Mk is computed using
Eq. (3).
Mk ¼
Pi
j¼ki MWi
k
ð3Þ
Standard Deviation of the mean RTT
In order to signify the extent to which the RTT values have been dispersed from
the ideal condition, the ratio of the standard deviation to the ideal RTT for last k
windows (Rk) is obtained using Eq. (4).
Rk ¼
rk
IRTT
ð4Þ
where, the standard deviation of the mean RTT values, MWj for the last
k windows (rk) is derived using Eq. (5).
rk ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pi
j¼ki ðMWj  MkÞ2
k
s
ð5Þ
In order to classify operating state of the network, the above statistical param-
eters from the measured RTT are required to be observed for short or long number
of windows (k). The high congestion state of the network exhibits smooth RTT and
hence produces higher value for normalized rise of mean RTT. On the other side, in
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network …
83

the network with less congestion and less amount of wireless losses, exhibits very
small amount of deviation for mean RTT. The proposed model for network state
classiﬁcation using above-mentioned RTT statistics is shown in Fig. 1.
3.2
Adaptive TCP [12]
Adaptive TCP sender attempts to estimate degree of congestion by exploiting
long-term evolution of RTT and its statistics. For that on arrival of each TCP-ack,
sender computes the value of congestion estimator (a) using Eq. (6).
a ¼ 1  RTTn  RTTmin
RTTmax  RTTmin
ð6Þ
The value of a varies from 0 to 1 based on the estimated value of RTT. This
mechanism not only facilitates sender for knowing the state of network (i.e., con-
gestion or non-congestion) but also assists TCP sender to quantify the degree of
congestion. This will guide sender about rising or decreasing trends of congestion
in the network. Adaptive TCP sender utilizes the above value of a and adjusts the
size of cwnd after nth loss recovery using Eq. (7).
WLAðnÞ ¼ a  cwndðnÞ þ ð1  aÞ  WLNðNÞ
ð7Þ
Here, cwnd(n) represents the maximum size of cwnd at sender prior to the nth
loss detection. WLN(N) is the size of cwnd, which a native TCP sender will have
after nth loss recovery action. Equation (7) itself concludes that the Adaptive TCP
sender never advances the size of cwnd after loss recovery beyond the size seen just
Fig. 1 Model for network
state classiﬁcation
84
D. Shah et al.

before loss detection. In this context, Adaptive TCP protects conservative approach
of TCP Newreno, which is essential for maintaining fairness.
4
Performance Evaluation
Performance evaluation for both of the techniques has been carried out through
simulations under ns-2. Firstly, the TCP codes in ns-2 are modiﬁed to implement
the stated behavior of TCP and also to obtain stated RTT statistics at the sender.
The simulation scenario used for obtaining all analysis is as shown in Fig. 2.
During simulations, wireless errors were introduced using a well-known two-state
Markov error model in the unit of frame error rate (FER). The results were obtained
for 200 s of TCP data transfer between sender(s) on wireless segment and receiver
(s) on wired segment. The backbone is conﬁgured for 10 Mbps of data rate and
45 ms of one-way delay. The queue size at intermediate nodes is kept higher than
bandwidth-delay product over end-to-end path. Unless speciﬁed, all other wired
links have 100 Mbps data rate and 1 ms of one-way delay. The wireless trans-
mission follows IEEE 802.11b speciﬁcations.
The simulations were carried out under four different network states as described
below.
State—‘00’
In this scenario, a single TCP/FTP ﬂow between W1 and S1 was introduced. The
wireless FER was set to 0%. It must be noted that the maximum TCP throughput
from each IEEE 802.11 AP is limited to 66% of its maximum data rate support
(5.5 Mbps). Therefore, with single ﬂow, the total data delivered over backbone is
less than its capacity and it will not cause congestion packet loss.
State—‘01’
This scenario was almost identical to that described above for state—00. In
addition, the wireless link errors were introduced using FER in the range of 0–10%.
Fig. 2 Performance scenario
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network …
85

State—‘10’
In this scenario, four identical TCP/FTP ﬂows (each through dedicated AP) were
introduced between wireless senders (W1 to W4) and receivers (S1 to S4) in wired
domain. The wireless FER is set to 0%. Thus, the trafﬁc TCP delivered over
backbone increases with increase in number of TCP ﬂows (each ﬂow from different
AP). This causes congestion packet loss over backbone.
State—‘11’
This scenario was almost identical to that described above for state—10.
Additionally, the wireless link errors were introduced using FER in the range of 0–
10%. This reassembles the network characteristics, identical to the terrestrial
environment for Internet access.
4.1
Analysis for RTT-Based Model
With an objective to validate RTT-based model proposed in [12], the simulations
were carried out in four different states of network environments. The statistics were
obtained based on evolution of RTT over a short period and long period. For
short-term analysis, RTT statistics are obtained considering the previous window
count (k) as 10 or 20; whereas, k is increased above 20 (say 40) for long-term
analysis.
Classiﬁcation using MRk
Table 1 gives the maximum value obtained for the normalized rise of the mean
RTT. The values are presented for different values of k as mentioned along with.
The obtained values resemble the model proposed for network state classiﬁca-
tion. The highest value of MRk is obtained for network state ‘10’. The proposed
state classiﬁcation with k = 10 and k = 20 is shown in Fig. 3.
It was also observed that the difference between maximum and minimum of
MRk reduces with increase in k (i.e., number of previous window into
consideration).
Classiﬁcation using Rk
Table 2 gives the maximum value obtained for the normalized rise of the mean
RTT. The values are presented for different values of k as mentioned along with.
The obtained values resemble the model proposed for network state classiﬁca-
tion (refer Fig. 4). The smallest value of Rk is obtained for network state ‘00’. It was
also observed that the smallest value of Rk reduces with increase in k (i.e., number
Table 1 Analysis for
maximum MRk
Network state
00
01
10
11
MR10 (k = 10)
0.177
0.152
0.720
0.641
MR20 (k = 20)
0.177
0.152
0.211
0.211
MR40 (k = 40)
0.177
0.177
0.211
0.211
86
D. Shah et al.

of previous window into consideration), which is obvious as the standard deviation
reduces with increase in the number of samples.
Figure 5 shows the approach for the network state classiﬁcation by combining
both of the RTT statistics obtained.
The results obtained through simulations direct us for development of algorithm
that continuously updates MRk and Rk and same can be utilized further for clas-
sifying the instantaneous network state, while resuming transmissions after loss
recovery.
4.2
Analysis for Adaptive TCP
The performance of Adaptive TCP is compared with Newreno through simulations
under all different states described earlier. Figure 6 shows the comparison in terms
of highest TCP sequence number of the sent packet in a network with state ‘00’.
The analysis is presented for the entire range of FER. It is observed that with
Fig. 3 Network state classiﬁcation using MRk
Table 2 Analysis for maximum Rk
Network state
00
01
10
11
R10 (k = 10)
0.300
0.428
0.616
0.610
R20 (k = 20)
0.217
0.322
0.477
0.532
R40 (k = 40)
0.174
0.279
0.462
0.516
Fig. 4 Network state classiﬁcation using Rk
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network …
87

increase in FER, the percentage improvement demonstrated by Adaptive TCP over
Newreno has also increased.
Figure 7 shows the comparison in terms of total TCP packets sent in a network
with state ‘10’. Here, the number of concurrent TCP ﬂows varies from one to four.
Though the results were obtained for entire range of FER, the analysis is presented
for the FER of 1%. It is observed that with increase in number of competing trafﬁc
over backbone (i.e., degree of congestion), the percentage improvement demon-
strated by Adaptive TCP reduces. However, the performance of Adaptive TCP is
Fig. 5 Network state classiﬁcation using MR10 and R10
Fig. 6 Comparison of TCP sequence numbers (1 TCP ﬂow)
88
D. Shah et al.

never seen inferior to that observed with Newreno. Both of the above results
validate the claims made by authors in [12].
The interesting outcome of simulation results is shown in Fig. 8. In Fig. 8,
maximum (RTTmax) and minimum (RTTmin) values of RTT observed during the
data transfer are plotted. It was noticed that with the progress in the data transfer,
their difference D (i.e., RTTmax−RTTmin) increases. This in turn wrench value of
a toward 1 (i.e., most of the time network is treated as non-congested). Such kind of
behavior may have adverse impact on Adaptive TCP’s performance, particularly
with abrupt delay variation that causes sudden congestion.
Fig. 8 also shows the minimum and maximum values of RTT, recorded during
uninterrupted evolution of cwnd. To explain, after each loss recovery, TCP initializes
RTTmin and RTTmax using the ﬁrst RTT estimate made. These values are referred
as RTTmin(i) and RTTmax(i), respectively. It is seen from the ﬁgure that, the pro-
gress in the data transfer does not result in the consistent increase in the difference
Fig. 7 Comparison of TCP sequence numbers (FER = 1%)
0
50
100
150
200
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
Simulation Time(sec.)
RTT
 
 
RTTmax(i)
RTTmax
RTTmin(i)
RTTmin
∆=0.167
∆=0.133
Fig. 8 RTT statistics over simulation period
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network …
89

RTTmax(i)−RTTmin(i). By utilizing this difference in computation of a (ref Eq. 6),
the performance penalty (as suspected earlier ) to Adaptive TCP, may be reduced.
5
Conclusion
From the analysis of simulation results, the following inferences are drawn.
(1) RTT-based network classiﬁcation approach reveals two facts.
(a) Long-term evaluation of RTT sample gives much better estimate regarding
negligible congestion in the network. However, short-term evaluation can
be useful for identifying strong congestion in the network.
(b) Hierarchical model using MRi and Ri statistics can be utilized for conﬁdent
network state classiﬁcation related to congestion in the network.
(2) Adaptive TCP proposal uses RTT deviation for estimating degree of network
congestion to demonstrate performance improvement. However, performance
improvement is high in a network which is less congested.
(3) The algorithm uses minimum and maximum values of RTT throughout the data
transfer phase. This certainly increases its difference and hence algorithm
unconsciously treats network as less congested. This may put up limit on the
performance gain over a network with sudden congestion change.
The results show possibility of improving performance of Adaptive TCP by
combining RTT-based network state classiﬁcation model for fair estimate of con-
gestion in the network.
References
1. Allman, M., Paxson, V. and Blanton, E. (2009) TCP Congestion Control. RFC5681. http://dx.
doi.org/10.17487/rfc5681.
2. Lar S-U, Liao X. An initiative for a classiﬁed bibliography on TCP/IP congestion control.
Journal of Network and Computer Applications 2012; 36(1):126–133. DOI:10.1016/j.jnca.
2012.04.003.
3. Dalal, Purvang, et al. “Reﬁning TCP’s RTT dependent mechanism by utilizing link
retransmission
delay
measurement
in
Wireless
LAN.”
International
Journal
of
Communication Systems (2015).
4. Henderson T, Floyd S, Gurtov A. The Newreno modiﬁcation to TCP’s fast recovery
algorithm, 2012. RFC6582.
5. Al-Jubari, Ammar Mohammed, et al. “TCP performance in multi-hop wireless ad hoc
networks: challenges and solution.” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking 2011.1 (2011): 1.
6. Ros, David, and Michael Welzl. “Less-than-best-effort service: a survey of end-to-end
approaches.” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 15.2 (2013): 898–908.
90
D. Shah et al.

7. Cheng, Rung-Shiang, and Hui-Tang Lin. “A cross-layer design for TCP end-to-end
performance improvement in multi-hop wireless networks.” Computer Communications
31.14 (2008): 3145–3152.
8. Sun, F., Li, V.O.K. and Liew, S.C. (2004) Design of SNACK Mechanism for Wireless TCP
with New Snoop. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 5, 1046–
1051.
9. Dalal, Purvang, et al. “Link Layer Correction Techniques and Impact on TCP’s Performance
in IEEE 802.11 Wireless Networks.” Communications and Network 2014 (2014).
10. La, Richard J., Jean Walrand, and Venkatachalam Anantharam. Issues in TCP vegas.
Electronics Research Laboratory, College of Engineering, University of California, 1999.
11. Sarkar, Mohanchur, K. K. Shukla, and K. S. Dasgupta. “Network State Classiﬁcation based
on the Statistical Properties of RTT for an Adaptive Multi State Proactive Transport Protocol
for
Satellite
based
Networks.”
International
Journal
of
Computer
Networks
and
Communication (IJCNC) 2.6 (2010): 155–174.
12. Dalal, Purvang, et al. “Adaptive TCP: A Sender Side Mechanism with Dynamic Adjustment
of Congestion Control Parameters for Performance Improvement in WLAN.” International
Journal of Communications, Network and System Sciences 8.5 (2015): 130.
13. M. Allman, S. Floyd, C. Partridge. Increasing TCP’s Initial Window, 1998. RFC 2414.
14. Paxson V, Sargent M, Allman M, Chu J. Computing TCP’s retransmission timer, 2011.
RFC6298.
15. Henderson T, Floyd S, Gurtov A. The Newreno modiﬁcation to TCP’s fast recovery
algorithm, 2012. RFC6582.
16. S. Floyd, T. Henderson The NewReno Modiﬁcation to TCP’s Fast Recovery Algorithm.
1999. RFC2582.
17. Lin, Dong, and H. T. Kung. “TCP fast recovery strategies: Analysis and improvements.”
INFOCOM’98.
Seventeenth
Annual
Joint
Conference
of
the
IEEE
Computer
and
Communications Societies. Proceedings. IEEE.
18. Sarolahti P, Kojo M Forward RTO-recovery(FRTO): an algorithm for detecting spurious
retransmission timeouts with TCP and the stream control transmission protocol (SCTP), 2005.
RFC4138.
19. Lim CH, Jang JW. Robust end-to-end loss differentiation scheme for TCP over wired/wireless
networks. IET Communication 2008; 2(2):284–291.
Evaluation of RTT-Based Techniques for Network …
91

CMOS Image Sensor Parameter
Conﬁguration Using LabVIEW
Dhvani R. Patel, Brijesh N. Shah and Karan Jasani
Abstract Imaging identiﬁers (detectors) are the main components of optical
equipment and space missions that have sensors placed on board committed to
Earth perception (high-determination imaging, environment spectroscopy, etc.),
solar system investigation (small-scale cameras, direction for self-governing vehi-
cle, etc.) and universe perception (space telescope central planes, controlling sen-
sors, etc.). UART–SPI interface is used for conﬁguring the different parameters of
image sensor which includes inserting the training pattern to sync LVDS
(low-voltage differential signalling) receivers, setting the offset at the input of the
ADC, inserting a pattern to generate a test pattern, enabling sequencer for image
capture, image type selection settings like monochrome/grey image or colour image
and many more. The image sensor has a number of LVDS high-speed outputs that
transfer image data over longer distances. A special training mode enables the
receiving system to synchronize the incoming data stream when switching to
master, slave or triggered mode. A programmable offset and gain ampliﬁer for each
channel also is integrated by the image sensor. It requires only one master clock for
operation up to 500 fps. The sensor is available in a monochrome version or Bayer
(RGB)-patterned colour ﬁlter array.
Keywords CMOS image sensor  FPGA  SPI  UART  LabVIEW
D. R. Patel (&)
Electronics and Communication Engineering, Charotar University
of Science and Technology, Changa, India
e-mail: pateldhvani22@gmail.com
B. N. Shah  K. Jasani
Charusat Space Research and Technology Center, Charotar University
of Science and Technology, Changa, India
e-mail: brijeshshah.ec@charusat.ac.in
K. Jasani
e-mail: karanjasani.ec@charusat.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_9
93

1
Introduction
Market for image sensor was dominated by charge- coupled device (CCD).
Effortlessness of on-chip integration, higher framing rate, less power utilization and
lower fabricating costs pushed CMOS APS (Active Pixel) innovation to make up
with CCDs [1] . For various scientiﬁc and technological applications, one of the
most powerful sensing devices is CMOS image sensor [2].
Communication is an important factor which affects the performance of the
system [3]. UART is a gadget that permits exchanging of information in
non-concurrent and in a sequential manner from a serial port of PC [4]. UART
makes the serial communication possible between two devices. UART contains
parallel-to-serial
converter
for
the
information
transmitted
from
PC
and
serial-to-parallel converter for the information coming in through the serial line.
Likewise, UART has a support for brieﬂy putting away information for rapid
transmission [3]. Exchange of information between the FPGA and secondary
devices in full-duplex concurrent mode is allowed by Serial Peripheral Interface
(SPI). There are two modes of operation: master and slave [5]. SPI allows master
device to initiate communication with slave device.
In this paper, the optimal conﬁguration of various parameters of the CMOS
image sensor is done using the UART–SPI interface. UART is used for the com-
munication between FPGA and PC. SPI is used for the communication between
FPGA and CMOS image sensor. CMOS image sensor is conﬁgured using SPI
uploads. Once the CMOS image sensor parameters are conﬁgured, the CMOS
image sensor data is read through SPI.
2
CMOS Image Sensor (CIS) Architecture
Figure 1 demonstrates the design of the CMOS image sensor. The sensor comprises
a pixel array, data block, analog front end, and LVDS transmitter and receiver.
Separate modules for SPI, clock division and sequencer are also integrated. This
architecture enables programmable addressing. The starting point of address can be
uploaded by SPI. In this system, CMOS image sensor parameter conﬁgurations
such as inserting the training pattern to sync LVDS receivers, setting the offset at
the input of ADC, inserting a pattern to generate a test pattern, enabling a sequencer
for image capture, image type selection settings like monochrome/grey image or
colour image and many more things are done using SPI.
94
D. R. Patel et al.

3
UART (Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter)
In this system, UART core functions are implemented using VHDL and integrated
them into FPGA. With help of this integration, we achieved stable, compact and
reliable data transmission [6]. In this system, UART is implemented for the com-
munication between labVIEW PC and FPGA. For establishing full-duplex data
communication between two devices, UART needs two lines for transmission
(TXD) and reception (RXD) (Fig. 2).
TXD on transmit side is the yield of Universal Asynchronous Receiver/
Transmitter; RXD on receiver side is the contribution of Universal Asynchronous
Receiver/Transmitter. “Start bit” is included by UART at the start of every word
Fig. 1 Block diagram of
CMOS image sensor
Fig. 2 Serial communication
CMOS Image Sensor Parameter Conﬁguration …
95

that will be transmitted. Start bit is utilized to recognize the recipient that now the
information will be transmitted. LSB of the individual information bits is trans-
mitted after the start bit. Even or odd parity bit may add by the sender (transmitter)
after the entire information word has been sent. To check an error, parity bit is used.
After parity bit, one stop bit is sent by sender (transmitter) [6].
UART incorporates sender (transmitter) and recipient. At sender (transmitter)
side,
parallel-to-serial
change
is
performed,
and
on
the
recipient
side,
serial-to-parallel transformation is performed. Signal of the UART waits for the
center and begins at the centre of sampling tick when the incoming signal changed
to “0” (start bit). When the center of the sampling tick reaches 7, the middle
position of the start bit will be reached by the incoming signal as shown in Fig. 3. It
clears the center and starts again. When the center of the sampling tick reaches 15,
the center of the ﬁrst information bit will be reached by the signal. Restart at the
centre and repeat the above step N−1 times to receive the rest of the information
bits; if parity bit is utilized, then repeat it one more time [7].
Figure 4 shows the front panel for serial communication with FPGA. To start the
serial communication with FPGA using front panel we need to set the different
parameters, for example, baud rate, serial port, no. of stop bits, no. of information
bits, no. of stop bits, parity, and timeout of the serial port of the PC for corre-
spondence. After setting all such parameters, communication is made possible
between PC and FPGA. Figure 5 shows the transmission and reception of character
“A”, transmitting “A” to FPGA and receiving same character on PC at a baud rate of
9600 bps.
4
Serial Peripheral Interface
Communication with a slave device can be initiated by master device which is
allowed by synchronous protocol such as Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI). Transfer
of data is performed from master to slave devices and vice versa [7]. Rapid data
transmission is allowed by SPI between two or more devices, and implementation
of SPI is also very easy. Master device provides the clock signal to maintain the
synchronization. Changing and reading of data are under the control of the clock
Fig. 3 UART frame
structure
96
D. R. Patel et al.

signal. The communication of the data between two devices is done with reference
to the clock signal, so SPI is known as synchronous protocol [8]:
• SCLK (serial clock)—generated by the master;
• MOSI (master out slave in)—used to transfer data to the slave device;
• MISO (master in slave out)—used to transfer data out of the slave device;
• SS (slave select)—for enabling device operation.
Fig. 4 a Software simulation result, b block diagram and c front panel in LabVIEW
CMOS Image Sensor Parameter Conﬁguration …
97

Serial Peripheral Interface is also master–slave protocol. As shown in Fig. 6, the
SCLK, which is the clock line, is controlled by the master and there is no transfer of
data performed until and unless the clock is manipulated. Multiple slave devices can
also be allowed with individual slave select line. All slaves are controlled by
master.
The information on the data “in” line is:
• Command bit, indicating write (1) or read (0) access;
• 7-bit address;
• 8-bit data word.
Data is always written on the bus on the falling edge of the clock and will be
sampled on the rising edge of the clock. As shown in Figs. 7 and 8, the system
clock must be active to keep SPI uploads stored on the chip. The SPI clock speed
must be slower by a factor of 30 when compared to system clock. The “out” line is
Fig. 5 Implementation on hardware
Fig. 6 SPI block diagram
98
D. R. Patel et al.

held high Z. The data for the address A is transferred from the shift register to the
active register bank (i.e. sampled) on a rising edge of cs_n. Only the register block
with address A can write its data on the “out” bus. The data on “in” is ignored.
Figure 9 shows the signals that are used in SPI for the CMOS image sensor
conﬁguration. This conﬁguration sets the values for the CMOS image sensor
parameters. These parameters include inserting the training pattern to sync LVDS
receivers, setting the offset at the input of ADC, inserting a pattern to generate a test
pattern, enabling a sequencer for image capture, image type selection settings like
monochrome/grey image or colour image setting and many more (Figs. 10 and 11).
Fig. 7 Write access (C = 1)
Fig. 8 Read access (C = 0)
Fig. 9 CMOS image sensor conﬁguration
CMOS Image Sensor Parameter Conﬁguration …
99

5
System Design
Figure 12 shows the full system design for the conﬁguration of CMOS image
sensor from LabVIEW through FPGA using UART (for the communication
between LabVIEW and FPGA) and SPI (for the communication between FPGA
and CMOS image sensors) interfacing. With the help of UART, PC can now
communicate with FPGA. Data from FPGA can be received on PC, and it can also
receive data from PC. If we conﬁgure the CMOS image sensor directly from FPGA,
there is need to make changes in the code every time when the data changes. After
saving the changes, load it into FPGA. But if we give/set the values of the different
parameters (gain, amplitude, magnitude, etc.) for the CMOS image sensor con-
ﬁguration from the LabVIEW using the VI shown in Fig. 10b, there is no need to
make any changes in the VHDL code, and you only need to select data that are
Fig. 10 a Block diagram and b front panel in LabVIEW
100
D. R. Patel et al.

listed in LabVIEW VI, then select the COM port to send the selected data values to
the CMOS image sensor, at last press the conﬁgure button as shown in Fig. 10b and
then run the VI. So, by using this way we can give any data values and no need to
generate and load VHDL ﬁle again. All this can be done through UART–SPI
interfacing.
Fig. 11 a Software simulation result and b result on MDO
Fig. 12 Complete system using UART-SPI interface
CMOS Image Sensor Parameter Conﬁguration …
101

6
Challenges
(a) Deciding various values for image sensor registers for conﬁguration to achieve
best possible image;
(b) Synchronization problems during UART–SPI interfacing;
(c) Working with different clock domains.
7
Conclusion
Communication using UART is less speedy, but there are no time constraints in the
system, so UART is used. Also, it is cheaper than PCI/PXI card that is used for
high-speed data transfer. UART–SPI interface is implemented for the CMOS image
sensor conﬁguration. Using UART–SPI interface, we can easily conﬁgure the
sensor and no need to change the code again and again.
References
1. Orit Skorka and Dileepan Joseph, “CMOS digital pixel sensors: technology and applications”,
SPIE, 2014.
2. Takshi Tokuda, Toshihiko Noda, Kiyotaka Sasagawa, Jun Ohta, “Optical and Electric
Multifunctional CMOS Image Sensors for On-Chip Biosensing Applications”, 2011.
3. Vibhu Chinmay, Shubham Sachdeva, “A Review Paper on Design and Simulation of UART
for Serial Communication”, IJIRT, 2014.
4. R. K. Agrawal and V. R. Mishra, “The design of high speed UART”, 2013 IEEE Conference
on Information & Communication Technologies, JeJu Island, 2013, pp. 388–390.
5. Prof. Jai Karan singh, Prof. Mukesh Tiwari, Vishal Sharama, “Implementation of SPI-Slave on
FPGA”, IJAET, 2012.
6. Y. Y. Fang and X. J. Chen, “Design and Simulation of UART Serial Communication Module
Based on VHDL”, 2011 3rd International Workshop on Intelligent Systems and Applications,
Wuhan, 2011, pp. 1–4.
7. T. Praveen Blessington, B. Bhanu Murthy, G. V. Ganesh and T. S. R.Prasad, “Optimal
implementation of UART-SPI Interface in SoC”, 2012 International Conference on Devices,
Circuits and Systems (ICDCS), Coimbatore, 2012, pp. 673–677.
8. M. Poorani and R. Kurunjimalar, “Design implementation of UART and SPI in single FGPA”,
2016 10th International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Control (ISCO), Coimbatore,
2016, pp. 1–5.
102
D. R. Patel et al.

Bridge Software Between Zigbee and CAN
Protocols for Distributed Embedded
System
Hiteshkumar J. Lad and Vibhutikumar G. Joshi
Abstract An industrial plant production quality can be improved by applying
robotic arms and automated system. Distributed embedded system shares infor-
mation and cooperates to control automatic operations in real-time environment.
Automated distributed embedded system network technology, communication
media topology (wired or wireless or heterogeneous), and protocol selection are
highly depended on the application environment. The challenging part in system
development is to provide compatibility and transaction of data between two dif-
ferent network protocols used in heterogeneous distributed embedded system. In
this paper, heterogeneous distributed embedded system (DES) is proposed using
controller area network (wired network) and Zigbee (wireless) protocol. Zigbee and
CAN
network
bridge
application
software
is
implemented
on
Freescale
MCS9s08DZ60 microcontroller. Software establishes bridge between Zigbee and
CAN protocols for data transaction and protocol compatibility. Such bridge soft-
ware establishes communication between two physically separated CAN networks
via wireless Zigbee-based network.
Keywords Controller area network (CAN)  Zigbee  Distributed embedded
system (DES)  Automation
1
Introduction
In industrial plant, product cost and quality can be improved by using advanced
technology-based automatic system. Such advanced system monitors different
parameters from the distributed sensors and controls particular actuators and
H. J. Lad (&)
Department of Information and Communication Technology, Surat, India
e-mail: hiteshlad.msc@gmail.com
V. G. Joshi
Department of Physics, Veer Narmad South Gujarat University, Surat, India
e-mail: joshi_vibhuti@yahoo.co.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_10
103

physical activity in the ﬁeld. The automatic system operation efﬁciency can be
improved by coupling the sensing, computing, actuating, and communication
activities in real-time controlled manner [1]. Normally in the plant, heavy
machinery section and mechanical machines are controlled through electronic cir-
cuits and its internal communication with ﬁeld bus (wired)-based DES. Industrial
plants have machinery installed in wide area and therefore to reduce wire harness,
complexity and cost, short range wireless communication is used between small
machinery sections [2]. Industrial real ﬁeld applications need to establish hetero-
geneous network using wired and wireless distributed embedded system which
collaboratively performs actions and fulﬁlls application requirements. The hetero-
geneous networked DES connected with Internet and run time processes infor-
mation access and control can be possible from remote location.
The percentage of production cost of electronic circuits (including software)
increased from 19% in 2004 to 40% in 2010, and it will eventually reach 50% in
2020 [3]. The software development and modiﬁcation approach can be better option
to reduce development time, complexity, and cost. In this paper, concept of bridge
software is used to establish interconnections between CAN protocol of ﬁeld bus
and Zigbee protocol of wireless network and also to establish heterogeneous net-
work. Two physically separated CAN networks are connected through Zigbee
wireless network which will work as single heterogeneous network.
2
Introduction of Protocols
2.1
Controller Area Network (CAN)
CAN uses message broadcasting method for message transmission in which single
CAN node transmits a message on two-wired ﬁeld bus and all other connected
nodes receive message. Multi-master policy of CAN allows that multiple nodes can
be a master and at the same time it can start communication but only one node can
do transmission on a serial ﬁeld bus at a time. Figure 1 shows data frame structure
of CAN 2.0A ﬁeld bus protocol. CAN 2.0A data frame’s First ﬁeld is Start of Frame
(SOF), which is of one bit ﬁeld is used to synchronize CAN bus connected nodes.
Next ‘11’-bit arbitration ﬁeld is considered as frame identiﬁer ﬁeld, and it is useful
to decide frame transmission priority during arbitration process. Next six-bit control
ﬁeld contained information about frame type and payload size. Data ﬁeld length is
about 8 byte, which contains payload of the message. Followed by cyclic redun-
dancy check (CRC), 15-bit ﬁeld helps to decide received message content is same
as transmitted message or not. Next ﬁeld is for acknowledgment ﬁeld and End of
Frame (EOF) ﬁeld [4]. CAN protocol uses non-return-to-zero coding for infor-
mation transmission [5, 6]. The CAN ﬁeld bus can transmit data maximum up to
1 Mbps data rate.
104
H. J. Lad and V. G. Joshi

2.2
Zigbee Protocol
Figure 2 shows Zigbee protocol (IEEE 802.15.4 standard speciﬁcation) data frame.
Three license-free ISM frequency bands: 2.4–2.4835 GHz, 868–870, and 902–
928 MHz can be used to establish Zigbee protocol-based wireless communication [7].
Zigbee nodes follows Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance
(CSMA—CA) policy to access communication channel. Zigbee communication
supports at three different maximum data transfer rates (1) 250 kbps at 2.4 GHz,
(2) 40 kbps data rate at 915 MHz, and (3) 20 kbps data rate at 868 MHz [8]. Zigbee
data frame’s ‘frame control ﬁeld’ carries information regarding frame type, delivery
mode, addressing mode, security, and acknowledge service information. The frame
is numbered to ensure a track that all frames are received.
The data frame payload ﬁeld is carrying data. A frame-check sequence helps to
check received frame at receiver is errorless or not. This frame structure improves
reliability in difﬁcult conditions [8].
3
System Architecture
As shown in Fig. 3, CAN nodes contain 8051 core microcontroller and sensor
device. Once CAN node receives sensor data, it transmits on CAN bus. If trans-
mitted message is only for local CAN network, then CAN gateway is inactive. If
transmitted message needs to transfer to other CAN network also, then CAN
gateway becomes active and transfers received data frame content of the message to
bridge software. Bridge software transfers CAN data frame arbitration ﬁeld, control
ﬁeld and payload content to Zigbee payload ﬁeld. Finally, using Zigbee transmitter
node data are transmitted wirelessly to the Zigbee receiver module and
computer-connected Zigbee node. At receiver network, microcontroller extracts
Zigbee data frame payload information in the variable. Receiver bridge software
sets arbitration ﬁeld, control ﬁeld, and data payload ﬁeld at CAN gateway and
Start 
of 
frame
Arbit
ration
field
Control 
field 
Data 
field 
CRC
field 
ACK 
field 
End 
of 
frame
Fig. 1 CAN 2.0A data frame
format
Frame
control
Sequence 
number
Address 
information 
Payload
 Data
Frame 
Check
Sequence 
Fig. 2 Zigbee data frame
format
Bridge Software Between Zigbee and CAN Protocols …
105

ﬁnally transmits it on CAN network. Zigbee-connected computer maintains data
log, and it can perform remote control actions also as per system requirements.
4
Experimental Work
Free scale code-worrier software has debug facility with simulator and emulator,
which provides great support. In the experiment two physically separated CAN
based wired DES are established and communication between these was established
through Zigbee nodes. All CAN modules contain microcontroller MCS9sDZ60 and
CAN trans-receiver module TJA1040. One of CAN-based DES functions as
measurement network, and its one CAN module senses temperature data using on
with bridge s/w
CAN
Gateway
CAN
node
CAN
node
CAN
node
Zigbee 
node
CAN
node
CAN
node
CAN
node
CAN
Gateway
with bridge s/w
node
Computer
Zigbee 
wireless 
node
Microcontroller
Zigbee Receiver
Microcontroller
Transmitter
Fig. 3 Heterogeneous network-based system architecture
106
H. J. Lad and V. G. Joshi

chip available temperature sensor of MCS9sDZ60 microcontroller and sends it on
CAN network. Second CAN module functions as CAN network gateway which
loaded with CAN to Zigbee protocol bridge program software. This bridge program
transforms content of arbitration ﬁeld, control ﬁeld, and payload of CAN data frame
to Zigbee data frame payload ﬁeld as shown in ﬂowchart (Fig. 4). Maximum 12
bytes of Zigbee payload is require to store information about CAN data frame
header and 8-byte payload. Two CAN-connected nodes make one sensor cluster of
CAN network.
Another CAN-based DES performs as actuator network, and its one CAN
module functions as CAN network gateway which is loaded with Zigbee to CAN
protocol bridge program software. This module microcontroller extracts informa-
tion from Zigbee data frame and transfers it to CAN data frame ﬁelds and transmits
it on CAN network as shown in ﬂowchart (Fig. 5). All other CAN-connected node/
nodes functions as actuator control node whereas LED functions as an actuator. In
implemented system, two microcontroller nodes make actuator cluster of CAN
network. Third Zigbee module connected with computer and communication
activities like signal strength and packet loss can be observed through XCTU
software. CAN module and Zigbee module communication is established using
UART communication at 9600 bps baud rate.
5
Conclusion
Bridge software for CAN and Zigbee protocols is successfully implemented with
the help of Freescale 8051 core microcontroller MCS9S08DZ60. In this system,
totally two CAN network clusters: (1) sensor cluster and (2) actuator cluster are
established. Cluster node internal communication has been successfully established
using CAN protocol-based communication at the distance of 100 m with 125 kB/s
data rate. Intra-cluster communication has been also successfully established using
Zigbee protocol-based communication up to the distance of 80 m. Each cluster
CAN network gateway is implemented using Zigbee-CAN bridge software suc-
cessfully and established wireless communication between two-wired CAN
network-connected clusters. Zigbee module transmits frame signal strength mea-
sured at various distances in open ﬁeld with maintaining line of sight as shown in
Table 1. Zigbee received frame’s received signal strength indicator (RSSI) is
reduced with the increasing of distance. As shown in Table 1, received frame RSSI
value after 80 m distance frame indicates frame information power loss is
increased. RSSI values of frame for 80 m and more distance indicate wireless
communication might generate information loss and increase number of same frame
retransmissions on network.
Bridge Software Between Zigbee and CAN Protocols …
107

Initialize counter i = 0x00, microcontroller internal 
Wait for data frame of measurement CAN N/W 
needs to transfer at actuator CAN N/W and reset 
counter 'i'
Transfer arbitration field, control field and payload 
field in data_trans[] array variable and make low 
respective port pin connected with  Zigbee module 
RTS pin 
Transfer data_trans[i]
variable content to Zigbee 
module through UART and 
increment counter i
If i < 12
Transmit packet on Zigbee wireless N/W and 
make respective port pin high connected with 
Zigbee module RTS pin 
A
A
Yes
No
Start
peripherals and ports
Fig. 4 Flowchart of bridge program at measurement
108
H. J. Lad and V. G. Joshi

Yes
No
Initialize counter i = 0x00, j = 0x00 microcontroller
internal peripherals and ports
Enable UART communication and reset pin no'5' of port-
C which connected with Zigbee module CTS pin reset 
counter i and j counter value as 0x00.
Start communication between Zigbee module and 
microcontroller
B
Start
B1
Transfer data from Zigbee 
module to variable data_rec[i] 
through UART increment
counter i
If i < 12
Reset counter J= 0x00
B1
Yes
No
Yes
No
If j < 2
If j = 2 
Transfer data_rec[j] in to CAN 
data frame arbitration field 
increment counter j by one
Transfer data_rec[j] in to CAN 
data frame control field 
increment counter j by one
B2
B2
B3
Fig. 5 Flowchart of bridge program at actuator network
Bridge Software Between Zigbee and CAN Protocols …
109

The bridge-based internetworked DES can establish electronic circuit network
where wired network installation is not possible. In future, heterogeneous network
utilities can be developed by establishing the bridge protocol between advanced
protocols of the wired and wireless distributed embedded system for industrial or
open ﬁeld applications.
Table 1 Measurements of
received signal strength
indicator (RSSI) at different
distances
Distance (m)
Percentage of RSSI (dbm)
10
−36
20
−53
30
−58
40
−64
50
−67
60
−71
70
−77
80
−85
90
−88
100
−90
110
−92
Transfer data_rec[j] in to CAN data 
frame Payload field increment 
counter j by one
If j < 12
B3
B3
Transmit data frame on Actuator
CAN network
B
Fig. 5 (continued)
110
H. J. Lad and V. G. Joshi

References
1. Bo Shen, Xingshe Zhou, Ru Wang, “ BER Analysis for Controller Area Network Impaired by
the Impulse Noise in Cyber-physical Systems”, IEEE International Conference on Computer
and Information Technology, 978-1-4799-6239-6/14, pp. 425–429, 2014.
2. Xiaohong Ren, Chenghua Fu, Tianwen Wang, Shuxiang Jia, “CAN Bus Network Design based
on Bluetooth Technology”, International Conference on Electrical and Control Engineering,
978-0-7695-4031-3/10, pp. 560–564, 2010.
3. Armin Wasicek, Oliver Höftberger, Martin Elshuber, Haris Isakovic, Andreas Fleck, “Virtual
CAN Lines in an Integrated MPSoC Architecture”, IEEE 17th International Symposium on
Object/Component-Oriented Real-Time Distributed Computing, 1555-0885/14, pp. 158–165,
2014.
4. Thomas
Nolte,
Hans
Hansson,
and
Christer
Norstrom,
“Probabilistic
Worst-Case
Response-Time Analysis for the Controller Area Network”, Proceedings of the 9th IEEE
Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium IEEE, 1080-1812/
03,2003.
5. Mouaaz
Nahas,
“Developing
a
Novel
Shared-Clock
Scheduling
Protocol
for
Highly-Predictable
Distributed
Real-Time
Embedded
Systems”,
American
Journal
of
Intelligent Systems, DOI:10.5923/j.ajis.20120205.06, pp. 118–128, 2012.
6. Mouaaz Nahas, Michael J. Pont, Michael Short, “Reducing message length variations in
resource-constrained embedded systems implemented using the Controller Area Network
(CAN) protocol”, Journal of Systems Architecture 55, Elsevier, 1383-7621. pp. 344–354,
2009.
7. P. Susmitha, V. Bhavya Reddy, Maninder Kaur, “Low Power Zigbee Technology in Wireless
Mesh Networks”, International Journal of Advanced Research in Electrical, Electronics and
Instrumentation Engineering, Vol. 2, Issue 2, ISSN(Online): 2278–8875, February 2013.
8. Dr. S.S. Riaz Ahamed, “The role of Zigbee Technology in future Data Communication”,
Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology, JATIT, www.jatit.org, 2009.
Bridge Software Between Zigbee and CAN Protocols …
111

A New Global Shutter 8T CIS
Architecture with CDS Operation
Kishankumar Suthar and Rajesh Thakker
Abstract CMOS image sensor (CIS) is heart of neoteric imaging system. Global
shutter image sensor is more popular. In global shutter image sensor, each pixel has
inbuilt storage capacity, by which it is possible to capture whole image at a time.
Hence, it used for high-quality and motion blur-free imaging. Correlated double
sampling (CDS) mechanism is introduced to reduce noise, and also it enables
high-speed imaging. To incorporate CDS mechanism, at least two storage elements
are required to obtain difference of reset signal and light signal. In this paper, new
8T global shutter pixel (GSP) based on 3T active pixel sensor (APS) is proposed.
This 8T CIS architecture incorporates two storage elements for CDS operation.
Theoretical analysis and simulation results based on spice model are reported in this
paper. Simulation of proposed architecture is carried out in 0.35 lm technology
using virtuoso analog design environment.
Keywords Global shutter pixel  CMOS image sensor (CIS)  In-pixel CDS
Low-noise image sensor  Low-power CIS
1
Introduction
A sensor is nothing but one type of transducer which converts energy from one
form to another. Image sensor converts photon energy of light into electrical form,
typically, in charge or voltage domain, depending upon the type of image sensor
[1]. Photosensitive components like photodiode (PD) can perform this task.
A charge-coupled device (CCD)-based structure can store photo-generated elec-
trons and is capable to transfer it toward the column ampliﬁer, but it is not com-
patible with standard CMOS process [2]. A pinned photodiode (PPD)-based
structure is used in which transfer gate is implemented in pixel to transfer electrons
K. Suthar (&)  R. Thakker
Vishwakarma Government Engineering College, Chandkheda, Ahmedabad 382424, India
e-mail: sutharkishan12@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_11
113

from the photodiode to the ﬂoating diffusion node [3]. It needs complicated process
during fabrication.
The camera shutter allows light to pass through for a determined period of time.
It can be mechanical or electronic mechanism. Method of light exposure can be
global, block, or rolling. In rolling shutter, the image rows are sequentially reset and
readout, while in a global shutter camera, all pixels in a frame capture whole image
at a single time. Note that readout operation in both cases is same. Global shutter
image sensors are essential where entire image is to be captured at a same time,
which is required to eliminate motion distortions. Such applications are high-speed
and machine-vision imaging. Global shutter imagers offer several advantages such
as improved SNR, lower power consumption, and high-speed readout [2]. The
global shutter imagers have number of challenges to be addressed. It should have
high dynamic range (DR), good ﬁll factor (FF), low-noise, high-speed readout, etc.
Further, CDS is necessary for low-noise imaging. CDS operation can be performed
by external circuitry or can be performed in pixel itself. In-pixel CDS operation
reduces time consumption, hence, increases frame rate and easy to implement. But,
it increases area consumption and complexity of pixel architecture, and hence,
restricts the FF.
This paper describes the architecture and the operation of a new 8T global
shutter pixel image sensor with in-pixel CDS. The proposed CDS architecture
eliminates some of the shortcomings of the recent global shutter designs [4–10]
such as the capacitive division between the reset and signal samples. The sensor can
be used for traditional global shutter application and other high-speed imaging
applications such as machine-vision imaging.
2
Literature Review
Solid-state sensors were introduced in 1960. Passive image sensor was introduced
ﬁrst which contains photodiode and one switch transistor only [1]. Active pixel
sensor (APS) was introduced in 1968 to overcome limitations such as large smear,
kBTC noise, column ﬁxed pattern noise (FPN) of early passive image sensor. 3T
APS is basic active pixel sensor with lowest complexity and good dynamic range
[11, 12]. 3T APS has trade-off between the full-well capacity and the conversion
gain. It also suffers from kBTC noise. To overcome these limitations, 4T and 5T
structures were proposed [13–17]. They are used in modern imagers as pioneer
blocks. Recent pixel architectures are proposed to incorporate in-pixel CDS and
global shutter compatibility [4–10].
Capacitive transimpedance ampliﬁer (CTIA) is also used for in-pixel CDS or
delta difference sampling (DDS) operation [18, 19]. CTIA CIS has good voltage
swings with 44 dB SNR, 70 frames/s frame rate and having improved sensitivity.
CTIA has good linearity and sensitivity but needs larger area and high power;
hence, it is used where area and power are not design constraints. Global shutter
pixel architectures [6–10] have low power consumption and can be operated at fast
114
K. Suthar and R. Thakker

frame rate. To incorporate in-pixel CDS, 8T CIS was introduced. After that, 9T CIS
was introduced in [7]. 9T CIS has 800 mV ‘voltage swing’ with less than 1%
linearity error. Figure 1 shows 9T CIS pixel architecture. Implementation of new
method for CDS operation was proposed in 10T CIS [10]. Figure 2 shows 10T CIS
pixel architecture. 10T CIS has approximately 1 V voltage swing, read out noise
ratio of 3400:1, maximum image lag of 10 ke−, and 71 dB dynamic range (DR).
3
Proposed Architecture
The design of the pixel architecture can be divided into three blocks: (1) the
photodiode, (2) 3T active pixel, and (3) CDS mechanism. The pixel architecture
proposed in this work is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 1 Schematic of 9T CIS [7]
Fig. 2 Schematic of
10T CIS [10]
A New Global Shutter 8T CIS Architecture with CDS Operation
115

3.1
Photodiode
PD is a PN junction photodiode, and it is only photosensitive component in the
circuit. With standard CMOS fabrication technique, n-well/p-sub photodiodes can
be made. This topology gives advantages like low-doped n-well which results into
wider depletion region and hence increases collection efﬁciency of the junction.
Here, n-wells are created by diffusion with junction tends to be deeper than n+/
p-sub junctions which further increases collection efﬁciency, and also wider
depletion region leads to a smaller capacitance. It improves charge-to-voltage
conversion ratio. Note that all modern CISs are based on the pinned photodiode
(PPD) due to its ability to perform efﬁcient CDS and capability to eliminate reset
noise present in traditional 3T APS. Also the dark current in PPD is typically very
low [10]. We can also incorporate PPD instead of PD.
3.2
3T Active Pixel
Transistors M1, SF1, M2, and PD together form a traditional 3T APS, in which M1
works as a reset switch and clears the charge stored in PD. Electron-hole pair is
generated due to light exposure (sometimes called photo-generated carrier) and
changes potential of PN junction. It is reﬂected between terminals of PD. After
ampliﬁcation, this potential can be sampled outside. Due to high input resistance,
source follower is best choice to perform this task. Threshold voltage of source
follower should be as low as possible (ideally zero), and also it should be less noisy.
Fig. 3 Schematic of 8T CIS. RST—Reset, SF—Source follower, C—Capacitor, M—Transistor,
RS—Row select, Vb—Bias voltage, CO—Column out, PD—Photodiode, VDD—Supply voltage,
S—Switch pulse
116
K. Suthar and R. Thakker

M2 works as select switch for this basic 3T APS. Voltage across PD will be
reﬂected to column readout circuitry or CDS mechanism, only when select switch,
i.e., M2, is in ‘ON’ state. One load transistor M3 is incorporated with 3T APS to
maintain required small standing current ISF1 for the ﬁrst-stage source follower SF1.
M3 is also used for two different purposes as explained later in this paper.
3.3
CDS Mechanism
Transistors M4–M5 and storage elements C1–C2 together form CDS mechanism,
where storage elements, i.e., capacitors, are used for dual purpose to sample the
reset and light signals and perform arithmetic operation between them. M4 works as
a switch and decides when to sample reset signal to capacitor C1. Same way
transistor M5 works as a switch and decides when to sample light signal to
capacitor C2. Different combinations of state of transistors M2, M3, M4, and M5
are used for different purposes, which is more clearly described in next section.
Transistors SF2 and M6 together form second-stage source follower which works
same as combination of SF1 and M2 works. Output of this second-stage source
follower is not just voltage level but it contains CDS-processed image information
on which necessary data processing can be performed directly.
4
Analysis and Operation
For proper pixel capture operation, four processes should be followed: (1) reset,
(2) integration, (3) sampling light information, and (4) row readout. Pixel capture
operation can be controlled by giving required pulse sequences to pixel.
4.1
Timing Control
The timing sequence of various control signals of proposed 8T CIS circuit (Fig. 3)
is shown in Fig. 4, and required voltage level is given in Table 1. Process to be
followed and related signal voltage are given in respective column. Figure 5 shows
timing scheme for entire frame operation. Detailed explanation with equations is
provided in the following text.
(A) For reset operation, M1 should be in ‘ON’ condition. At same time, we can
sample voltage of PD to capacitor C1. Note that at this time, transistor M3
works as load. Column ‘A’ represents required signal voltages to be given for
these two tasks.
A New Global Shutter 8T CIS Architecture with CDS Operation
117

(B) After that, some time should be allocated as exposure time. In between,
capacitor C2 can discharge through M3 and M5. In this process, M3 is in ‘ON’
state along with M5. Discharging time is not necessary to be long as exposure
time because capacitor can discharge in very short time compare to exposure
time.
(C) After exposure, voltage across PD is sampled across capacitor C2. This voltage
is denoted by Vt. M2 and M5 should be in ‘ON’ condition.
Fig. 4 Control signal timing
Table 1 Voltage level for different control signals of 8T CIS shown in Fig. 3
Signal
A
B
C
D
RST
Vhigh
Vlow
Vlow
Vlow
Vb
Vbias
Vhigh
Vbias
Vlow
S1
Vhigh
Vlow
Vhigh
Vlow
S2
Vhigh
Vlow
Vlow
Vhigh
S3
Vlow
Vhigh
Vhigh
Vlow
RS
Vlow
Vlow
Vlow
Vhigh
Fig. 5 Frame operation timing scheme
118
K. Suthar and R. Thakker

(D) During this time, CDS and row readout operations can be performed simulta-
neously. M6 and M4 should be in ‘ON’ condition. Here, M3 should be in cutoff
condition to prevent unnecessary discharge which causes information loss.
4.2
CIS Circuit Operation
Traditional 3T structure and its working are reported in many literatures [1–3,
11–13]. For accumulation mode, PD can be considered as parallel combination of
capacitor and discharging current source [2, 3]. During reset operation, the voltage
across PD will be
Vreset ¼ VDD  Vth
ð1Þ
where Vth is threshold voltage of transistor M1. Reset voltage (Vreset) is sampled
across capacitor C1 through transistors M2 and M4. Here, transistor M3 should be
biased in such a way that maximum potential drops across M3. Reset sample
(voltage across C1) is Vreset −Vth. Here, Vth is threshold voltage of transistor SF1.
Next, M1 is turned off, and the PD is electrically ﬂoated. The photo-generated
carriers accumulate in the PD junction capacitance as light is incident on it. The
potential of the PD varies due to accumulated charges. The voltage of the PD
decreases depending upon intensity of input light. Meanwhile, capacitor C2 is
discharged through transistors M5 and M3, by which charges of previous frame are
removed and the capacitor is ready for next frame.
Fig. 6 Simulation scheme
A New Global Shutter 8T CIS Architecture with CDS Operation
119

Note that capacitor C1 is not needed to be discharged as reset voltage will be
approximately same, i.e., variance of reset voltages is very low. After an accu-
mulation time, the transistor M2 is turned on, and the signal in the PD is readout
and sampled across storage element C2 through transistors M2 and M5. As in reset
signal sampling, M3 is in biased condition.
The voltage sampled across C2 corresponding to light intensity is of Vt−Vth.
Here, Vth is threshold voltage of transistor SF1, and Vt is voltage of photodiode after
accumulation time. After sampling, transistors M2, M3, and M5 are turned off; M4
and M6 are turned on, by which CDS operation is performed. Voltage on gate of
SF2 is
Vg;SF2 ¼ Vreset  Vth
ð
Þ  Vt  Vth
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
Vg;SF2 ¼ Vreset  Vt
ð3Þ
Therefore, voltage at output node is,
Vout ¼ Vg;SF2  Vth
ð4Þ
Here, Vth is threshold voltage of second-stage source follower SF2. Threshold
voltages of M1, SF1, and SF2 greatly affect voltage swing of this architecture. We
may use hard reset on M1 and special purpose transistor with zero threshold
voltage, to increase voltage swing or voltage overhead.
5
Discussion/Advantage
The proposed pixel architecture in this paper offers several advantages over pre-
vious designs. The bias current in the ﬁrst-stage source follower is controlled by
adding the switch M2 which greatly reduces power consumption.
Proposed architecture is better compare to existing 8T and 9T designs. This
circuit does not use charge sharing between the reset and the signal samples stored
in the in-pixel capacitors. CDS signal amplitude is not attenuated because there is
no capacitive division between the two samples. It also increases the device sen-
sitivity under identical conditions. Compare to 10T CIS, no additional voltage
source is required for CDS operation.
Final output is containing difference of Vreset and Vt, which are the voltages
before and after accumulation time, respectively. Thus, irrespective of reset voltage,
we get exact light information, i.e., Vreset−Vt. It will help us to reduce noise.
Assuming noise component as Vnoise,
VC1 ¼ Vreset  Vth;SF1 þ Vnoise
ð5Þ
120
K. Suthar and R. Thakker

VC2 ¼ Vt  Vth;SF1 þ Vnoise
ð6Þ
Vout ¼ VC1  VC2
ð
Þ  Vth;SF2
ð7Þ
Vout ¼ Vreset  Vth;SF1 þ Vnoise


 Vt  Vth;SF1 þ Vnoise


 Vth;SF2
ð8Þ
Vout ¼ Vreset  Vt
ð
Þ  Vth;SF2
ð9Þ
It can be seen that no noise component is present in ﬁnal output. If threshold
voltage of SF2 is brought to zero voltage, output voltage will be Vreset −Vlight. The
ﬁll factor of the proposed sensor is approximately 27% because of the two storage
capacitors and eight transistors per pixel.
6
Simulation
To verify the performance of proposed pixel architecture, a spice simulation is
performed. Capacitor with parallel current source can be used instead of a photo-
diode [12]. Alternate method is given in [7] in which PD is replaced by voltage
source. In simulation circuitry, a transistor Mb is incorporated to maintain required
output current Iout. Here, one frame is assumed to be of 1 us time duration, and
result of two frames is shown in Fig. 7. It is assumed that in ﬁrst frame, light is
incident in PD while in second frame, no light is present. To realize this assump-
tion, discharging current source is set to 40 nA for ﬁrst frame and 1 pA for second
dark light frame. Control signals are applied as shown in Fig. 4.
To understand results of simulations, two basic characteristics of photodiode are
to be understood; photocurrent of PD linearly increases with input light intensity,
and voltage of PD decreases linearly when it operates in ‘accumulation’ mode [2]. It
should be noted that the accumulation of electrons is interpreted as the process of
discharge in the charged capacitor by generated photocurrent. Figure 8 shows
relationship between photocurrent and equivalent CDS output. Output voltage is
measured for different photocurrent Ipd in light frame. Voltage swing is difference
between maximum output voltage and minimum output voltage. Maximum output
swing of PD is limited in such a way to that linearity error of output voltage remains
less than 1%. Here, output swing is found to be 1.2. Dynamic range (DR) is deﬁned
as the ratio of the largest non-saturating photocurrent to the minimum detectable
photocurrent [20].
DR ¼ 20log imax=imin
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
Power consumed per frame can be obtained by integrating current drawn from
voltage source within frame time and multiplying it with supply voltage. It can vary
according to intensity of light incident on PD. Standard deviation of light samples
can be referred as random noise. Here, random noise is calculated of eight light
A New Global Shutter 8T CIS Architecture with CDS Operation
121

samples. Simulation results of proposed architecture with 9T and 10T pixels are
given in Table 2. It is carried out in 0.35-lm CMOS technology.
7
Conclusion
We have presented an 8T global shutter pixel with CDS mechanism. It can be used
for traditional global shutter applications such as high-speed and hyper-spectral
imaging. The proposed architecture offers several advantages over existing designs.
Fig. 7 Waveforms at different nodes in the simulation scheme of the proposed circuit shown in
Fig. 6 obtained using simulation
122
K. Suthar and R. Thakker

Overall KTC noise is found to be reduced. Voltage swing is approximately 1.2 V,
which can be further improved by using source follower transistor with low
threshold voltage. Dynamic range is found to be 72 dB.
References
1. Abbas El Gamal and Helmy Eltoukhy, “CMOS Image Sensor,” IEEE Circuits & Devises
Magazine, Vol. 21, No. 3, May 2005.
2. Jun Ohta, “Smart CMOS Image Sensors and Applications,” Book, CRC Press, 2007.
3. Eric R. Fossum and Donald B. Hondongwa, “A Review of the Pinned Photodiode for CCD
and CMOS Image Sensors,” IEEE Journal of the Electron Devices Society, Vol. 2, No. 3,
May 2014.
Fig. 8 Linearity of output voltage with photocurrent
Table 2 Parameter comparison
Parameter
9T CIS
10T CIS
This work (8T CIS)
Voltage swing
0.7 V
1.1 V
1.2 V
DR
66 dB
71 dB
72 dB
Power (per frame)
4.2 nW
5.2 nW
4.8 nW
Random noise
1.5 mV
1.1 mV
0.5 mV
SNR
53.3 dB
60 dB
67 dB
Supply voltage
3.3 V
3.2, 2.6, 2.8 V
3.3 V
Estimated pixel size (um2)
15  15
14  14
13.5  13.5
FF
21%
25%
27%
A New Global Shutter 8T CIS Architecture with CDS Operation
123

4. Xhakoni, A. and Gielen, G., “A 132-dB Dynamic-Range Global-Shutter Stacked Architecture
for High-Performance Imagers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II Exp. Briefs 61(6), 398–402,
2014.
5. Masaaki S, “An 83 dB-Dynamic-Range Single-Exposure Global-Shutter CMOS Image
Sensor with In-Pixel Dual Storage”, Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest Technical Paper
(ISSCC), Feb, 2012.
6. X.Y. Wang, “A 2.2 M CMOS Image Sensor for High Speed Machine Vision Applications”,
proc. Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), Vol. 7536, San Jose, Jan.
2010.
7. Yang Liu, Cheng Ma, Quan Zhou, and Xinyang Wang, “A New 9T Global Shutter Pixel with
CDS Technique,” Proc. of Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), Vol.
9522 952210-1.
8. G. Meynants, “Global shutter imagers for industrial applications,” Proc. Society of
Photographic Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), Vol. 9141, 914108, 2014.
9. Wu, X. and Meynants, G., “High speed global shutter image sensors for professional
applications,” Proc. Society of Photographic Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), Vol. 9522,
95220 N, 2015.
10. K. Stefanov, B. Dryera, D. Halla, A. Hollanda, J. Pratlongb, M. Fryerb, and Andrew Pikeb,
“A Global Shutter CMOS Image Sensor for Hyperspectral Imaging,” Proc. of Society of
Photographic Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE), Vol. 9602 96020 K-1, 2015.
11. E. Fossum, “CMOS Image Sensor: Electronics Camera-On-A-Chip,” IEEE Transaction on
Electron Devices, Vol. 44, No. 10, October 1997.
12. T. Reiner, B. Mishori, T. Leitner, A. Horovitz, Y. Vainbaum, M. Hakim, A. Lahav, S.
Shapira, and A. Fenigstein, “CMOS Image Sensor 3T Nwell Photodiode Pixel Spice Model,”
Proceedings 23rd IEEE Convention, Electrical and Electronics Enginner in Israel, 2004.
13. S. Mendis, S. Memeny, and E. Fossum, “CMOS Active Pixe Image Sensor,” IEEE
Transaction on Electron Devices, Vol. 41, No. 3, March 1994.
14. V. Lalucaa, V. Goiffon, P. Magnan, C. Virmontosis, Guy Rolland, and S. Petit, “Single Event
Effects in 4T Pinnend photodiode Image Sensor,” IEEE Transaction on Nuclear Science, Vol.
60, No. 6, December 2013.
15. Zhiyuan Gao, Jiangtao Xu, Yiming Zhou, and Kaiming Nie, “Analysis and Modeling of the
Light-Dependent Full Well Capacity of the 4-T Pixel in CMOS Image Sensors,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, Vol. 16, No. 8, April 15, 2016.
16. E. Martin, T. Nuns, J. P. David, O. Gilard, J. Vaillant, P. Fereyre, V. Prevost, and M.
Boutillier. “Gamma and Proton-Induced Dark Current Degradation of 5T CMOS Pinned
Photodiode 0.18 um CMOS Image Sensors,” IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol. 61,
No. 1, February 2014.
17. Liqiang Han, Suying Yao, and Albert J. P. Theuwissen, “A Charge Transfer Model for
CMOS Image Sensors,” IEEE Transactions On Electron Devices, Vol. 63, No. 1, January
2016.
18. M. Rafat, M Elmahlawy, A. Zaki and M. Hamid, “Low-Power Low-Noise CTIA Readout
Integrated Circuit Design for Thermal Imaging Applications,” Communications on Applied
Electronics (CAE), Vol. 2, No. 8, September 2015.
19. Kartikeya Murari, Ralph Etienne-Cummings, Nitish V. Thakor, and Gert Cauwenberghs, “A
CMOS In-Pixel CTIA High-Sensitivity Fluorescence Imager,” IEEE Transactions on
Biomedical Circuits And Systems, Vol. 5, No. 5, October 2011.
20. C. Jun, R. Feng, Y. Hui, and X. Meihual, “A CMOS Image Sensor with Self-Reset Circuit in
Active Pixel.” Image and Signal Processing, 2009. CISP’09. 2nd International Congress on.
IEEE, 2009.
124
K. Suthar and R. Thakker

Time Series Regression of Weather
Parameters Over the Last Century
for Cotton Crop
Riddhi Patel and Geetali Saha
Abstract Agriculture is the largest provider of livelihood, not only to rural India in
terms of produce but also to the urban sector in many fruitful ways varying from
yielding harvest to processing to transporting to exporting these crop products
amongst various commodity markets. Cotton, sugar, wheat and rice are the major
Indian cash crops that are exported to other countries. The productivity of these
crops is mainly affected by change in climatic conditions. However, at times
extreme variations in climatic conditions such as temperature, vapour pressure, crop
evapotranspiration can cause losses. The objective behind this research is to ﬁgure
out upcoming weather parameter values for the crop of cotton. Different time series
methods, such as moving average, single exponential methods and neural
network-based methods are used to predict weather parameters and relate it to the
productivity of major cotton-producing states of India such as Gujarat and
Maharashtra covering around different districts. Data is taken for over a century
(1901–2002), and based on that, forecast is determined. To check the efﬁciency of
the different models, mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), mean square error
(MSE) and root mean square error (RMSE) are evaluated and tabulated.
Keywords Crop evapotranspiration  MA  SES  Neural network
Regression analysis
1
Introduction
India is mainly an agricultural country. Agriculture continues to play a dominant
part in the overall economic scenario as it produces many essential cash crops. Cash
crops such as cotton, coffee, sugarcane, rice, wheat, onion, mangoes play a very
R. Patel (&)  G. Saha
G. H. Patel College of Engineering and Technology, Vallabh Vidyanagar, India
e-mail: patelriddhi96@yahoo.com
G. Saha
e-mail: geetalisaha@gcet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_12
125

signiﬁcant role in Indian economy thereby contributing to the foreign exchange.
Amongst all cash crops, cotton is the major cash crop of India. Some of the
cotton-producing states of India are Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Punjab,
Haryana, Andhra Pradesh, etc. However, Gujarat and Maharashtra are the major
cotton-producing
states
of
India
(approximately
46%).
Next
to
Gujarat,
Maharashtra is the second state in terms of cotton production.
Cotton is one of the major crops of Gujarat state. Gujarat contributes more than
30% of the total cotton production in the country as cotton grows in more than 30
lac hectares of the land. Due to the black soil and rainfall of 80–100 cm—
parameters that are required for cotton production—Gujarat is most advantageous
to the country. The major cotton-producing districts of Gujarat are Rajkot, Bharuch,
Vadodara,
Panchmahal,
Mehsana,
Ahmedabad
and
Surendranagar
[1].
A comparison of cotton productivity over 16 years from 1999 to 2015 is compiled
for reference.
Maharashtra is the next major contributor of cotton production in India. The lava
soil of this state makes it more suitable for cotton production. Three main regions
are Khandesh, Vidarbha and Marathwada which involve different districts such as
Akola, Nagpur, Wardha, Dhule, Amravati [2]. A comparison of cotton production
in Maharashtra for 8 years is quoted for reference [3].
Prediction of weather parameters such as temperature, vapour pressure and crop
evapotranspiration plays a very dominant role for cultivation of cotton, and Also it
would be a big beneﬁt to the farmers if such parameters could be estimated
beforehand. Temperature in the range of 21°–30 °C, vapour pressure in between 15
and 30 hPa and crop evapotranspiration 2.54–7.11 mm/day are the basic require-
ments for cotton production. There are mainly four types of cotton: Gossypium
arboreum, Gossypium herbaceum, Gossypium hirsutum and Gossypium bar-
badense produced in Gujarat and Maharashtra; the ﬁrst two known as Asiatic
cotton, and the last two are known as New World cotton. Features of all types of
cotton are explained in detail in [4].
A dissertation report [5] is a very neatly compiled book by Ratnadip and
Agarwal. They have covered many prediction methods right from basic mathe-
matical moving average methods to soft computing techniques such as artiﬁcial
neural network and support vector machine in sufﬁcient details. To calculate the
accuracy amongst different models ﬁtted to time series, many error parameters are
discussed.
In [6], there is a detailed survey of different techniques which are used for
prediction of different datasets. Also, based on their experimentation work, they
have identiﬁed techniques that give fruitful results to particular sets of data. It
contains a detailed explanation of traditional-, stochastic-, soft computing-based
and fuzzy-based forecasting techniques along with their merits and demerits over
each other. For comparing accuracy of different prediction techniques, University of
Alabama’s dataset and TAIEX-Taiwan Stock Exchange data are used based on
which error measures are tabulated.
Moving average is the most popular and easy technique of prediction. In [7],
variety of uses of moving average is well explained, and also the merits and
126
R. Patel and G. Saha

demerits of different types of moving average methods are discussed. There are
some unique types of moving average.
In [8], required parameters of weather for different crops are introduced. The
behaviour of climatic conditions is beneﬁcial to the farmers for proper cultivation of
crops. Weather parameters such as average temperature, average rainfall, vapour
pressure and cloud cover around 101 years are used to predict the next year weather
situations. Prediction is done using different algorithms of TSA methods, and
accuracy of each model is analysed by calculating RMSE, MAPE and MSE.
Evapotranspiration plays a very important role in estimating water cycle and
moisture content of the atmosphere in the nearby vicinity. It has started becoming a
large contributor in predicting crops and planning of resources. Three regression
models, namely multivariate fractional polynomial, robust regression and Bayesian
regression, are used to estimate the evapotranspiration on monthly basis for three
cities of Iran [9]. Evapotranspiration is a complex and nonlinear element. So
multivariate fractional polynomial is best tool for nonlinear problems as per their
experimental results.
In [10], Penman–Monteith and artiﬁcial neural network methods are compared
for the prediction of monthly reference evapotranspiration in sub-humid region of
Dehradun. For NN modelling, different training algorithm and varied number of
neurons are properly utilized to get the most suitable structure of ANN. The ANN
with Levenberg–Marquardt with nine numbers of neurons in single hidden layer
gives best prediction result with respect to their database.
The [11] provides the prediction of one day-ahead temperature in Kermanshah
city of Iran. About 10 years of data from 1996 to 2006 was trained and tested using
Multi-Layer Perceptron. It has been proven that with the help of Levenberg–
Marquardt algorithm, MLP is the best model of prediction and has least error.
With reference to the database from Indiawaterportal [12], a comparison of basic
time series analysis methods is executed using MATLAB tool, version (R2015b).
In this paper, we used meteorological data such as average temperature, vapour
pressure and reference crop evapotranspiration of 101 years from 1901 to 2001 and
predict the same for the year 2002.
The present paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 gives a detailed explanation of
the various time series models for prediction. Section 3 shows the error measures
which are used to check the accuracy of predictive algorithm. Section 4 provides
the information about the data used for proposed work. Section 5 is about the result
and discussion obtained using the time series methods. Section 6 gives the con-
clusion and suggestion for future work.
2
Time Series Models
A time series is essentially a set of collection of data points for speciﬁc time
interval. A time series is an array of observations of variable measured at successive
time periods. The measurements are captured at any regular time interval such as
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
127

every hour, every day, month or year. The pattern of data is an important factor in
understanding how the time series has behaved over the past. The past data values
play an important role for forecasting the nature of data values in the future. There
are many application areas where time series are well being utilized. The aim of
time series analysis is to describe and summarize time series data and make an
accurate forecast. Here, in-site data is fed and simulated using software for data
analysis.
2.1
Moving Average Model
A moving average is a statistical method to analyse the data points by creating
series of averages of different subsets of the full dataset. It is used to smooth out
short-term ﬂuctuations and highlight longer-term trends or cycles. It is an average
of the previous n data points in time series data.
Each value in the time series data is equally weighted, so there are no weighting
factors applied to any of the data value. The moving average method formula is
given below:
Pt þ 1 ¼ St þ St1 þ    þ Stn þ 1
n
ð1Þ
where
Pt þ 1
Forecast for the next period
St
Actual value for current period
n
period over which averaging is done.
This method is easily applicable as it is a simple one but it is relevant to
short-term forecasting. Also, the selection of the period of moving average is a
difﬁcult chore. For different MA interval, forecasting error may differ.
2.2
Single Exponential Smoothing (SES)
It is also called as simple exponential smoothing. It is mostly preferable for simple
data without trend and seasonality, but the mean of the time series is slightly
changing over time. SES model provides larger weights to the most nearest data,
and the weights decrease exponentially as the data becomes more distant. The
formula for SES method is as below:
Gt þ 1 ¼ a  St þ 1  a
ð
Þ  Gt
ð2Þ
128
R. Patel and G. Saha

where
Gt þ 1
next forecast value of the variable;
Gt
present forecast value of the variable;
St
present actual value of the variable;
a
smoothing constant between 0 and 1.
Trend is a long-term increase or decrease in the time series data. This is the type
of tendency which continues to exist for a very long period over the years.
Seasonality is deﬁned as periodic ﬂuctuation of time series data within certain
limits. This is short-term instant in time series with repetitive variations in weather
within the one year.
If the time series data has two components, trend and seasonality, there are some
other methods such as double exponential smoothing (DES) and triple exponential
smoothing (TES) which also give better forecasting results.
Also there are some other techniques which are useful for prediction of future
data. Neural networks are widely used in forecasting.
2.3
Neural Networks
Neural networks consist of many nodes. Each node has an activation function.
Networks are basically information processing system. In this system, elements
called neurons which process the information. The signals are transmitted by means
of connection links. Every link possesses an associated weight, which is multiplied
along with the incoming signal of net. The net is trained by applying activations to
the net input.
Neural network uses mathematical algorithms to learn the relationship and
patterns from a given dataset. These activation functions determine the actual
output from the network. By choosing a combination of these functions, the net-
work can be trained, validated and tested. Once trained, this net is given a set of
input and output for validation, and after validation, the net is used for testing
(Fig. 1).
Different types of activation functions used for the proposed algorithm are given
below.
Purelin:
Tansig
Logsig
Fig. 1 Different activation functions
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
129

3
Error Measures
After prediction, the accuracy of the models is tested by means of the common
measures of error such as MAPE, MSE and RMSE. These errors give the core
success of the time series models. In this paper, different models are compared by
calculating the mentioned errors, each of which is deﬁned as follows.
3.1
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE)
MAPE can be deﬁned as:
MAPE ¼ 1
n
X
n
t¼1
Yt  Ft
ð
Þ2
Yt
 100
ð3Þ
3.2
Mean Square Error (MSE)
MSE can be described as:
MSE ¼ 1
n
X
n
t¼1
Yt  Ft
ð
Þ2
ð4Þ
3.3
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE)
RMSE can be deﬁned as:
RMSE ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1
n
Xn
t¼1 Yt  Ft
ð
Þ2
r
ð5Þ
where,
Yt
Actual value
Ft
Forecasted value.
130
R. Patel and G. Saha

4
Dataset Description
Gujarat and Maharashtra are the major cotton-growing states of the country.
Majority cotton-producing districts of Gujarat are in the southern part, and districts
of Maharashtra are in the middle north part.
There are few weather organizations of India which provides the database as
well as weather information. Few of them are Indiawaterportal, India Meteorology
Department (IMD) [13], Accuweather, etc. In this paper, the monthly meteoro-
logical data from ﬁve major cotton-producing districts of Gujarat—Rajkot,
Bharuch, Amreli, Sabarkantha and Surendranagar—and also three districts of
Maharashtra—Nagpur, Wardha and Akola of 100 years from 1901 to 2001—is
taken from Indiawaterportal. The parameters observed are as follows:
(1) Average temperature (°C)
(2) Vapour pressure (hPa)
(3) Reference crop evapotranspiration (mm/day) (Figs. 2, 3 and 4).
Fig. 2 Fluffy growing cotton
that is ready to harvest.
Reference: www.
cottonsource.com
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
131

5
Results and Discussion
For experimentation,
Moving average methods for different time intervals are implemented, and it is
found that the period is incoherent.
SES works best when the latest data is given maximum weightage.
Using neural network, the data is split into three parts:
For training: Indices [1:1100];
For validation: Indices [1101:1212]; and
For testing: Indices [1213:1224].
The network is optimized for different combinations of activation functions, and
it is observed that minimum error is obtained when purelin function is used in
hidden layer and tansig in the output layer. We tried to use Levenberg–Marquardt
algorithm as it is the fastest algorithm.
We have tried to summarize the variations on different parameters at identical
locations using mentioned techniques.
Fig. 3 Map indicating cotton-producing districts of Gujarat. Reference: www.mapsoﬁndia.com
132
R. Patel and G. Saha

Tables 1, 2 and 3 show the comparison of moving average, SES and neural
networks for ﬁve different cotton-producing districts of Gujarat for parameter
average temperature.
Tables 4, 5 and 6 show the same for parameter vapour pressure.
Tables 7, 8 and 9 show the same for parameter evapotranspiration.
Tables 10, 11 and 12 show the comparison of moving average, SES and neural
networks for three different districts of Maharashtra for parameter average
temperature.
Tables 13, 14 and 15 show the same for parameter vapour pressure.
Tables 16, 17 and 18 show the same for parameter evapotranspiration (Figs. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9 and 10; Tables 19 and 20).
Fig. 4 Map indicating cotton-producing districts of Maharashtra. Reference: www.mapsoﬁndia.
com
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
133

Table 1 Comparison of parameter: Average temperature; state: Gujarat; method: Moving
average
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Amrell
3
0.0125
6.4772
2.5450
5
0.0126
8.4378
2.9048
7
0.0152
8.9773
2.9962
9
0.0148
8.5112
2.9174
11
0.0110
6.6330
2.5755
Bharuch
3
0.0145
11.8247
3.4387
5
0.0145
14.5634
3.8162
7
0.0177
15.0743
3.3972
9
0.0179
14.6008
3.8211
11
0.0136
11.4932
3.3902
Rajkot
3
0.0146
13.3148
3.6489
5
0.0153
17.6843
4.2053
7
0.0190
18.9542
4.3536
9
0.0187
17.8889
4.2295
11
0.0142
13.8520
3.7218
Surendranagar
3
0.0191
18.7959
4.3354
5
0.0203
24.8093
4.9809
7
0.0251
26.5026
5.1481
9
0.0249
25.0967
5.0097
11
0.0193
19.4295
4.4079
Sabarkantha
3
0.0198
22.6195
4.7560
5
0.0215
0.0675
5.4834
7
0.0269
32.2197
5.6762
9
0.0269
30.4499
5.5181
11
0.0208
23.5408
4.8519
Table 2 Comparison of parameter: Average temperature; state: Gujarat; method: SES
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Amrell
0.1
1.1404
5.3870
2.3210
0.2
1.2587
5.5098
2.3473
0.3
1.2853
5.4021
2.3242
0.4
1.2642
5.1194
2.2626
0.5
1.2259
4.7514
2.1798
0.6
1.1839
4.3605
2.0882
0.7
1.1393
3.9774
1.9943
0.8
1.0881
3.6157
1.9015
0.9
1.0262
3.2820
1.8116
(continued)
134
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 2 (continued)
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Bharuch
0.1
1.1768
10.6753
3.2673
0.2
1.4733
10.8896
3.2999
0.3
1.4773
10.6378
3.2616
0.4
1.4219
10.0566
3.1712
0.5
1.1480
9.3160
3.0522
0.6
1.2706
8.5305
2.9207
0.7
1.1897
7.7583
2.7354
0.8
1.1008
7.0276
2.6510
0.9
1.00
6.3552
2.5210
Rajkot
0.1
1.4673
11.0730
3.3276
0.2
1.5610
11.2911
3.3602
0.3
1.5550
10.9548
3.3098
0.4
1.4980
10.2362
3.1994
0.5
1.4272
9.3522
3.0581
0.6
1.1590
8.4461
2.9062
0.7
1.2938
7.5648
2.7540
0.8
1.2260
6.7928
2.6063
0.9
1.1501
6.0792
2.4656
Surendranagar
0.1
1.9545
16.8082
4.0998
0.2
2.0591
17.0660
4.1311
0.3
2.0302
16.4688
4.0582
0.4
1.9316
15.3000
3.9115
0.5
1.8134
13.8968
3.7278
0.6
1.6975
12.4738
3.5325
0.7
1.5853
11.1459
3.3385
0.8
1.4701
9.9336
3.1518
0.9
1.3465
8.8520
2.9752
Sabarkantha
0.1
2.0671
21.408
4.6269
0.2
2.1652
21.6259
4.6504
0.3
2.1054
20.7351
4.5536
0.4
1.9640
19.1225
4.3729
0.5
1.8013
17.2317
4.1511
0.6
1.6438
15.3485
3.9177
0.7
1.4943
13.6008
3.6379
0.8
1.3467
12.0304
3.4685
0.9
1.1951
10.6446
3.2626
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
135

Table 3 Parameter: Average temperature; state: Gujarat; method: Neural network
Place
Architecture
Transfer function
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Layer1
Layer2
Amrell
1-5-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0805
0.2203
0.0293
1-4-1
0.0770
0.2207
0.03190
1-5-1
0.0765
0.2206
0.03741
1-10-1
0.0757
0.2207
0.04053
1-2-1
Logsig
0.4678
1.1324
2.4377
1-4-1
0.4671
1.1346
2.2294
1-5-1
0.4729
1.1331
2.5212
1-10-1
0.4749
1.1328
2.1305
Bharuch
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0951
0.3061
0.09162
1-4-1
0.1052
0.3053
0.0932
1-5-1
0.1017
0.3063
0.0626
1-10-1
0.1110
0.3082
0.0727
1-2-1
Logsig
0.7925
1.7645
3.9686
1-4-1
0.7908
1.7647
4.0971
1-5-1
0.7944
1.7641
3.6064
1-10-1
0.7930
1.7640
3.4386
Rajkot
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1120
0.3448
0.08126
1-4-1
0.1159
0.3464
0.0767
1-5-1
0.1138
0.3438
0.09224
1-10-1
0.1132
0.3445
0.084604
1-2-1
Logsig
0.7561
1.6776
3.5171
1-4-1
0.7508
1.6736
4.2347
1-5-1
0.7568
1.6776
4.2323
1-10-1
0.7535
1.6778
3.9639
Surendranagar
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1546
0.4410
0.1548
1-4-1
0.1598
0.4406
0.15505
1-5-1
0.1577
0.4407
0.1608
1-10-1
0.1576
0.4400
0.17048
1-2-1
Logsig
1.1675
2.1826
5.6167
1-4-1
1.1677
2.1824
6.0905
1-5-1
1.1733
2.1835
5.9042
1-10-l
1.1659
2.1828
7.1715
Sabarkantha
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1718
0.4565
0.1560
1-1-1
0.1608
0.4562
0.17566
1-5-1
0.1644
0.4560
0.13115
1-10-l
0.1477
0.4617
0.10659
1-2-1
Logsig
1.3936
2.6433
8.9727
1-1-1
1.3993
2.6434
7.8432
1-5-1
1.3980
2.6433
8.4326
1-10-l
1.3979
2.6433
9.609
136
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 4 Parameter: Vapour pressure; state: Gujarat; method: Moving average
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Amrell
3
0.0401
29.3171
5.4145
5
0.0540
43.6561
6.9754
7
0.0623
56.4122
7.5108
9
0.0572
50.3725
7.0974
11
0.0461
37.3170
6.1088
Bharuch
3
0.0229
50.6014
7.1135
5
0.0461
75.7126
8.7013
7
0.0537
85.1826
9.2294
9
0.0468
77.0341
8.7769
11
0.037
59.2497
7.6974
Rajkot
3
0.0477
41.1144
6.8640
5
0.0631
78.4153
8.8552
7
0.0716
91.0253
9.5407
9
0.0656
81.2522
9.0140
11
0.0530
60.0969
7.7522
Surendranagar
3
0.0531
50.8659
7.1320
5
0.0741
84.9579
9.2173
7
0.083
96.6887
9.9342
9
0.0748
87.9375
9.3775
11
0.0604
65.1369
8.0707
Sabarkantha
3
0.0626
62.2430
7.8894
5
0.0958
100.01
10.0182
7
0.1018
115.0342
10.7254
9
0.0852
103.2364
10.1605
11
0.0082
77.0094
8.7755
Table 5 Comparison of parameter: Vapour pressure; state: Gujarat; method: SES
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Amrell
0.1
4.6492
30.8306
5.5525
0.2
4.7950
30.5001
5.5227
0.3
4.5539
23.1309
5.3039
0.4
4.0837
24.5822
4.9580
0.5
3.5436
20.8025
4.5610
0.6
3.0312
17.3723
4.1681
0.7
2.5854
14.5043
3.8084
0.8
2.2132
12.1993
3.4928
0.9
1.9106
10.3839
3.2224
(continued)
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
137

Table 5 (continued)
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Bharuch
0.1
3.6967
48.755
6.9825
0.2
3.7063
43.3346
6.9382
0.3
3.32
46.0762
6.7379
0.4
2.7145
41.7316
6.46
0.8
2.0806
37.1555
6.0955
0.6
1.5447
33.1791
5.7601
0.7
1.1666
30.1156
5.4878
0.8
0.9649
27.9930
5.2908
0.9
0.9403
26.7393
5.1710
Rajkot
0.1
5.3772
49.9033
7.0642
0.2
5.5604
49.3795
7.0271
0.3
5.3049
45.5219
6.7470
0.4
4.7796
39.7359
6.3036
0.5
4.1606
33.5702
5.7940
0.6
3.5589
27.9700
5.2387
0.7
3.0203
23.2764
4.8246
0.8
2.5540
19.4917
4.4149
0.9
2.1565
16.4902
4.0608
Surendranagar
0.1
6.1053
54.9654
7.4139
0.2
6.3345
54.2866
7.3679
0.3
6.0144
49.9676
7.0688
0.4
5.3568
43.5562
6.5997
0.8
4.5843
36.7653
6.0633
0.6
3.8423
30.6363
5.5350
0.7
3.1964
25.5507
5.0548
0.8
2.6653
21.5052
4.6374
0.9
2.2490
18.3552
4.2343
Sabarkantha
0.1
7.1253
66.5119
8.1555
0.2
7.5015
65.3247
8.1132
0.3
7.1445
60.7805
7.7962
0.4
6.2845
53.2101
7.2945
0.5
5.2204
45.1565
6.7199
0.6
4.1729
37.3787
6.1546
0.7
3.2580
31.8340
5.6422
0.8
2.5186
27.0269
5.1987
0.9
1.9617
23.2919
4.8262
138
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 6 Comparison of parameter: Vapour pressure; state: Gujarat; method: Neural network
Place
Architecture
Transfer function
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Layer1
Layer2
Amrell
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0917
0.3852
0.1484
1-4-1
0.0887
0.3844
0.1477
1-5-1
0.0922
0.3848
0.1480
1-10-1
0.0806
0.3839
0.1473
1-2-1
Logsig
3.6632
3.3665
11.3268
1-4-1
3.6644
3.3633
11.3120
1-5-1
3.6644
3.3631
11.3106
1-10-1
3.6644
3.3633
11.3116
Kharuch
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1909
0.4234
0.1793
1-4-1
0.1866
0.4201
0.1765
1-5-1
0.1910
0.4217
0.1778
1-10-1
0.1837
0.4193
0.1758
1-2-1
Logsig
3.7281
4.9823
24.8230
1-4-1
3.7285
4.9824
24.8242
1-5-1
3.7288
4.9825
24.8249
1-10-1
3.7275
4.9821
24.8217
Rajkot
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0661
0.4748
0.2254
1-4-1
0.0664
0.4756
0.2262
1-5-1
0.0631
0.4719
0.2227
1-10-1
0.0631
0.4745
0.2251
1-2-1
Logsig
4.2585
4.3336
18.9538
1-4-1
4.2587
4.3535
18.9525
1-5-1
4.2573
4.3557
18.9719
1-10-1
4.2573
4.3557
18.9725
Surendranagar
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0365
0.4520
0.2043
1-4-1
0.0900
0.4525
0.2047
1-5-1
0.0514
0.4498
0.2023
1-10-1
0.0682
0.4480
0.2007
1-2-1
Logsig
3.3293
4.8986
23.9964
1-4-1
5.3295
4.8999
24.0093
1-5-1
5.3231
4.9002
24.0117
1-10-1
3.3293
4.9000
24.0104
Sabarkantha
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1773
0.5951
0.3541
1-4-1
0.2148
0.5907
0.3490
1-5-1
0.1800
0.5945
0.3534
1-10-1
0.1781
0.5947
0.3537
1-2-1
Logsig
7.4741
6.3139
39.8659
1-4-1
7.4749
6.3138
39.8647
1-5-1
7.4748
6.3138
39.8645
1-10-1
7.4743
6.3139
39.8655
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
139

Table 7 Comparison of parameter: Reference crop evapotranspiration; state: Gujarat; method:
Moving average
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Amrell
3
0.0166
0.410
0.6403
5
0.0130
0.4154
0.6445
7
0.0192
0.3852
0.6207
9
0.0244
0.4033
0.6350
11
0.0213
0.3324
0.5765
Bharuch
3
0.029
1.0809
1.0397
5
0.0184
1.2380
1.1127
7
0.0281
1.2323
1.1101
9
0.0341
1.2276
1.1080
11
0.029
0.9773
0.9886
Rajkot
3
0.0239
0.8110
0.9551
5
0.0334
1.0131
1.0121
7
0.0283
1.0105
1.0053
9
0.0188
1.0244
1.0065
11
0.0202
0.9122
0.9005
Surendranagar
3
0.0273
1.6591
1.2881
5
0.0276
2.0003
1.4143
7
0.0414
2.0524
1.4326
9
0.0469
2.0013
1.4147
11
0.0402
1.5747
1.2549
Sabarkantha
3
0.0288
2.0970
1.4481
5
0.0299
2.5743
1.6045
7
0.0217
2.6709
1.6343
9
0.0512
2.5825
1.6070
11
0.0435
2.0249
1.4230
Table 8 Comparison of parameter: Reference crop evapotranspiration; state: Gujarat; method:
SES
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Amrell
0.1
1.9379
0.3026
0.5501
0.2
1.8671
0.3149
0.5611
0.3
1.7711
0.3152
0.5614
0.4
1.6931
0.3065
0.5537
0.5
1.6447
0.2923
0.5406
0.6
1.6115
0.2745
0.5240
0.7
1.5725
0.2547
0.5047
0.8
1.5129
0.2337
0.4534
0.9
1.4262
0.2124
0.4609
(continued)
140
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 8 (continued)
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Bharuch
0.1
2.6672
0.9356
0.9673
0.2
2.5091
0.9589
0.9792
0.3
2.2738
0.9351
0.9670
0.4
2.0533
0.8809
0.9386
0.5
1.8848
0.8132
0.9018
0.6
1.7534
0.7421
0.8615
0.7
1.6469
0.6722
0.8199
0.8
1.5269
0.6056
0.7782
0.9
1.3857
0.5433
0.7371
Rajkot
0.1
2.6443
0.7835
0.8351
0.2
2.5050
0.8017
0.8954
0.3
2.2905
0.7323
0.8845
0.4
2.0872
0.7384
0.8593
0.5
1.9310
0.6831
0.8265
0.6
1.8139
0.6247
0.7904
0.7
1.7110
0.5669
0.7529
0.8
1.6001
0.5116
0.7152
0.9
1.4687
0.4597
0.6780
Surendranagar
0.1
3.6990
1.4920
1.2215
0.2
3.5008
1.5191
1.2325
0.3
3.1668
1.4686
1.2119
0.4
2.8234
1.3689
1.1700
0.5
2.5362
1.2495
1.1178
0.6
2.3069
1.1282
1.0622
0.7
2.1085
1.0127
1.0064
0.8
1.9136
0.9059
0.9518
0.9
1.7059
0.8087
0.8993
Sabarkantha
0.1
3.9901
1.8960
1.3770
0.2
3.7858
1.9284
1.3387
0.3
3.4143
1.8581
1.3631
0.4
3.0234
1.7241
1.3131
0.5
2.6931
1.5661
1.2514
0.6
2.4300
1.4076
1.1364
0.7
2.2054
1.2587
1.1219
0.8
1.9881
1.1224
1.0595
0.9
1.7539
0.9996
0.9998
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
141

Table 9 Comparison of parameter: Reference crop evapotranspiration; state: Gujarat; method:
Neural network
Place
Architecture
Transfer function
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Layer1
Layer2
Amrell
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1415
0.0562
0.0032
1-4-1
0.1412
0.0567
0.0032
1-5-1
0.1428
0.0563
0.0032
1-10-1
0.1436
0.0566
0.0032
1-2-1
Logsig
2.1549
0.4084
0.1668
1-4-1
2.1552
0.4085
0.1668
1-5-1
2.1548
0.4084
0.1668
1-10-1
2.1550
0.4084
0.1668
Bharuch
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.2545
0.1079
0.1668
1-4-1
0.2482
0.1078
0.0116
1-5-1
0.2552
0.1078
0.0116
1-10-1
0.2425
0.1076
0.0116
1-2-1
Logsig
3.0160
0.6716
0.4511
1-4-1
3.0161
0.6718
0.4513
1-5-1
3.0160
0.6714
0.4508
1-10-1
3.0161
0.6716
0.4511
Rajkot
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1991
0.0975
0.0095
1-4-1
0.2028
0.0970
0.0095
1-5-1
0.2012
0.0973
0.0095
1-10-1
0.2015
0.0172
0.0095
1-2-1
Logsig
2.8538
0.5951
0.3542
1-4-1
2.8540
0.5954
0.3545
1-3-1
2.8539
0.5953
0.3544
1-10-1
2.8540
0.5953
0.3544
Surendranagar
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.4037
0.1316
0.0173
1-4-1
0.4011
0.1316
0.0173
1-5-1
0.4020
0.1316
0.0173
1-10-1
0.4246
0.1320
0.0174
1-2-1
Logsig
4.2508
0.9064
0.8216
1-1-1
4.2507
0.9063
0.3214
1-5-1
4.2508
0.9065
0.8217
1-10-1
4.2508
0.9063
0.8213
Sabarkantha
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.4356
0.1433
0.0205
1-4-1
0.4281
0.1433
0.0205
1-3-1
0.4245
0.1434
0.0206
1-10-1
0.4227
0.1433
0.0205
1-2-1
Logsig
4.7100
1.0507
3.3040
1-4-1
4.71
1.0507
3.3039
1-5-1
4.71
1.0507
3.3039
1-10-1
4.71
1.0507
3.3039
142
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 10 Comparison of parameter: Average temperature; state: Maharashtra; method: Moving
average
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Akola
3
0.0132
18.4009
4.2896
5
0.0116
23.2767
4.8246
7
0.0169
24.5899
4.9588
9
0.0203
23.4677
4.8443
11
0.0222
18.4071
4.2904
13
0.0260
13.9550
3.7356
Nagpur
3
0.0112
21.9290
4.6828
5
0.0110
28.7048
5.3577
7
0.0146
30.7950
5.5493
9
0.0173
29.0497
5.3898
11
0.0184
22.6028
4.7542
13
0.0208
17.0587
4.1302
Wardha
3
0.0117
20.0899
4.4822
5
0.0104
25.8453
5.0838
7
0.0155
27.5178
5.2457
9
0.0186
26.1029
5.1091
11
0.0201
20.3914
4.5157
13
0.0231
15.4170
3.9264
Table 11 Comparison of parameter: Average temperature; state: Maharashtra; method: SES
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Akola
0.1
1.7002
14.5778
3.8416
0.2
1.5528
14.8728
3.8565
0.3
1.3481
14.2997
3.7815
0.4
1.1497
13.3129
3.6487
0.5
0.9857
12.1862
3.4909
0.6
0.8548
11.0872
3.3298
0.7
0.7425
10.0907
3.1766
0.8
0.6344
9.2250
3.0373
0.9
0.5214
8.5031
2.9160
Nagpur
0.1
1.6022
18.2086
4.2672
0.2
1.5090
18.4106
4.2608
0.3
1.3153
17.6743
4.2041
0.4
1.1058
16.3479
4.0433
0.5
0.9228
14.8102
3.8484
0.6
0.7735
13.2976
3.6466
0.7
0.6474
11.9146
3.4518
0.8
0.5319
10.6965
3.2706
0.9
0.4187
9.6514
3.1067
(continued)
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
143

Table 11 (continued)
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Wardha
0.1
1.5933
16.5491
4.0681
0.2
1.4723
16.7112
4.0879
0.3
1.2724
16.0511
4.0064
0.4
1.0696
14.8837
3.8579
0.5
0.8986
13.5378
3.6794
0.6
0.7615
12.2160
3.4951
0.7
0.6489
11.0079
3.3178
0.8
0.5380
9.9448
3.1535
0.9
0.4296
9.0360
3.0060
Table 12 Comparison of parameter: Average temperature; state: Maharashtra; method: Neural
network
Place
Architecture
Transfer function
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Layer1
Layer2
Akola
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0661
0.0874
0.2957
1-4-1
0.0662
0.0867
0.2945
1-5-1
0.0667
0.0875
0.2959
1-10-1
0.0695
0.0881
0.2969
1-2-1
Logsig
1.7002
6.0358
2.4568
1-4-1
1.7000
6.0378
2.4572
1-5-1
1.6988
6.0590
2.4612
1-10-1
1.6991
6.0515
2.4600
Nagpur
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0885
0.1398
0.3740
1-4-1
0.0921
0.1407
0.3751
1-5-1
0.0922
0.1426
0.3776
1-10-1
0.0939
0.1412
0.3758
1-2-1
Logsig
1.6698
7.4996
2.7385
1-4-1
1.6698
7.4994
2.7385
1-5-1
1.6690
7.5027
2.7391
1-10-1
1.6685
7.5074
2.7400
Wardha
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0831
0.1212
0.3482
1-4-1
0.0721
0.1188
0.3446
1-5-1
0.0742
0.1190
0.3449
1-10-1
0.0751
0.1194
0.3456
1-2-1
Logsig
1.6541
6.8161
2.6108
1-4-1
1.6548
6.7993
2.6075
1-5-1
1.6545
6.8052
2.6087
1-10-1
1.6551
6.7959
2.6069
144
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 13 Comparison of parameter: Vapour pressure; state: Maharashtra; method: Moving
average
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Akola
3
0.0121
41.4460
6.4379
5
0.0131
60.1880
7.7561
7
0.0103
66.9655
8.1832
9
0.0089
61.3387
7.8319
11
0.0092
46.7823
6.8398
13
0.0107
35.0075
5.9167
Nagpur
3
0.0072
69.0969
8.3125
5
0.0102
82.5055
9.0833
7
0.0064
85.7072
9.2578
9
0.0048
81.6048
9.0335
11
0.0044
66.2720
8.1408
13
0.0049
51.2735
7.1605
Wardha
3
0.0092
55.0834
7.4218
5
0.0117
70.0675
8.3706
7
0.0080
74.4615
8.6291
9
0.0064
70.0034
8.3668
11
0.0062
55.5598
7.4538
13
0.0071
42.4677
6.5167
Table 14 Comparison of parameter: Vapour pressure; state: Maharashtra; method: SES
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Akola
0.1
3.9425
33.5423
6.2082
0.2
4.3173
33.7171
6.2223
0.3
4.2557
36.5075
6.0421
0.4
3.8348
32.3978
5.7357
0.5
3.2179
23.9712
5.3325
0.6
2.5573
25.3944
5.0393
0.7
1.9523
22.4197
4.7349
0.8
1.4539
20.0743
4.4840
0.9
1.0814
13.3079
4.2788
Nagpur
0.1
2.3506
53.7187
7.6628
0.2
2.6392
60.6606
7.7385
0.3
2.9714
60.1097
7.7530
0.4
2.7693
57.9919
7.6152
0.5
2.3429
55.4694
7.4478
0.6
1.8211
53.3076
7.3012
0.7
1.3036
51.8508
7.2007
0.8
0.8505
51.2235
7.1574
0.9
0.4837
51.5212
7.1778
(continued)
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
145

Table 14 (continued)
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Wardha
0.1
1.6022
13.2086
4.2672
0.2
1.5090
13.4106
4.2608
0.3
1.3193
17.6743
4.2041
0.4
1.1058
16.3479
4.0433
0.5
0.9228
14.3102
3.8484
0.6
0.7735
13.2976
3.6466
0.7
0.6474
11.9146
3.4518
0.8
0.5319
10.6965
3.2706
0.9
0.4137
9.6514
3.1067
Table 15 Comparison of parameter: Vapour pressure; state: Maharashtra; method: Neural
network
Place
Architecture
Transfer function
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Layer1
Layer2
Akola
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.0507
0.1639
0.4048
1-4-1
0.0466
0.1629
0.4036
1-5-1
0.0561
0.1653
0.4066
1-10-1
0.0664
0.1683
0.4102
1-2-1
Logsig
4.8072
28.0023
5.2917
1-4-1
4.8071
28.0007
5.2916
1-5-1
4.8066
27.9927
5.2908
1-10-1
4.8068
27.9952
5.2910
Nagpur
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.2353
0.2430
0.4929
1-4-1
0.2333
0.2441
0.4941
1-5-1
0.2419
0.2443
0.4941
1-10-1
0.2338
0.2454
0.4954
1-2-1
Logsig
3.4611
44.3359
6.6585
1-4-1
3.4601
44.3333
6.6583
1-5-1
3.4614
44.3378
6.6587
1-10-1
3.4615
44.3372
6.6586
Wardha
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.1776
0.2279
0.4774
1-4-1
0.1767
0.2269
0.4763
1-5-1
0.1691
0.2279
0.4774
1-10-1
0.1763
0.2272
0.4766
1-2-1
Logsig
4.2893
44.2543
6.6524
1-4-1
4.2891
44.2524
6.6522
1-5-1
4.2897
44.2564
6.6525
1-10-1
4.2895
44.2537
6.6523
146
R. Patel and G. Saha

Table 16 Comparison of parameter: Reference crop evapotranspiration; state: Maharashtra;
method: Moving average
Place
MA interval
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Akola
3
0.0357
1.8560
1.3624
5
0.0307
2.3691
1.5392
7
0.0510
2.4972
1.5803
9
0.0647
2.3881
1.5453
11
0.0738
1.8559
1.3623
13
0.0860
1.3861
1.1773
Nagpur
3
0.0290
2.1246
1.4576
5
0.0249
2.7088
1.6458
7
0.0448
2.8544
1.6895
9
0.0570
2.7290
1.6520
11
0.0639
2.1219
1.4567
13
0.0860
1.3861
1.1773
Wardha
3
0.0135
2.0082
1.4171
5
0.0271
2.5765
1.6052
7
0.0472
2.7229
1.6501
9
0.0602
2.5985
1.6126
11
0.0682
2.0175
1.4204
13
0.0791
1.5065
1.2274
Table 17 Comparisonof parameter: Reference crop evapotranspiration; state: Maharashtra;
method: SES
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Akola
0.1
3.2765
1.6713
1.2928
0.2
2.8989
1.6833
1.2974
0.3
2.4425
1.6058
1.2672
0.4
2.0348
1.4735
1.2139
0.5
1.7276
1.3229
1.1502
0.6
1.5082
1.1758
1.0844
0.7
1.3339
1.0412
1.0204
0.8
1.1854
0.9214
0.09591
0.9
1.0279
0.8162
0.9033
Nagpur
0.1
3.1930
1.9275
1.3883
0.2
2.8242
1.9486
1.3959
0.3
2.3481
1.8626
1.3648
0.4
1.9157
1.7113
1.3081
0.5
1.5900
1.5373
1.2399
0.6
1.3604
1.3669
1.1691
0.7
1.1876
1.2104
1.1002
0.8
1.0358
1.0707
1.0348
0.9
0.8840
0.9477
0.9735
(continued)
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
147

Table 17 (continued)
Place
Alpha
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Wardha
0.1
3.2792
1.8476
1.3593
0.2
2.8931
1.8628
1.3648
0.3
2.4109
1.7765
1.3328
0.4
1.9774
1.6287
1.2762
0.5
1.6516
1.4606
1.2085
0.6
1.4214
1.2965
1.1386
0.7
1.24.72
1.1465
1.0707
0.8
1.0932
1.0130
1.0065
0.9
0.9381
0.08957
0.9484
Table 18 Comparison of parameter: Reference crop evapotranspiration; state: Maharashtra;
method: Neural network
Place
Architecture
Transfer function
MAPE
MSE
RMSE
Layer1
Layer2
Akola
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.4011
0.0129
0.1134
1-4-1
0.3757
0.0125
0.1119
1-5-1
0.3355
0.0125
0.1119
1-10-1
0.3365
0.0125
0.1120
1-2-1
Logsig
4.2695
1.0795
1.0390
1-4-1
4.2691
1.0801
1.0393
1-5-1
4.2691
1.0801
1.0393
1-10-1
4.2694
1.0979
1.0391
Nagpur
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.3707
0.0146
0.1208
1-4-1
0.4222
0.0158
0.1256
1-5-1
0.3766
0.0146
0.1207
1-10-1
0.3961
0.0147
0.1212
1-2-1
Logsig
4.5755
1.4155
1.1898
1-4-1
4.5756
1.4154
1.1897
1-5-1
4.5755
1.4155
1.1898
1-10-1
4.5755
1.4156
1.1898
Wardha
1-2-1
Purelin
Tansig
0.4271
0.0141
0.1189
1-4-1
0.4225
0.0141
0.1136
1-5-1
0.4163
0.0141
0.1136
1-10-1
0.4269
0.0141
0.1137
1-2-1
Logsig
4.5773
1.3325
1.1543
1-4-1
4.5775
1.3323
1.1545
1-5-1
4.5775
1.3329
1.1545
1-10-1
4.5776
1.3326
1.1544
148
R. Patel and G. Saha

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
one year(2012)
Rajkot Average Temperature (°C)
comparison of methods
Actual Value
SES
NN
Fig. 5 Comparison of SES
and ANN methods for place:
Rajkot; parameter: average
temperature
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
one year(2012)
Nagpur Average Temperature (°C)
comparison of methods
Actual Value
SES
NN
Fig. 6 Comparison of SES
and ANN methods for place:
Nagpur; parameter: average
temperature
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
149

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
10
15
20
25
30
35
one year(2012)
Surendranagar Vapour Pressure(hPa)
comparison of methods
Actual Value
SES
NN
Fig. 7 Comparison of SES
and ANN methods for place:
Surendranagar; parameter:
vapour pressure
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
one year(2012)
Akola Vapour Pressure(hPa)
comparison of methods
Actual Value
NN
SES
Fig. 8 Comparison of SES
and ANN methods for place:
Akola parameter: vapour
pressure
150
R. Patel and G. Saha

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
one year(2012)
Amreli Reference Crop Evapotranspiration(mm/day)
comparison of methods
Actual Value
SES
NN
Fig. 9 Comparison of SES and ANN methods for place: Amreli; parameter: reference crop
evapotranspiration
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
8
one year(2012)
Wardha Reference Crop Evapotranspiration
  (mm/day)
comparison of methods
Actual Value
SES
NN
Fig. 10 Comparison of SES and ANN methods for place: Wardha; parameter: Reference crop
evapotranspiration
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
151

6
Conclusion
Prediction of a good crop can be assured if the relevant parameters are rightly
predicted well before in time. The monthly predictions for the year 2002 are made
based on the past data of the last century for all the ﬁve major cotton-producing
districts of Gujarat and three districts of Maharashtra. These values are then
compared to in situ data as recorded. As the variations are found to be minimum, a
good crop is expected, which is reﬂected in the Article by cotton statistics and
news. Moreover, out of all the methods discussed and implemented, it is observed
that minimum error is reﬂected in the readings when neural networks are used as
prediction model. It is further observed these parameters alone are not totally
sufﬁcient to predict the upcoming crop. Other important factors such as rainfall, soil
quality, availability of irrigation facilities play an equally signiﬁcant role.
With the advent of new mechanisms and technology, many varieties are
observed to achieve many evolving characteristics like earliness and adaptability,
which are very helpful for growth. Earliness varieties provide for multiple
cross-breeding and are known to have excellent pest tolerance with reduced
maturity period. Adaptability refers to the characteristic of the crop variety to adapt
to changing environmental conditions, specially exhibited by hybrid varieties.
No matter how adaptive the variants become, but forecasting still helps in having
an estimate over upcoming weather variations.
Table 19 Year-wise area, annual production and annual productivity of cotton in Gujarat [1]
Year
Area (million
hectares)
Production (million
bales)
Productivity per annum
1999–2000
1.516
3.5
392
2000–2001
1.578
2.7
291
2001–2002
1.687
3.3
342
Table 20 Year-wise area, annual production and annual productivity of cotton in Maharashtra [3]
Year
Area (lakh hectares)
Production (lakh bales)
Productivity per annum
1999–2000
32.54
31.26
163
2000–2001
27.93
14.57
89
2001–2002
30.00
27.98
158
152
R. Patel and G. Saha

References
1. Amar Singh, (2015, Nov 24), “History of cotton in Gujarat”, Available: http://www.caionline.
in.
2. M. Sabesh, M. Ramesh, A.H. Prakash, G. Bhaskaran, “Is There any Shift in Cropping Pattern
in Maharashtra after the Introduction of Bt. Cotton?” Cotton Research Journal, Vol. 6, 2014,
pp. 63–70.
3. Performance of Bt. Cotton Cultivation in Maharashtra “Report of State Department of
Agriculture” Available: www.envfor.nic.in/divisions/csurv/geac/srmh.pdf.
4. P. Singh, M.S Kairon (2000), “Cotton Varieties and Hybrids”, CICR, Bulletin No. 13,
Available: http://www.cicr.org.in.
5. Adhikari, Ratnadip, and R.K. Agrawal. “An introductory study on time series modeling and
forecasting.” arXiv: 1302.6613 (2013).
6. Mahalakshmi, G.S. Sridevi, and S. Rajaram. “A survey on forecasting of time series data.”
In Computing Technologies and Intelligent Data Engineering (ICCTIDE), International
Conference on, pp. 1–8. IEEE, 2016.
7. N.E. Hwa (2007) “Different uses of moving average (MA),” Available: https://www.
chartnexus.com/learning/static/pulses_apr2007.pdf.
8. D. Sodha, G. Saha, “Crop management of Agricultural products using Time Series Analysis”
IEEE Recent Trends in Electronics Information Communication Technology, pp. 1–4, 2016.
9. Khoshravesh, Mojtaba, Mohammad Ali Gholami Seﬁdkouhi, and Mohammad Valipour.
“Estimation of reference evapotranspiration using multivariate fractional polynomial,
Bayesian regression, and robust regression models in three arid environments.” Applied
Water Science (2015): 1–12.
10. Nema, Manish K., Deepak Khare, and Surendra K. Chandniha. “Application of artiﬁcial
intelligence to estimate the reference evapotranspiration in sub-humid Doon valley.” Applied
Water Science (2017): 1–8.
11. Hayati, Mohsen, and Zahra Mohebi. “Application of artiﬁcial neural networks for temperature
forecasting.” World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology 28, no. 2 (2007):
275–279.
12. https://www.indiawaterportal.org/metdata last accessed on 3rd March, 2017.
13. https://www.imd.gov.in last accessed on 3rd March, 2017.
Time Series Regression of Weather Parameters Over …
153

Enhancement of Data Streaming
in Clustering for Uncertain Data
Jeny Ganatra and Chintan Thacker
Abstract Data stream mining presents exciting model from the stream of infor-
mation. The objective of clustering data stream is to cluster and determine unknown
pattern from streaming data. Streaming data generated from imprecise hardware
result into uncertainty built into them. In this paper, we propose a novel approach
for data stream clustering which reduces the degree of uncertainty and increases the
degree of homogeneity. Unlike current procedures whose aim is to cluster data
stream, we consider the case where uncertainty of micro-cluster affects the quality
of clustering outcome. The proposed algorithm Fuzzy-HCMStream is based on
HCMStream algorithm which incorporates the concept of Fuzzy C-Mean algorithm,
in account for uncertainty. Our proposed algorithm increases degree of homo-
geneity, which leads to improvement in clustering quality. The implementation of
proposed algorithm is tested with two data sets comprising synthetic and real data
set. The Fuzzy-HCMStream algorithm shows improvement in performance com-
pared to the other state-of-the-art algorithms in terms of various indices for eval-
uating clustering results.
Keywords Data mining  Data stream clustering  Fuzzy clustering
Uncertain data
1
Introduction
Data mining is the methodology for determining stimulating knowledge or pattern
from incredible extent of contribution [1]. The current method in knowledge is
capable to increase sole calculation of statistics, which is mandatory to discover
online as they seem. Data stream is constant generation of sequenced data.
J. Ganatra (&)  C. Thacker
Computer Engineering Department, HJD-ITER, Kachchh 370430, Gujarat, India
e-mail: jenyganatra9@gmail.com
C. Thacker
e-mail: chintanthacker450@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_13
155

Instances consist of telephone records, sensor networks, etc. Data stream mining
publishes exciting model from the stream of information [2]. These assessments are
produced frequently with exciting differ charges.
Due to inexact apparatus or hardware, inexact data are produced which effect
into vagueness constructed into them. By considering inexact data, we can increase
the result of clustering algorithm in stream mining. With the usage of inexact data
stream, we can fortify productivity of data mining procedure [3].
The objective of clustering is to cluster the streaming data into evocative classes
and determine unknown pattern from streaming data. There are numerous clustering
procedures for static data bank, but they are not appropriate for streaming data [4–
6]. Data streams clustering process is capable to identify impulsive pattern, hold
clatter, clustering without preceding proﬁciency about number of groups. An
instance of clustering is the pursuing of network data cast-off to study alterations in
trafﬁc ﬂow patterns and to identify potential interruptions. In this instance, fur-
thermore, data must be handled as it is formed.
As streaming data originates in vast quantity, we cannot load entire records in
memory at an interval. The streaming data cannot be reconsidered due to its
growing nature. Fuzzy clustering technique is capable to decrease effort of data via
Fuzzy data estimation [7]. In Fuzzy clustering, data section can have its place to
numerous clusters (i.e., two or more groups) with certain deﬁnite worth of
membership. Figure 1 shows an instance of hard clustering and soft (or Fuzzy)
clustering.
The Fuzzy clustering problem can be resolved by means of the Fuzzy C-Means
procedure. If Fuzzy examination is used, actual ﬂuctuations may be recognized via
alterations of degrees of membership. By obstruction, the dynamic Fuzzy clustering
contributions to save time and can produce additional consistent outcome.
The remainder of this paper is arranged as follows. In the next section, we
overview the clustering algorithms for uncertain data and clustering algorithm
based on Fuzzy set theory for data streams. Sect. 2 provides the proposed work for
algorithm, and Sect. 3 introduces the GUI and proposed algorithm. Finally, we
conclude study.
Fig. 1 Hard clustering & Fuzzy clustering
156
J. Ganatra and C. Thacker

2
Related Work
As per the research scenario, clustering data stream is a signiﬁcant research topic of
stream mining. A lot of researches and projects are developed on data stream
mining as well as on data stream clustering [8]. Many successful algorithms are
proposed for data stream clustering, for example, CluStream [4] and DenStream [5]
which are earliest proposed algorithm. E-Stream and HECES are subsequentially
proposed algorithms in order to provide efﬁcient clustering result.
According to research, a number of procedures have been preferred for uncertain
ﬂow of data [3]. In the uncertain data clustering, UK-means algorithm [9],
M-FDBSCAN algorithm, and UMicro algorithm are proposed.
A Fuzzy method seems to be mainly beneﬁcial for the kind of application, in
which the clustering construction is matter to constant ﬂuctuations. In Fuzzy
clustering, an object may ﬁt into different groups, and it is conveyed with mem-
bership theme [10]. We can see Fuzzy C-Mean as basic clustering method for soft
clustering [11–14], as it expresses clustering being assigned to certain clusters with
certain deﬁnite degree of membership.
HCMStream [6], a data streaming clustering procedure which agrees elimina-
tions of statistics archives at some uninformed interval. It customs hyper-cylindrical
micro-clusters produced by assimilation of outmoded spherical micro-clusters,
agrees the eliminations of statistics at any random interval. The clustering process is
performed in connected manner by incrementally informing adjacency matrix each
and every time there is an alteration in the arrangement of the micro-clusters; ofﬂine
phase is not compulsory. The procedure needs two input variables from end user,
namely np and r. Parameter np is the threshold for determining outliers. r is the
static radius of spherical and cylindrical micro-clusters. The radius of entirely
micro-clusters is conventional at persistent for the entire procedure. This method
uses destructor which leads to information loss, and also, uncertainty in
micro-clustering is not considered.
The UMicro algorithm [15], considered the deviation of each dimension. This
algorithm adds an error representation for each dimension to reﬂect data uncertainty
when dealing with a dimensional uncertain data tuple. This algorithm adopted the
two-layer frame of Clustream algorithm. The number of micro-clusters requires to
be stated in the algorithm. For each coming data tuple, the similarity between the
existing data tuple and new coming micro-cluster needs to be re-calculated. The
similarity is the expectation distance between the uncertain data tuple and clustered
one. Besides, a pyramidal time frame is proposed in UMicro algorithm to well
analyze data stream. However, the outlier of data stream is not considered in this
algorithm. There is no good method to deal with outlier whatsoever.
Gloria et al. [16] propose a supplement of DBSCAN algorithm to initiate clusters
with Fuzzy density quality. In this method, only density threshold is enrolled and its
intention is to identify Fuzzy clusters with estimation of density attribute. This
algorithm allows user to specify input parameters for execution, and it suggest a soft
constraint to deﬁne number of points, approximately.
Enhancement of Data Streaming in Clustering for Uncertain Data
157

D-Stream [17] is a foundation for streaming data clustering through a
density-based approach. It examines clustering multi-dimensional data in the for-
mation of a stream. This method utilizes online element which plans all input data
into mesh and an ofﬂine element which calculates the mesh based on weight. It
acquires density decaying technique to ensure modiﬁcation of data stream. It
automatically alters clusters without demanding particular. This algorithm is able to
cluster high-speed data stream without decaying the nature of clustering. This
algorithm is able to identify arbitrary shape clusters with efﬁciency and accuracy.
3
Proposed Algorithm
Fuzzy-HCMStream clustering algorithm is based on HCMStream clustering algo-
rithm. In our proposed algorithm, Fuzzy clustering technique is used with
hyper-cylindrical micro-clustering technique. There are two different kinds of
micro-clusters (MC) in HCMStream, i.e., spherical micro-cluster (SM) and cylin-
drical micro-cluster (CM). A SM is cast off as an essential component to charac-
terize a native cluster. A fresh MC is mainly created as a SM. Then, numerous
overlying SMs will procedure a CM. A set of overlying MCs formulates a cluster as
shown in Fig. 2.
Thus, incorporating the concept of Fuzzy C-Mean algorithm with HCMStream
clustering algorithm results in less degree of uncertainty in micro-cluster, which
leads to improvement in clustering quality. Here, SM represents spherical
micro-cluster and x represents incoming data element in algorithm described below.
Algorithm 1 Fuzzy-HCMStream
1. Algorithm attempts to combine an incoming element (x) with present CM
2. if x can’t be allotted to any CM, it is tested with SM
3. end if
4. if x is not into any present MC, a fresh micro-cluster (SMnew) is created to cover x
5. end if
6. When SMk is revised through addition of a fresh data element
a. if the population in the MC is intense, we attempt to combine it with present
CM
b. end if
Fig. 2 An example of cluster formation by connecting micro-cluster
158
J. Ganatra and C. Thacker

7. if SMk can’t be merged with other CM
a. if it overlays further SM
(1) The overlying SM are combined jointly & changed by a new CM
(2) return
b. end if
8. end if
9. return cluster clst
3.1
Input Parameters
The algorithm entails two input restrictions from user, namely np and r. Restriction
np is the threshold designed for deﬁning outliers. On supplementary indicator, MCs
whose statistics points are less than np are not consumed in clustering. r is the static
radius of SM and CM. The radius of all MCs is established at persistent for the
entire procedure.
The parameters np and r play a signiﬁcant part in deﬁning the clustering per-
formance. When np is huge, added micro-clusters with comparatively less statistics
would be accepted as of the clustering. This can assistance extrication of two
clusters by rejecting outliers among two clusters.
The radius of micro-clusters r regulates the determination of clustering. Higher
clustering determination, resultant as of smaller r, regularly indications to more
separate clusters being originate. If r is huge, micro-clusters would develop less
dense since they would shelter more zone deprived of statistics opinions. However,
if r is too minor, MCs in the similar cluster developed excessively minor to
completely attach through all further, which prominent to the solitary cluster vio-
lation addicted to trashes.
In adjusting the limits, we usually separate some data points intended for con-
veying the worth of np and r. First, np is set at little worth such as 5, then
preliminary beginning with small r and progressively increasing r, and we can
discover the choice of r that revenues the steady number of ultimate clusters. Small
r can be selected from this variety to realize high clustering resolve.
3.2
Performance Indices
The data stream clustering outcomes were associated through the class labels
providing in the data sets. We have chosen performance indices, namely Adjusted
Rand index (AR), Rand index (RI), Hubert’s index (HI). These indices reﬂect the
Enhancement of Data Streaming in Clustering for Uncertain Data
159

homogeneity of clusters. The principles of these indices commonly span from 0 to
1, except HI. HI can be negative assessment.
Rand index interpretations clustering as a sequence of choices in selecting sets of
statistics in the set. Rand index can be deliberate by
RI ¼ No: of Agreement
ð
Þ= Total No: of Pairs
ð
Þ
ð1Þ
Hubert’s index is deﬁnite by the alteration of the prospect of contract and the
prospect of divergence. It is computed as
HI ¼ No: of Agreement  No: of Disagreement
ð
Þ= Total No: of Pairs
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
Adjusted Rand Index (AR) is calculated as
AR ¼ No: of Agreement  Expected Index
ð
Þ= Total No: of Pairs  Expected Index
ð
Þ
ð3Þ
However, the other indices, namely RI and HI capture the comparison founded
on including the contract among altogether sets of data substances. RI sincerely
tallies the number of assenting sets while Hubert’s index comprises the punishment
of conﬂicting pairs in the cunning by withdrawing conﬂicting sets FP + FN from
the supportive sets TP + TN. As an outcome, HI is always fewer than RI; since RI
regularly has worth between 0.5 and 1 [6].
4
Experimental Results
Algorithm is implemented in MATLAB. Two data sets: synthetic and real are used.
The data set consists of two-dimensional data with changing density, and 7% data
are equally and arbitrarily created as noise to the original data set. Forest cover type
data set is obtained from UCI machine learning repository. It contains 54 carto-
graphic variables including 44 qualitative binary variables and 10 quantitative
variables [18]. We used familiar similarity measures which are frequently used in
evaluating clustering outcome, namely Rand Index (RI), Hubert’s Index (HI), and
Adjusted Rand Index (AR).
Table 1 shows the result of Fuzzy-HCMStream algorithm with different values
of r and np. Table 2 shows comparison of outcome of Fuzzy-HCMStream clus-
tering
algorithm
with
HCMStream
clustering
algorithm.
It
shows
that
Fuzzy-HCMStream outperforms the HCMStream clustering algorithm in terms of
performance indices which are considered on the basis of homogeneity of
micro-cluster. Figure 3 shows comparison of Fuzzy-HCMStream with HCMStream
clustering algorithm.
160
J. Ganatra and C. Thacker

5
Conclusion and Future Work
HCMStream algorithm does not give efﬁcient clustering result when we gradually
increase value of r and np. On the other hand, incorporating the concept of Fuzzy
clustering in HCMStream clustering gives improved clustering quality when we
increase value of r and np. It gives better clustering outcome in terms of homo-
geneity (i.e., increase degree of homogeneity), which is measured by performance
Table 1 Fuzzy-HCMStream clustering result for forest cover data set
PI
r = 0.15; np = 5
r = 0.25; np = 10
r = 0.35; np = 20
r = 0.50; np = 30
AR
0.1095
0.1412
0.1728
0.1026
HI
0.3149
0.2965
0.3097
0.2994
RI
0.6575
0.6482
0.6548
0.6497
Table 2 Comparison of Fuzzy-HCMStream with HCMStream for forest cover data set
Fuzzy-HCMStream algorithm
HCMStream algorithm
PI
r = 0.25; np = 30
r = 0.25; np = 30
AR
0.1920
0.0885
HI
0.2202
0.1274
RI
0.6101
0.5127
Fig. 3 Comparison of outcome: performance indices for real data set with r = 0.25; np = 30
Enhancement of Data Streaming in Clustering for Uncertain Data
161

indices, which gives better clustering outcome. In Future work, multi-media
streaming data can be used with Fuzzy-HCMStream clustering algorithm.
References
1. Han and Kamber, Book Review: “Data mining – Concepts and Techniques”.
2. Mohamed Medhat Gaber, Arkady Zaslavsky and Shonali Krishnaswamy, “Mining Data
Streams: A Review”, SIGMOD Record, Volume 34, No. 2, June 2005. doi:10.1145/1083784.
1083789.
3. Charu C. Aggarwal, “A Survey of Uncertain Data Clustering Algorithms”.
4. S. Guha, A. Meyerson, N. Mishra, R. Motwani, L. O’Callaghan, Clustering data streams:
theory and practice, IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 15 (2003) 515–528. doi:10.1109/TKDE.
2003.1198387.
5. F. Cao, M. Ester, W. Qian, A. Zhou, Density-based clustering over an evolving data stream
with noise, in: Proceedings of SIAM International Conference on Data Mining, 2004,
pp. 328–339.
6. Sirisup Laohakiat, Suphakant Phimoltares, Chidchanok Lursinsap, “Hyper-cylindrical
micro-clustering for streaming data with unscheduled data removals”, 10.1016/j.knosys.
2016.02.004, Elsevier, 2016.
7. Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic Theory and Applications by George J. Klir and Boyuan.
8. Jonathan A Silva, Elaine R Faria, Rodrigo C Barros, et al., “Data stream clustering, A
survey,” ACM Computing Surveys, 2013, 46(1). doi:https://doi.org/10.1145/2522968.
2522981.
9. Ngai Wang Kay, Ben Kao, Chun Kit Chui et al., “Efﬁcient clustering of uncertain data,”
in Proc. of 6th International Conference on Data Mining, Hong Kong, China, 2006,
pp. 436–445.
10. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.381.2407&rep=rep1&type=pdf.
11. P. Hore, L. O. Hall, and D. B. Goldgof, “A Fuzzy C Means Variant For Clustering Evolving
Data Streams,” IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Montreal,
pages 360–365, Oct. 2007.
12. P. Hore, L. O. Hall, D. B. Goldgof, W. Cheng, “Online Fuzzy C Means”, 978-1-4244-2352-1/
08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE, 2008.
13. Baoju Zhang, Shan Qin, Wei Wang, Dan Wang, Lei Xue, “Data stream clustering based on
Fuzzy C-Mean algorithm and entropy theory”, 10.1016/j.sigpro.2015.10.014, 2015.
14. Abir Smiti, Zied Eloudi, “Soft DBSCAN: Improving DBSCAN Clustering method using
fuzzy set theory”, IEEE 2013. https://doi.org/10.1109/HSI.2013.6577851.
15. Yue Yang, Zhuo Liu, Zhidan Xing, “A Review of Uncertain Data Stream Clustering
Algorithms”, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICICSE.2015.30.
16. Gloria Bordogna, Dino Ienco, Irstea, Montpellier, “Fuzzy Core DBScan Clustering
Algorithm”, Springer, 2014.
17. Yixin Chen, Li Tu, “Density-Based Clustering for Real-Time Stream Data”, 13th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
2007. https://doi.org/10.1145/1281192.1281210.
18. UCI Machine Learning Repository. http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/, 1999.
162
J. Ganatra and C. Thacker

Performance Analysis of Word Spotting
Techniques Using HOG and Shape
Descriptor on Gujarati Script
Himanshu M. Kathiriya
and Mukesh M. Goswami
Abstract The current paper represents the performance analysis of word spotting
techniques in Gujarati script using two of the well-known feature extraction tech-
niques, namely HOG and shape descriptors (SD). The experiments were performed
using dynamic time warping (DTW) on a small-sized word image database col-
lected from machine printed book images and the initial results are encouraging.
Keywords Word spotting  Gujarati script  Document image retrieval
1
Introduction
Information retrieval (IR) is a task to retrieve relevant information from the doc-
uments. It is easier to retrieve information from a digital text document whereas in
document images it is an area of research. Mainly two approaches are used for IR in
document
images,
namely
recognition
based
and
recognition
free.
The
recognition-based approach converts the document image into a machine editable
text document using OCR and uses standard text processing techniques for IR.
However, OCR restricts transformation of poor quality document images. Also, the
word-level accuracy of OCR systems for Indian scripts has remained low because
of the issues of characters and glyphs segmentation [1]. Therefore, many
researchers are motivated to explore recognition free approach.
Over the years, various techniques have been evolved to query the document
images using the physical layout, logical and structural information, and other
extracted contents [2]. Word (keyword) spotting from the document image is one of
the frequently used techniques for IR task in which the query word image is directly
matched with document word images without explicitly recognizing the characters.
H. M. Kathiriya (&)  M. M. Goswami
Dharmsinh Desai University, Nadiad, India
e-mail: hm.kathiriya@gmail.com
M. M. Goswami
e-mail: mukesh.goswami@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_14
163

Gujarati is a prominent Indian script having rich cultural heritage and the lit-
erature. There are around 39,000 machine printed Gujarati books already available
online by DLI [3]. However, the OCR technology for Gujarati script is still in
progress. While it will take some time for the Gujarati OCR to reach maturity, word
spotting-based document image retrieval can be a viable intermediate solution to
search and retrieve documents from large repositories like DLI. The current paper
presents word-spotting experiments on a small-sized Gujarati word image database
using well-known histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) and shape descriptor
(SD) features. The remaining of the paper is organized as follows, Sect. 2 gives
brief literature review followed by the discussion on feature extraction and
matching in Sect. 3. The experimental setup and results are discussed in Sect. 4
followed by conclusion in Sect. 5.
2
Related Work
Numerous amount of work has been reported for major Indian scripts like
Devanagari, Bengali, and Telugu. The approaches suggested for word spotting in
Devanagari and Sanskrit script include features like moment function [4], hybrid
features [5–7], and SD [8]. The highest accuracy reported for Devanagari script was
using hybrid features. The technique also performs well for Telugu script in
comparison with SIFT [9]. SIFT and SD were also used for the other Indian scripts
like Bangla and Malayalam and reported an acceptable results. To the best of our
knowledge, there is very less amount of work reported so far for the other Indian
scripts like Gurumukhi, Gujarati, Kannada, Dogri.
3
Feature Extraction and Matching
The word images are divided into ﬁxed sized blocks to extract features. As the
height of the word image in the database is ﬁxed (50 pixels), the number of the
blocks in the word image will very depend on the width of the block (ranging from
30 to 50 pixels). Figure 1 shows the division of word image into blocks. It can be
seen that a block may not represent a single character. The block-wise represen-
tation of word images facilitates incremental matching in which the entire word
image may not be same but partially matching.
Fig. 1 Dividing word image
into ﬁxed size of blocks
164
H. M. Kathiriya and M. M. Goswami

In the next step, the HOG and SD features are extracted from each block.
The HOG technique divides the block image into ﬁxed number of small connected
regions known as cells and counts the occurrences of gradient orientation in
localized portions of interest (ROI). A histogram of nine different gradients is
calculated for each cell in an image, and ﬁnally, all histograms are concatenated to
generate a ﬁnal feature vector [10, 11]. On the other hand, SD is categorized as
contour-based SD which uses only the boundary information of shape extracted by
conventional edge or contour detection approach. A logical grid of constant size is
applied on boundary image and the boundary points which are intersecting with the
logical grid are selected as descriptor points. The feature vector is generated by
ﬁnding the relative arrangement of the descriptor points in the grid using the
summation of log-polar histogram computed at each descriptor point [8].
After computing feature descriptor for each block on a word image, we compute
a similarity score between two word images using feature matching technique. The
current experiment focuses on incremental matching instead of exact matching.
Thus DTW-based algorithm is used to match block-wise features of two word
images. Distance between ith and jth block feature vector, d(i, j) is computed using
Euclidian distance feature vector of each block of a word image is compared with
every block of other word image, and distance matrix for two word images is
calculated as described in [5] using Eq. (1). Figure 2 shows the distance matrix
calculated for two word images. The distance between two word images is nor-
malized in between 0 and 1.
D i; j
ð
Þ ¼ min
D i  1; j  1
ð
Þ
D i; j  1
ð
Þ
D i  1; j
ð
Þ
þ
8
<
:
d i; j
ð
Þ
ð1Þ
where d(i, j) is Euclidian distance of ith and jth block feature vector.
Fig. 2 Distance matrix to
compute sequential matching
score using DTW
Performance Analysis of Word Spotting Techniques …
165

4
Experiments and Results
The experiments are performed on a small-sized printed Gujarati word image
database collected from machine printed Gujarati document images available on
DLI. The database consists of 280 word images of size 3–7 characters manually
grouped based on shape similarity. In order to show the discriminating strength of
the features, the shape similarity matrix is computed that shows the distance
between every pair of word images in the database. Figure 3a, b shows the opti-
mum shape similarity matrix for HOG and SD features, respectively. It was
observed that for both HOG and SD features increasing the size of the block within
group similarity is improved but across group similarity has remained unchanged.
However, for SD features increasing the number of bins in log-polar histogram by
varying radial and angular bins, the result was improved for both within and across
group similarities (Fig. 3b).
To perform the word retrieval experiments, a random query image is selected
from the database and matched against all other images. The word images having
similarity score more than some threshold are retrieved and ranked according to the
similarity score. The precision (PR) and recall (RC) values were computed based on
the relevant and retrieved images to measure the performance. Figure 4a, b shows
the PR and RC versus query radius (threshold) graph for HOG and SD, respec-
tively. The highest PR of 68% was recorded at 50% RC for SD features, whereas
for HOG it is 57% only. Figure 5 shows the visual results for the word image
retrieval experiments using SD. It is evident that the proposed approach also
retrieves the morphological variants of the query image as well as handles structural
noise like cuts and blobs.
Fig. 3 a Similarity matrix image for HOG descriptor for block size (50, 50). b Similarity matrix
image for shape descriptor with log-polar histogram of 35R and 36T
166
H. M. Kathiriya and M. M. Goswami

5
Conclusion
Based on the analysis of the literature for word spotting techniques in Indian script,
two feature extraction techniques, namely HOG and SD, were selected and
word-matching experiments were performed on printed Gujarati script. It is evident
from the results that the SD features gives better results than HOG. However, the
method requires further improvement to match the state of the art. The work can be
extended in future by considering a larger database with a combination of multiple
features to improve the performance.
References
1. S. Kompalli, et al. “Challenges in OCR of Devanagari documents.”, Proceedings of the
Eighth International Conference on Document Analysis and Recognition, (2005):1–5.
2. B. Varghese and S. Govilkar, “A Survey on Various Word Spotting Techniques for Content
Based Document Image Retrieval” International Journal of Computer Science and
Information Technologies, Vol. 6.3 (2015):2682–2686.
3. “DLI Home.” [Online]. Available: http://www.dli.ernet.in/, [Accessed: 15-Oct-2016].
Fig. 4 a Precision & recall versus various thresholds for HOG descriptor. b Precision & recall
versus various thresholds for HOG descriptor
Fig. 5 Visual results for the word image retrieval experiments using SD
Performance Analysis of Word Spotting Techniques …
167

4. A. Bhardwaj, D. Jose, and V. Govindaraju, “Script Independent Word Spotting in
Multilingual Documents”, International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
(2008):48–54.
5. M. Meshesha and C. V. Jawahar, “Matching word images for content-based retrieval from
printed document images”, International Journal of Document Analysis and Recognition, Vol.
11.1 (2008):29–38.
6. S. N. Srihari, H. Srinivasan, C. Huang, and S. Shetty, “Spotting words in Latin, Devanagari
and Arabic scripts”, Vivek: Indian Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Vol. 16.3 (2006):2–9.
7. A. Kumar, C. V Jawahar, and R. Manmatha, “Efﬁcient Search in Document Image
Collections” Asian Conference on Computer Vision, (2007):586–595.
8. E. Hassan, S. Chaudhury, and M. Gopal, “Word shape descriptor-based document image
indexing : a new DBH-based approach”, International Journal on Document Analysis and
Recognition, Vol. 16.3 (2013):227–246.
9. R. Shekhar and C. V Jawahar, “Word Image Retrieval using Bag of Visual Words”, 10th
International Workshop on Document Analysis Systems, (2012):297–301.
10. A. Kovalchuk, L. Wolf, and N. Dershowitz, “A Simple and Fast Word Spotting Method”,
14th International Conference on Frontiers in Handwriting Recognition, (2014):3–8.
11. A. J. Newell and L. D. Grifﬁn, “Multiscale histogram of oriented gradient descriptors for
robust character recognition”, International
Conference
on Document Analysis and
Recognition, (2011):1085–1089.
168
H. M. Kathiriya and M. M. Goswami

Investigation of Surface Degradation
in Polymer Dielectrics with Micro-ﬁllers
Nitin V. Nair and R. R. Patel
Abstract Dielectrics used in high voltage applications are prone to partial dis-
charge. Recent studies have indicated that addition of ﬁllers in epoxy polymers lead
to considerable improvement in dielectric properties. This paper illustrates an
experimental study on how incorporation of micro-ﬁllers lead to improvement of
surface properties on application of voltage stress via surface degradation experi-
ment. For the experimental study, Al2O3 micro-ﬁllers were dispersed in
Bisphenol-A type epoxy resin. Surface discharge was performed on both neat
epoxy and micro-ﬁlled specimen with 4% w/w loading for comparison. Both effect
of time and voltage level was noted. High resolution microscopic photographs were
used to compare eroded area in both specimen. Simulation of electrical ﬁeld
intensity was performed on ANSYS Maxwell to illustrate the ﬁeld distribution
around the periphery of electrode.
Keywords Surface discharge  Al2O3  Micro-composites  Epoxy
Degradation  Ansoft maxwell  Microscopic analysis
1
Introduction
Epoxy resins are the most popular thermoset polymers for high voltage applications
including outdoor and indoor line insulators, transformer bushings and PCB coat-
ings. Being around the scene for almost 5 decades, it has withstood the test of time
due to its robustness, low cost and superior dielectric properties compared to other
polymers [1, 2].
Surface degradation is an anomaly that occurs when the dielectric strength of the
material is strong enough to withstand the voltage stress without causing break-
down and the effect is observed on the surface of the dielectric in form of tracks and
N. V. Nair  R. R. Patel (&)
Department of Electrical Engineering, G H Patel College of Engineering
and Technology, Anand, India
e-mail: riteshpatel@gcet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_15
169

turbid areas. Surface discharge causes degradation and volume erosion, for poly-
mers with weak surface resistivity.
Researches show that addition of ﬁllers enhance dielectric properties and surface
characteristics. Epoxy micro-ﬁllers, as they are known after curation, exhibit better
properties than its neat counterpart in reduction of surface degradation in a long run
which may prevent eventual treeing and erosion when exposed to chemicals [3].
Various authors [5–8] have proved that using ﬁllers (micro or nano) lead to less
material erosion compared to neat epoxy when exposed to surface discharges. This
was investigated by Maity et al. [4] using Laser Surface Proﬁlometry (LSP). Rafaey
et al. [9] observed greater degradation area when voltage magnitude was increased.
This
paper
intends
to
investigate
the
surface
properties
of
neat
and
micro-composite epoxy matrices. Two specimen were prepared for the experi-
mentation which consisted of neat epoxy and composite with 4% w/w ﬁller loading.
Addition of ﬁllers reinforces the dielectric and stronger inter-atomic bonds that
prevent volume erosion.
2
Experimental
2.1
Materials
Bisphenol A type Epoxy resin named Araldite CY230 (Density 1.15 gm/cm3 at
25 °C) and Amide Hardener Aradur HY951 (Density 0.98 at 25 °C) was selected
for this study. This resin is widely popular for its low viscosity and insulation
properties manufactured by Huntsman Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. Al2O3 were
selected as micro-ﬁllers.
2.2
Specimen Preparation
For neat epoxy, base resin about a 100 ml was mixed with hardener HY951 in a
10:1 proportion. Micro-composite specimen was prepared by adding 4% w/w
micro-ﬁllers to the base resin in a glass beaker and stirring for 20 min with a glass
rod. The mixture was kept in an ultrasonic bath for 180 min for proper dispersion.
For gelation, specimens were poured into an acrylic mold of the size 200 mm
90 mm  3 mm and kept at room temperature for 24 h. Specimens were also
post-cured for 24 h and kept another 24 h for cooling in a temperature controlled
oven before experimentation.
170
N. V. Nair and R. R. Patel

2.3
Test Setup
The surface degradation experiments were carried out in accordance to IEC-60343.
The set-up consists of The IEC (b) electrode conﬁguration consists of a rod-plane
electrode assembly as shown in Fig. 1. The electrodes are made of stainless steel
and the diameter of the rod electrode is 6 mm, with 1 mm end curvature.
Experimentation was done for the following degradation time and voltage levels.
1. 10 kV for 3 h
2. 15 kV for 3 h
3. 15 kV for 6 h
3
Results and Discussions
The tests were performed on both neat and micro-composite matrix. The areas
affected by voltage stress were observed under high-resolution microscope manu-
factured by Olympus Corporation Ltd. to observe the effect of voltage magnitude
and time shown in Fig. 2 degraded for 3 h under 10 kV and 15 kV and 6 h for
15 kV respectively. The effect of degradation was signiﬁcantly less towards the
outer periphery of the degraded region i.e. areas farther from the edge of the
electrode as tabulated in Table 1.
From the results in Table 1, voltage magnitude and time of voltage application
can be correlated with degradation. The effect of partial discharge is rigourous at
region closer to the electrode edge. In case of neat epoxy, increase in time does not
increase the area of degradation. Rather, there is increase volume erosion within the
periphery of degraded region as obtained by Mostafa et al. [9].
Fig. 1 IEC (b) type electrode
Investigation of Surface Degradation in Polymer Dielectrics …
171

Surprisingly, the visible tracks obtained for the voltage 15 kV for 6 h in
micro-composite was found to be higher as tabulated in Table 2. But, the size of the
craters on further investigation was found to be less in micro-composites at 4% w/w
as compared to the neat epoxy for the same voltage level and time. The craters seen
in the microscopic images indicate volume erosion (Figs. 3, 4 and 5).
4
Possible Mechanism of Degradation
The effect and possible mechanism of surface degradation can be illustrated in
Fig. 6. For neat epoxy, the ﬁeld distribution is uniform. As for micro-composite
matrix, when ﬁeld distribution is uniform, both area and volume of degradation is
less, given that particle distribution is also uniform. Due to the absence of any
Fig. 2 Photographs of degraded area 10 kV for 3 h, 15 kV for 3 h and 15 kV for 6 h for neat
matrix
Table 1 Degraded area for neat epoxy
Time and magnitude of voltage
application
Radius of degraded region from the edge of the
electrode (mm)
10 kV for 3 h
2
15 kV for 3 h
15
15 kV for 6 h
15
Table 2 Degraded area for micro-composite
Time and magnitude of voltage
application
Radius of degraded region from the edge of the
electrode (mm)
10 kV for 3 h
8
15 kV for 3 h
14
15 kV for 6 h
20
172
N. V. Nair and R. R. Patel

reinforcements unlike in micro-composites, neat epoxy degrades signiﬁcantly more
in comparison forming deeper craters indicating higher volume erosion.
The most likely hypothesis in micro-composite is shown in Fig. 7, as the volume
eroded and depth of erosion were not quantiﬁed. First, if the volume of material
eroded is signiﬁcantly less as compared to the neat matrix, the reinforcement and
stronger inter-atomic bonds subjects the leakage current only onto the surface
preventing its penetration into the volume of the material. Second, the visible result
show higher degradation for micro-composite. If the volume erosion more or less
remains the same, then the obtained result is caused either by agglomeration or
higher particle content than required. The possible explanation can be conﬁrmed
after performing the experiments on particle concentration less than 4% w/w.
The simulation of experimentation is done in Ansoft Maxwell. The result
obtained shows the electric ﬁeld distribution indicating greater ﬁeld density along
the area subjected to voltage stress. It reduces gradually farther away from the edge
of the electrode as illustrated in Fig. 8. Electric ﬁeld intensity as expected, changes
with voltage magnitude.
(a)                      
(b)
(c)
300 μm
300 μm
300 μm
Fig. 3 Degraded area in neat epoxy under 40 resolution 15 kV for 6 h: a 5 mm, b 8 mm and
c 12 mm from the electrode edge
(a)
(b)
300 μm
300 μm
Fig. 4 Degraded 10 kV for 3 h: a neat epoxy, b micro-composite
Investigation of Surface Degradation in Polymer Dielectrics …
173

(a)
(b)
(c)
300 μm
300 μm
300 μm
Fig. 5 Degraded area of micro-composite under 40 resolution 15 kV for 6 h: a 5 mm for
electrode edge, b 12 mm from electrode, c 18 mm from electrode edge
Fig. 6 Degradation mechanism for neat epoxy
174
N. V. Nair and R. R. Patel

It is still to be investigated whether properties improve with change in con-
centration. Amount of ﬁller loading also result in change of relative permittivity and
thermal conductivity which may contribute to either worsening or improvement of
the surface and dielectric properties.
Fig. 7 Degradation mechanism and ﬁeld distribution for micro-composites evenly distributed
ﬁllers
Fig. 8 Simulation of ﬁeld distribution during surface degradation in Ansoft Maxwell for 15 kV
Investigation of Surface Degradation in Polymer Dielectrics …
175

5
Conclusions
In an attempt to improve surface properties of epoxy dielectrics, micro-ﬁllers were
reinforced into the polymer by ultrasonic dispersion. 4% w/w ﬁller loading was
selected and the following results were noted.
1. Area and turbidity of degraded area increase with voltage magnitude and time
respectively in both neat and micro-composite matrix respectively.
2. Visible tracks formation in micro-composite with 4% w/w ﬁller loading was
higher. But further investigation showed less volume erosion as compared to
neat epoxy.
3. For 6-h of degradation, observation indicated greater degradation along with
increase in periphery of degraded region.
Investigation of surface properties of micro-composites with ﬁller loading less
than 4% w/w is underway. A 3D simulation of the experimentation with and
without ﬁllers is also under progress.
References
1. Bernstorf, R. Allen, Randall K. Niedermier, and David S. Winkler. “Polymer compounds used
in high voltage insulators.” Hubbell power Systems (2000).
2. Schifani, R. “Surface discharge effects on dielectric properties of epoxy resins.” IEEE
Transactions on Electrical Insulation (1983): 504–512.
3. Bartnikas, R. “Engineering Dielectrics Volume 2B-Electrical Properties of Solid Insulating
Materials: Measurement Techniques.” (1987).
4. Maity, Parimal, et al. “Improvement in surface degradation properties of polymer composites
due to pre-processed nanometric alumina ﬁllers.” IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and
Electrical Insulation 15.1 (2008).
5. Maity, Parimal, Sumit Basu, Venkitanarayanan Parameswaran, Nandini Gupta. “Degradation
of polymer dielectrics with nanometric metal-oxide ﬁllers due to surface discharges.” IEEE
Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation 15, no. 1 (2008).
6. Maity, Parimal, Sumit Basu, Venkitanarayanan, Parameswaran, Nandini Gupta. “Surface
Degradation Studies in Polymer Dielectrics with Nano- sized Fillers.”IEEE 8th International
Conference on Properties & applications of Dielectric Materials, pp. 171–174. IEEE, 2006.
7. Wu, X., Wang, Y., Xie, L., Yu, J., Liu, F., & Jiang, P. (2013). “Thermal and electrical
properties of epoxy composites at high alumina loadings and various temperatures”. Iranian
Polymer Journal, 22(1), 61–73.
8. Iizuka, Tomonori, Yuqing Zhou, Tomoaki Maekawa, Toshikatsu Tanaka, and Kohei Tatsumi.
“Surface analysis of epoxy nanocomposite insulator materials eroded by partial discharge.
IEEE Conference on Electrical Insulation and Dielectric Phenomena (CEIDP), pp. 703–706.
IEEE, 2014.
9. Refaey Mostafa, and Josef Kindersberger. “Factors of inﬂuence on surface erosion of epoxy
resin exposed to electrical discharges.” IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical
Insulation (2014): 1198–1206.
176
N. V. Nair and R. R. Patel

Characterization of Power Cable Using
Various Diagnostic Techniques
R. R. Patel and Vidushi Badmera
Abstract The increased need of continuous high-quality electrical energy com-
bined with various issues related to underground cable makes the condition
assessment of the cable very necessary. The main contribution of this paper is to
establish the correlation between Tand Tip-up and partial discharge performance
of newly manufactured medium voltage cable samples of 11 and 33 kV, of
crossed-linked polyethylene (XLPE), at power frequency. A complete sequence
of type test is performed which includes partial discharge test, Tand test, heat cycle
test, bending test, impulse test and HV AC withstand test. From the results
obtained, the Tand Tip-up value and partial discharge value are used and perfor-
mance ranking is done. On the basis of performance ranking, a plot is obtained
which correlates the above-mentioned features and shows which sample has better
performance as compared to other.
Keywords Tand Tip-up  Partial discharge  XLPE  Type test
1
Introduction
Continuous, reliable and high-quality supply of electrical energy is the heart of our
economy. The engineers of the world work hard to make this power supply reliable
and safe. Distribution- and transmission-class cable systems play key role in
achieving this goal and when we talk about underground cable! The insulation
becomes the centre of attraction.
The underground cable from day one of installation is subjected to thermal,
electrical and mechanical stress, foreign particle ingress and variations of
R. R. Patel (&)  V. Badmera
Department of Electrical Engineering, G H Patel College of Engineering and Technology,
Vallabh Vidyanagar, Anand 388120, Gujarat, India
e-mail: riteshpatel@gcet.ac.in
V. Badmera
e-mail: vidushibadmera@yahoo.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_16
177

temperature and humidity. All these increase the working temperature of the cable.
The heating accelerates the chemical reactions in the insulation which results in
degradation of the dielectric character of the insulation. This process has an ava-
lanche effect. Hence, the changing electrical character of the insulation increases the
loss factor. So if the dissipation factor Tand is monitored periodically, then it
becomes possible to predict and/or avoid the catastrophic failure of the electrical
equipment. Dissipation factor is the energy taken by the ﬂow of current through the
resistive component of the insulation.
The most widely used diagnostics technologies include dissipation factor (Tand)
and partial discharge measurements; therefore, they are the main focus. The dis-
cussion is based on data obtained from tests performed in Polycab Wires Pvt. Ltd.
2
Experimental
Type test is performed on all the manufactured cables before supplying on com-
mercial basis. A sequence of type test was performed on four, newly manufactured,
cable samples as described in Table 1. These tests were performed in high-voltage
laboratory of Polycab Wires Pvt. Ltd. Type test was performed in a ﬁxed sequence
which is listed in Table 2 [1].
2.1
Partial Discharge Test
Partial discharge test was performed on four cable samples listed in Table 1 as per
IS: 10810 part 49 [2].
In this test, 1.73 times the rated voltage was applied to the four samples using
HV AC series resonant test set. The value of partial discharge was noted for each
sample in partial discharge recorder. The results obtained clearly indicate that the
value of partial discharge for all the four samples does not exceed 5 pC. Hence, it is
within the limit set by IS 7098 part 2 (Fig. 1 and Table 3).
Table 1 Cable sample description
Sample
ID
Insulation
Voltage class
(kV)
Number of cores, cross-sectional
area
Length
(m)
1
XLPE
11/11 kV (Ue)
3C X 240 mm2 A2xFY FRLSH
10
2
XLPE
11/11 kV (Ue)
3C X 300 mm2 A2xFY FRLSH
10
3
XLPE
19/33 kV(e)
1C X 300 mm2 A2xWaY FR
10
4
XLPE
19/33 k(e)
1C X 630 mm2 A2xWaY FR
10
178
R. R. Patel and V. Badmera

Table 2 Sequence of type test
List of tests
Speciﬁcations
Partial discharge Test
Less than 5 pC at 1.73V0
Bend test
Mandrel size 20 OD ± 5%
Partial discharge test
Less than 5 pC at 1.73V0
Tand function of voltage
At 0.5V0
V0
2V0
0.004
Increment in Tand
0.5V0 to 2V0
0.002
Tand function of temperature
at 2 kV ambient and 100 °C
0.004
Heat cycle test
At least 2-h heating
At least 3-h cooling
20 cycles
Partial discharge test
Less than 5 pC at 1.73V0
Tand function of voltage
At 0.5V0
V0
2V0
0.004
Increment in Tand
0.5V0 to 2V0
0.002
Impulse test
10 shots +ive
10 shot –ive of
95 kV for samples 1 & 2
170 kV for samples 3 & 4
Four-hour HV AC withstand test
4V0
Fig. 1 Block diagram for HV AC series resonance test set
Characterization of Power Cable …
179

2.2
Dielectric Power Factor Test
This test was performed on four cable samples listed in Table 1. The test is per-
formed based on IS 10810 part 48 [3]. HV AC series resonant test set along with
Tand measuring instrument is used to obtain the value of Tand. The value of Tand
was noted for 0.5V0, V0 and 2V0. Thereafter the cable samples were heated at
100 °C, and Tand value was noted as 2 kV.
The results obtained show that the value of Tand is not exceeding 0.004. Hence,
the limit set by IS 7098 part 2 is met.
2.3
Heat Cycle Test
Heat cycle test was performed on the four cable samples as listed in Table 1. The
test is performed on the basis of IS 10810 part 49 [4]. The maximum continuous
operating temperature at normal condition is 90 °C. The cable samples were heated
at 100 °C temperature for 2 h. Then, it is cooled for 3 h. Twenty such cycles are
conducted to check the adequacy of manufacturing technique.
2.4
Bending Test
Bending test was performed on the four cable samples as given in Table 1 and as
per IS 10810 part 50 [5]. In this test, 10-m-long cable samples are wound on the
cylinder of diameter, 10 times the outer diameter of cable. Then, it is unwound and
wound again. Bending is carried out at reasonably uniform speed between 15 and
30 s per half cycle. Three such cycles were conducted to check the adequacy of
manufacturing technique.
2.5
Impulse Test
In this test, 10 shots of positive voltage and 10 shots of negative voltage were
applied on the four cable samples. The voltage level is listed in Table 4. These
voltage levels are as per IS 7098 part 2. The test is performed as per IS 10810 part
47 [6].
Table 3 Applied voltage for
partial discharge test
Cable sample
Applied voltage (kV)
1 and 2
10.98
3 and 4
32.96
180
R. R. Patel and V. Badmera

2.6
Four-Hour HV AC Withstand Test
This was conducted on the same four cable samples as per IS 10810 part 45 [7]. In
this test, 4V0 was applied to the core of the conductor continuously for four hours.
3
Result and Discussion
Type test included a number of tests which includes
1. Partial discharge test
2. Bend test
3. Tand test as a function of voltage
4. Tand test as a function of temperature
5. Heat cycle test
6. Impulse test
7. Four-hour HV test
These tests were performed in a ﬁxed sequence. The results obtained are given in
Table 5.
3.1
Performance Ranking
Performance ranking was performed on the basis of series of electrical tests per-
formed under type test. The diagnostic ranks are simply assigned by looking at the
value of feature under consideration. For example, if the mean value of Tand is
considered at V0, then, the cable sample that has highest value (here sample 4) is
selected as the poorest performer, thus assigned the rank of one. The performance
continues until the best performer is identiﬁed. The same procedure is repeated for
another diagnostic feature (Table 6).
A graph is plotted of partial discharge performance rank (C) versus Tand Tip-up
rank (E) as shown in Fig. 2. Accuracy of the diagnostic feature is directly related to
how far the dots are from the dashed lines. Similarly, a graph of Tand as function of
voltage (H) versus Tip-up (I) can also be plotted. But in this paper, partial discharge
after bending (C) and Tand Tip-up after bending test (E) are selected for perfor-
mance ranking.
Table 4 Impulse voltage
level
Sr. No
Voltage class (kV)
Applied voltage (kV)
1
6.35/11 (e)
75
2
11/11 (Ue)
95
3
19/33 (e)
170
Characterization of Power Cable …
181

Table 5 Results of type test
Sample ID
1
2
3
4
PD before bending (pC)
1.8
1.9
2.3
2.4
PD after bending (pC)
2.0
2.3
2.4
2.6
Tand as a function
of voltage
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00012
(2) At V0
0.00021
(3) At 2V0
0.00072
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00060
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00015
(2) At V0
0.00034
(3) At 2V0
0.00047
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00032
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00021
(2) At V0
0.00056
(3) At 2V0
0.00105
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00084
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00063
(2) At V0
0.00110
(3) At 2V0
0.00172
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00109
Tand at 2 kV as function
of temperature (100 °C)
At ambient
0.00090
At 100 °C
0.00017
At ambient
0.00090
At 100 °C
0.00027
At ambient
0.00015
At 100 °C
0.00005
At ambient
0.00043
At 100 °C
0.00015
PD after HCT (pC)
2.3
2.5
2.8
3.6
Tand as a function of voltage
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00015
(2) At V0
0.00030
(3) At 2V0
0.00065
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00050
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00017
(2) At V0
0.00039
(3) At 2V0
0.00099
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00082
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00019
(2) At V0
0.00049
(3) At 2V0
0.00092
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00073
(1) At 0.5V0
0.00030
(2) At V0
0.00074
(3) At 2V0
0.00132
(4) Increment
0.5V0–2V0
0.00102
Impulse test
Withstood
Withstood
Withstood
Withstood
4-h HV AC withstand test
Withstood
Withstood
Withstood
Withstood
Table 6 Performance ranking table
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
1
4
4
4
3
2
4
4
4
2
3
3
3
4
1
3
3
2
3
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
3
4
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
A—Sample ID
B—Partial discharge before bending (pC)
C—Partial discharge after bending (pC)
D—Tand as a function of voltage
E—Tip-up 0.5V0–2V0
F—Tand at 2 kV as a function of temperature
G—Partial discharge after heat cycle test
H—Tand as a function of voltage
I—Tip-up 0.5V0–2V0
182
R. R. Patel and V. Badmera

4
Observations and Conclusions
4.1
Observations
The performance ranking plot can be interpreted as follows:
The samples in the left corners are the worst performers; that is, (e.g. rank 1) the
one having higher value of Tand Tip-up and higher value of partial discharge after
bending, which indicates that their performance will be poor as compared to other
cables in the group.
On the other hand, the upper-right corner of the plot contain better performers;
that is, (e.g. rank 4) the one that have lower value of Tand Tip-up and lower value
of partial discharge after bending, which indicates that their performance will be
better as compared to other cables in the group.
Dashed line can be thought of as the perfect correlation between any two
diagnostic features.
4.2
Conclusions
Type test was conducted in a ﬁxed sequence as listed in Table 2 on four cable
samples as listed in Table 1. Results obtained were used to do performance ranking.
Performance ranking leaded to the results that the performance of the cables can be
easily judged on the basis on partial discharge performance rank versus Tand
Tip-up diagnostic rank. Hence, graph in Fig. 2 clearly indicates that the perfor-
mance of the cable improves as we move from left end towards right end.
Fig. 2 Performance ranking plot
Characterization of Power Cable …
183

Performance ranking table clearly shows the rank of each sample for every diag-
nostic feature. Hence, the performance of each sample can be judged and compared.
Acknowledgements The authors are grateful to the engineers of Polycab Wires Pvt. Ltd. for
providing help to perform the tests.
References
1. Indian
Standard,
“Cross-linked
polyethylene
insulated
thermoplastic
sheathed
cables-speciﬁcation” Part 2 for working voltages from 3.3 kV up to and including 33 kV
2. Indian Standard “Methods of test for cables” Part 46 Partial Discharge Test
3. Indian Standard “Methods of test for cables” Part 48 Dielectric Power Factor Test
4. Indian Standard “Methods of test for cables” Part 49 Heating Cycle Test
5. Indian Standard “Methods of test for cables” Part 50 Bending Test
6. Indian Standard “Methods of test for cables” Part 47 Impulse Test
7. Indian Standard “Methods of test for cables” Part 45 High Voltage Test
8. Steven Boggs and John Densley “Fundamentals of Partial Discharge in Context of Field
Cable Testing” IEEE Electrical Insulation Magazine Vol. 16, No. 5; September/October 2001
9. John Densley “Ageing Mechanisms and Diagnostics for Power cables- An Overview” IEEE
Electrical Insulation Magazine Vol. 17, No. 1; January/February 2001
10. J. C. Hernández-Mejía, R. Harley and N. Hampton, and R. Hartlein “Correlation between
Tand Diagnostic Measurements and Breakdown Performance at VLF for MV XLPE Cables”
IEEE Transactions on Dielectrics and Electrical Insulation Vol. 16, No. 1; February 2009 16
184
R. R. Patel and V. Badmera

Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time
Overcurrent Relay
Param Mehta
and Vijay H. Makwana
Abstract This paper describes the modeling of deﬁnite time overcurrent relay
using MATLAB/Simulink tool. The model is developed as a Simulink block which
accepts input from the user to feed relay settings. The model is validated on
Simulink for different values of pickup values and time delays. A hardware model
implementation is carried out using ATMega328 microcontroller and ACS712
current sensor. The performance of the hardware model is tested on a radial feeder
network with the backup protection relays operating at a time delay of 0.5 s. The
results are satisfactory and accurate and therefore can be used in digital relays and
applied in relay systems. In addition to this, a hardware model with different inverse
deﬁnite minimum time characteristics is included along with different interfacing
elements such as keypads, LCD, LEDs. The hardware model designed is ready to
use for any overcurrent applications and shows accurate and satisfactory behavior.
Keywords Power system protection  Power system relaying  Power system
faults  Microcontrollers
1
Introduction
Overcurrent relay is simple and widely used in protection strategy in distribution
circuits, maintaining high degree of serviceability and security [1]. The relay works
on the basic principle that when current exceeds a threshold value or pickup value,
it trips with or without time delay, tripping the associated circuit breakers [2]. The
overcurrent relays with ﬁxed time delays are called as deﬁnite time overcurrent
relay [3].
P. Mehta (&)  V. H. Makwana
G.H. Patel College of Engineering and Technology, Vallabh Vidhyanagar,
Anand 388120, Gujarat, India
e-mail: theparammehta@gmail.com
V. H. Makwana
e-mail: vijaymakwana@gcet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_17
185

Various time delays are covered by the following equation:
t ¼ K= PSM
ð
Þa1
ð
Þ
ð1Þ
where t is the time of operation of relay, PSM = I=Ip (I is the fault current and Ip is
the pickup current), and K, a are the constants which determine relay
characteristics.
For achieving selectivity and backup protection, delay in operation of relay is an
important requirement. If k ! 0 and n ! 0, then deﬁnite time characteristics are
obtained. With deﬁnite time delaying arrangement, a time-graded system is yielded.
The deﬁnite overcurrent relay starts timing out once it exceeds the preset value,
termed as ‘pickup.’ The pickup settings range from 50 to 200% of the rated current,
and the time settings range from 0.1 to 1, 1 to 10, 3 to 30, 6 to 60, etc. [4].
The overcurrent protection is one of the basic strategies for protecting power
systems. This paper describes the modeling of deﬁnite time overcurrent relay using
MATLAB/Simulink tool. Furthermore, hardware implementation of deﬁnite time
overcurrent relay using ATMega328 microcontroller board and the result are
compared for radial feeder network. A comparative result is carried out for simu-
lation and hardware implementation.
2
Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay Model
2.1
Modeling of Overcurrent Relay Using MATLAB/
Simulink
MATLAB/Simulink is one of the most powerful and efﬁcient tools for modeling
power system. The relay model includes the use of various libraries included in
Simulink. The deﬁnite time overcurrent relay measures the current and compares
with the predeﬁned threshold values, and after ﬁxed time delay issues trip signal to
the circuit breaker. Figure 1 shows the deﬁnite time overcurrent relay block
modeled using MATLAB/Simulink. The relay model should be fed with input
current ‘i’, and the output terminal issues trip signal.
Fig. 1 Deﬁnite time
overcurrent relay Simulink
block
186
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

The RMS block outputs the RMS value of the input current signal which is
utilized to compare with the threshold value. If the fault current is increased beyond
the threshold value, then the relational comparator generates active HIGH signal,
which is integrated to reﬂect time delay. The integrated signal is compared with the
time dial settings. When the integrated time increases beyond the time threshold,
the relational comparator generates active HIGH signal. The relay block ensures
that the relay does not reset by itself. Figure 2 shows the subsystem of the deﬁnite
over current relay block [3].
A. Block Mask Parameter Dialog Box
The block mask parameter dialog box is designed in such a way that the user can
input relay settings very easily. It takes input from the user like pickup value and
time delay value. Then, this setting is passed to the corresponding pickup current
block and time delay block. Figure 3 illustrates the block mask parameter dialog
box of the proposed deﬁnite time overcurrent relay block.
Fig. 2 Deﬁnite time overcurrent relay Simulink block subsystem
Fig. 3 Deﬁnite time overcurrent relay Simulink block subsystem mask
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay
187

2.2
Single-Phase System Protection Using Deﬁnite Time
Overcurrent Relay Model
Figure 4 shows the single-phase system protected by the deﬁnite time overcurrent
relay block. The system is supplied by a single-phase AC voltage source. Similarly,
the transmission line is shown by equivalent series RL branch and load at the end.
The current is fed to the input terminal of the overcurrent relay model, while the
output terminal is fed back to the circuit breaker via a NOT block as the circuit
breaker takes active low (i.e., the control signal connected to the block input port
must be 0 (zero) to open the breaker).
To simulate the fault condition, a switch is used with other end connected to the
ground. This fault can be simulated by conﬁguring switching times. Figure 5 shows
Fig. 4 DTOC relay used for power system
Fig. 5 DTOC relay sending a trip signal at t = 0.4 s, when fault ocuurs
188
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

the performance of the overcurrent relay model in fault conditions. At time t = 0.2 s
fault occurred, and exactly after 0.2 s, i.e., at time t = 0.4 s relay issued tripping
signal to the circuit breaker.
3
Relay Model Using ATMega328P Microcontroller
Arduino microcontroller is an open source platform which is powered by
ATMega328P,
a
low-power
CMOS
8-bit
microcontroller
based
on
the
AVR-enhanced RISC architecture [5]. It is equipped with the input and output ports
which forms the basic block for the modeling of a digital relay.
The block diagram of the proposed relay model can be simpliﬁed into three
major bocks as shown in Fig. 6.
• The input transducer block essentially comprises of current sensor that samples
the input current by generating magnetic ﬁeld in which the Hall IC converts into
a proportional voltage. This sampled data is sent to the microcontroller’s analog
pin.
• The analog to digital conversion circuit features 10-bit successive approxima-
tion ADC. The ADC contains a sample and hold circuit which ensures that the
input voltage to the ADC is held at a constant level during conversion.
• The decision-making block analyzes the current data and uses deﬁnite time
overcurrent relay principles to issue trip signal.
3.1
Current Measurement with ACS712 Sensor
The sensor consists of a precise, low-offset, linear Hall circuit. The current ﬂowing
through sensor generates a magnetic ﬁeld in which the Hall IC converts into a
proportional voltage. The ACS712 outputs an analog signal, VOUT, which varies
linearly with the primary sampled current, IP, within the range speciﬁed. Capacitor
is recommended for noise management. Figure 7 shows the sensor package using
ACS712 IC [6]. The output voltage is sent to analog pin input A0 of the
microcontroller.
Fig. 6 Basic block diagram of a digital relay
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay
189

Figure 8 shows the interface circuit of current sensor with microcontroller. The
input samples fed to the analog pin A0, which is converted to digital bits and then it
is converted to current data using the following equation:
I ¼
A  5=1024
ð
Þ
ð
Þ  2:5
ð
Þ=0:234
ð2Þ
where
I
is the sampled current value and
A
is the ADC value of sample.
Here in (2), 2.5 is the offset voltage. At supply voltage of 5 V, the sampled data
is measured with an offset of 2.5 V. Thus, we have to subtract that amount from the
original sampled value. The offset voltage depends on the supply voltage to the
current sensor, i.e., in this case it is 5 V thus an offset voltage of 2.5 V. The plot for
output voltage for a unit change in input current is shown in Fig. 9, whose slope is
0.234 which is used in (2). The sampled data plot is shown in Fig. 10, which is a
sinusoidal curve. Table 1 shows the sampled current data value, and the average
number of samples per cycle is 34, which is sufﬁcient for modeling of an over-
current relay.
Fig. 7 ACS712 current
sensor package
Fig. 8 Interfacing of current
sensor with microcontroller
190
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

Fig. 9 ACS712 current
sensor characteristics
Fig. 10 ACS712 current
sensor sampled current
waveform
Table 1 Instantaneous
current sample data
Current sample data
0.23
2
0.27
−1.79
−0.44
0.61
2
−0.06
−1.77
−0.15
0.94
1.77
−0.38
−1.84
1.21
1.63
−0.73
−1.73
1.48
1.42
−1
−1.54
1.69
1.13
−1.34
−1.36
1.86
0.9
−1.54
−1.09
1.94
0.56
1.67
−0.75
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay
191

3.2
Modeling of Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay Using
Microcontroller
This is a crucial part of the system where the sampled data should be processed and
then process the data according to generic description of an overcurrent relay and
issue trip signal [7–10]. The proposed design uses the microcontroller with
ATMega328P as a core, capable of doing such task. The complete process is
described as follow.
The sampled data is obtained by microcontroller and is converted to digital
signal using A/D converter of the microcontroller. The ﬂowchart of the proposed
relay algorithm is shown in Fig. 11.
• Next after getting samples, it calculates RMS value of the current.
• The current values compare it against the pickup value of the relay setting. If the
calculated RMS current is higher than the pickup value, then microcontroller
starts counting time, from the moment of initiation of fault.
If the fault time is higher than the time delay, then the trip command is issued,
which makes digital pin 12 HIGH.
Fig. 11 Flowchart of the
proposed algorithm
192
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

4
Results—Radial Feeder Protection Using Deﬁnite
Overcurrent Relay
Figure 12 shows the basic setup of a radial protection scheme using deﬁnite
overcurrent relay. The deﬁnite time overcurrent principle for a radial feeder network
is illustrated. It shows the time delays of the relays in the protection system of the
network. The microcontroller is fed with the relay settings such that it provides
backup to other relay with a ﬁxed time delay of 0.5 s. Table 2 shows the relay time
of operation of relays used for the protection of radial feeder network when fault
was initiated at time t = 1.0 s, at different locations, i.e., F1, F2, F3, etc. The
tabulated results clearly indicate that the relays operated satisfactorily with desired
accuracy. In the entire discussion,
FL
Fault location
tC
Calculated time of operation in seconds
tA
Actual time of operation in seconds.
%E is the percentage error given by, %E ¼
tCtA
tC


 100
Fig. 12 Radial feeder protection scheme
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay
193

5
Inverse Deﬁnite Minimum Time (IDMT)
Overcurrent Relay
IDMT overcurrent relay works on the principle that when the current increases
beyond a threshold value, than after a time delay, calculated by a mathematical
equation described in [11], sends the tripping signal. The mathematical equation for
different inverse characteristics is as follows:
IEC Standard Inverse
t ¼ T 
0:14
I
Is
 0:02
1
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð3Þ
IEC Very Inverse
t ¼ T 
13:5
I
Is
 1
1
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð4Þ
IEC Extreme Inverse
t ¼ T 
80
I
Is
 2
1
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð5Þ
ANSI/IEEE Moderately Inverse
t ¼ T 
0:0515
I
Is
 0:02
1
þ 0:114
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð6Þ
Table 2 Hardware results
Section-I (Relay-1)
Section-II (Relay-2)
Section-III (Relay-3)
FL
tc
tA
%E
tc
tA
%E
tc
tA
%E
F1
1.50
1.51
0.67
–
–
–
–
–
–
F2
1.50
1.51
0.67
–
–
–
–
–
–
F3
2.00
2.02
1.00
1.50
1.57
4.67
–
–
–
F4
2.00
2.02
1.00
1.50
1.57
4.67
–
–
–
F5
2.50
2.54
1.60
2.00
2.09
4.50
1.50
1.54
1.78
F6
2.50
2.54
1.60
2.00
2.09
4.50
1.50
1.54
1.78
194
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

ANSI/IEEE Very Inverse
t ¼ T 
19:61
I
Is
 2
1
þ 0:491
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð7Þ
ANSI/IEEE Extreme Inverse
t ¼ T 
28:2
I
Is
 2
1
þ 0:122
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð8Þ
Schneider Electric Long Inverse
t ¼ T 
120
I
Is
 1
1
0
B
@
1
C
A
ð9Þ
Out of these seven different inverse characteristics, one can select the desired
characteristic as per application.
6
Hardware Model
The hardware model shown in Fig. 13 comprises of a special enclosure housing all
the interfacing elements like LCD, LEDs, keypads, current sensor, relay driving
circuits connected to the ATMega2560 microcontroller board.
Fig. 13 Hardware model of
IDMT overcurrent relay
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay
195

Now, the hardware model is tested for different values of plug settings and time
multiplier settings. Figure 14 illustrates the ﬂowchart of the algorithm of proposed
digital overcurrent relay. Figure 15 shows the IEC standard inverse plot of time of
operation of relays for different values of plug setting multipliers and time multi-
plier settings.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, modeling of deﬁnite time overcurrent relay is carried out using
MATLAB/Simulink software tool. This relay model is designed as a Simulink
block with capability to input the relay settings using a mask parameter dialog box,
such that user can connect and conﬁgure the block for the modeling of a protection
Fig. 14 Flowchart of the
proposed IDMT overcurrent
relay model
196
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

scheme for power system network. The relay model was validated using a
single-phase model for different values of plug settings and time delay.
Furthermore, an implementation of hardware model was carried out using
ATMega328 microcontroller and ACS712 current sensor. The hardware model was
tested on a radial feeder network, and time of operation of relays for different faults
at different locations is noted, operations of relay being satisfactory and accurate.
Similarly, a hardware model with different interfacing elements is also designed
which includes seven different inverse characteristics. The ﬂowchart of the pro-
posed relay as well as the plot of standard inverse characteristic curve is also
illustrated.
Acknowledgements Special acknowledgments for G H Patel College of Engineering and
Technology, Vallabh Vidhyanagar, India, for letting us to use switchgear and protection laboratory
which helped us to do this research work.
References
1. Y. L. Goh, A. K. Ramasamy, A. A. Z. Abidin and F. H. Nagi, “Modelling of overcurrent relay
using digital signal processor,” 2010 IEEE Symposium on Industrial Electronics and
Applications (ISIEA), Penang, 2010, pp. 367–370.
2. J. C. Tan, P. G. McLaren, R. P. Jayasinghe and P. L. Wilson, “Software model for inverse
time overcurrent relays incorporating IEC and IEEE standard curves,” IEEE CCECE2002.
Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering. Conference Proceedings
(Cat. No.02CH37373), 2002, pp. 37–41 vol. 1.
Fig. 15 Standard inverse
characteristic curves for
different values of TMS
Radial Feeder Protection by Deﬁnite Time Overcurrent Relay
197

3. M. Kezunovic, J. Ren, and S. Lotﬁfard, Design, modeling and evaluation of protective relays
for power systems. Springer, 2016.
4. B. A. Oza, N. Nair, R. P. Mehta, and V. H. Makwana, Power system protection and
switchgear. TataMc-Graw Hill, 2010.
5. Atmel, 8-bit AVR Microcontrollers - ATMega328/P, 2011.
6. A. M. LLC, ACS712 Fully Integrated, Hall Effect-Based Linear Current Sensor IC with 2.1
kVRMS Isolation and a Low-Resistance Current Conductor, 2013.
7. M. Weeks, Digital signal processing using MATLAB & wavelets. Jones & Bartlett Learning,
2010.
8. M. A. Ali and F. M. Bendary, “Design of prototype non directional overcurrent relay
micro-controller-based,” in 22nd International Conference and Exhibition on Electricity
Distribution (CIRED 2013), June 2013, pp. 1–4.
9. S. Chan and R. Maurer, “Modeling overcurrent relay characteristics,” IEEE Computer
Applications in Power, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 41–45, Jan 1992.
10. A. Nasiruzzaman, “A student friendly toolbox for power system analysis using matlab,”
Matlab-Modelling, Programming and Simulations, pp. 67–86, 2010.
11. S. Electric, MiCOM P125, P126 and P127 Directional or Non Directional Relay Manual,
2011.
198
P. Mehta and V. H. Makwana

Conditional Analysis of Dust Accumulated
on Solar Photovoltaic Panel
Kaushal B. Jani and Jatinkumar J. Patel
Abstract The paper presents analysis of impact of dust on photovoltaic solar panel
located at CSIR, Bhavnagar city, Gujarat, India. Proposed work is used to analyze
the losses due to accumulation of dust on the surface of photovoltaic panel. Due to
dust, radiation changes have been observed using the array tester system (SAT
100V 30A). The accumulation of the dust on the surface of polycrystalline PV
panel shows reduction in power generation compared to clean module. It is
observed that 8–10% decrement has been noticed in the given constraints and
efﬁciency has been reduced by 5–10%. Result analysis has been discussed in detail
with MATLAB/SIMULINK-based environment as well as practical setup at
research laboratory for the different time duration.
Keywords Solar photovoltaic panel  Dust accumulation  MATLAB/SIMULINK
Condition monitoring
1
Introduction
Electricity demand in year 2050 is predicted to lie between 8 and 26 TW with an
average growth of about 3.75–17.81%. Fossil fuel, e.g., natural gas, coal, and oil, is
still the dominating source of worldwide energy [11]. Nevertheless, due to
increasing prices of fossil fuels and also due to the alarming increase of environ-
mental issues related to fossil fuel, renewable energy is getting more attention. It
has been projected that by 2040 more than 50% of the global energy is going to be
in the form of renewable energy [5]. Solar energy, being a major source of
renewable energy, is crucial in meeting future energy demand.
In this paper, we have included the normal use of resources. Study of the
environmental effect of dust and the exhaustion of non-renewable resources. Due to
K. B. Jani (&)  J. J. Patel
Electrical Department, G H Patel College of Engineering & Technology,
V.V. Nagar, Anand, India
e-mail: janikaushal@yahoo.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_18
199

these reasons, there is an increase in worldwide interest for sustainable energy
production and energy saving. Among all, the technologies involved in the gen-
eration of viable and common energy, a key role is played by photovoltaic
(PV) cells, wind generators, biomass plants and fuel cells. In the particular area,
photovoltaic systems can be considered one of the universal results with hopeful
margins of development while ensuring the generation of energy with low envi-
ronmental effect [5].
A regular cleaning of PV panels is suggested in order to maximize the efﬁciency.
However, this method can be difﬁcult to apply in complex systems or panels located
in particular sites. In case, such activities lead to a major increase in its costs. In
order to enhance the maintenance of the system, some parameters have to be
overseen [6]. Renewable natural resources are the source to generate renewable
energy, such as solar radiation, wind, rainfall, tides, geothermal heat. To convert
solar radiation into electricity, a photovoltaic cell is required.
The photovoltaic effect is a physical phenomenon of converting the energy
carried by optical electromagnetic radiation into electrical energy. The main
application has been in space vehicles for many years, instead terrestrial application
of PV developed very slowly, nevertheless PV fascinated not only the researchers
but also the general public. Solar PV system is also used where the electricity
cannot reach with line that is area easily generates electricity using solar photo-
voltaic system (Fig. 1).
The clearance of dust and sand on cell surfaces may be uniform or non-uniform
depending on the mass of the PV arrays and the ground of the location. Smaller
panels may have the drops, and uniform dust accumulation in panel performance
may be same for many panels in the array [6]. However, the shape of dust addition
may not be equal for all the panels in the module, whether they are located in large
area or at large distance. Therefore, the drops in panel performance due to dust
removal may not be same over the total array and hence it is more difﬁcult to predict
the atmospheric effect like rainfall, temperature, for an installation of PV system.
Fig. 1 Factors inﬂuencing dust accumulation [6]
200
K. B. Jani and J. J. Patel

On the other hand, it is seen that wind and rainfall often help us to clear the dust
on PV surfaces. As it is veriﬁed by the experimental setups, that at high wind speed
the tendency of dust deposition increases on PV surface and is the reason of drops
in panel power generation. Rainfall is one of the sources to remove the dust particle
from PV system but if this drop evaporates from PV surface without wearing off, it
creates grip of dust on PV system. It is necessary to investigate the effect of the dust
particles on PV system to ﬁnd out the losses and also to set the maintenance
schedule for better performance.
The effect of dust on PV system can be tested by comparing the performance of
I–V characteristics of the panels with and without dust clearance on their surfaces.
The I–V characteristics can be reﬂected to investigate the photovoltaic element for
every PV element, which produces a unique I–V curve whose shapes depend on the
conditions of surface, temperature, cell functioning temperature, mismatch of loss,
and other balance system-related losses.
This approach has been adopted in the present study to ﬁnd out the effect of dust
accumulation on PV operating characteristics, while keeping the panels unprotected
identical ambient parameters but with differing quantities of dust accumulation. The
paper presents the measurement setup and the experimental procedure. It also
presents a statistical analysis of the results and a detailed discussion.
2
System Introduction
2.1
Simulation Setup
Here, analysis has been carried out for PV system of 75 W connected with isolated
R-L load based on simulation and real-time setup at CSIR-CSMCRI, Bhavnagar.
A MATLAB-based simulated model of PV system with input variation of different
values of temperature and radiation has been carried out as shown in Fig. 1. We
have considered maximum power (Pmax) 75 W, maximum voltage (Vmax) 17.06 V,
maximum current (Imax) 4.40, the open-circuit voltage (Voc) 21.78 V, and
short-circuit current (Isc) 4.73 A (Fig. 2).
The performance of simulation characteristics (short circuit and open circuit) has
been achieved and indicated in Fig. 4.
2.2
Experimental Setup
The experimental analysis was based on PV panels which were kept at same
ambient temperature (29–35 °C) and radiation (278–985 W/m2). The result is
recorded for two cases, i.e., with dust particle and without dust particle, and the
Conditional Analysis of Dust …
201

setup was installed on the rooftop at the Central Salt & Marine Chemicals Research
Institute, Bhavnagar (latitude 21.76°N, longitude 72.15°E). The test setup consists
of two identical open-stand-mounted polycrystalline silicon photovoltaic panels
installed parallel and sloped at 21 °C to the ground facing southward. The
arrangement for the experimental work is shown in Fig. 3. The detailed speciﬁ-
cations for PV panels are listed in Table 1. The I–V characteristics for the panels
were plotted and listed using an array tester. The cell surface temperatures are
measured using Mextech DT–8811 Digital Infrared and Contact Thermometer.
As mentioned speciﬁcations of 75 W Polycrystalline silicon based martial made
by Kotak Urja Ltd. in Table 1. Here, as shown in Fig. 3, two panels with same
ratings are situated side by side with same environmental but different operational
conditions. Here, one panel is fully cleaned, while the other is the one accumulated
with dust particle of 0.5 mm thickness.
Fig. 2 MATLAB simulation of photovoltaic panel
Fig. 3 Experimental setup of
polycrystalline PV panel
202
K. B. Jani and J. J. Patel

3
Results Analysis
3.1
Simulation Analysis
Simulation-based analysis is for different radiating conditions that are elaborated in
Fig. 4. It is observed that short-circuit current (Isc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc)
are normal I–V characteristics of polycrystalline PV panel. It has been notice that
there is accountable amount of decrement in dusty panel as compared to clean panel
for Isc is 22% for the radiation level 435 W/m2, 15% for 756 W/m2 while for 9%
for 856 W/m2.
Furthermore, ratio of values of open-circuit voltage Voc (dusty)/Voc (clean) has
been shown in Table 2 for input intensity range of 290–856 W/m2. The
open-circuit voltage (Voc) of the dusty panel is slightly lower than that of the clean
panel at all light intensities. Similarly, parameters like short-circuit current (Isc) and
power output are obtained as per Tables 3 and 4, respectively.
3.2
Real-Time Analysis
As described in experimental setup, output of 75 W polycrystalline PV panel
creating prototype of different environmental conditions like clean and dusty sur-
face (which includes various constrains) has been established at Terrace of Solar
Lab at CSIR-CSMCRI, Bhavnagar.
The comparison of I–V characteristics of clean panel and dusty panel is shown in
Fig. 5. The I–V characteristic curves obtained from the panels which are parallel to
each other with or without dust particle under different atmospheric conditions at
different time periods from different intensity levels, like 435, 848, and 925 W/m2
have been plotted in Fig. 5.
Due to similarities, graphical analysis is done for initial, ﬁnal, and average value
of given set of readings.
From the results achieved by practical setup, the following observations can be
drawn.
Table 1 PV panel
speciﬁcation
Dimensions (in mm)
PV crystal panel
1190  545
Module dimensions
125  125
Cell dimensions
36
Maximum power (W)
75 W
Voltage at maximum power (V)
17.06 V
Open-circuit voltage (Voc)
21.78 V
Current at maximum power (A)
4.40 A
Short-circuit current (Isc)
4.73 A
Conditional Analysis of Dust …
203

Fig. 4 Performance characteristics of polycrystalline panel. a For 435 W/m2. b For 756 W/m2.
c For 856 W/m2
204
K. B. Jani and J. J. Patel

1. Dust has a minor adverse effect on short-circuit current produced by the panels.
The clean panel consistently produced a higher current output compared to the
dusty panel.
2. The Voc of the dusty panel is observed to be lower in comparison with that of
the clean panel at a particular solar intensity as shown in Table 5. This ratio
remains close to 100% for all solar insulations. It is therefore proposed that dust
does not affect system voltage signiﬁcantly.
Table 2 Open-circuit voltage losses
Intensity (W/m2)
Open-circuit voltage
(V)
Voc (dusty)/Voc (clean) average (%)
Clean
Dusty
345
20.77
20.65
99.42
435
20.98
20.90
99.61
525
21.18
21.07
99.48
756
21.50
21.43
99.67
856
21.69
21.58
99.49
985
21.72
21.65
99.67
Table 3 Short-circuit current losses
Intensity (W/m2)
Short-circuit current
(A)
Isc (dusty)/Isc (clean) average (%)
Clean
Dusty
345
1.64
1.51
92.07
435
2.05
1.89
92.19
525
2.52
2.30
91.26
756
3.61
3.40
94.18
856
4.10
3.72
90.73
985
4.50
4.25
94.44
Table 4 Power output losses
Intensity (W/m2)
Average power output (W)
Power output losses %
Clean
Dusty
345
34.0628
31.1815
8.45
435
43.009
39.501
8.15
525
53.3736
48.461
9.20
756
75.615
72.862
3.64
856
88.929
80.2776
9.72
985
97.74
92.0125
5.85
Conditional Analysis of Dust …
205

Fig. 5 Performance characteristics of polycrystalline panel. a For 435 W/m2. b For 756 W/m2.
c For 856 W/m2
206
K. B. Jani and J. J. Patel

3. From graph, we observed dust accumulation thickness and the power losses
related to dust accumulation on photovoltaic panels. Here in real-time experi-
mental setup where the dust thickness was found to be 1.8 g/m2, the power loss
due to dust was 8–12% of the power generation (Tables 6 and 7).
4. There is main change in short-circuit current (Isc) on panels in the presence of
dust. Hence, showing in Table 8 the real-time experiment analysis of the two
panel losses for accumulation of dust. When the clean panel efﬁciency of power
generation is high compare to the dusty panel.
The power generation is more in clean panel by 8–12% as compared to the dusty
panel. And the cell temperature of the both panel is different. Maximum cell
Temperature 54 °C in clean panel. The density of collected dust was found to be
0.35 g and 0.28 m2 surface area which resulted in 5–6% of power losses as com-
pared to dust-free PV system. This reduction can be observed better in a large PV
plant as compared to a small PV system.
The proposed work suggests remedies to reduce this effect on solar PV system
and improvement of power generation. Photovoltaic panels are constantly exposed
to various types of weather and thus become a target for dirt, dust, industrial
residues, atmospheric pollution, bird droppings, etc. The presence of these elements
on the panel’s surface prevents the sun’s rays from ﬁltering onto the panel’s
photovoltaic cells completely, reducing the solar performance and therefore efﬁ-
ciency. Accumulated dust reduce efﬁciency and may damage the material the panels
are made from. The following care can be taken to avoid dust accumulation thus
improving the performance of PV panel.
1. Daily cleaning of PV panel surface with water
The agents responsible for the deterioration of the surfaces also include the
chemicals used during cleaning. These form an excellent attraction for dust and
accelerate the deterioration process, with negative repercussions on the appearance
and above all, the function of the structure.
Cleaning is, therefore, an indispensable part of the maintenance of these struc-
tures, and the frequency of the cleaning depends on the geographic area and cli-
mate. Industrial areas may require more thorough maintenance than rural areas.
Table 5 Open-circuit voltage losses
Intensity (W/m2)
Open-circuit voltage
(V)
Voc (dusty)/Voc (clean) average (%)
Clean
Dusty
345
17.09
16.8
98.30
435
17.98
17.6
97.88
525
7.87
7.6
96.56
756
17.62
17.19
97.55
856
16.65
16.32
98.01
985
16.53
16.14
97.64
Conditional Analysis of Dust …
207

Table 6 Short-circuit current losses
Intensity (W/m2)
Short-circuit current
(A)
Isc (dusty)/Isc (clean) average (%)
Clean
Dusty
345
2.94
2.58
87.75
435
3.17
3.08
97.16
525
3.41
3.08
90.32
756
3.42
3.32
97.07
856
3.79
3.54
93.40
985
4.93
4.7
95.33
Table 7 Power output losses
Intensity (W/m2)
Cell temperature
(°C)
Average power
output (W)
Power output losses%
Clean
Dusty
Clean
Dusty
345
34
33
32.25
26.86
16.71
435
36
35
37.64
35.56
5.52
525
45
45
39.27
35.56
9.44
756
51
50
38.84
36.62
5.71
856
46
45
38.87
34.79
10.49
985
54
55
44.08
41.07
6.82
Table 8 Comparison of simulation and real-time data
Intensity
(W/m2)
Simulation results
Experimental results
Voc
(dusty)/Voc
(clean)
average
(%)
Isc (dusty)/
Isc (clean)
average
(%)
Power
output
losses
(%)
Voc
(dusty)/Voc
(clean)
average
(%)
Isc (dusty)/
Isc (clean)
average
(%)
Power
output
losses
(%)
345
99.42
92.07
8.45
98.30
87.75
16.71
435
99.61
92.19
8.15
97.88
97.16
5.52
525
99.48
91.26
9.20
96.56
90.32
9.44
756
99.67
94.18
3.64
97.55
97.07
5.71
856
99.49
90.73
9.72
98.01
93.40
10.49
985
99.67
94.44
5.85
97.64
95.33
6.82
208
K. B. Jani and J. J. Patel

If we clean PV panel with water, panel corrosion and aging effect will increase.
Due to this, the panel life decreases and also power generation decreases gradually.
2. Placing PV panel at the location having green grass
Advantage to select such as location is that dust particle will decrease. But, due
to the green grass, the humidity will play an adverse role on the performance of PV
panel.
4
Conclusions
The proposed work is considered for dust accumulation on photovoltaic system
performance. Here, the panels’ performance was investigated under the similar
conditions of ambient temperature and insolation with the help of I–V characteristics
when one of the panels was dusty and other one was cleaned of dust.
The proposed work presents result analysis of dust-accumulated panel in
MATLAB/SIMULINK environment as well as experimental setup of PV panel
which are kept side by side having different atmospheric temperatures 28–33 °C
and different time periods like 1 month, 2 months, and 6 months. The presence of
dust particles on PV panel will be approximately 5–10% deviation, and due to this,
there will be losses in power generation. Through the diagnosis of power losses in
the presence of dust particle in PV panel, we concluded that in the absence of dust
particles the power generation from PV panel will be more and losses will be less
compared to dust particles present in PV panel.
Acknowledgements The author(s) of proposed work would like to thank Dr. (Mrs.) Subarna
Maiti, (Senior Scientist), and her team (PDEC Solar Department) CSIR (Central Salt & Marine
Chemicals Research Institute, Bhavnagar, Gujarat.) for providing technical and infrastructure
support.
References
1. A. Chatterjee, Abir, Ali Keyhani, and Dhruv Kapoor. “Identiﬁcation of photovoltaic source
models.” IEEE Transactions on Energy conversion 26.3 (2011): 883–889.
2. A. Rao, R. Pillai, M. Mani, and P. Ramamurthy, “Inﬂuence of dust deposition on photovoltaic
panel performance,” Energy Procedia, vol. 54, pp. 690–700, 2014.
3. Akram, Mohd Naﬁs, and Saeed Lotﬁfard. “Modeling and Health Monitoring of DC Side of
Photovoltaic Array.” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy6.4 (2015): 1245–1253.
4. Costa, Suellen CS, Antonia Sonia AC Diniz, and Lawrence L. Kazmerski. “Dust and soiling
issues and impacts relating to solar energy systems: Literature review update for 2012–2015.”
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 63 (2016): 33–61.
5. M. Catelani, L. Ciani, L. Cristaldi, M. Faifer, M. Lazzaroni, and M. Rossi, “Characterization
of photovoltaic panels: the effects of dust,” in Energy Conference and Exhibition
(ENERGYCON), 2012 IEEE International, 2012, pp. 45–50.
Conditional Analysis of Dust …
209

6. Mani, Monto, and Rohit Pillai. “Impact of dust on solar photovoltaic (PV) performance:
Research status, challenges and recommendations.”Renewable and Sustainable Energy
Reviews 14.9 (2010): 3124–3131.
7. Nahar, N. M., and Jagdish P. Gupta. “Effect of dust on transmittance of glazing materials for
solar collectors under arid zone conditions of India.” Solar & wind technology 7.2–3 (1990):
237–243.
8. Parikh, Abhishek, et al. “Solar Panel Condition Monitoring System based on Wireless Sensor
Network.”
9. Said, S. A. M. “Effects of dust accumulation on performances of thermal and photovoltaic
ﬂat-plate collectors.” Applied Energy 37.1 (1990): 73–84.
10. Stauffer, Y., et al. “Power monitoring based photovoltaic installation fault detection.” 2015
International Conference on Renewable Energy Research and Applications (ICRERA). IEEE,
2015.
11. Xu, Xiaoli, Huan Wang, and Yunbo Zuo. “Method for diagnosing photovoltaic array fault in
solar photovoltaic system.” Power and Energy Engineering Conference (APPEEC), 2011
Asia-Paciﬁc. IEEE, 2011.
12. V.U. Hoffmann and A. Goetzberge, Photovoltaic Solar Energy Generation.
13. V. F. Pires, J. Fernando, and A. Silva, “Teaching nonlinear modeling, simulation, and control
of electronic power converters using MATLAB/SIMULINK,” IEEE Trans. Educ., vol. 45,
no. 3, pp. 253–261, Aug. 2002.
14. Kimber A., 2007. The Effect of Soiling on Photovoltaic Systems Located in Arid Climates,
Proceedings of the 22nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Milan, Italy.
15. F. Jiang, A. Wong, April 2005. Study on the performance of different types of PV modules in
Singapore, IEEE 7th International Power Engineering Conference, Niigata, Japan.
16. U.S. Department of Energy, The History of Solar.
17. Weidong Xiao, July 2003. A Modiﬁed Adaptive Hill Climbing Maximum Power Point
Tracking (MPPT) Control Method For Photovoltaic Power System, The University of British
Columbia.
18. Introduction to Photovoltaic Systems, Renewable Energy, the Inﬁnite Power of Texas, SECO
Fact Sheet No. 11.
19. E. Allen, N. LaWhite, Y. Yoon, J. Chapman, and M. Ilic, “Interactive object-oriented
simulation of interconnected power systems using SIMULINK,” IEEE Trans. Educ., vol. 44,
no. 1, pp. 87–94, Feb. 2001.
210
K. B. Jani and J. J. Patel

Modeling of Three-Phase Distribution
Transformer for Analysis of Core
and Ohmic Losses Using FEM
Priyal V. Patel and Sameer B. Patel
Abstract This article presents modeling of three-phase 315 kVA-distribution
transformer. The analysis of magnetic ﬂux density, core loss, and ohmic loss of the
transformer is done using 3D ﬁnite element method (FEM). Finite element method
is one of the most efﬁcient methods used to analyze magnetic ﬁelds. The result
shows the comparison between practical value and the value obtained from 3D
FEM.
Keywords Transformer  Core loss  Ohmic loss  Finite element method (FEM)
1
Introduction
Transformer plays a key role in the interconnection of power systems. Without the
transformer, it would not be possible to use electric power. In many different ways,
it is used today. Also, transformers occupy prominent positions in the electric
power system, being the key links between power-generating stations and points of
electric power utilization [1]. The efﬁciency of a transformer is highest among all
the machines; it is around 95–98% [2]. But the major problem associated with a
transformer is a hot spot formation due to increase in temperature at particular
portion. The heating problem is due to increase in losses. Mainly, losses are divided
into two parts: load loss and no-load loss. The no-load loss is the constant loss; they
do not change with the change in load, whereas load loss changes with the change
in load. Core loss is a constant loss. Generally in core, losses occurs in joints. [3].
Core loss is divided into two parts: eddy current loss and hysteresis loss. To
reduce core loss laminated core is used and by increasing numbers of laminations it
can be reduced. Numerical methods are used to estimate and study the leakage and
magnetic ﬁelds. One of the accurate and popular method is ﬁnite element method
P. V. Patel (&)  S. B. Patel
Electrical Department, GCET College, Anand, Gujarat, India
e-mail: priyalp2305@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_19
211

(FEM). There are many methods to reduce stray loss, such as topological change
and shielding.
2
Finite Element Method
FEM is powerful and versatile numerical technique for handling problems
involving complex geometries. It is also referred as ﬁnite element analysis (FEA). It
subdivides a large problem into smaller, simpler parts that are called ﬁnite elements.
The simpler equations that model these ﬁnite elements are then assembled into a
larger system of equations that model the entire problem.
There are many advantages of FEM over other numerical methods; one is that
formulation is independent of problem’s geometrical complexity. Anisotropic,
non-uniform, and nonlinear media can be incorporated into the solution scheme in
FEM. Many commercial software are available that are based on FEM. A ﬂowchart
of ﬁnite element analysis is shown below [4] (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1 FEM ﬂowchart
212
P. V. Patel and S. B. Patel

3
Distribution Transformer Modeling
The modeling of 315 kVA-distribution transformer has been done for the analysis
of magnetic ﬁelds using 3D FEM. The core is made of CRGO steel; it is laminated
to reduce eddy current loss. Initially, stepped core is designed as shown in Fig. 2.
Further, L.V and H.V winding made of copper is designed according to the
speciﬁcations as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 2 Core design of
315 kVA-transformer
Fig. 3 Model of
315 kVA-distribution
transformer
Modeling of Three-Phase Distribution Transformer for Analysis …
213

Figure 4 represents the mesh model of transformer. Mesh generation consists of
dividing the model into a number of tetrahedron units to get accurate results [5].
More the number of cells, more accurate result is produced, but the time of sim-
ulation increases. In this model, analysis is done by considering 500 meshes.
4
Results
The results include magnetizing current, current, and voltage of L.V winding and H.
V winding. Magnetic analysis consists of magnetic ﬂux density in the core, core
loss, and ohmic loss in the winding.
4.1
Current and Voltage Waveforms
Figure 5 represents the magnetizing current of transformer required to magnetize
the core for the ﬁrst time. The value of magnetizing current is very less. The
obtained value is 0.69 A.
Figures 6 and 7 represent the branch current of L.V and H.V windings of
315 kVA-transformer, respectively. The value of branch current is nearly the rated
value. The obtained value of L.V branch current and H.V branch current is 386 A
and 8.38 A, respectively.
Figures 8 and 9 represent the waveform of L.V and H.V winding peak voltages
of 315 kVA-transformer, respectively. Initially, the voltage is increasing thereafter
Fig. 4 Mesh model of 315 kVA-transformer
214
P. V. Patel and S. B. Patel

Fig. 5 Magnetizing current of 315 kVA-distribution transformer
Fig. 6 Branch current of L.V winding
Fig. 7 Branch current of H.V winding
Modeling of Three-Phase Distribution Transformer for Analysis …
215

Fig. 8 L.V winding peak voltage
Fig. 9 H.V winding peak voltage
Fig. 10 Core loss versus time graph
216
P. V. Patel and S. B. Patel

it becomes stable. The obtained value of L.V and H.V winding peak voltage is
351 V and 15 kV, respectively.
The core loss in a transformer is the constant loss; it will not change with the
change in load. Figure 10 shows the core loss versus time graph. It can be seen
from the graph that initially core loss is increasing with time, but after few cycles it
becomes stable. The obtained value of core loss is 644.31 W.
4.2
Magnetic Field Analysis
Figure 11 represents the magnetic ﬂux density distribution of 315 kVA-distribution
transformer. The maximum ﬂux density value obtained is 1.75 T. It can be
observed from the ﬁgure that ﬂux density is maximum at the corners; it is due to the
turning of ﬂux lines which lead to high value of ﬂux density. This will lead to
increase in the loss.
Figure 12 shows the ohmic loss in the winding of the transformer. The obtained
value is 1.917e + 005 watts per meter cube. The total volume of all the three
winding is 0.018 m3. So the ohmic loss in watts is 3450.
Fig. 11 Magnetic ﬂux density distribution in 315 kVA-transformer
Modeling of Three-Phase Distribution Transformer for Analysis …
217

4.3
Comparison of Results
Table 1 shows the comparison of the result of core loss and ohmic loss with
experimental values.
The above results show that the percentage variation of core loss from experi-
mental value is 6.5% and variation of ohmic loss is 7%.
Table 2 represents the comparison of transformer parameters with their actual
values. L.V and H.V voltage, current, and magnetic ﬂux density values are com-
pared; it can be seen that all the values are very close to that of actual value.
Fig. 12 Ohmic loss in the windings of 315 kVA-transformer
Table 1 Comparison of core and ohmic loss value with experimental value
Loss quantity
Experimental value (W)
Value obtained using 3D FEM (W)
Core loss
689
644.31
Ohmic loss
3722
3450
Table 2 Comparison of parameters with actual value
Parameters
Actual value
Value obtained using 3D FEM
L.V voltage
353.54 V
351 V
H.V voltage
15556 V
15302 V
L.V current
420 A
386 A
H.V current
9.54 A
8.36 A
Magnetic ﬂux density
1.71 b/m2
1.79 b/m2
218
P. V. Patel and S. B. Patel

5
Conclusion
From the magnetic ﬂux density plot, we can conclude that the ﬂux density is
maximum at the corners. The core loss versus time graph represents that the core
loss becomes constant after a few cycles. From the comparison table, it can be
concluded that the FEM is very accurate as all the values are very close to the
experimental values.
References
1. Pavlos S. Georgilakis, “Spotlight on Modern Transformer Design”, Springer-Verlag London
Limited 2009.
2. R.K. Agrawal, “Principles of electrical machine design”, S.K. Kataria & Sons.
3. Olivares-Galván, Juan C., Pavlos S. Georgilakis, and Rodrigo Ocon-Valdez. “A review of
transformer losses.” Electric Power Components and Systems 37.9 (2009): 1046–1062.
4. Kirar, Mukesh, et al. “Study of stray losses reduction through Finite Element Method.” 2013
Annual IEEE India Conference (INDICON) 2013.
5. Olivares, Juan Carlos, et al. “Reducing losses in distribution transformers.” IEEE transactions
on power delivery 18.3 (2003): 821–826.
Modeling of Three-Phase Distribution Transformer for Analysis …
219

Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting
Using Feed Forward Neural Network
Ankitkumar M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi
Abstract Wind energy injection is intermittent in nature and is one of the most
affecting factors in maintaining deviation limits. This paper proposes an artiﬁcial
neural network-based day-ahead short-term wind energy forecasting using feed
forward neural network. Different training algorithms were studied, and mean
absolute percentage error of each has been calculated. The results show that
Levenberg–Marquardt back propagation provides a better accuracy than other
training algorithms.
Keywords Wind energy forecasting  ANN  Feed forward neural network
MATLAB
1
Introduction
Wind energy is one of the most promising sources for electricity generation. The
utilization of wind energy has become increasingly popular due to its free avail-
ability and environmental friendly. Renewable energy sources are growing
remarkably since the last two decades among which wind energy is the fastest
growing source of energy. Also renewable energy sources are considered as best
alternate source for conventional energy.
The factor to be considered in wind energy is its reliability as wind is uncertain.
Wind speed is the most difﬁcult weather parameter to forecast. The intermittent
behavior of wind speed causes difﬁculty in forecasting wind generation [1]. To deal
with such challenging nature of wind generation, also increasing wind energy
A. M. Makwana (&)  P. R. Gandhi
Electrical Department, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Institute
of Technology, SVIT, Vasad, Gujarat, India
e-mail: ankitkumarmakwana97@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_20
221

penetration and to overcome its impact, a realistic forecast is vital and prerequisite
for reliable operation. Moreover, real-time wind generation and operational avail-
ability of wind mills are also crucial part for more accurate wind energy forecasting.
For better operation of power system, a good forecasting has to be made by
transmission system operator [2]. A physical approach for wind forecasting tech-
nique uses wind pattern along with wind turbine power curve for forecasting output
power of wind. Mathematical model can be used by forecaster based on physical
approach [3]. Physical models can be used which considers terrain, obstacles,
temperature, and pressure to estimate wind power generation.
Currently, various methodologies have been developed to predict the wind
power and wind speed. Methodology like time series modeling such as ARMA and
ARIMA provide a good forecasting. To forecast for short- and medium-term
interval of time artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) has proved very useful. ANN
provides accurate result with minimum errors.
ANN is inspired from biological nervous system. ANN is composed of highly
interconnected processing elements working in union to solve speciﬁc problems.
ANN is used in speciﬁc applications such as pattern recognition and data classi-
ﬁcation through learning process. Thus, ANN is an information processing system.
In this information processing system, the elements called neurons which process
the information. ANN consists of many nodes and connecting synapses. Nodes
operate in parallel and communicate with each other through connecting synapses
[4]. The signals are transmitted by connected links. This links possess an associated
weight, which are multiplied with incoming signal. The output signal is obtained by
applying activation to the net input. In recent years, ANN is used for forecasting
and for solving complex problems. The advantage of ANN includes modeling of
both linear and nonlinear systems by means of learning with training data [5].
Transmission system operator currently uses day-ahead wind energy forecast to
predict the power to be delivered for each time blocks of the next day. This forecast
ensembles day-ahead commitments of generation resources [6]. By using day-ahead
forecasting, it helps the system operator to meet with the demand of power.
Due to variability and uncertainty in wind power generation, it becomes difﬁcult
for power system operator to maintain the balance between generation and demand.
A reliable prediction of day-ahead forecast helps the power system operator to make
good decision in critical situation and also to maintain grid stability of the system.
Development of wind generation has increased in state of Gujarat. It has 52
pooling station for wind generation. Wind farms are located at the coastal regions,
and also offshore wind projects are being developed. As wind energy injection is
intermittent in nature, an accurate forecasting should be made.
Section 2 describes wind generation characteristics, wind pattern of one region.
Section 3 presents the methodology implemented in wind energy forecasting.
Section 4 shows the forecast values and is compared with actual values and Sect. 5
provides conclusion.
222
A. M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi

2
Wind Generation Characteristics
Gujarat has a good wind potential. The wind installed capacity of Gujarat is
4086 MW as on July 2016 and currently ranks 3rd in installed capacity across
India. Various wind farms which is located at coastline of Gujarat produce large
amount of wind power. So it gives challenge to system operator to meet between
generation and demand. The power obtained from renewable energy sources should
be used instantly at the time it is produced. Initially, it is needed to understand the
behavior of wind generation before developing wind energy forecasting method-
ology. Annual-, month-, day-wise scenarios of actual wind generation as well as
seasonal scenario need to be observed to identify the behavior of wind generation.
Wind generation is also affected by heavy rain. Sudden rise and fall of wind may
lead to wide variation in wind generation.
Seasonal variation of Gujarat also affects wind generation. Gujarat has primarily
three seasons: winter, from November to March; summer, from March to June; and
monsoon, from July to September. As Gujarat has a long coast line, sea breezes and
it inﬂuences the wind characteristics in this region.
Wind power output depends on weather parameters such as wind speed, tem-
perature, pressure, humidity, and air density [7]. The wind power equation is
given by
P ¼ 0:5 qAv3
ð1Þ
where q is air density in kg/m3, A is the swept area of turbine blade, v is the wind
speed in m/s, and P is the power in W. Weather parameters play important role in
wind energy forecasting model. Wind speed is one of the major parameters to be
considered as a slight variation in wind speed causes change in wind power. Wind
power curve depends on three key points: cut-in speed, speed below which turbine
not produce power; rated speed, speed at which rated power of turbine is produced;
and cutoff speed, deﬁned as the speed beyond which the turbine is not allowed to
deliver power. The production of wind power depends humidity, and the relative
humidity of air depends on amount of water vapor in air, which determines air
density. Temperature and pressure directly inﬂuence wind power as they are related
to air density. Also geographic location also affects wind generation, if wind power
plant are installed where the availability of wind speed, temperature, pressure,
humidity is not available at desired range wind power plant will not give a better
output.
Wind generation trend remains same during particular season, but it does not
mean that the same pattern will be followed the entire season. Wind generation may
have change of pattern on hourly basis.
Figure 1 shows the wind pattern of one region of Jamnagar, Gujarat. From the
ﬁgure, a wide variability in wind energy of three days can be seen.
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed Forward Neural …
223

Wind energy pattern also changes from one region to another as it is related to
wind speed. Due to this type of variability, it becomes difﬁcult to manage grid
operations.
3
Methodology Implemented
ANN-based methods are good choice to study forecasting problems. ANN has
ability to learn from the past data which is very useful for future prediction.
Various ANN techniques like feed forward neural network (FFN), radial basis
function neural network (RBFN), and Elman recurrent neural network can be used
for forecasting.
In this paper, wind energy forecasting is done using feed forward neural net-
work. Feed forward neural network is formed by interconnection of several layers.
A three-layered feed forward neural network is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 1 Wind energy pattern of three days
Fig. 2 Three-layer feed
forward neural network
224
A. M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi

FFN often has more than one hidden layers followed by output layer. Multiple
layers allow network to learn nonlinear relationship between input and output.
Analysis was done on one of pooling stations of Gujarat. The wind farm of
WWIL is considered for forecasting. The wind farm has installed capacity of
319 MW. It is connected to Tebhda substation. Wind power and weather data were
provided by SLDC GETCO. Location of wind farm is at Jamnagar, so hourly
weather dataset was provided.
Various weather data which affect the wind power are to be considered. Weather
dataset is considered as the input data, and generated wind power is given as Target
data. After specifying, the inputs and target data were normalized to a range of [−1, 1].
Normalization is to bring data in a uniform scale. It is helpful for better training
performance. The equation of normalization used is as below:
pn ¼ minpn þ maxpn  minpn
ð
Þ  p  minp
ð
Þ= maxp  pmin
ð
Þ
After normalization, feed forward neural network has to be created by specifying
number of inputs and target data and hidden layer. Various parameters such as
training algorithm, learning rate, number of epochs are to be speciﬁed. The neural
network is then trained by using different types of training algorithm.
Short-term wind energy forecasting procedure is as below:
Weather parameters are comprised of wind speed, temperature, pressure,
humidity. The parameters selected as weather data are related with wind power.
From Eq. (1), wind power is related with cube of wind speed and is also related
with air density. Air density is related with pressure and temperature, so all these
parameters are used in weather data. Wind power data are considered for the
investigation. Hourly dataset of months of July and August was used for detail
study. A multilayered feed forward neural network consisting of input layer, hidden
layer, and output layer is used. The number of neurons in hidden layer is selected on
a trial-and-error basis. Two types of training algorithms are used and compared. The
neural network is trained on hourly dataset of months of July and August, and
prediction was made for day ahead. The network is trained using Levenberg–
Marquardt algorithm. The LM algorithm tries to reduce mean square error, i.e.,
minimizing the performance function in form of sum of squares.
MSE ¼ 1
n
X
n
q¼1
Tq  Aq
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
Tq
= target value
Aq
= actual value
The second algorithm used for training the network is gradient descent with
momentum back propagation. Gradient descent with momentum depends on two
parameters: 1. learning rate which is similar to simple gradient descent and 2.
the momentum constant in which the value is to be set between 0 and 1.
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed Forward Neural …
225

Another algorithm is gradient descent back propagation. The weights and biases are
updated in the direction of negative gradient of performance function. The learning
rate is multiplied times the negative of the gradient to determine the changes to the
weights and biases [8].
The network is ready for training; during the training, weights and bias are
adjusted. After training, the neural network was tested on new dataset, and error has
been computed.
The network is developed and trained using MATLAB R2015a. Figure 3 shows
the feed forward neural network consisting of four input parameters followed by
two hidden layers, and one output layer has been created. First hidden layer consists
of 30 neurons, and second hidden layer consists of 20 neurons. The output layer
consists of single neuron. The transfer function of ﬁrst layer and second layer in
‘tansig’ i.e. hyperbolic tansigmoid. It is selected as it gives high convergence. The
output layer has transfer function ‘purelin.’
Error analysis can be computed by mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) and
is given by
MAPE ¼ 1
n
X
n
i¼1
Zai  Zpi=Zai
ð3Þ
where
Zai
is actual value
Zpi
is forecasted value
n
is number of periods
4
Result and Discussion
Feed forward neural network has been developed, network was ﬁrst trained on
hourly data of two months, and prediction was made for day ahead. Three types of
training algorithm were considered: LM back propagation, gradient descent with
momentum back propagation, and gradient descent back propagation. MAPE for all
the three training algorithms is obtained.
Fig. 3 Developed network
226
A. M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi

1. Training algorithm: LM back propagation
Levenberg–Marquardt back propagation was implemented on the developed
neural network. The learning rate was set at 0.01. Parameters were divided into
random division consisting of training samples used for analysis is 70%, validation
and testing of network at 15% each (Fig. 4).
The best validation performance is at 0.033959 at epochs 5 as LM back prop-
agation is fastest and gives a stable convergence.
Figure 5 depicts the regression analysis on the test data. Regression analysis
clariﬁes in terms of training, testing, and validation of the developed model. It can
also be seen from Fig. 5 test and validation have a value greater than 0.96.
Also the actual and predicted plots of wind power generation using feed forward
neural network trained with LM back propagation on hourly basis are shown in
Fig. 6. MAPE with LM back propagation is 13.08%.
2. Training algorithm: gradient descent with momentum back propagation
In this algorithm, learning rate was same and momentum constant of the
parameter was considered as 0.8. Data division was random as above case. The best
validation performance was obtained at 0.0035504 at epoch 286 (Fig. 7).
Regression analysis was also done as shown in Fig. 8. MAPE obtained is
28.75%. The validation of the trained algorithm obtained is R = 0.92479, and
testing result is R = 0.96434.
Fig. 4 Performance plot
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed Forward Neural …
227

Figure 9 shows actual and predicted outputs of wind power generation using
GDM back propagation. MAPE obtained is 28.75%.
3. Training algorithm: gradient descent back propagation
Gradient descent back propagation combines learning rate with momentum
training. The momentum constant was taken as 0.8. The training algorithm took 115
iterations. Data division was random, i.e., 70% data were used for training, rest 15%
for testing and validation. The learning rate was same as previous case. In Fig. 10,
performance plot best validation is obtained at 0.07787 at epoch 98.
Fig. 5 ANN regression analysis
228
A. M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi

Regression plot is shown in Fig. 11. The testing and validation value for
regression analysis is more than 0.95.
Figure 12 depicts actual and predicted results of wind power generation with GD
back propagation. MAPE of above algorithm is 18.89%.
Table 1 indicates the comparison of various training algorithm.
Fig. 6 Comparison of actual and predicted wind power using LM back propagation
Fig. 7 Performance plot
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed Forward Neural …
229

Fig. 8 ANN regression analysis
230
A. M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi

Fig. 9 Comparison of actual and predicted wind power using gradient descent with momentum
back propagation
Fig. 10 Performance plot
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed Forward Neural …
231

Fig. 11 Regression analysis
Fig. 12 Comparison of actual and predicted wind power using gradient descent back propagation
232
A. M. Makwana and P. R. Gandhi

5
Conclusion
The developed feed forward neural network is capable for providing day-ahead
wind energy forecasting. The network is able to forecast on hourly wind power.
From Table 1, it is seen that LM back propagation provides accurate forecasting
with least deviation between actual and forecasted value. The developed model
gives a desirable accuracy. The predicted results show that ANN is an excellent
tool, and by using different algorithm, it can provide a better forecasting.
Acknowledgements The author would like to thank SLDC, GETCO for providing weather and
wind power data for analysis.
References
1. Ahmed Ouammi, Hanane Dagdougui, Roberto Sacile, “Short Term of Wind Power by an
Artiﬁcial Neural Network Approach” IEEE 2012.
2. Priyadarshini S, Booma J, Dhanarega A. J, Dhanlakshmi “A very short term wind power
forecasting using back propagation algorithm in neural networks”, Vol 10, No. 6, April 2015
APRN Journal of engineering and applied sciences.
3. Anirudh S. Shekhawat “Wind Power Forecasting using Artiﬁcial Neural Networks.”, Vol.
3 Issue 4 April 2014 IJERT.
4. Introduction to Neural Networks using MATLAB 6.0 by S N Sivanandam, S Sumathi,
S N Deepa.
5. K. G. Upadhyay, A.K Choudhary, M.M. Tripathi “Short term wind speed forecasting using
feed forward Neural Network” Vol 3 No. 5 2011 pp 107–112.
6. Debra Lew, Michael Milligan, Gary Jordan and Richard Piwko “The value of Wind Power
Forecasting”, 2nd Conference on Weather, Climate and the New Energy Economy Jan 26 2011.
7. Vicky Jain, Alok Singh, Vibhor Chauhan and Alok Pandey “Analytical Study of Wind Power
Prediction using Feed Forward Neural Network” ICCPEIC pp 303–306.
8. Neural Network Toolbox, MATHWORK Inc. Mark H Beale, Martin T. Hagan, Howard B.
Demuth.
Table 1 Comparison of different training algorithm
Training algorithm
MAPE (%)
LM back propagation
13.08
Gradient descent back propagation
18.89
Gradient descent with momentum back propagation
28.75
Day-Ahead Wind Energy Forecasting Using Feed Forward Neural …
233

To Find Parameters of Transformer Using
Open-Circuit and Short-Circuit Tests
Pooja N. Upadhyaya and Vijay H. Makwana
Abstract The transformer is one of the most important components in power
system network. Because of its relatively simple construction, it is a highly reliable
piece of equipment. Keeping design principle in mind the parameter of transformer
was obtained by open circuit and short circuit tests, without actually loading the
transformer, and these two assessed tests give the test results which are used to
determine the equivalent circuit parameters. This paper presents the equivalent
parameters from test data and signiﬁcance H.V. or L.V. side in which the calcu-
lation to be performed, and then simulated same thing in MATLAB/Simulink. The
comparison of simulated results and experimental results of open circuit and short
circuit is shown.
Keywords Single-phase transformer  Simulation  Laboratory tests
Parameters of transformer
1
Introduction
Transformers are the most vital component of power system. Transformer is a static
device which transfers electric power from one circuit to another without changing
its frequency [1].
To ﬁnd out the parameters of transformer, we have to perform some experiments
on single-phase transformer in laboratory [2]. Open-circuit test and short-circuit test
are such experiments. These tests are performed in laboratory and are replicates via
MATLAB/Simulink model. It has enhanced as well as complete understanding of
transformer setup under changed condition [3].
P. N. Upadhyaya (&)  V. H. Makwana
G.H. Patel College of Engineering & Technology, V.V. Nagar, India
e-mail: pooja.upadhyay007@gmail.com
V. H. Makwana
e-mail: vijaymakwana@gcet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_21
235

With offered Simulink model, we are clear with changed characteristic for
transformer operation and we can easily calculate any required data, e.g., efﬁciency,
regulation [1]. The MATLAB simulation as part of laboratory experiment improves
laboratory experiment providing the opportunity to conﬁrm results of laboratory
experiment and compare them with those obtained by MATLAB simulations. The
steady-state operation of the single-phase transformer, connected with the load we
can calculate current and power, voltage regulation percentage and efﬁciency
according to the load. This requires the knowledge of equivalent circuit obtained by
open-circuit and short-circuit tests [4].
The MATLAB Simulink model of transformer is attempted by using linear
transformer model available in Simulink which will work on the linear character-
istic of transformer [3]. We have used readings for the no-load test and the
short-circuit test.
2
Experimental Setups of Transformer Tests
The parameters of transformer are inspected using an equivalent circuit. The
equivalent circuit of transformer referred to its primary side is shown in Fig. 1. In
this circuit, Rp and Xp are the primary winding resistance and leakage reactance,
respectively, Rs and Xs are the secondary winding resistance and leakage reactance,
respectively, Ro stands for resistance core loss, and Xo stands for magnetizing
reactance. N stands for transformer turn ratio [3].
The excitation current is very small compared to the load current of the trans-
former. In fact, it is very small that under normal condition it causes a completely
negligible voltage drop in Rp and Xp [1]. So, the parameters of transformer are
found from the open-circuit and short-circuit tests.
The SimPower system toolbox is valuable software to change the simulation
model of power system application in MATLAB/Simulink. There are many dis-
advantages on test of transformer, like testing transformer, testing condition, safety,
Fig. 1 Equivalent circuit of a transformer referred to primary
236
P. N. Upadhyaya and V. H. Makwana

and many more. To overwhelm such short coming, we used this Simulink tech-
nology to decrease the testing condition [5].
2.1
Open-Circuit Test
As shown in Fig. 2, in open-circuit test the secondary of transformer is kept open
circuited, and its primary winding is connected to a full-rated line voltage. The
parameters are calculated from short-circuit test reading referred to primary side.
The purpose of this investigation is to deﬁne no-load loss or core loss which is
helpful in ﬁnding resistance core loss and magnetizing reactance [6].
When normal voltage is applied to the primary side of transformer, normal ﬂux
will be there in the core of transformer; hereafter, normal iron losses will be noted
by wattmeter. As the primary no-load current is very minor, copper loss is negli-
gible in primary side and zero in secondary side [1].
The equations used to ﬁnd out the parameters of transformer are given below:
W ¼ V1I0 cos ;0
Il ¼ I0 sin ;0
Iw ¼ I0 cos ;0
X0 ¼ V1
Il
R0 ¼ V1
Iw
The Simulink model of open-circuit test of transformer is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 2 Experimental setup of open-circuit test on transformer
To Find Parameters of Transformer Using Open-Circuit and Short …
237

2.2
Short-Circuit Test
The short-circuit test is carried out to calculate the parameters of transformer. In this
experiment, the secondary side of transformer is shorted and the primary side of
transformer is connected to lower voltage side as shown in Fig. 4. The parameters
are calculated from short-circuit test reading referred to secondary side. The input
voltage is adjusted till the current in short-circuited winding is equal to its rated
value [6]. The input voltage, current, and power are measured.
Since the input voltage is low at the time of SC test, excitation side has small
current. If the excitation current is not taken into consideration, then the total
voltage drop in the transformer can be credited to the series element in the circuits
[1]. The magnitude of the series impedance raised to the primary side of the
transformer is as follows:
Fig. 3 Simulink implementation of open-circuit test of linear transformer
Fig. 4 Experimental setup of the short-circuit test on transformer
238
P. N. Upadhyaya and V. H. Makwana

Z01 ¼ Vsc
I1
W ¼ I2
1R01
R01 ¼ W
I1
X01 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Z2
01  R2
01


q
It is possible to determine the total series impedance raised to the primary side
using this method. To split the Req into primary and secondary components, the dc
test is achieved. In addition, the Xeq approximately can be split into the following:
XP ¼ N2Xs ¼ Xeq
2
The Simulink model of short-circuit test of transformer is shown in Fig. 5.
Several measurement blocks are used in Simulink model like current measure-
ment and voltage measurement are used to measure current, voltage, and power.
3
Experimental Setup for Transformer Test
To ﬁnd out the parameters of transformer, we perform the open-circuit and
short-circuit tests on transformer. In this method, the actual load is not used on
transformer. But the equivalent circuit parameter of transformer is determined by
conducting two tests on transformer.
Fig. 5 Simulink implementation of short-circuit test of linear transformer
To Find Parameters of Transformer Using Open-Circuit and Short …
239

3.1
Setup for Open-Circuit Test
Procedure
1. Connect the circuit as per the setup shown in Fig. 6.
2. After getting it checked, switch on the supply.
3. Adjust the rated voltage input to the H.V. winding with the help of autotrans-
former (say 230 V).
4. Take the readings of wattmeter, ammeter, and voltmeter.
5. Switch off the supply.
3.2
Setup for Short-Circuit Test
Procedure
1. Connect the circuit as per the set shown in Fig. 7.
2. First of all, adjust the autotransformer setting for zero output voltage, and then
switch on the supply after getting it checked.
3. Increase the input voltage slowly by the means of autotransformer, till rated
full-load current circulates in both the windings.
4. Take the readings of all meters for full-load current value.
5. Switch off the supply.
Precautions
1. All the connection should be properly checked.
2. Check all the meters are on zero position; if not all, then set it to zero position.
3. Connection is done by above all the conditions.
Fig. 6 Setup of open-circuit test
240
P. N. Upadhyaya and V. H. Makwana

4. While performing SC test, care should be taken to see that autotransformer
tapping positions are for zero output and then the input voltage should be
increased slowly until the ﬁnal load current is circulating in the windings.
4
Result Analysis and Discussion
For the transformer tested, the experimental setup of open-circuit and short-circuit
tests were performed. The results are given in Tables 1 and 2, respectively. In
Table 1, the comparison of open-circuit test between simulated result and experi-
mental result is shown, and Table 2 represents the comparison of short-circuit test
Fig. 7 Setup for short-circuit test
Table 1 Analysis result of open-circuit test
Experimental results
Simulation results
% Error
V0 (v)
230
230.17
0.7
I0 (A)
0.25
0.245
2
P0 (W)
25
24.494
2.024
Table 2 Analysis result of short-circuit test
Parameters
Experimental
results
Simulation
results
% Error
Vsc (V)
12.35
12.38
0.24
Isc (A)
4.35
4.298
1.19
Psc (W)
50
49.99
0.02
To Find Parameters of Transformer Using Open-Circuit and Short …
241

between simulated result and experimental result. In Table 3, the equivalent
parameters were obtained by calculation.
The simulation result was nearly same as obtained by experimental setup in
laboratory. The percentage error is shown in Tables 1 and 2 of open-circuit test and
short-circuit test, respectively.
4.1
Open-Circuit Test
By performing experiment of open-circuit test on transformer, Table 1 shows
experimental result and simulated result.
4.2
Short-Circuit Test
By performing experiment of short-circuit test on transformer, Table 2 shows
experimental result and simulated result.
To ﬁnd out the parameters of transformer, we use the formulas given above. The
parameters of transformer like resistance and inductance referred to primary side of
transformer and the resistance core loss and magnetizing reactance obtained by
mathematical calculation, after performing open-circuit and short-circuit tests on
transformer. The result obtained is given in Table 3.
In general, the simulation models were helpful that MATLAB and Simulink can
be easily used. Using simulation tool, one can easily ﬁnd out the parameters and
characteristics of transformers under varying condition.
Important Note
If primary is L.V. winding and secondary is H.V. winding, then the transformer is
step-up transformer. In short-circuit test, supply is given to H.V. winding and L.V.
is shorted. In such case, we connect meter on secondary side of transformer, i.e., H.
V. side; for this purpose, the H.V. side acts as primary side of transformer. In such
case, the parameters are calculated from the short-circuit test reading, which are
referred to secondary side. So, before doing this calculation, it is necessary to ﬁnd
out whether the readings are recorded on transformer primary side or secondary side
and accordingly the parameters are calculated.
Table 3 Parameters of transformer
R1
L1
Rm
Lm
0.04 p.u.
0.01 p.u.
40 p.u.
19.76 p.u.
242
P. N. Upadhyaya and V. H. Makwana

In step-down transformer, high-voltage side itself is primary side to which
supply is given in short-circuit test. So, in that case results of parameters are
referred to primary side.
5
Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presented simulation models of transformer performed in MATLAB as
well performed test in laboratory to ﬁnd out the parameters of transformer.
Parameters were obtained by performing test experiments in laboratory, and the
obtained results were then used for the calculation to ﬁnd out the other parameters
of transformer.
The test performs open circuit, short circuit, presented in this paper, can also be
used in the software called MATLAB which gives complete vision for different
operation on a single-phase transformer.
In this paper, we have performed the simulation with linear transformer. Further,
we can do the same simulation with saturable transformer considering B–H curve of
transformer and different characteristics can be obtained.
Acknowledgements Special acknowledgments for G.H. Patel College of Engineering and
Technology, Vallabh Vidyanagar, India, for letting us to use electrical machine laboratory which
helped us to do experiments to ﬁnd out the parameters of transformer.
Appendix
The rating of transformer used for this test has following speciﬁcation:
1 kVA, 230/115 V single-phase transformer, 50 Hz.
References
1. Theraja, B. L., Theraja, A. K., Patel, U. A., Uppal, S. L., Panchal, J. C., Oza, B.,… & Patel, R.
M. (2005). A Textbook of Electrical Technology Vol II. Chand & Co., New Delhi.
2. Ayasun, Saffet, and Chika O. Nwankpa. “Transformer tests using MATLAB/Simulink and
their integration into undergraduate electric machinery courses.” Computer Applications in
Engineering Education 14.2 (2006): 142–150.
3. Laughton, Michael A., and Maurice George Say, eds. Electrical engineer’s reference book.
Elsevier, 2013.
4. A. C. Franklin, and D. P. Franklin, The J & P Transformer Books, 11th ed. New Delhi: Aditya
Books, 1983.
5. Song, H., Zhao, F., & He, D. (2012). Simulation Study on Internal Fault of Transformer.
Physics Procedia, 25, 459–464.
6. M. G. Say, The Performance and Design of Alternating Current Machines, 3rd ed. NewDelhi:
CBSPublishers, 1983.
To Find Parameters of Transformer Using Open-Circuit and Short …
243

Parametric Study of Virgin and Aged
Transformer Oil
Nikita Rajda and R. R. Patel
Abstract Liquid dielectrics are deemed to be more useful because of their inherent
properties. Amongst them, transformer oil is more widely used. It is expected to
function as both, a dielectric and a coolant. Due to its interaction with various types
of stress while in-service with the transformer oil undergoes consistent degradation.
Apart from the degradation due to external factors, the oil also undergoes inherent
degradation. In order to gain a broader insight, it is essential to study this inherent
degradation. To analyze these characteristics has become even more essential due to
the increasing utilization of high voltage. With this aim, this paper assesses the
major parameters of the virgin and naturally aged transformer oil. To analyze the
dielectric strength, AC breakdown voltage test has been conducted. Density, vis-
cosity, ﬂash, and ﬁre point tests have been conducted over a range of temperature to
gauge its physical traits. Weibull analysis has been employed for the statistical
evaluation of the AC breakdown voltage data. The tests indicate that the dielectric
breakdown strength shows major degradation with age, but the other tested
parameters exhibit a minor deterioration.
Keywords Transformer oil  Virgin  Naturally aged  AC breakdown voltage
Viscosity  Flash point  Fire point  Weibull analysis
1
Introduction
Transformer oil is typically a highly reﬁned mineral oil that is stable at high
temperature which has excellent properties to suppress arcing, serve as coolant and
electrical insulation [1]. The transformer oil has an effect on the dielectric properties
of paper and pressboard insulations as well. Thermally, the oil removes the heat
generated during the operation of transformer by convection. Moreover, size and
N. Rajda  R. R. Patel (&)
Department of Electrical Engineering, G.H. Patel College of Engineering
& Technology, Vallabh Vidyanagar, 388120 Anand, Gujarat, India
e-mail: riteshpatel@gcet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_22
245

weight of the transformer and the current density of the transformer windings
depend on the amount of oil and the rate of heat transfer [2].
Oil used in transformers is expected to have high dielectric strength, low vis-
cosity, high ﬂash, and ﬁre point and is required to sustain these properties for a long
duration of time. These are the essential electrical, physical, and thermal properties.
It is not feasible and economical to replace the oil frequently. Hence, from the
performance, safety as well as economic viewpoint, it becomes essential to study its
major parameters as well as the changes in them with age.
Keeping these aspects in mind, two types of oil were tested—virgin oil and aged
oil. The virgin oil used is TRANSOL GIS: IS 335 manufactured by Savita Oil
Technologies Limited. The aged oil is 20 years old, and its manufacturer is
unknown. It has undergone a natural degradation without ever coming into contact
with a transformer. Figure 1 shows both the types of oil. Visually, it can be stated
that the aged oil has undergone severe degradation. Both the types of oil have been
sampled directly from the oil container.
2
Experimental Details
2.1
AC Breakdown Voltage Test (50 Hz)
The breakdown voltage is an indicator of the dielectric strength. This test was
carried out as per IEC 60156 standard. The test was conducted in oil test kit
manufactured by High Voltage, India. Figure 2 shows its schematic diagram. The
test cell comprises of spherical brass electrodes at a standard gap of 2.5 mm. A total
of three samples each of both the types were taken. Six tests were conducted on
each oil sample at an interval of 2 min. The voltage was raised with the help of a
knob at an interval of 2 kV/s. Before replacing any oil sample, the test cell was
thoroughly cleaned. The mean value of the six consecutive tests was taken as the
breakdown voltage strength of the respective sample.
Fig. 1 Virgin and aged
transformer oil
246
N. Rajda and R. R. Patel

2.2
Density Test
The density of both the oil was measured with the help of 10 ml pycnometers
manufactured by Borosil and a high precision weighing scale with four digits of
precision manufactured by Mettler Toledo. The pycnometer is also known as
speciﬁc gravity bottle. The density gives an indication of the suitability of the oil in
terms of its thickness at a particular temperature.
2.3
Viscosity
Viscosity is an important physical property of oil. It has an inﬂuence on both the
electrical properties and the heat transfer performance of mineral oil [3]. The
kinematic viscosity was measured using Redwood Viscometer-1: Universal man-
ufactured by Raj Instruments, India, as per ASTM D445:04 standard.
It is a capillary type viscometer. The type-1 viscometer is used for ﬂuids having
viscosity corresponding to Redwood seconds less than 2000. It makes use of the
water bath to heat the oil. After the oil is heated, at a speciﬁed temperature, the time
taken by the oil to ﬁll 50 ml in a beaker is known as the Redwood second. It is
converted to centimeter stokes using a speciﬁc formula.
The dynamic viscosity, which describes the force needed to surpass the internal
friction between the oil layers, was also calculated using the results obtained from
the density test and the kinematic viscosity test.
Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of the oil test kit
Parametric Study of Virgin and Aged Transformer Oil
247

2.4
Measurement of Flash Point and Fire Point
Flash point and ﬁre point can indicate contamination as well as potential ﬁre hazard.
It is vital to know their values since the transformer oil undergoes constant heating
under working conditions. The ﬂash point indicates the lowest temperature at which
the oil vaporizes to form an ignitable mixture with air. The ﬁre point is the lowest
temperature beyond the ﬂash point at which the vapor continues to burn for 5 s [4].
These properties are based on an empirical measurement than a fundamental
physical parameter. The test for ﬂash and ﬁre points was conducted in a closed cup
type Pensky–Martens apparatus manufactured by Indian Trading. This apparatus
makes use of a brass test cup, which is ﬁtted with cover. The oil sample is heated in
this cup and stirred at speciﬁc rate. The ﬂash point test has been conducted as per
ASTM D93:02 standard.
3
Results and Discussion
3.1
AC Breakdown Tests
As can be seen in Table 1, the breakdown voltage value of the virgin oil is nearly
1.85 times that of the aged oil, which indicates that the oil has undergone inherent
degradation with time without the effect of any external factors.
In order to obtain broader distribution of the breakdown voltage values at all the
probabilities, Weibull analysis, a popular statistical method has been employed. It is
appropriate especially for calculating the withstand voltages at low probabilities.
Therefore, we use Weibull distribution to calculate the withstand voltages and
obtain the shape parameter and scale parameter.
The cumulative distribution function of the two-parameter Weibull distribution
is given as follows [5]:
F x
ð Þ ¼ 1  exp  x=a
ð
Þ
½
b
ð1Þ
a = scale parameter calculated at 63.2%,
b = shape parameter,
x = breakdown voltage value.
Table 1 AC breakdown
voltage test results
Sr. No.
Virgin (kV)
Aged (kV)
Sample 1
32.5
16.84
Sample 2
29
15.5
Sample 3
29.67
17
248
N. Rajda and R. R. Patel

From Fig. 3, it can be seen that the Weibull analysis reafﬁrms that the aged oil
has undergone severe degradation. The virgin oil exhibits superior performance at
all the Weibull probabilities.
The shape parameter depicts the homogeneity of the results, which points to the
scattering of the data. The virgin oil, as can be seen from the shape parameter
depicted in Fig. 4, is more homogeneous in nature, as compared to the aged oil.
The scale parameter in Fig. 4 reafﬁrms the experimentally obtained values and
displays the superiority of the virgin oil over the aged oil. It shows that the aged oil
holds a value of 17.5 kV, while the virgin oil holds nearly double value of 31.3 kV
Fig. 3 Comparison of breakdown voltage of virgin and aged oil at Weibull probabilities
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
α (kV)
β
Virgin
Aged
Fig. 4 Comparison of
Weibull parameters
Parametric Study of Virgin and Aged Transformer Oil
249

3.2
Density Test
As can be seen in Fig. 5, there is a deﬁnite increase in density with age, which can
be attributed to the oxidation of oil and the resulting by-products. Although, it can
be seen that the increment in density is minor, which does not lead to disastrous
effects.
3.3
Viscosity Test
Figure 6 shows the temperature performance of both the types of oil with time in
terms of Redwood seconds. A clear nonlinear performance is obtained, indicating
the non-Newtonian nature of the oil. The obtained kinematic viscosity of the aged
oil is greater than the virgin oil as can be seen from Fig. 7. It is visible that with
increase in temperature, nearly after the temperature of 45 °C, the gap between the
viscosity values of both the oil decreases, thereby indicating a minor improvement
of the viscous characteristics of the aged oil with temperature, which can be
attributed to the evaporation of volatile impurities. Figure 8 denoting the dynamic
viscosity shows that the virgin oil overcomes the internal friction between the oil
layers in a superior manner compared to the aged oil.
3.4
Flash Point and Fire Point Test
Table 2 enlists the obtained empirical values for these tests. It can be seen that both
the types of oil exhibit high ﬂash and ﬁre points, though the virgin oil is far
superior. The minimum requirement of ﬂash point of transformer oil is 140 °C [6].
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
31.2
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Density (g/cm3)
Temperature (˚ C)
Aged
Virgin
Fig. 5 Changes in density
with temperature
250
N. Rajda and R. R. Patel

Even after aging, the 20 years old exhibits sufﬁcient values, this can be attributed to
the fact that this particular oil was naturally aged over a period of 20 years and has
not been in contact with transformer. Hence, it is devoid of sludge and other such
impurities.
Fig. 6 Redwood seconds versus temperature
Fig. 7 Kinematic viscosity of oil samples
Parametric Study of Virgin and Aged Transformer Oil
251

4
Conclusions
From this work, it can be concluded that there is a deﬁnite inherent degradation of
oil with aging. The breakdown voltage values at all probabilities are reduced to a
great extent with age, as afﬁrmed by Weibull analysis. Though the density and
viscosity values have increased with age, the increment is quite minor and will not
have any major impact. The ﬂash and ﬁre points exhibit a sufﬁcient value even after
a lengthy span of 20 years.
Thus, it can be inferred that despite the natural aging of transformer oil, the
breakdown voltage value and hence the dielectric strength undergo major degra-
dation, while the cooling properties deteriorate only slightly.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Dr. Sunil Chaki of the Department of
Physics, Sardar Patel University, Vallabh Vidyanagar for the invaluable inputs and providing the
aged transformer oil.
Fig. 8 Dynamic viscosity of oil samples
Table 2 Flash and ﬁre point
test results
Oil type
Flash point (°C)
Fire point (°C)
Virgin
164
192
Aged
144
158
252
N. Rajda and R. R. Patel

References
1. R. Karthik,T. Sree Renga Raja, R. Madavan, “Enhancement of Critical Characteristics of
Transformer Oil Using Nanomaterials”, Journal of Arab Science and Engineering, Vol. 38,
PP 2725–2733, 2013.
2. Pugazhendi Sugumaran.C, “Experimental Evaluation on Dielectric and Thermal Characteristics
of Nano Filler Added Transformer Oil, IEEE International conference on high voltage
engineering and application, pp. 207–210, September 2012.
3. Jin, H., T. Andritsch,P.H.F. Morshuis, J.J. Smit. “AC breakdown voltage and viscosity of
mineral oil based SiO 2 nanoﬂuids.” Electrical Insulation and Dielectric Phenomena (CEIDP),
2012 Annual Report Conference on. IEEE, 2012.
4. Karthik, R., and T. Sree Renga Raja. “Investigations of transformer oil characteristics.” IEEJ
Transactions on Electrical and Electronic Engineering 7.4 (2012): 369–374.
5. Jian-quan, Zhou, Du Yue-fan, Chen Mu-tian, Li Chen-rong, Li Xiao-xin, Lv Yu-zhen, “AC
and lightning breakdown strength of transformer oil modiﬁed by semiconducting nanoparti-
cles.” Electrical Insulation and Dielectric Phenomena (CEIDP), 2011 Annual Report
Conference on. IEEE, 2011.
6. Bureau of Indian Standards, “New Insulating Oils – Speciﬁcation (fourth revision)”, IS
335:1993.
Parametric Study of Virgin and Aged Transformer Oil
253

Optimal Placement of Capacitor Using
Backward/Forward Sweep Method
Priyanka Parmar and Chintan Patel
Abstract In power system, distribution system is very important part for the
consumer side. Consumer demand for the reactive power can cause low power
factor, low voltage and high power loss. Simulation is carried out by backward/
forward sweep load ﬂow method which is used for the calculation of the voltage
and branch current. To improve the voltage regulation, the capacitors are placed at
the different nodes of the 15-bus standard radial distribution system. Shunt
capacitors are used, to achieve power and energy loss reduction. The achievement
of such beneﬁts among other beneﬁts depends greatly on how optimally these shunt
capacitors are installed.
Keywords Backward/forward sweep method  Capacitor placement
Genetic algorithm  Power loss
1
Introduction
In distribution systems, the demand of the reactive power is very important. To
fulﬁll that requirement, various objectives are considered. The appropriate place-
ment of capacitor can maintain the voltage proﬁles by reducing losses. The power
capacitor’s aims are to generate the proper power supply and reactive power to the
consumers and also to reduce the power loss and to improve the voltage regulation.
In power system, there are various load ﬂow methods such as Newton–Raphson
load ﬂow methods, Gauss–Seidel load ﬂow method and also fast decoupled
method, which are used only in transmission system. In distribution system, more
preferable method is backward/forward sweep load ﬂow method, because distri-
bution system has high R/X ratio, radial structure of the network and also unbal-
anced conditions [2].
P. Parmar (&)  C. Patel
Electrical Department, G H Patel College of Engineering and Technology,
V.V. Nagar Anand, India
e-mail: priyanka1618135@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_23
255

The backward/forward sweep load ﬂow algorithm is better for the voltage and
current calculations. One of the most commonly used methods for improving the
voltage proﬁle of the distribution network is the use of shunt capacitor bank with
the feeders [4–7]. The size and locations of capacitor banks would have an
important impact on the voltage proﬁle enhancement. The objective functions
thought in the work include reducing active power loss and improving voltage
regulation.
2
Backward/Forward Sweep Method
During the last many years, a variety of approaches based on the forward/backward
algorithm are widely used by researchers to get good convergence and fast cal-
culation speed of voltage and current.
This algorithm has advantages of less computation requirements and calculation
time compared to the Newton–Raphson method and Gauss–Seidel method.
The network is split into different layers starting from the base bus. This
approach is a direct application of Kirchhoff’s Current Law (KCL) and Kirchhoff’s
Voltage Law (KVL). For the calculations of the both sweeps the required data are,
active and reactive power and positive sequence impedance model for all the
branches. The major steps are included in backward sweep (Fig. 1):
1. Set ﬂat voltage as 1 per unit for the reference of the ﬁrst iteration.
2. Starting by end node, the branch current is calculated by using KCL using
Iði;0Þ ¼ Si=Vi
ð
Þ
3. Voltage will be updated using previous rated voltage.
4. Same steps are used to calculate for the nodes.
5. Compute the voltage till the reference node.
The major steps are included in forward sweep:
1. By starting with the reference node at rated voltage.
2. Same procedure for calculating voltage and current is performed but in forward
direction such as reference node to end nodes.
3. Similarly, the steps are performed till the end node.
By this method, the power loss is calculated. Using voltage and current, the
complex power Sij from bus i to bus j and Sji from bus j to bus i is calculated using
equation Sij ¼ ViI
ij.
256
P. Parmar and C. Patel

3
Problem Formulation
The optimal capacitor placement model can be developed using various constraints
[8–13].
1. Minimizing the power loss due to placement of shunt capacitor.
2. Improving the voltage proﬁle.
3. Power ﬂow constraints: The real and reactive power injections from the bus
should be within limits.
Fig. 1 Flow chart of backward/forward sweep method
Optimal Placement of Capacitor Using Backward/Forward …
257

Pmin  PG  Pmax
Qmin  QG  Qmax
Here, the capacitor bank is to be assumed as ﬁxed reactive power capacity Q0.
Assume Xi is integer variable, which is used to represent the number of capacitor
banks installed at ith bus;
The reactive power is
QCj ¼ XiQ0
Assume the TC as the total number of capacitor bank in the given distribution
system,
X
n
i¼0
Xi ¼ TC
where Xi is the integer variable.
4
Review on Genetic Algorithm
Normally, genetic algorithm uses the principle of natural evolutional and population
genetic to arrive at the high quality of global solution. The traditional optimization
techniques require one starting point, GA uses a set of points as the initial condi-
tions. These points are called chromosomes.
Genetic operators are the stochastic transition rules applied to each chromosome
during each generation procedure to generate a new improved population from an
old population. Genetic operators consist of reproduction, crossover and mutation.
1. Reproduction: This process is probabilistic for selecting two parent strings
from population of strings on basis of roulette wheel mechanism.
2. Crossover: This process is for selecting a random position in the string. This
position is called crossover point.
3. Mutation: This process is for the random modiﬁcation of string position by
changing position of “0” and “1”. Mutation can completely prevent the loss of
genetic material through reproduction and crossover.
5
Simulation and Results
The proposed backward forward sweep algorithm is applied to standard 15-bus
network. The line data and load data for this system are given in Appendix (Fig. 2).
258
P. Parmar and C. Patel

The total active power is 1109.36 kW.
The total reactive power is 842.56 kvar.
The base kV is 11 and base kVA is 100 for the 15-bus radial distribution system.
The voltage and active power losses of 15-bus system are obtained by using the
backward forward sweep method. The voltage magnitude at different nodes and
power loss of this system are given in Table 1.
It shows the minimum voltages at bus 11, i.e. 0.6542 p.u., 15 i.e. 0.7453 p.u.
and 8 i.e. 0.8083 p.u. of the system. The performance of the methodology is shown
in Table 2.
Fig. 2 15-bus standard radial distribution network
Table 1 Voltage magnitude
and power loss at all the buses
No. of buses
Voltage (p.u.)
Loss (p.u.)
1
1
0
2
0.9051
0.0925
3
0.9022
0.0001
4
0.9633
0.018
5
0.8995
0.1556
6
0.8349
0.0295
7
0.8519
0.1195
8
0.8083
0.0226
9
0.9671
0.0145
10
0.9266
0.0664
11
0.6542
0.2257
12
0.9019
0.0001
13
0.8401
0.1448
14
0.8168
0.0241
15
0.7453
0.3168
Optimal Placement of Capacitor Using Backward/Forward …
259

The minimum voltage at the buses can be improved by putting capacitor banks
at various possibilities. Various combinations of using capacitors are included.
Table 3 shows the capacitor placement locations and sizes. Thus, 200 kvar of
capacitor bank is installed at 11th bus. Therefore, the power loss during that instant
will be reduced by 15.64% of total power loss.
The elaborated results suggesting the optimal locations and number of shunt
capacitor banks are depicted in Table 3. The capacitor banks are optimally allotted
to various buses to maintain improved voltage proﬁles. Comparing the results, it
can be observed that the system voltage proﬁle is mostly improved due to capacitor
placement. With increasing number of capacitor banks, the least bus voltage will be
increased monotonously. Furthermore, it can also be observed from the results that
installing capacitor banks at various adjacent buses is likely to provide a better
system voltage proﬁle and better reduction of power loss than installing them
altogether at a single bus.
6
Conclusion
Using the backward/forward sweep load ﬂow algorithm, the values of voltages at
various 15 buses are deﬁned. Voltage regulation of the 15 buses is less at the 11, 15,
8 buses. To improve the performance, capacitor banks are installed. Various sized
capacitor banks are used. To improve at single bus 11, 15 and 8, the 200 kvar
capacity of capacitor banks are used respectively. And for the better performance,
the different two 100 kvar of capacitor banks are used at 11,15 and 15,8 and 11,8
buses respectively. It improved the voltage regulations and higher percentage of the
loss reduction for the 15-bus standard radial distribution network. Moreover,
capacitor banks could be deputed optimally to have a better voltage proﬁle and
reduction of losses.
Table 2 Performance of methodology
Total active power (kW)
Total active power loss (kW)
Minimum voltage (p.u.)
1109
123.09
0.6542
Table 3 Reduction of losses by adding capacitor banks
Optimal location (No. of bus)
Optimal size (kvar)
Reduction in power loss (%)
11
200
15.64
15
200
23.24
8
200
37.35
11,15
100,100
26.87
15,8
100,100
24.65
11,8
100,100
24.67
11,15,8
100,100,100
38.79
260
P. Parmar and C. Patel

Appendix
15-bus line data:
Sending end node
Receiving end node
Resistance (X)
Reactance (X)
1
2
0.0594
0.0226
2
3
0.0643
0.0342
1
4
0.0297
0.0232
1
5
0.0445
0.0125
5
6
0.0198
0.0432
1
7
0.1188
0.0404
7
8
0.0247
0.0273
1
9
0.0297
0.0232
1
10
0.0415
0.0221
7
11
0.148
0.0324
2
12
0.0396
0.0352
1
13
0.1584
0.0194
5
14
0.0495
0.0903
1
15
0.198
0.0226
Active and reactive load data:
Nodes
Active power (p.u.)
Reactive power (p.u.)
1
0
0
2
1.22
0.916
3
0.032
0.024
4
0.778
0.584
5
0.673
0.595
6
1.22
0.916
7
0.0488
0.0366
8
0.956
0.717
9
0.698
0.523
10
1.265
0.949
11
1.235
0.94
12
0.0488
0.0366
13
0.956
0.717
14
0.698
0.523
15
1.265
0.949
Optimal Placement of Capacitor Using Backward/Forward …
261

References
1. Chang, G. W., S. Y. Chu, and H. L. Wang. “An improved backward/forward sweep load ﬂow
algorithm for radial distribution systems.” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 22.2,2007.
2. A. D. Rana, J. B. Darji, Mosam Pandya, “ Backward/Forward Sweep Load Flow Algorithm
for Radial Distribution System”, IJSRD - International Journal for Scientiﬁc Research &
Development|Vol. 2, Issue 01, 2014.
3. J. A. Michline Rupa, S. Ganesh, “Power Flow Analysis for Radial Distribution System Using
Backward/Forward
Sweep
Method”,
International
Journal
of
Electrical,
Computer,
Electronics and Communication Engineering Vol:8, No:10, 2014.
4. Maurizo Delfanti, Gianpietro P. Granelli, Paolo Marannino and Mario Montagna, “Optimal
Capacitor
Placement
Using
Deterministic
and
Genetic
Algorithms”,
IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 3, AUGUST 2000.
5. Mohammad A. S. Masoum, Marjan Ladjevardi, Akbar Jafarian, and Ewald F. Fuchs, Fellow,
IEEE, “Optimal Placement, Replacement and Sizing of Capacitor Banks in Distorted
Distribution Networks by Genetic Algorithms”, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER
DELIVERY, VOL. 19, NO. 4, OCTOBER 2004.
6. S. Sunisith, K. Meena, “Backward/Forward Sweep Based Distribution Load Flow Method”,
International Electrical Engineering Journal (IEEJ) Vol. 5, No.9, 2014.
7. Minnan Wang and Jin Zhong, “A Novel Method for Distributed Generation and Capacitor
Optimal Placement considering Voltage Proﬁles”, 978-1-4577-1002-5/11/2011 IEEE.
8. Das, D. “Optimal placement of capacitors in radial distribution system using a Fuzzy-GA
method”. International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy Systems 30.6 (2008): 361–367.
9. Sultana, Sneha, and Provas Kumar Roy. “Optimal capacitor placement in radial distribution
systems using teaching learning based optimization.” International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems 54 (2014): 387–398.
10. Reddy, K. Sravan Kumar, and M. Damodar Reddy. “Optimal placement of capacitor in
distribution
networks
using
fuzzy
and
SFLA.”
Electrical,
Electronics,
Signals,
Communication and Optimization (EESCO), 2015 International Conference on. IEEE, 2015.
11. Chiang, H-D., et al. “Optimal capacitor placements in distribution systems. I. A new
formulation and the overall problem.” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 5.2 (1990):
634–642.
12. Hocaoğlu, Ulaş Eminoğlu M. Hakan. “Comparison of distribution Systems Power Flow
Algorithms for Voltage Dependent Loads”.
13. Gnanasekaran, N., et al. “Optimal placement of capacitors in radial distribution system using
shark smell optimization algorithm.” Ain Shams Engineering Journal 7.2 (2016): 907–916.
262
P. Parmar and C. Patel

Improved Model of Modular Multilevel
Converter
Rushikesh Chakubhai Kalariya and Mukesh Bhesaniya
Abstract Voltage sourced converter (VSC) exhibits a brilliant open door in dif-
ferent ﬁelds of the power system. Newly introduced modular multilevel converters
(MMCs) are expected to replace two- and three-level VSC-based conﬁgurations for
high-voltage direct current (HVDC) transmission systems due to their advantages in
terms of performance, scalability, and efﬁciency. In this paper, construction, basic
operation, and control strategies of MMC are discussed. In HVDC transmission
systems, due to a large number of submodules in MMC, simulation time in elec-
tromagnetic transient (EMT) program is very large. Few researchers have addressed
this problem. In this paper, improved model of MMC for simulation is presented.
The simulation studies show that the proposed model exhibits high computational
efﬁciency with good accuracy.
Keywords Modular multilevel converter (MMC)  Voltage sourced converter
(VSC)  Computationally efﬁcient model (CEM)  High-voltage direct current
(HVDC)
1
Introduction
For
medium-
and
high-voltage
applications,
such
as
voltage
sourced
converter-based high-voltage direct current (VSC-HVDC) transmission system, the
modular multilevel converter (MMC) has provided best solution as compared to
other multilevel VSC-HVDC system [1–6]. In comparison with other multilevel
converter topologies, the renowned features of the MMC include (i) it has modular
structure to provide any voltage-level requirements, (ii) higher efﬁciency of the
MMC provides better solution for high-power applications, (iii) it has best har-
R. C. Kalariya (&)  M. Bhesaniya
G.H. Patel College of Engineering and Technology, V.V. Nagar, Anand, Gujarat, India
e-mail: rushikalariya17@gmail.com
M. Bhesaniya
e-mail: mukeshbhesaniya@gcet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_24
263

monic performance for high-voltage applications, so the passive ﬁlter’s size can be
reduced, (iv) DC-link capacitors are not required or the size is very small in case of
the MMC [4].
Toward addressing the technical challenges related to operation and control of
the MMC, there has been a great effort over past few years. Voltage sourced
converters are based on the insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) combined with
control strategies to gain high speed and independent control of active and reactive
power by maintaining stable voltage and frequency [2]. For HVDC power trans-
mission system, mainly two topologies are used: (i) two-level and (ii) multilevel
neutral-point diode-clamped. Recently developed multilevel topology MMC con-
nects numbers of submodules (SMs) in series to obtain required AC output voltage.
MMC employs lower switching frequency to attain lower switching loss. In
addition, ﬁlter requirement can be eliminated by using large numbers of SMs per
phase.
The IGBT switches in MMC can either be modeled in detail, which give better
accuracy or using equivalent models which give reduced accuracy but easy to
implement in electromagnetic transient (EMT) program [1, 7]. The simulation time
with the detailed model is very high; hence, such models are not used for the MMC
with a large number of submodules. In [7], the continuous model is presented to
reduce the simulation time. In this paper, PWM switching is considered to improve
the accuracy of the model.
2
Modular Multilevel Topology
The schematic representation of the three-phase N-level MMC is shown in Fig. 1.
As shown in Fig. 1, the MMC consists of two arms per leg phase where each
consists of N-series-connected submodules (SMs) and a series-connected inductor
L0. The SMs of each arm are controlled to produce required AC phase voltage, and
the arm inductor is used to suppress the high-frequency harmonic components of
arm current.
2.1
MMC Submodules
As shown in Fig. 1, MMC topology containing series connections of SMs which
comprise of a capacitor C and two IGBT switches called S1 and S2 (Fig. 2). During
normal operation, any of the two IGBT switches S1 or S2 is ON.
There are various types of SMs which are used for MMC construction which are
given as follow [4]:
• Half-Bridge circuit
• Full-Bridge circuit
264
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

• Clamp-double circuit
• Three-level FC (ﬂying capacitor) circuit
• Three-level NPC (neutral-point-clamped) circuit
• Five-level cross-connected circuit
As the Half-Bridge SM has more advantages than other SMs structure which can
be used in MMC construction so the Half-Bridge SM mainly used in the MMC
construction.
Fig. 1 Basic structure of MMC
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
265

2.2
MMC Operation
Figure 3 shows the construction of a single phase MMC leg. In the case of the
MMC, N submodules are connected in series to form a leg of the converter. The AC
system is connected to the midpoint of the leg, and each half of this leg is called
arm. In the case of MMC, the energy of DC bus is not stored in a single large
capacitor, but it is stored in the each submodules capacitor. For even voltage
distribution of voltage across each submodule, various control techniques are used
which is explained in next section.
To keep individual submodule voltage constant over time, the total numbers of
connected submodules in a leg must remain same [1]. If N submodules per arm
where all the upper arm submodules are connected and submodules of lower arm are
disconnected, then the average voltage across the submodules capacitor is given as:
VCx ¼ VDC
N
ð1Þ
If a submodule is inserted from the lower arm, but none of the upper arm
submodules is bypassed, there would be N + 1 submodules that are inserted in the
system and their average voltage becomes
VDC
N þ 1; so the submodules voltage will
change. To prevent the change in the submodules voltage, the only combination of
n submodules from the upper and N-n from the lower arm is connected to get
desired output voltage [1].
3
MMC Control
As we know that the MMC is a type of voltage sourced converter, the MMC can be
controlled by the control strategies used for the control of voltage sourced con-
verter. As we know that the voltage is distributed across submodules and also the
Fig. 2 Structure of
submodule
266
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

inductor present in each phase of the MMC leads us to adopt new control for the
MMC. As the voltage is stored in multiple capacitors of submodules instead of a
single capacitor as in the voltage sourced converter. So the MMC has to be
equipped with the special control to ensure that the voltage is shared equally among
all the capacitor of the converter. As a result of unbalancing in capacitor voltage, it
will produce the circulating current in the leg of MMC. So the controlling scheme
of the MMC can be divided as follow [4]:
Fig. 3 Single phase MMC leg
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
267

• Capacitor voltage balancing
• Switching strategy
• Circulating current control
3.1
Capacitor Voltage Balancing
In the MMC, the submodules are inserted and bypassed out of the system. For
capacitor voltage balancing, the submodules are selected which are to be inserted or
bypassed. Failure to balancing control results in the disturbance in the output
voltage but also results in equipment damage if individual submodule voltage
ﬂuctuates outside of the rated values of equipment.
The change in submodule’s voltage is dependent on its inserted/bypassed state as
well as the magnitude and direction of the arm current of the MMC leg. When the
SM is inserted, the voltage of capacitor increases (decreases) if the arm current is
ﬂowing into (out of) the SM. And if the SM is bypassed, the voltage of capacitor
remains unchanged [4].
According to the state of the SM, the capacitor voltage balance is achieved. If the
SM voltage is lower (higher) than the average voltage of arm, the SM should be
inserted (bypassed). There are various methods to control capacitor voltage which is
classiﬁed according to their sorting algorithms used for sorting of the SMs. The
sorting method can be given as (i) bubble sorting, (ii) odd–even sorting, (iii) voltage
balancing without sorting.
In this paper for the simulation of the MMC, the capacitor voltage balancing is
done using bubble sort algorithm. In bubble sort algorithm, an array of unsorted
numbers of the SMs is taken and then compared one by one, exchanging their order
if the capacitor voltage of ﬁrst SM has a higher value [1, 2].
Then, the same process is repeated until the array is completely sorted. For
example, a small array of four numbers is taken [2, 4, 3, 1]. Table 1 shows the steps
required to sort the array [8]. As noticed, the largest item is sorted after the com-
pletion of a single iteration. The sorting is said to be completed if an iteration does
not produce any change in the order of an array.
3.2
Switching Strategy
The MMC control is designed to determine the number of the SMs to be inserted in
each arm at any point of time [9]. The MMC gives the ﬂexibility to decide how
many SMs are to be inserted; it requires appropriate techniques. If the current
direction is such that will raise the SMs voltage, the SMs should be inserted starting
from the lowest voltage and up. If the current direction is reversed, the inserted SMs
should be replaced by the highest voltage SMs.
268
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

This technique has advantages such as low harmonic distortion and adequate
voltage balancing. But it also has disadvantage such as high switching loss. To
overcome the above-mentioned shortcomings, other techniques are used such as
nearest-level voltage control, sinusoidal pulse width modulation (SPWM), phase
shifted sinusoidal pulse width modulation (PS-SPWM), phase disposition sinu-
soidal pulse width modulation (PD-SPWM) [4].
For the simulation of MMC in this paper, the sinusoidal pulse width modulation
(SPWM) is used for switching of SMs. The SPWM is one of the standard tech-
niques used for control of voltage sourced converter (VSC). The SPWM is the
simplest techniques used for VSCs. In SPWM, the modulating signal is compared
with the carrier waveform which is a triangular wave with higher frequency than the
modulating signal which is shown in Fig. 4. If a triangular wave has a value smaller
than the required signal, then the resulting command is negative otherwise the
command is positive. If the modulating signal has 60 Hz frequency and the tri-
angular carrier signal has 1800 Hz frequency, the modulated signal has 30th har-
monic which has magnitude near to fundamental frequency. But after ﬁltering, the
modulated signal will trace the modulating signal.
3.3
Circulating Current Control
In the MMC, the main concern is to control the circulating current which ﬂows
through the three-phase of the converter. This circulating current does not affect the
AC-side voltages and currents. From the previous research, it has been proved that
the circulating currents in the MMC are generated by the inner voltage difference
Table 1 Bubble sort algorithm
Initial order
Description
Change in order
Initial Order
[2, 4, 3, 1]
First Iteration
[2, 4, 3, 1]
Compare SM 1 & 2, no exchange
[2, 4, 3, 1]
[2, 4, 3, 1]
Compare SM 2 & 3, exchange
[2, 3, 4, 1]
[2,4,3,1]
Compare SM 3 & 4, exchange
[2, 3, 1, 4]
Second Iteration
[2, 3, 4, 1]
Compare SM 1 & 2, no exchange
[2, 3, 1, 4]
[2, 3, 1, 4]
Compare SM 2 & 3, exchange
[2, 1, 3, 4]
[2, 1, 3, 4]
Compare SM 3 & 4, no exchange
[2, 1, 3, 4]
Third Iteration
[2, 1, 3, 4]
Compare SM 1 & 2, exchange
[1, 2, 3, 4]
[1, 2, 3, 4]
Compare SM 2 & 3, no exchange
[1, 2, 3, 4]
[1, 2, 3, 4]
Compare SM 3 & 4, no exchange
[1, 2, 3, 4]
Sorting Completed
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
269

between the SMs in each phase [5]. The circulating currents are in form of negative
sequence with the frequency doubled than the fundamental frequency. As known,
the circulating current has no effect on the output voltage and current but it
increases the rms value of the arm current which results in higher converter losses.
It also increases the ratings of the SMs capacitors which will affect the design of the
MMC.
To control the circulating current, various techniques have been suggested such
as predictive control technique, open loop control technique, current suppression
control technique, active resistance control technique.
The equation of the three-phase inner difference currents is given as below:
idiff a ¼ Idc
3 þ I2f sin 2x0t þ u0
ð
Þ
ð2Þ
idiff b ¼ Idc
3 þ I2f sin 2x0t þ u0 þ 2p
3


ð3Þ
idiff c ¼ Idc
3 þ I2f sin 2x0t þ u0  2p
3


ð4Þ
where Idc is the total DC current, and I2f is the peak value of the double line
frequency circulating current. x0 is the fundamental frequency, and u0 is the initial
phase angle.
From Eqs. (2) to (4), three-phase circulating current can be transformed to two
DC components in double line frequency negative sequence rotating reference
frame as below.
Fig. 4 Sinusoidal pulse width modulation
270
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

Tabc=dq ¼ 2
3
cos h
cosðh  2p=3Þ
cosðh þ 2p=3Þ
 sin h
 sinðh  2p=3Þ
 sinðh þ 2p=3Þ


ð5Þ
where h ¼ 2x0t. The phase sequence of the transformation is a–c–b.
The inner dynamic performance of the MMC is given by the below-mentioned
equation.
udiff j ¼ L0
didiff j
dt
þ R0idiff j ¼ 1
2 Udc  ðupj þ unjÞ


ð6Þ
Rewrite Eq. (6) in the a–c–b sequence,
udiff a
udiff c
udiff b
2
4
3
5 ¼ L0
d
dt
idiff a
idiff c
idiff b
2
4
3
5 þ R0
idiff a
idiff c
idiff b
2
4
3
5
ð7Þ
Substitute Eqs. (2)–(3) into (7) and multiplying Eq. (5) gives,
udiff d
udiff q


¼ L0
d
dt
i2fd
i2fq


þ
0
2x0L0
2x0L0
0



i2fd
i2fq


þ R0 i2fd
i2fq


ð8Þ
where udiff d and udiff q are the dq components of the inner unbalance voltage.
In this paper, the circulating current control is implemented which is suggested
in the reference [4]. Figure 5 shows the structure of the circulating current sup-
pressing controller (CCSC). In CCSC, the upper and lower arm currents are
transformed into the double line frequency, negative sequence rotational reference
frame. Then, the dq components of the circulating current are compared with their
respective reference values which are set at zero to reduce the circulating current.
The control signals are obtained using the PI controller with cross-coupling com-
pensation. Then, these control signals are transformed to abc reference frame by
doing inverse transformation.
4
Computationally Efﬁcient Model
As the modules increase in the MMC, it increases the complexity as well as the
simulation time. In the proposed model, the IGBTs are not modeled and the MMC
behavior is represented using controlled voltage source [1]. Here, in the proposed
model, the voltage to be inserted in the arm is derived using the total available
capacitor voltages in the arm and the arm current. This reduces the computational
complexity of the system model.
The relation between the total available capacitor voltages in the arm and the arm
currents is derived by considering the total stored energy in the arms. The total
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
271

energy stored in the upper and lower arm of the VSC-MMC with N-
series-connected submodules per arm is given by,
Exu ¼
X
N
j¼1
1
2 CSMv2
Cxuj
ð9Þ
Exl ¼
X
N
j¼1
1
2 CSMv2
Cxlj
ð10Þ
The line derivative of (9) and (10) will give the instantaneous input power to the
upper and lower arm, respectively.
Pxu ¼ dExu
dt
¼ CSM
X
N
J¼1
vCxuj
dvCxuj
dt
ð11Þ
Pxl ¼ dExl
dt ¼ CSM
X
N
J¼1
vCxlj
dvCxlj
dt
ð12Þ
If the submodule capacitor voltages in the arm are well-balanced, then the
variation in the individual submodule capacitor voltages from the average value of
the submodule capacitor voltages will be negligible. Hence, (11) and (12) can be
revised as,
Pxu ¼ CSM
vT
Cxu
N
X
N
j¼1
dvCxuj
dt
¼ CSM
vT
Cxu
N
dvT
Cxu
dt
ð13Þ
Fig. 5 Circulating current suppressing controller
272
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

Pxl ¼ CSM
vT
Cxl
N
X
N
j¼1
dvCxlj
dt
¼ CSM
vT
Cxl
N
dvT
Cxl
dt
ð14Þ
where vT
Cxu and vT
Cxl are the total capacitor voltages in upper and lower arm,
respectively. vT
Cxu
N and vT
Cxu
N represent the average value of the submodule capacitor
voltages in the respective arm. The instantaneous input power to the upper and
lower arm can be written as follows,
Pxu ¼ vCxuixu ¼ ixuNxu
vT
Cxu
N
ð15Þ
Pxl ¼ vCxlixl ¼ ixlNxl
vT
Cxl
N
ð16Þ
By comparing (13) with (15) and (14) with (16), we get
dvT
Cxu
dt
¼ Nxuixu
CSM
ð17Þ
dvT
Cxl
dt
¼ Nxlixl
CSM
ð18Þ
By integrating (17) and (18), the total capacitor voltages in upper and lower arm
are calculated from,
vT
Cxu ¼
1
CSM
Z
Nxuvxudt
ð19Þ
vT
Cxl ¼
1
CSM
Z
Nxlvxldt
ð20Þ
Finally, the inserted capacitor voltages in the upper and lower arms are calcu-
lated by,
vc
Cxu ¼ Nxu
vT
Cxu
N
ð21Þ
vc
Cxl ¼ Nxl
vT
Cxl
N
ð22Þ
From the (21) and (22), the schematic diagram of the modulation block, the
generator of the controlled voltage signal, and the proposed model are shown in
Figs. 6, 7 and 8.
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
273

Fig. 7 Block diagram showing the generation of controlled voltage signals of the arm
L
L
L
L
L
L
Vdc
+
-
A
B
C
Vcxu
Vcxl
Fig. 8 Schematic diagram of the computationally efﬁcient model
Fig. 6 Modulation block
274
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

5
Simulation and Results
The simulation of the ﬁve-level MMC was carried out using PSCAD/EMTDC,
which consisted of 9 kV DC voltage, 1900 µF of submodule capacitance, 3 mH
arm inductance with switching frequency of 1 kHz for the R-L load. For the cir-
culating current control, the circulating current suppressing controller (CCSC) was
implemented and the results obtained are shown below.
The multilevel output voltage waveform generated by the MMC is shown in
Fig. 9. Figure 9a shows the waveform of output phase voltage which has a value of
5.2 kV. The line–line output voltage is shown in Fig. 9b with a value of 9.5 kV.
The three-phase output voltage waveform is shown in Fig. 9c. As shown from
Fig. 9, as the number of levels increased in the MMC, the output voltage waveform
tends toward sinusoidal characteristics. Figure 9d shows the waveform of the
three-phase output current of the MMC which has a value of 0.14 kA. From
Fig. 9d, it is clear that the output current traces sinusoidal waveform. As discussed
in Sect. 3.3, the CCSC was incorporated in the simulation which came into effect
after 1 s. From Fig. 10a, it is clear that it contains higher amount of second-order
harmonics which was reduced after the CCSC was incorporated. It also reduces the
Fig. 9 Output results of ﬁve-level DM: a output voltage phase voltage, b line–line output voltage,
c three-phase output voltage, d three-phase output current
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
275

peak to peak value of the circulating current. Figure 10b shows the harmonics of
the circulating current. It is clear from Fig. 10b that after incorporation of the
CCSC, second-order harmonic was reduced to 0.33%. Figure 10c shows the THD
of the circulating current which also reduced after the incorporation of the CCSC.
Another simulation of VSC-MMC is done by the computationally efﬁcient
method with PWM signals. This simulation is compared with the detailed simu-
lation of the VSC-MMC. The simulation studies are performed on a 2.30 GHz Intel
Core i5-4200U CPU with 8 GB RAM and Windows 8.1 PRO 64-bit OS running
PSCAD professional V4.5.
The comparison of the computer time of ﬁve-level and 11-level detailed and
computationally efﬁcient model is carried out with 10 and 20 s of the simulation
time with 20 µs solution time step. The comparison is shown in Table 2.
Fig. 10 Circulating current waveform with CCSC: a Circulating current of phase-a, b Individual
harmonics of circulating current of phase-a, c THD of circulating current of phase-a
Table 2 Comparison of the
computer time
Model
Computer time (s)
10
20
Five-level DM
304
607
11-level DM
1296
2570
Five-level CEM
46
81
11-level CEM
48
88
276
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

Figure 11 shows the output voltages and current waveforms of the computa-
tionally efﬁcient model. After comparing Figs. 6 and 10, we can say that the
computationally efﬁcient model replicates the output voltage and current wave-
forms of the detailed model. After considering the speed of the simulation by the
computationally efﬁcient model, it is clear that the computational efﬁcient model is
very accurate and faster than the detailed model of the MMC. From Table 2, it is
clear that the computationally efﬁcient model boost up the simulation without loss
of the accuracy.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, construction, basic operation, and control strategies of MMC are
discussed. Moreover, an improved model of MMC by considering the PWM
switching is presented which gives better performance than the continuous model of
the MMC. The presented model gives the output results which are comparable to
the actual output of the MMC with higher accuracy. The MMC model is analyzed
which gives performance advantage over the conventional multilevel VSC-based
Fig. 11 Output results of ﬁve-level CEM: a output voltage phase voltage, b line–line output
voltage, c three-phase output voltage, d three-phase output current
Improved Model of Modular Multilevel Converter
277

converter. The main issue related to the MMC is the circulating current which is
compensated by implementing the CCSC. The simulation results support the
reduction in second-order harmonic in the circulating current. The computationally
efﬁcient model represents the faster option for the simulation of the VSC-MMC
detailed model which is slower as compared to the other model.
References
1. Peralta, Jaime, et al. “Detailed and averaged models for a 401-level MMC–HVDC system.”
IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 27.3 (2012): 1501–1508.
2. Lesnicar, A., and R. Marquardt. “A new modular voltage source inverter topology.” Proc.
EPE. Vol. 3. 2003.
3. Debnath, Suman, et al. “Operation, control, and applications of the modular multilevel
converter: A review.” IEEE transactions on power electronics 30.1 (2015): 37–53.
4. Tu, Qingrui, Zheng Xu, and Lie Xu. “Reduced switching-frequency modulation and circulating
current suppression for modular multilevel converters.” IEEE transactions on power delivery
26.3 (2011): 2009–2017.
5. Marquardt, Rainer. “Modular Multilevel Converter: An universal concept for HVDC-Networks
and
extended
DC-Bus-applications.”
Power
Electronics
Conference
(IPEC),
2010
International. IEEE, 2010.
6. Hagiwara, Makoto, and Hirofumi Akagi. “Control and experiment of pulsewidth-modulated
modular multilevel converters.” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 24.7 (2009): 1737–
1746.
7. Ahmed, Noman, et al. “A computationally efﬁcient continuous model for the modular
multilevel converter.” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics 2.4
(2014): 1139–1148.
8. Paradis, Dominic, Real-time simulation of Modular Multilevel Converters. Diss., University of
Toronto, 2013.
9. Bhesaniya, Mukesh M., and Anshuman Shukla. “Current source modular multilevel converter:
Detailed analysis and STATCOM application.” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery 31.1
(2016): 323–333.
278
R. C. Kalariya and M. Bhesaniya

Closed-Loop Control of Flow Under
the Inﬂuence of Varying Temperature
in Air Blower System Using PLC and VFD
Hiren G. Patel and Mihir Raval
Abstract The main objective of this paper is to design and implement the
closed-loop control of mass ﬂow rate in the air blower system when air is under the
inﬂuence of varying temperature. As mass ﬂow rate of air changes with the tem-
perature, it can be maintained to desired value only by varying the blower speed
suitably. For this purpose, we have used mainly programmable logic controller
(PLC) and variable frequency drive (VFD). Based on the difference between actual
and desired value of ﬂow rate, PLC increases or decreases the speed of air blower
operated by three-phase induction motor through VFD to maintain the desired air
ﬂow rate under the inﬂuence of varying temperature. Obtained results clearly
indicate that desired value of ﬂow rate is achieved nicely even under the inﬂuence
of variation in the temperature.
Keywords Variable frequency drive (VFD)  Programmable logic controller
(PLC)  Mass ﬂow rate  Supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
1
Introduction
It is necessary to maintain the mass ﬂow rate accurately in pharmaceutical, petro-
leum, metallurgy, chemical, building materials, food, machinery, petroleum, and
other industries. Recently, more accurate and reliable technics like magnetic ﬁeld,
positive displacement, true mass, and ultrasonics are available for ﬂow measure-
ment [1]. However even with this improved technology, true ﬂow calculations need
to take into account temperature, pressure, pipe diameter, and martial purity [2]. Air
mass ﬂow rate changes with the temperature. Hence to maintain air mass ﬂow rate
to the desire level under the inﬂuence of varying temperature is the difﬁcult
H. G. Patel (&)
Electrical Engineering Department, S. V. National Institute of Technology, Surat, India
e-mail: hpatel.svnit@gmail.com
M. Raval
NiTech Automation, Surat, Gujarat, India
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_25
279

problem. Here, programmable logic controller (PLC) and variable frequency drive
(VFD) are used to maintain the air ﬂow rate to the desired level under the inﬂuence
of variation in the temperature.
PLC has been widely accepted in industries to control various quantities like
pressure, speed, temperature, ﬂow. In an automated system, PLC controller is
usually the central part of a process control system. With execution of a program
stored in program memory, PLC continuously monitors status of the system
through signals from input devices, and based on the execution of logic, it produces
the output signal. PLC has several known advantages including, ﬂexibility, relia-
bility, low power consumption, reliability, and ease of expandability [3]. Its ﬂexible
conﬁguration will provide users with software tools to quickly build industrial
automatic control system. VFD is widely used to vary the speed of three-phase
induction motor in industries. It can vary the desired speed by changing the fre-
quency using switching sequence of IGBT [4]. PLC can be programmed to give
suitable command to VFD to control the speed of air blower system.
In the literature, authors have reported control of varies quantities using PLC, for
example, supervisory control of electrical transmission line was discussed in [5] and
dynamic ﬂow controller was discussed in [6]. Temperature control system using
fuzzy logic was proposed in [7], and constant pressure irrigation pump was
implemented in [8]. But results are not available for the closed-loop control of air
ﬂow rate under the inﬂuence of varying temperature.
Hence, here we have implemented the closed-loop control of air ﬂow rate using
PLC and VFD. Section 2 discusses the design and implementation of air blower
system. Control of mass ﬂow rate is discussed in Sect. 3. Obtained results with the
implementation are presented in Sect. 4, and concluding remarks are discussed in
Sect. 5.
2
Design and Implementation
The air blower system is shown in Fig. 1a, and physically implemented air blower
system is shown in Fig. 1b. It consists of three-phase induction motor which is
connected with air blower [2]. Air blower blows the air in the pipe structure as
shown in Fig. 1a and b. Heaters, sensors for temperature, ﬂow, and pressure are
also shown in Fig. 1a, b. Encoder and speed sensor are connected to motor shaft.
Flow rate of air can be easily varied by varying the speed of the three-phase
induction motor. The speed of induction motor is directly proportional to the supply
frequency and number of poles of motor [9]. Variable voltage variable frequency
drive (VVVFD), loosely known as variable speed/frequency drive, varies the speed
of the induction motor by changing the frequency and voltage using switching
sequence of IGBT [10]. Yashikava make J 1000 series VVVFD is used in the
hardware implementation. Air mass ﬂow rate in kg/h is measured using oriﬁce type
of ﬂow sensor. Oriﬁce ﬂow sensor works on the principle of differential pressure.
By measuring the change in pressure, mass ﬂow can be calculated by ﬂow
280
H. G. Patel and M. Raval

calculating device, known as ﬂow totalizer. Depending upon the mass ﬂow rate,
ﬂow totalizer gives output in the range of 4–20 mA to the PLC.
Desired value of air ﬂow rate is entered in the supervisory control and data
acquisition (SCADA). Voltage across the heaters is controlled using proportionate
power control solid state rarely (PPCSSR) and PLC. As the temperature changes,
mass ﬂow rate of air in pipe also changes. Thus, the closed-loop control of ﬂow
under the variation of temperature would be the difﬁcult problem. But we have
successfully implemented the same. Controlling of ﬂow rate using PLC and VFD
shall be discussed in the next section.
3
Control of the Mass Flow Rate
Consider the closed-loop control scheme as shown in Fig. 2 [2]. Desired value of
the mass ﬂow rate is provided to the controller through SCADA, and actual value of
ﬂow rate is provided to controller as a feedback signal. Based on the compression
of the actual value of mass ﬂow rate and set value of mass ﬂow rate, error signal is
generated. Error signal is used by controller to produce control signal based on the
pre-deﬁned logic [2, 11]. Control signal is provided to actuator, and actuator
operates the ﬁnal control element to minimize the error. Desired value of ﬂow rate is
achieved when error becomes zero.
Physically implemented control panel of air blower system is shown in Fig. 3a
and b. Required value of ﬂow rate is given though the SCADA. Visual IO make
SCADA is used in the implementation. PLC receives the actual value of mass ﬂow
Air Blower system
(a)
(b) Hardware 
implementation 
Fig. 1 a Air blower system, b hardware implementation
Closed-Loop Control of Flow Under the Inﬂuence of Varying …
281

rate from the ﬂow totalizer in the range of 4–20 mA. Based on the comparison of
set value and actual value of mass ﬂow, PLC produces error signal. Error signal is
used by proportional integral derivative (PID) algorithm. PID algorithm is written
in the PLC using ladder logic to make error signal low. Proportional gain Kp,
integral time Ti, and derivative time Td of PID are varied to get desired value of the
ﬂow rate. Process of varying Kp, Ti, and Td to get desired response is known as PID
tuning [12].
Hence, with the proper tuning of PID, error signal tends to becomes zero which
leads to actual mass ﬂow rate same as that of the set value of ﬂow rate. Output of the
PLC is the control signal in the range of 0–10 V. This control signal is given to the
VFD, which makes three-phase induction motor to run in the range of 0–50 Hz, i.e.,
0–3000 RPM corresponding to 0–10 V depending upon the PID action. Maximum
mass ﬂow of 100 kg/h can be achieved with the maximum motor speed of
3000 RPM and similarly 0 kg/h ﬂow with 0 RPM speed of motor. Temperature of
air is increased by increasing the % SSR ﬁring. Higher the % SSR ﬁring, higher
would be the voltage across the heater and because of higher % SSR ﬁring tem-
perature of air increases quickly.
Fig. 2 Close loop control scheme of mass ﬂow rate
(a)
(b) 
Fig. 3 a Control panel (outside), b implemented control panel (inside)
282
H. G. Patel and M. Raval

When the temperature of air increases, air becomes lighter so to maintain the
desired value of the mass ﬂow rate motor speed has to be increased. PLC is
programmed to handle variation of this temperature effect as well. In a nutshell,
mass ﬂow rate, even with the variation of temperature, is maintained because of
change in motor speed by the VFD depending upon PLC output signal.
4
Results
Table 1 describes the effect of variation of temperature on mass ﬂow rate. The set
value of the mass ﬂow rate is 50 kg/h. Desired value of mass ﬂow rate with output
temperature of 24.94 °C is achieved with the motor speed of 1856 RPM. As the
temperature of air increases, air becomes lighter so to maintain the desired value of
the mass ﬂow rate motor speed has to be increased. This can be easily veriﬁed from
Table 1. It is clearly seen that to maintain the mass ﬂow rate of 50 kg/h with the
output temperature of 34.68 °C, the motor speed increases to 1906 RPM. Similarly,
to maintain the mass ﬂow rate of 50 kg/h with the output temperature of 51.20 °C,
the motor speed increases to 1994 RPM, and to maintain the desired mass ﬂow rate
with the output temperature of 70.42 °C, the motor speed increases to 2098 RPM.
Figure 4 is the snapshots from the SCADA and describes the effect of variation of
temperature on mass ﬂow rate. The set value of the mass ﬂow rate is 50 kg/h. As
described in Fig. 4, with proportional gain Kp, integral time Ti, and derivative time
Td equal to 0.75, 5.0, 0, respectively, desired value of mass ﬂow rate with output
temperature of 70.42 °C is achieved with the motor speed of 2098 RPM.
The variation of actual value of mass ﬂow rate can be easily seen in Fig. 5. It is
clear that actual value of ﬂow rate becomes equal to the desired value of ﬂow rate
after few cycles of initial transient. This transient can also be minimized with the
proper tuning of PID. Thus, even with the variation in the temperature, mass ﬂow
rate is maintained with the corresponding increase in the motor speed, as seen in
Fig. 5.
Table 1 Effect of variation in the temperature on mass ﬂow rate
Set value of mass
ﬂow (kg/h)
Actual mass ﬂow
rate (kg/h)
Output
temperature (°C)
Blower speed (RPM)
50
49.91
24.94
1856
50
49.74
34.68
1906
50
50.25
51.20
1994
50
49.36
70.42
2098
Closed-Loop Control of Flow Under the Inﬂuence of Varying …
283

Fig. 4 Effect of variation in the temperature on mass ﬂow rate
Fig. 5 Tread of mass ﬂow under the inﬂuence of varying temperature
284
H. G. Patel and M. Raval

5
Conclusion
Close loop control scheme for mass ﬂow rate was designed and implemented
successfully using PLC and VFD. Based on the difference between actual and
desired value of ﬂow rate, PLC increases or decreases the speed of air blower
through VFD to maintain the desired air mass ﬂow rate. Results obtained from the
implementation reveal that desired value of ﬂow rate is achieved and maintained
nicely even under the inﬂuence of varying temperature.
Acknowledgements Authors are thankful to the S.V. National Institute of Technology, Surat,
Gujarat, for providing necessary ﬁnancial support.
References
1. Singh, R. S., Sharma, A., Dubey, H.: PLC based PID implementation in process control of
temorature ﬂow and level. International Journal of Advanced Research in Engineering and
Technology, 6(1), 19–26 (2015).
2. Patel, H., Raval. M.: Implementation of closed loop control of ﬂow in air alower system using
PLC and SCADA. Journal of Control & Instrumentation, 7(3), 39–43 (2016).
3. Webb, J. W., Reis, A.: Programmable Logic Controllers: Principles and Applications. Fifth
Edition, PHI Ltd, India (2002).
4. Prakash, R., Singh, R., Kumar, R. R.: Variable Voltage Variable Frequency Speed Control of
Induction Motor Using FPGA-Xilinx. International Research Journal of Engineering and
Technology, 02(03), 1268–1273 (2015).
5. Prosser, J.: Supervisory control of electric power transmission networks. IEEE Transactions
on Power System, 10(2), 1104–1110 (1995).
6. Afzalian, A., Niaki, S.A., Iravani, S. A., Wonham, W. M.: Discrete-event systems supervisory
control for a dynamic ﬂow controller. IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 24(1), 209–230
(2009).
7. Li, H., Yang, L.: The application of fuzzy control in PLC temperature control System Based
on OPC Technology. Seventh International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and
Design, pp. 288–291, China (2014).
8. Sungur, C., Çalişir, S., Kaya, S.: Developing an automation system for improving the energy
efﬁciency of constant pressure irrigation pumps. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage
Engineering, 142(11), 040160521–7 (2016).
9. Kailaswar, S. V., Keswani, S. V.: Speed control of three phase induction motor by V/f method
for batching motion system. International Journal of Engineering Research and Applications,
3(2), 1732–1736 (2013).
10. Deepa, M.: Design of VFD drive for a 3-phase induction motor. International Journal of
Innovative Research in Science, Engineering and Technology, 4(1), 18755–18762 (2015).
11. Nagrath, J., Gopal, M.: Control systems engineering. 5th Edition, New Age International
Publishers, India (2009).
12. Ogata, K.: Discrete - Time control systems. 2nd Edition, PHI Ltd, India (2005).
Closed-Loop Control of Flow Under the Inﬂuence of Varying …
285

Harmonic Analysis and Simulation
of a Chemical Plant—A Case Study
Vidhi D. Patel and Sumit K. Rathor
Abstract Numerous kinds of electrical plants exist with different types of load into
the system, the reliability of any industrial plant is key important issue, and oper-
ation of offender load normally affects either the performance of the system or the
whole system that gets collapsed. Harmonics are one of the issues in power system
and nowadays needs more focus because of a number of electrical devices exist
which generate huge amount of harmonics. Arc furnace is one that considers to be
the worst nonlinear load existing in power system, followed by variable frequency
drive (VFD), power electronics converter, etc. To run the motors as per require-
ments, VFD is commonly used facilities in the plant; however, the operation of
these facilities presents violent and nonlinear characteristics, which may cause
power quality issues. In this study, the problem of harmonics among all power
quality issues is the main concern that occurs in power system. For harmonic
analysis of 11 kV system of source, transformer and VFD model without ﬁlter are
modeled and implemented on PsCAD/EMTDC software. FFT analysis at point of
common coupling (PCC) shows the harmonic pattern with THD and IHD levels.
Keywords VFD  PCC  Harmonics  Total harmonic distortion
FFT analysis
1
Introduction
At
present
to
make
power
system
and
its
control
efﬁcient,
the
power
electronics-based technology increases frequently. For this reason, in industries the
quantity of nonlinear loads is being added to electrical system, and hence, the power
quality issues raise in the power system [1]. In this paper, among all power quality
issues main concern is harmonics. An attempt has been made in this paper to study
V. D. Patel (&)  S. K. Rathor
Department of Electrical Engineering, G.H. Patel College
of Engineering and Technology, Anand, India
e-mail: patelvidhi3752@gmail.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_26
287

the level, characteristics, and effect of harmonic distortion in chemical plant, which
has a good number of power electronics converter like variable frequency drives,
arc furnaces as nonlinear loads. And due to this, the harmonics are injected in power
system, which may cause worse effect on other main equipment in the industry.
To analyze and reduce these harmonics, harmonic measurement has been done at
different points and PCC. Fluke power analyzer has been used to measure these
harmonics and total harmonic distortion (THD) at point of common coupling. The
analysis has been done based on IEEE Standard 519-2014, after that simulation has
been carried out for this chemical plant in PSCAD/EMTDC software. This simu-
lation model is used for FFT analysis of harmonics at different points.
2
Harmonic Sources and Its Effects
There are many harmonic sources like VFDs, UPS, computers, rectiformers, SMPS,
arc furnaces in industries [1]. These nonlinear sources create a worse effect in power
system, but the main power quality issue is harmonics. It affects so many main
power system equipment like transformers, cables, circuit breakers, relays, capac-
itor banks, bus bars, ac motors. [2]. Effects of harmonics on these main devices are
brieﬂy described below.
2.1
Transformer
Harmonics can affect transformers primarily in two ways: (1) core and (2) winding.
There are mainly three types of losses in the transformers: (1) hysteresis loss,
(2) copper losses, and (3) eddy current losses.
Hysteresis loss. Hysteresis loss increases because voltage harmonics set up
hysteresis loop on fundamental loop. So each loop represents higher magnetization
power requirement and higher core losses in the transformer.
Copper loss. As harmonic current increases, it may result in the transformer rms
current being higher than its capacity [2], and hence, this increased total rms current
results in an extra copper loss in conductors.
Eddy current loss. Eddy currents are induced in transformer caused by the
magnetic ﬂuxes. This component of the transformer losses increases with the square
of the frequency of the current causing the eddy currents [1].
Transformers that are required to supply large nonlinear loads must be derated to
handle the harmonics. This derating factor is based on the percentage of the har-
monic current in the load and the rated winding eddy current loss. The derating
factor is known as “K factor” [2].
288
V. D. Patel and S. K. Rathor

K ¼ I2
1ð1Þ2 þ I2
2ð2Þ2 þ I2
3ð3Þ2 þ    þ I2
nðnÞ2
ð1Þ
2.2
Cables
When harmonic current ﬂows, it creates additional copper losses in the cables, plus
as frequency increases the resistance of the cable increases so current ﬂows from
outer periphery of the conductor and it is known as “skin effect” [3]. To handle the
nonlinear loads, cables are rated by factor q by which we can know the capability of
the cables [2].
q ¼ I2
1ðE1Þ þ I2
2ðE2Þ þ I2
3ðE3Þ þ    þ I2
nðEnÞ
ð2Þ
2.3
Protective Scheme
Harmonic current inﬂuences the operation of protective devices. Fuses and motor
thermal overload devices are prone to nuisance operation when subjected to non-
linear load. Electromechanical relay is also affected by the harmonic current. They
may be operated faster or slower than their expected time [2].
2.4
Capacitor Bank
Most capacitor bank is used for power factor correction. Large level of voltage and
current harmonics present in the system increase the rating of capacitor bank. The
reason behind that is as reactance of capacitor is inversely proportional to the
frequency, harmonic current of high-frequency ﬂow in capacitor bank behaves as
the sink for those harmonic currents [2]. And due to this, overload may occur and
capacitor bank may lead to failure. One more serious effect on capacitor bank due to
harmonics is “resonance.” Resonance conditions are created when inductive and
capacitive reactance is equal at any one of the harmonic frequency. If a high level of
harmonic voltage and current is present at resonance frequency, more damage is
occured in capacitor bank as well as other equipment.
Harmonics also interfere with telecommunication system, especially noise on
telephone lines. Induction motor may refuse to start or may run at sub-synchronous
speed due to harmonics. It creates problem in excitation panel and may cause
generator failure. So if harmonics are beyond its acceptable level, then proper action
should be taken to reduce it.
Harmonic Analysis and Simulation …
289

3
Industrial Base Power System
Harmonic measurements are taken in the “Aarti Industries Limited,” which is a
chemical plant located in Gujarat. The studied system conﬁguration comprises a
VFD modeling, load modeling, and generator modeling. The plant model is shown
in Fig. 1, in which 11 kV, 50 Hz generator is connected with 11/0.430 kV trans-
former and 430 V is given to the two VFDs located in plant. VFDs are mainly used
to control the induction motor speed.
The harmonic analysis is done at point of common coupling as shown in Fig. 1.
All the data measured by ﬂuke meter are shown in Table 1.
4
System Simulation
From the designed circuit parameter, the PSCAD simulation is done as shown in
Fig. 2. Here, 11 kV source is used as incomer, and it is given to the 11 kV bus. And
it is converted to 11/0.430 kV by transformer. Two subsystems are created for
VFDs to connect it with 0.430 kV bus as shown in Fig. 2.
Here, two VFDs in subsystem comprise ﬁrstly the rectiﬁer which converts ac
power into dc power, then ac capacitive ﬁlter removes the dc ripple, and next
inverter model again converts dc power into ac power [4]. Induction motor is
modeled to connect as a load at the end of VFDs. In the subsystem, whole VFD
modeling is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 1 Plant model
Table 1 Measured data at
PCC
Phase-A
Phase-B
Phase-C
Voltage (L-L, rms) (V)
427.62
428.753
426.557
Current (phase, rms)
(kA)
2.9
3.11
2.92
290
V. D. Patel and S. K. Rathor

In subsystem to control the ac output, “controlled inverter scheme” was mod-
eled. The switching signals of the six IGBT switches of the three-legged inverter
bridge were generated using a “sinusoidal pulse width modulation” technique as
shown in Fig. 4. Here, three sine wave generators were used to generate 50 Hz
three-phase sine wave which is compared with 4350 Hz triangle waveform [5].
These three gate signals are given to the upper switch of the inverter, and its invert
waveforms are given to the lower switches of the inverter [5].
Fig. 2 Simulation of the chemical plant
Fig. 3 Simulation of VFD in the subsystem
Fig. 4 Simulation of pulse width modulation technique
Harmonic Analysis and Simulation …
291

5
Result and Discussion
To verify the harmonic analysis of the system, a model is developed in PSCAD/
EMTDC software as discussed in above chapter. To calculate the total harmonic
distortion at a different point, FFT analysis is done in the PSCAD software. For
calculation of THD, the FFT analysis block is used [5] and the output of this block
is given to one another harmonic distortion block which calculates the total har-
monic distortion as well as the individual harmonic distortion.
5.1
Harmonic Analysis at Load End Side
FFT analysis was done at the end of VFDs, and the waveforms of voltage, current,
and THD are shown in Figs. 5, 6, and 7. 430 V ac power was converted into 600 V
dc by uncontrolled rectiﬁer. And due to controlled inverter, the harmonics were
produced in voltage and current waveform.
5.2
At the Point of Common Coupling
At point of common coupling (PCC), two VFDs are connected, and at that point,
also voltage and current waveform and its THD were measured which is shown in
Figs. 8 and 9.
For this current THD of 18.77%, the individual harmonic graph was shown in
Fig. 10. The ﬁfth- and seventh-order harmonics were dominant as shown in har-
monic spectrum (Fig. 11) [6]. And this is because of the two VFDs connected at the
PCC.
-1.25 
-1.00 
-0.75 
-0.50 
-0.25 
0.00 
0.25 
0.50 
0.75 
y
<Ea5>
Fig. 5 Distorted voltage waveform at load end side
292
V. D. Patel and S. K. Rathor

VFD2 : Graphs
x
0.00 
0.10 
0.20 
0.30 
0.40 
0.50 
-3.0 
-2.0 
-1.0 
0.0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
Ia1
Fig. 6 Distorted current waveform at load end side
Fig. 7 Load-side current
THD (14.81%)
Main : Graphs
x
0.00 
0.10 
0.20 
0.30 
0.40 
0.50 
0.60 
0.70 
0.80 
0.90 
1.00 
-6.0 
-4.0 
-2.0 
0.0 
2.0 
4.0 
6.0 
IA
Fig. 8 Current waveform at PCC (2.9 kA)
Harmonic Analysis and Simulation …
293

6
Conclusion
Chemical, steel, aluminum, and oil plants having a number of loads are connected
into the system; here, in this paper, case study of chemical plant is done with the
simulation based on PSCAD/EMTDC that has been modeled for running chemical
plant for various types of loads, offender and offending loads. For harmonic
analysis, FFT analysis tool is used and total harmonic distortion for voltage and
Fig. 9 Current THD at PCC
(18.77%)
Fig. 10 Individual current
harmonic at PCC
Fig. 11 Voltage THD at
PCC (11.89%)
294
V. D. Patel and S. K. Rathor

current is calculated. Current THD was low at the end of one VFD, and it is due to
the switching of the inverter. But as two VFDs are connected at the PCC, the
current THD was increased from 14.81 to 18.77%. And the voltage THD was also
increased to 11.89% which is beyond the limit. Active or passive ﬁlter is suggested
for the same plant for more reliable operation of the plant. Looking at the plant
(cost, operation, and conﬁguration) and harmonic signature application of passive
ﬁlter can mitigate such level of harmonics, which is cost-effective as well with
advantage of ﬁlter as reactive power compensation in case when high reactive
power is demanded.
References
1. Roger C. Dugan, “Electrical Power Systems Quality”, 2nd Edition, Tata Mcgraw Hill
Publication, chapter 3 and 5.
2. C. Sankaran, “Power quality”, CRC Press, 2002, chapter 4.
3. J.P. Srividhya, dr. D. Sivakumar, T. Shanmathi, “A Review on causes, effects and detection
technique of harmonics in the power system”, International conference on computation of
power, energy information and communication (ICCPEIC), 2016 IEEE.
4. M D Singh and K B Khanchandani, “Power Electronics ”, 2nd Edition, Tata Mcgraw Hill
Publication, 2006.
5. Abdulrahman Kalbat, “PSCAD Simulation of Grid-Tied Photovoltaic System and Total
Harmonic Distortion Analysis”, 3rd international conference on electrical power and energy
conversion, 2013 IEEE.
6. M.B. jannat, J.S. Abdulmalek “Reducing the effects of harmonics produced by electrical arc
furnaces in misurata steel plant”, environment and electrical engineering (EEEIC),11th
international conference, 2012.
7. IEEE Recommended Practice and Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power
Systems, IEEE power and energy society, ANSI/ IEEE 519-2014.
8. Mahesh M Swamy, “Harmonic interaction between 1500 KVA supply transformer and VFD
load at an industrial plant”, Transaction on industry application, 1998 IEEE.
9. D Bentancur, G Perez, A Pardo, A Rondoni, “Study of a Cement Plant Experiencing Power
Quality Problems Uruguay”, 16th International Conference and Exhibition on electricity
distribution, 2001 IEEE.
10. Minghui BAO, Jun XIA, Xiaogen YIN, Manling dong, Hengxin HE, Junjia HE, “Harmonic
measurement and analysis in a Morden steel manufacturing facility”, power and energy
society general meeting, 2010 IEEE.
11. V. Suresh Kumar, P. S. Kannan and V. Saravanan, “Harmonic distortion in a morden cement
industry- A case study”, Power India conference, 2006 IEEE.
Harmonic Analysis and Simulation …
295

Computational Analysis and Intelligent
Control of Load Forecasting Using Time
Series Method
Parth A. Joshi and Jatinkumar J. Patel
Abstract Electrical demand forecasting is a nonlinear and complex process for
intelligent control of large-scale electrical power system and computational analysis
and intelligent control of load forecasting. The research attempts for increasing
accuracy of load forecasting. The time series method (TMS) is implemented for the
midterm load forecasting for higher accuracy. It reﬂects the natural growth of the
load. Here, the results show that the predication is better for midterm load fore-
casting (MTLF), which is most important parameter for seasonal planning and
intelligent generation control of electric power using autoregressive and Box–
Jenkins method by System Identiﬁcation Tool (SIT) in MATLAB environment.
Experimental support for the proposed work has been granted from State Load
Dispatch Center (SLDC), Gotri, Gujarat, for forecasting the load. Here, load
forecasting is carried out for Uttar Gujarat Vij Company Ltd. (UGVCL), India.
Keywords Load forecasting  Intelligent control  Midterm load forecasting
(MTLF)  Time series method (TSM)
1
Introduction
Main difﬁculty of electrical energy is that it cannot be stored in large-scale
according to demand. It is broadly generated by thermal, hydro, atomic, wind, and
solar power plants. According to the difference between demand and supply pre-
diction for startup, running and shut down become important factors for smooth
functioning of the system every time and some time in case of emergency. If we can
predict the required demand of consumers ahead with better accuracy, we can
schedule demand consequently to generation [1].
P. A. Joshi (&)  J. J. Patel
Electrical Department, G H Patel College of Engineering & Technology,
V.V. Nagar, Anand, India
e-mail: joshiparth23@yahoo.com
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_27
297

This process of predicting active load with actual accordance to load is called
load forecasting. In India, the load forecasting was the neglected part compared to
other countries in previous years. However, after realizing electric power require-
ment in various states, the government of India conducted ﬁrst load survey of India
in 1958. Nowadays, load forecasting is central process with all phases like gen-
eration, distribution, and transmission of the power system. Load forecasting is
classiﬁed into three categories. They are short term, midterm, and long term [2]
(Table 1).
Accurate load forecasting brings toward to the large amount of saving money in
electrical utility company. According to Bunn and Farmer, these savings are real-
ized when load forecasting is used to control operation and decision such as unit
commitment, dispatch, fuel allocation, and off-line network analysis [3]. The
methods for load forecasting are broadly classiﬁed as traditional method which
includes end use method, econometric method, time series method (BJ, AR, MA,
ARMA), regression method. Kalman Filter, Support Vector Machine(SVM). And
Artiﬁcial Intelligence Method which includes neural network, Expert system, and
Fuzzy logic system [4].
2
Load Characteristics
The system load at any given time is mostly a combination of four separate
components, i.e., residence load, agriculture load, industrial load, and commercial
load. Here, we analyze the load characteristics for the various components at
500–700 MWh with 150 MWh allowable variation. Here, we observed that the
load characteristics for UGVCL is consists of 48% (336 MWh), agriculture load
30% (210 MWh), industrial load 13% (91 MWh) load is residential load and 9%
(63 MWh) is unusual or any special event load [5]. In general, total system load can
be mathematically represented as:
T ¼ Tn þ Tw þ Ts þ Tr þ Ti þ Ta
ð1Þ
Table 1 Types of load forecasting [2]
Nature of
forecast
Lead time
Application
Short term
0.5–5 h
Operational planning, allocation of spinning reverse,
maintenance scheduling, contingency analysis
Medium
term
7–30 days
Planning for seasonal peak winter, summer
Long term
30 days to
one year
Planning generation growth
298
P. A. Joshi and J. J. Patel

where
T
is the total load of the system.
Tn
is the normal load of the system which is set for uniform load pattern for each
type of day.
Tw
is the weather sensatative part which represents the seasonal effect.
Ts
is any special event or unusual event of the load.
Tr
is the random part of the load which has zero mean white noise.
Ti
is the industrial load.
Ta
is the agriculture load.
3
MTLF Modeling and Analysis
In this paper, we forecast the midterm load forecasting using time series method. If
the historical data are restricted to past value to be forecasted then the procedure is
called time series [6]. The aim of the time series analysis to discover the pattern
from the past data and extrapolate pattern for the future demand curve and the
future forecasting is only based on the historical data. Time series is an observation
of variable at successive point in the time. The measurement is taken for the span of
hourly, weekly, monthly, and yearly. To identify the load pattern, ﬁrst of all, we
construct time series plot. Time series plot is the graphical representation of time
and time series variable. The Y-axis represents the time which is in the form of
hourly, weekly, monthly, and yearly, and X-axis represents the time series variable
like MW consumption [7]. The reason for choosing time series is that there are
many methods that are used in time series method like autoregressive (AR), moving
average (MA), autoregressive moving average, Box–Jenkins method (BJ).
A. Autoregressive Method
If the load is assumed to be a linear, combination of previous loads then the
autoregressive (AR) model can be used for the load proﬁle which is given by Liu
et al. in 1996 by,
Lt ¼ ;1L þ ðt  2Þ þ ;2Lðt  2Þ. . .;pLðt  pÞ þ Wt
ð2Þ
where Lt is the predicted load at time k, Wt is a random load disturbance. The
coefﬁcients ;1; ;2; ;p of the AR can be found out by using least and likelihood
method. Also, one well-known algorithm least mean square is used which is rep-
resented by Mbamula and El–Hawary in 1993. The algorithm presented by EI–
Hawary includes an adaptive AR modeling techniques enhanced with partial
autocorrelation analysis [6, 8].
Computational Analysis and Intelligent Control …
299

B. Moving Average Method
The Moving Average method is used the average of most recent K data value in
time series as forecast the next period. The expression for moving average is written
as
Ft þ 1 ¼ Yt þ Yt1 þ Yt2 þ Ytk
ð
Þ=k
ð3Þ
where
Ft + 1
is the forecasting for term t + 1.
Yt
is the actual value of time series in time t.
Every time a new observation is available so the moving word is used for this
method. The new observation is computed by replacing the old observation. As, the
average will be change, or new observation become available [7]. This method is
the very oldest method of the time series. This method is accurate then autore-
gressive method because at every interval, we consider a new value to be forecast.
Before using “Moving average” to forecast a time series, we have a need to select
the order or number of time series values, which has including in time series [9]. If
only the most recent data of time series are considered, then the small value of (k) is
preferred. And if more past data are considered, then the large value of k is more
suitable for time series. The given method has a limitation that it is only applicable
for linear system and is not able to accurately predict when other environment
constrains are considered.
C. Box–Jenkins Method
This method is developed by George Box and Gwilym Jenkins in 1970. This
method is the combination of the autoregressive and moving average method [8].
This method is used for both stationary and nonstationary systems. This model can
be easily modiﬁed for incorporated environmental effects like rainfall, wind
velocity, and humidity [10]. Based environmental constrained, has been modiﬁed as
Ft ¼ ;1L þ ðt  1Þ þ ;2Lðt  2Þ. . .;pLðt  pÞ þ Wt þ Yt þ Yt1 þ Yt2 þ Ytk
ð
Þ=k
ð4Þ
where
;1; ;2; ;p
are the coefﬁcient of the time series (BJ).
Yt; Yt1; Yt2
are the past data of time series (BJ).
K
is a number of samples.
For the forecasting load using above all methods the mathematically exercise is
increase for the data analysis. So to overcome above problem, software-based
analysis is highly needed. Dedicated tool developed by MATLAB has been used by
authors.
300
P. A. Joshi and J. J. Patel

D. System Identiﬁcation Tool
System Identiﬁcation Tool is mapping the input and output of the system. It
takes the current input and output variable of the process as an input and estimates
the system parameter. Using the system identiﬁcation tool, we can estimate linear
and nonlinear system are observed.
This is the major advantage of the system identiﬁcation tool. The network is
simulated using MATLAB for different learning rates and different number of
training point. The simulated network is implemented to estimate the damping
coefﬁcient of the linear or nonlinear variable.
The network is simulated. The system identiﬁcation determines the mathematical
model, block diagram, and ﬂow diagrams. The identiﬁcation tool is used to estimate
nonlinear effect for measurement and control system [11].
4
Result Analysis
Here, estimations made by autoregressive model using System Identiﬁcation Tool
up to fourth order system. Simulated results and best curve ﬁtted are shown in
Fig. 1.
The result says that forecasting curve for given mathematical model is indicated
by pink color. While black indicts the best ﬁtted values. Suggested methods are
used to ﬁnd the value of time series up to fourth order as per Table 2 input and
output of AR method (second order system).
As shown in Fig. 2, the forecasting curve for the given mathematical model is
represented by blue color. While the black is presented the best ﬁtted values for the
nonlinear AR method to ﬁnd the value of time series up to second order as per
Table 3 the output of the time series for nonlinear AR is linear. The predicted loss
function is 13.4529%.
Fig. 1 Load pattern analysis using AR method
Computational Analysis and Intelligent Control …
301

Table 2 Input and output of nonlinear AR method (second order system)
% System identiﬁcation tool constructing nonlinear autoregressive time series %
Name = nlarx1
Nonlinear ARX model with 1 output and 1 input
Inputs: u1
Outputs: y1
Standard regressors corresponding to the orders
na = 2, nb = 2, nk = 1
No custom regressor
Nonlinear regressor
None
Model output is linear in regressors
Loss function: 13.4529%
Fig. 2 Load pattern analysis using nonlinear AR (second order system)
Table 3 Input and output of AR method
% Autoregressive with exogenous input (Arx) and the multiple regression model %
Model = Arx441
Discrete-time ARIX model: A(z)y(t) = B(z)u(t) + 1/(1 −z−1) e(t)
A(z) = 1 −1.609 z−1 + 0.4974 z−2 + 0.5632 z−3 −0.28 z−4
B(z) = 1.517 z−1 −3.402 z−2 + 2.843 z−3 −0.8046 z−4
Name arx441
Sample time: 0.002 s
Parameterization
Polynomial orders: na = 4 nb = 4 nk = 1
Number of free coefﬁcients: 8
Model contains integration on noise channel
Use “polydata”, “getpvec”, “getcov” for parameters and their uncertainties
Status
Estimated using ARX on time domain data “mydataf”
Fit to estimation data: 99.88% (prediction focus)
FPE: 0.01977%, MSE: 0.01805%
302
P. A. Joshi and J. J. Patel

As shown in Fig. 3, the forecasting curve for the given mathematical model is
indicated by gray color. While the black is presented the best ﬁttest values. Method
is used to ﬁnd the value series up to fourth order as per Input and output of
Nonlinear AR Method (4th Order system). The predicted loss function is
0.03608%. As shown in Table 4, for the input and output of nonlinear AR method
(fourth order system), the time series output contains the nonlinearity wavelet. As
shown in Table 2, for the input and output of the nonlinear AR model up to second
order system with increasing the order of the system, the loss function is reduced,
Fig. 3 Load pattern analysis using nonlinear AR (fourth order system)
Table 4 Input and output of nonlinear AR method (fourth order system)
% System identiﬁcation tool constructing nonlinear autoregressive time series %
Name = nlarx5
Nonlinear ARX model with 1 output and 1 input
Inputs: U1
Outputs: Y1
Standard regressor corresponding to the orders
na = 4, nb = 4, nk = 1
No custom regressor
Nonlinear regressors
Y1(t −1)
Y1(t −2)
Y1(t −3)
Y1(t −4)
U1(t −1)
U1(t −2)
U1(t −3)
U1(t −4)
Nonlinearity: wavenet with nine units
Loss function: 0.03608%
Computational Analysis and Intelligent Control …
303

but the output of the model is linear in the second order system, while for the fourth
order system the output of the model is nonlinear.
As shown in Fig. 4, the forecasting curve of the given mathematical model is
indicated by red color. While the black is indicted the best ﬁtted values. Method is
used to ﬁnd the value series up to fourth order as per Table 5. The predicted curve
is ﬁt approximate 98.85% to best ﬁt. The mean square error (MSE) is 1.698%. As
shown in Table 5, the input and output of Box–Jenkins method, the number of free
coefﬁcient of time series using BJ method is 16. This method is suitable for linear
and nonlinear system. By using this method, we can observe that the accuracy of
this method is accurate compared to other method (Fig. 5; Table 6).
Fig. 4 Load pattern analysis
using Box–Jenkins method
Table 5 Input and output of
Box–Jenkins method
% Auto-regressive and moving average time series model %
Name = Bj 44441
Discrete-time BJ model: y(t) = [B(z)/F(z)] u(t) + [C(z)/D(z)] e
(t)
B(z) = 1.625 z−1 −4.412z−2 + 4.4 z−3 −1.609 z−4
C(z) = 1 + 3.508 z−1 + 4.604 z−2 + 2.673 z−3 + 0.5775 z−4
D(z) = 1 −3.15 z−1 + 3.98 z−2 −2.326 z−3 + 0.5236 z−4
(z) = 1 −1.814 z−1 + 0.1927 z−2 + 1.539 z−3 −0.9123 z−4
Sample time: 0.002 s
Parameterization:
Polynomial orders: nb = 4 nc = 4 nd = 4 nf = 4 nk = 1
Number of free coefﬁcients: 16
Use “polydata”, “getpvec”, “getcov” for parameters and their
uncertainties
Status:
Estimated using POLYEST on time domain data “mydatafd”
Fit to estimation data: 98.85% (prediction focus)
FPE: 0.0001646%, MSE: 1.698%
304
P. A. Joshi and J. J. Patel

After the analysis of the time series methods for electric load forecasting using
AR, nonlinear AR, and BJ methods, the BJ method gives better result with linear
and nonlinear system. Nonlinear also gives best result for only nonlinear system.
Proposed work plays a signiﬁcant role in daily operation of electrical utility like
fuel resource management and for consideration in balancing the supply and
demand of electrical power inﬂuence by load forecasting. Obtained such accurate
result analysis indicates that it is the base for spot price establishment for entire state
electric system and to minimize purchase cost of electricity in recent electricity
market. Intelligent control for smart grid integration, such as proposed accurate load
forecasting is useful in planning for demand side management, storage, maintains
and their schedules integrated control of renewable sources with MTLF beneﬁts
consumers with by means of the relationship between demand and price variation
with electrical uses pattern based on its prices. i.e. Available Based Tariff (ABT).
Fig. 5 Load pattern Analysis for all combine methods
Table 6 Comparison of all methods
Sr no
Method name
MSE or loss function (%)
1
AR
0.01805
2
Non linear AR (second order system)
13.4529
3
Non linear AR (fourth order system)
0.03608
4
Box–Jenkins
1.698
Computational Analysis and Intelligent Control …
305

5
Conclusion
In given paper, MTLF is presented using time series method in the system iden-
tiﬁcation tool. Here we forecast the amount of (MWh) load using various methods
and conclude that autoregressive and Box–Jenkins method provide better accuracy.
The mean square errors of these two methods are 0.01805 and 1.698%. Also we
understand that in nonlinear autoregressive method, with increasing the order of the
system, the loss function is reduced. And we also conclude that the Box–Jenkins
method is able to provide nearly precise results for the linear and nonlinear system
compared to other method at same sampling time.
Acknowledgements The author(s) of this paper are thankful of State Load Dispatch Center
(SLDC), Gotri, Gujarat, India for providing permission and infrastructural support.
References
1. Abu-El-Magd, M. A., and R. D. Findlay. “A new approach using artiﬁcial neuralnetwork and
time series models for short term load forecasting.” Electrical and Computer Engineering,
2003. IEEE CCECE 2003. Canadian Conference on. Vol. 3. IEEE, 2003.
2. Kothari D P and I J Nagrath Moeden Power System Analysis, 4th edition, Tata MCGrew Hill
Delhi.
3. Alfares, Hesham K., and Mohammad Nazeeruddin. “Electric load forecasting: literature
survey and classiﬁcation of methods.” International Journal of Systems Science 33.1 (2002):
23–34.
4. Prakash, G. L., et al. “Short Term Load Forecasting for Uttarakhand using neural network and
time series models.” Reliability, Infocom Technologies and Optimization (ICRITO) (Trends
and Future Directions), 2014 3rd International Conference on. IEEE, 2014.
5. Annual report 2015 -2016 State Load Dispatch Center, Gujarat Energy Transmission
Corporation Limited.
6. Zhang, G. Peter. “Time series forecasting using a hybrid ARIMA and neural network
model.” Neurocomputing 50 (2003): 159–175.
7. Weron, Rafal. Modeling and forecasting electricity loads and prices: A statistical approach.
Vol. 403. John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
8. Shen,
Haipeng.
“On
modeling
and
forecasting
time
series
of
smooth
curves.” Technometrics 51.3 (2009): 227–238.
9. Chen, J. F., Wang, W. M., & Huang, C. M. (1995). Analysis of an adaptive time-series
autoregressive moving-average (ARMA) model for short-term load forecasting. Electric
Power Systems Research, 34(3), 187–196.
10. Hagan, Martin T., and Suzanne M. Behr. “The time series approach to.
11. www.mathworks.com.
306
P. A. Joshi and J. J. Patel

Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter
Operating Under Faulty H-Cell Condition
Soniya V. Atodaria and Nilesh V. Shah
Abstract Reliability is an important aspect in the multilevel inverters (MLIs) as
they are used for high-power applications and also the number of switch increases
with the increase in levels. The efﬁciency improvement, optimized control strate-
gies, new applications, and fault-tolerant operation are another area of interest of
researcher for MLIs. In this paper, the control scheme of cascaded H-bridge mul-
tilevel inverter operating under faulty H-cell condition is presented. A modiﬁed
level-shifted pulse width modulation (LS-PWM) method is used for the control of
cascaded H-bridge multilevel inverter operating under faulty conditions. To study
the open-circuit and short-circuit fault cases of the H-cell of cascaded H-bridge
inverter, two methods of switching have been presented and simulated using
MATLAB/Simulink. Neutral shift method is used for achieving balanced
line-to-line voltage and line-to-line current. Additionally, to distribute power among
H-bridge power cells, rotation scheme in LS-PWM has also been simulated. The
simulation results validate the fault-tolerant operation of cascaded H-bridge MLI.
Keywords Cascaded H-bridge multilevel inverter  Level-shifted pulse width
modulation  Fault tolerant  Neutral shift
1
Introduction
Multilevel inverters (MLIs) have experienced continuous and increasing growth in
terms of application and research. The effort of the researchers and industry has led
to a rapid development of different multilevel inverter topologies, modulation
techniques, and control strategies. Multilevel inverters are widely used in com-
pressors, blowers, fans, crushers, grinders, etc. [1]. The cascaded H-bridge
S. V. Atodaria (&)  N. V. Shah
Sarvajanik College of Engineering & Technology, Surat, India
e-mail: atodariasv@yahoo.com
N. V. Shah
e-mail: nilesh.shah@scet.ac.in
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2_28
307

(CHB) MLI has penetrated more industry applications compared to neutral point
clamped (NPC) and ﬂying capacitor (FC) [1]. Also, CHB does not have problem of
dc-link capacitor voltage balancing. Its losses are also less compared to NPC and
FC. Also, CHB uses low-frequency IGBTs compared to high-frequency IGBTs/
IGCTs used in FC. In [2], the comparison between phase-shifted pulse width
modulation (PS-PWM) and level-shifted pulse width modulation (LS-PWM) is
given, which shows that the LS-PWM gives better output voltage proﬁle compared
to PS-PWM. In [3], comparison between different LS-PWM techniques, i.e., in
phase disposition (IPD), phase opposite disposition (POD), and alternative phase
opposite disposition (APOD) is presented. It shows that IPD gives less THD in the
output voltage compared to POD and APOD. IPD also gives more levels in
line-to-line output voltage compared to POD and APOD [3].
To increase the reliability of MLIs, several methods have been presented in
[4–8]. In [4], space vector modulation (SVM) is used and to bypass the faulty
H-cell, SCR is used as fast-acting switch. To make the line-to-line voltage and
current balanced, maximum voltage algorithm is used. In [5], phase-shifted pulse
width modulation (PS-PWM) control is applied, whereas to bypass the faulty
H-cell, contactor is used. To make the line-to-line voltage and current balanced,
voltage equivalency triangle is used for which the prior calculations are done and
stored in lookup table. In [6], redundant H-cell in each phase is used, which
increases reliability only when single cell becomes faulty in any phase. In [7], only
one redundant H-cell is used but the method is effective only when there is a
single-cell fault condition. In [8], the MLI is used for battery energy storage system
and to make the line-to-line voltage and current balanced, neutral shift method is
used. In [9], open-circuit fault detection method based on LS-PWM is discussed,
which can give information about faulty switch. In [10], fault detection is obtained
by the use of artiﬁcial intelligence method. The fault-tolerant operation based on
LS-PWM is presented in [11, 12]. To bypass faulty H-cell, zero-voltage switching
state is used. Thus, reducing the need of extra element/device. The neutral shift
method is applied to make the line-to-line voltage and current balanced. But the
calculation for offset voltage injection by neutral shift method is given only for
single-cell fault condition in the phases. In [13], to overcome limitation of
LS-PWM, i.e., unequal power distribution among H-cells, rotation scheme is given.
In this paper, the generalized equations for offset voltage calculation are derived
based on the neutral shift method presented in [8], which can be used for fault in
more than one cell. To distribute the power equally among the H-cells under faulty
condition, rotation technique of carrier wave is used in LS-PWM technique. Also,
to achieve balance line-to-line voltage and current, the derived generalized equa-
tions of neutral shift method are used. The control strategy using modiﬁed
LS-PWM technique with the generalized neutral shift equations is veriﬁed through
simulation results. The simulation result validates the control scheme for different
cases of open-circuit and short-circuit fault conditions of single as well as multiple
faulty switches in a seven-level CHB–MLI.
308
S. V. Atodaria and N. V. Shah

2
Neutral Shift Method
Neutral shift method is used to maximize the available output voltage under faulty
cell bypassed condition. The seven-level CHB-MLI is shown in Fig. 1 with three
cells per phase. In this section, generalized equations for neutral shift voltage are
derived. The three-phase ac voltages are given by (1)–(3).
van ¼ mVdc sin xt
ð1Þ
vbn ¼ mVdc sin xt  2p
3


ð2Þ
vcn ¼ mVdc sin xt þ 2p
3


ð3Þ
where m = modulation index.
The phasor diagram showing relation as in (1)–(3) for cascaded H-bridge MLI
under healthy condition is shown in Fig. 2a. Under faulty cell condition, when it is
assumed that cell a1 in phase-a gets faulty, without neutral shift, the modulation
index of remaining (N −1) healthy inverter cells would have been increased by 1.5
to balance output line voltage as per (4)–(6). The corresponding phasor diagram is
shown in Fig. 2b.
Fig. 1 Seven-level CHB-MLI
Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter …
309

van ¼
N
N  nfa

 mVdc sin xt
ð4Þ
vbn ¼ mVdc sin xt  2p
3


ð5Þ
vcn ¼ mVdc sin xt þ 2p
3


ð6Þ
where nfa is number of faulty cells in phase-a.
With neutral shift, the burden, i.e., power transferred by the cell that gets faulty,
is distributed among remaining (3N −1) healthy inverter cells. The neutral shift is
based on the injection of a fundamental-frequency zero-sequence voltage, v0f. The
ac voltages of healthy cells can be expressed by (7)–(9), and corresponding phasor
diagram is shown in Fig. 2c.
van ¼
N
N  nfa

 mVdc sin xt  v0f sin xt


ð7Þ
vbn ¼ mVdc sin xt  2p
3


 v0f sin xt
ð8Þ
Fig. 2 Phasor diagram of seven-level CHB-MLI with N = 3 a under normal operation, b under
cell a1 gets faulty and the modulation index of remaining cells va2 and va3 is increased to 1.5 and
c injection of zero-sequence voltage by neutral shift method
310
S. V. Atodaria and N. V. Shah

vcn ¼ mVdc sin xt þ 2p
3


 v0f sin xt
ð9Þ
where the second term on right, i.e., v0f sin xt, is zero-sequence voltage.
Let the three-phase line currents be balanced as follows:
ia ¼ p2I sin xt
ð10Þ
ib ¼ p2I sin xt  2p
3


ð11Þ
ic ¼ p2I sin xt þ 2p
3


ð12Þ
The input electric power to each converter cell is given by the following:
pa1 ¼ 0
ð13Þ
pan ¼
Z
2p=x
0
vaniadt
¼ p
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
x
N
N  nfa

 mVdc  v0f


I;
for n ¼ 2; 3; . . .; N
ð14Þ
pbn; ¼
Z
2p=x
0
vbnibdt
¼ p
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
x
mVdc þ v0f
2


I;
for n ¼ 1; 2; . . .; N
ð15Þ
pcn ¼
Z
2p=x
0
vcnicdt
¼ p
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
x
mVdc þ v0f
2


I;
for n ¼ 1; 2; . . .; N
ð16Þ
These powers ðpa2; pa3; . . .; pc3Þ absorbed by the 3N  nf healthy battery units
should be equal during the faulty condition, i.e.,
pan ¼ pbn ¼ pcn
ð17Þ
Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter …
311

From (10) to (17), the equation for zero-sequence voltage can be derived as
given by (18).
v0f ¼
2nfx
3N  nfx
ð18Þ
where nfx is total number of faulty cells in phases x = phase a, b, or c.
If one cell becomes faulty in phase-a and one cell becomes faulty in phase-b,
then (7)–(9) are modiﬁed as given by (19)–(21).
van ¼
N
N  nfa


mVdc sin xt  v0f sin xt  v0f sin xt  2p
3




ð19Þ
vbn ¼
N
N  nfb


mVdc sin xt  2p
3


 v0f sin xtv0f sin xt  2p
3




ð20Þ
vcn ¼ mVdc sin xt þ 2p
3


 v0f sin xt  v0f sin xt  2p
3


ð21Þ
3
Fault-Tolerant Operation by Modiﬁed LS-PWM
Method
In this section, the fault-tolerant operation of CHB-MLI is analyzed by two different
methods using modiﬁed LS-PWM.
3.1
Method-1: For Open and Short-Switching Device Faults
In this method, the faulty cell is bypassed. Hence, inverter gives (L-2) voltage levels
in faulty phase. The method of bypassing the faulty H-cell is explained as follows.
Considering switch S11 has become faulty, i.e., open-circuited, the switch in
opposite leg is made off and the two bottom switches are made on; thus, it gives
path to the current and zero voltage. If switch S11 has become short-circuited,
immediately the bottom two switches are made off and switch in opposite leg is
made on to give path to the current and to give zero voltage.
To allow the reference signal to be modulated linearly with carrier bands, the
reference signal is adjusted as shown in Fig. 3. At t = 0.06 s, amplitude modulation
index of the reference signal is decreased as given by (22).
312
S. V. Atodaria and N. V. Shah

V
ref
x ¼ N  nfx


N
Vref
x
ð22Þ
where x represents the phase a, b, or c.
For a seven-level inverter, number of cascaded cell = 3 and with the number of
faulty inverter cell nfa ¼ 1, the adjusted reference signal Vref_a
*
is given by (23).
V
ref
a ¼ 2
3 Vref
a
ð23Þ
At t = 0.12 s, the zero-sequence voltage for the neutral shift is injected due to
which the Vref_a
*
has been increased as shown in Fig. 3.
3.2
Method-2: Only for Open-Switching Device Faults
In this method, faulty cell is not bypassed. Hence, inverter gives (L-1) levels in
faulty phase. Consider that switch S11 has become open-circuited. The reference
signal is modiﬁed only during the original modulation of S11 as shown in Fig. 4.
The carrier Vcr1 corresponding to switching of S11 is made to shift outer-most, and
adjusted reference signal is applied as given by (24).
If Vref
a [ 2
3
then; V
ref
a ¼ 2
3 Vref
a
and if; Vref
a\ 2
3
then; V
ref
a ¼ Vref
a
ð24Þ
The faulty cell-1 is responsible for the inner-most modulation level of the
negative region. The healthy inverter cells, i.e., cell-2 and cell-3, are responsible for
the inner-most and middle level in the positive region and middle and outer-most
Fig. 3 Reference wave of phase-a containing faulty cell and method-1 is applied for LS-PWM
Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter …
313

level in the negative region. With this modiﬁed rotation scheme, the total amount of
power delivered by cell-2 and cell-3 is still equal during the two cycles of the
fundamental wave.
4
Simulation Results
A seven-level CHB-MLI model has been developed for verifying the control
scheme using modiﬁed LS-PWM technique for the fault-tolerant operation using
MATLAB/Simulink. The parameters used for simulation are given in Table 1.
The simulation is performed for different cases, and the results are discussed as
follows:
Case-1: Considering switch S11 in phase-a become faulty and method-1 is
applied. Figure 5 shows the reference voltages of three phases, phase voltages, line
currents, and line-to-line voltages. Up to time t = 0.06 s, the faulty H-cell is
bypassed as discussed in method-I. At time t = 0.12 s, the zero-sequence voltage is
injected which gives balanced line currents and line-to-line voltages as shown in
Fig. 5.
Case-2: Considering S11 and S12 in phase-a become faulty and method-1 is
applied. This could be the worst case that out of three cells of phase-a, two cells
become faulty. Though the possibility of this type of fault is very less, but the
simulation results are presented in Fig. 6 to demonstrate the feasibility of the
fault-tolerant method for the worst-case situation also.
Fig. 4 Reference wave of phase-a containing faulty cell and method-2 is applied
Table 1 Simulation
parameters for seven-level
CHB-MLI
Individual dc voltage source
300 V
Amplitude modulation index, ma
0.833
Reference wave frequency
50 Hz
Switching frequency
1.5 kHz
R-L load
R = 25 Ω, L = 4 mH
314
S. V. Atodaria and N. V. Shah

Case-3: Considering switch S11 in phase-a become faulty and method-2 is
applied. Figure 7 shows the reference waveforms of all three phases, phase voltage,
line current, and line-to-line voltage. In method-2, the faulty H-cell is not bypassed;
instead, the healthy switches are let to work normally. At t = 0.06 s, the method-2
is applied for control of CHB-MLI under faulty condition and the six-level phase
voltage +2 Vdc to −3 Vdc is generated at the faulty phase-a as shown in Fig. 7(b).
At t = 0.12 s, the zero-sequence voltage is injected that gives balanced line currents
as shown in Fig. 7(c) and line-to-line voltages as seen in Fig. 7(d).
Fig. 5 Simulation results with Nfa = 1, ma = 0.833 and method-1 LS-PWM is applied:
a Reference waves. b Phase voltages. c Line currents. d Line voltages
Fig. 6 Simulation results with Nfa = 2, ma = 0.633 and method-1 LS-PWM is applied:
a Reference waves. b Phase voltages. c Line currents. d Line voltages
Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter …
315

5
Conclusion
In this paper, the control of CHB-MLI under faulty H-cell conditions using two
different methods for open-circuit and short-circuit fault conditions is presented.
The generalized equations of the neutral shift method for zero-sequence voltage
injection are derived, and balanced line-to-line voltage and line current are obtained
under different faulty conditions. Method-1 is applicable for the control of
CHB-MLI under faulty cell condition to both types of faults, i.e., open and
short-switching device faults. Of course, method-1 can be considered as more
reliable as it deals with both types of fault, i.e., open-circuit and short-circuit fault.
By implementing rotation of the carrier in the presented modiﬁed LS-PWM
method, equal power distribution among the H-cells can be obtained that improves
the lifetime of the switching devices. The simulation results demonstrate the
validity of the control scheme for the fault-tolerant operation of CHB-MLI.
References
1. S. Kouro, M. Malinowski, K. Gopakumar, J. Pou, L.G. Franquelo, B. Wu, J. Rodriguez, M.
A. Perez, and J. I. Leon, “Recent advances and industrial applications of multilevel
converters,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2553–2580, Aug. 2010.
2. B. Wu, “Cascaded H-bridge Multilevel Inverters”, in High-Power Converters and ac Drives,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, USA, 1st ed., pp. 127–136, 2006.
Fig. 7 Simulation results with Nfa = 1, ma = 0.833 and method-2 LS-PWM is applied:
a Reference waves. b Phase voltages. c Line currents. d Line voltages
316
S. V. Atodaria and N. V. Shah

3. M. Tamasas, M. Saleh, M. Shaker, A. Hammoda, “Evaluation of modulation techniques for
5-level inverter based on multicarrier level shift PWM”, in Proc. of 17th IEEE Mediterranean
Electrotechnical Conference (MELECON) 2014, pp. 17–23, 13–16 April 2014.
4. S. Wei, B. Wu, F. Li, and X. Sun, “Control method for cascaded H-bridge multilevel inverter
with faulty power cells, in Proc. of Eighteenth Annual IEEE Applied Power Electronics
Conference and Exposition, APEC’03, pp. 261–267, 2003.
5. J. Rodriguez, P. W. Hammond, J. Pontt, R. Musalem, P. Lezana, and M. J. Escobar,
“Operation of a Medium-Voltage Drive Under Faulty Conditions,” IEEE Trans. Ind.
Electron., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1080–1085, Aug. 2005.
6. W. Song and A. Q. Huang, “Fault-Tolerant Design and Control Strategy for Cascaded
H-Bridge Multilevel Converter-Based STATCOM,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 57, no.
8, pp. 2700–2708, Aug. 2010.
7. P. Moamaei, H. Mahmoudi, and R. Ahmadi, “Fault-Tolerant Operation of a Cascaded
H-Bridge Inverters Using One Redundant Cell”, Power and Energy Conference at Illinois
(PECI), IEEE 2015.
8. L. Maharjan, T. Yamagishi, H. Akagi, and J. Asakura, “Fault-Tolerant Operation of a
Battery-Energy-Storage System Based on a Multilevel Cascade PWM Converter with Star
Conﬁguration,” IEEE Trans. Power Electron., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 2386–2396, Sep. 2010.
9. H. W. Sim, J. S. Lee, and K. B. Lee, “A Detection Method for an Open-Switch Fault in
Cascaded H-bridge Multilevel Inverters,” in Proc. IEEE ECCE 2014, pp. 2101–2106,
Sep. 2014.
10. S. Khomfoi and L. M. Tolbert, “Fault Diagnosis and Reconﬁguration for Multilevel Inverter
Drive Using AI-Based Techniques,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 2954–2968,
Dec. 2007.
11. S. M. Kim, J. S. Lee, and K. B. Lee, “Fault-tolerant strategy using neutral-shift method for
cascaded multilevel inverters based on level-shifted PWM,” in Proc. of 9th International
Conference on Power Electronics ECCE, Asia, 2015.
12. S. M. Kim, J. S. Lee, and K. B. Lee, “A Modiﬁed Level-Shifted PWM Strategy for
Fault-Tolerant Cascaded Multilevel Inverters with Improved Power Distribution,” IEEE
Trans. Ind. Electron., Jan. 2016.
13. M. Angulo, P. Lezana, S. Kouro, J. Rodriguez and Bin Wu, “Level shifted PWM for cascaded
multilevel inverters with even power distribution,” in Proc. of IEEE Power Electron. Spec.
Conf. (PESC), pp. 2373–2378, Jun. 2007.
Cascaded H-Bridge Multilevel Inverter …
317

Author Index
A
Atodaria, Soniya V., 307
B
Badmera, Vidushi, 177
Bhesaniya, Mukesh, 263
Borisagar, Komal, 1
D
Dalal, Purvang, 79
Dalal, Sejal, 79
Dwivedi, Vedvyas, 1
G
Gabani, Hardika B., 45
Ganatra, Jeny, 155
Gandhi, P. R., 221
Goswami, Mukesh M., 35, 163
J
Jadav, A.D., 15
Jani, Kaushal B., 199
Jasani, Karan, 93
Joshi, Parth A., 297
Joshi, Rucha, 53
Joshi, Vibhutikumar G., 103
K
Kakaiya, U.Y., 15
Kalariya, Rushikesh Chakubhai, 263
Kathiriya, Himanshu M., 163
Kavaiya, Bhumika D., 65
L
Lad, Hiteshkumar J., 103
M
Mahant, Keyur, 53
Makwana, Ankitkumar M., 221
Makwana, Vijay H., 185, 235
Mandaliya, Kashyap, 25
Mehta, Param, 185
Mewada, Hiren, 53
N
Nair, Nitin V., 169
P
Pabari, J. P., 15
Parmar, Priyanka, 255
Patel, Amit, 53
Patel, Chintan, 255
Patel, Chirag I., 25
Patel, Dhvani R., 93
Patel, Hiren G., 279
Patel, Jatinkumar J., 199, 297
Patel, Priyal V., 211
Patel, Riddhi, 125
Patel, Ripal, 25
Patel, R. R., 169, 177, 245
Patel, Sameer B., 211
Patel, Vidhi D., 287
Paunwala, Chirag N., 45
R
Rajda, Nikita, 245
Rao, Brijesha D., 35
Rathor, Sumit K., 287
Raval, Mihir, 279
S
Saha, Geetali, 125
Sarkar, Mohanchur, 79
Savani, Rushi, 25
Shah, Brijesh N., 93
Shah, Dipali, 79
© Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2018
R. Kher et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems
and Signal Processing, Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing 671,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6977-2
319

Shah, Nilesh V., 307
Shelar, Pushkar, 25
Suthar, Kishankumar, 113
T
Thacker, Chintan, 155
Thakker, Rajesh, 113
Thanki, Rohit, 1
Thumar, Vinay M., 65
U
Upadhyaya, Pooja N., 235
320
Author Index

