
Thank you for downloading this
AMACOM eBook.
Sign up for our newsletter, AMACOM BookAlert, and 
receive special offers, access to free samples, and  
info on the latest new releases from AMACOM, 
the book publishing division of 
American Management Association.
To sign up, visit our website: www.amacombooks.org
To learn more about the American Management 
Association visit: www.amanet.org
The copyright information for this title may be found at the end of this eBook file.

PROFITABLE 
PODCASTING

GROW YOUR BUSINESS,  
EXPAND YOUR PLATFORM, AND
BUILD A NATION OF TRUE FANS
STEPHEN WOESSNER
AMERICAN MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION
New York  •  Atlanta  •  Brussels  •  Chicago  •  Mexico City  •  San Francisco  
Shanghai  •  Tokyo  •  Toronto  •  Washington, DC
PROFITABLE 
PODCASTING

[ v ]
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments	
vii
Foreword by Don Yaeger	
ix
Introduction:  How a Podcast Can Be Your Trojan Horse of Selling	
1
Chapter 1: 	 Overcome Your Biggest Obstacles to Success	
13
Chapter 2: 	Take Your Vitals	
23
Chapter 3: 	System Overview—Your Recipe for Success	
35
Chapter 4: 	Grow Your Revenue	
43
Chapter 5: 	Expand Your Platform	
53
Chapter 6: 	Build Your Nation of True Fans	
61
Chapter 7:  	Your Avatar, Dream 50, and My $2 Million Mistake	
69
Chapter 8: 	Stage 1: Strategic Planning and Production Kickoff	
77
Chapter 9: 	Stage 2: Guest Experience and Website Groundwork	
89
Chapter 10:  Stage 3: Audio Intros, Outros, and Design	
111

[ vi ]
contents
Chapter 11:  Stage 4: Social Media, Recording Software, and  
First Round of Guest Interviews	
127
Chapter 12:  Stage 5: Final Website Content and Show Notes	
143
Chapter 13:  Stage 6: Equipment, Software, and Editing  
Your Interviews	
155
Chapter 14: 	Stage 7: Launch Strategy: How to Reach  
the Top of iTunes	
167
Chapter 15:  How to Be an Excellent Host	
175
Chapter 16:  How to Attract Sponsorships	
181
Chapter 17: 	 Getting It All Done: Recruit Rock Star  
Unpaid Interns	
191
Epilogue:  Don’t Quit—Win the Oscar Instead	
201
Appendix:  Success Stories from Business Owners	
209
Notes	
	
247
Index	
	
249
About the Author	
259
Free Sample from Get Scrappy by Nick Westergaard 	
260
About Amacom	
274

[ vii ]
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
To Christine and Caitlyn—I appreciate your love and support in every challenge 
I tackle. You make me want to strive to be a better husband, father, and person. I 
love you to the moon and back—and always will.
To my grandfather, Peter Maronitis—you spent your life in service of others. It 
was you who taught me the value of mentorship, hard work, and commitment to 
family. You lived a life worthy of following. I look forward to our conversations 
again. I love you, Pop.
To Don Yaeger and Drew McLellan—thank you for being great friends and 
trusted mentors. You know how to get the best out of me. I appreciate you more 
than you will ever know. 
To Wendy Keller—this book would not have been possible without you. You 
planted the seed and then you gave me the road map to follow. Thank you so 
much for being my wonderful agent, mentor, and friend. 
To our Predictive ROI clients and our Onward Nation guests—you have 
helped my team and me grow in new ways, you pushed us to be better, and  
you generously shared your expertise with our listeners—and with me directly—
so we could all move onward to that next level. Thank you so very much, my 
friends!
To Ellen Kadin and the team at AMACOM—thank you for this opportunity, 
and I greatly appreciate all your support, encouragement, and pushing to make 

[ viii ]
acknowledgments
sure the ideas and thoughts in our book were the best possible. Exceptional 
teamwork! Thank you!
Thank you for picking up our book. Congratulations on taking the first step 
toward growing your revenue, expanding your platform, and building your nation 
of true fans. Herein lies everything you need to make your vision a reality. Time 
to get to work!

[ ix ]
FOREWORD
Why are some teams capable of being great and sustaining their high perfor-
mance over a long period of time—while others can’t? We see it happen not just 
in sports. We also see it happen in business teams with companies like Starbucks, 
Southwest Airlines, members of the Inc. 500 list, and so on. 
How are they able to consistently outperform their competition time and 
time again?
I have studied the best-of-the-best team builders in sports and in business 
over the last twenty-five years and uncovered what makes the great teams great. 
I have witnessed how great teams are in constant study of other great teams to 
learn what they need to come together, to manage adversity as a group, to find a 
common purpose, to protect their inner circle, and more. 
If you believe as I do that success leaves clues—then our job as business 
leaders is to go find the clues and apply them within our teams. But . . . are we as 
leaders willing to invest the time and energy to study what it takes to move our 
businesses onward to that next level?
In my opinion, one of the best ways to learn from the experiences of others, 
and to uncover the clues to their success, is to invite them to participate in a 
platform like a YouTube channel, blog, or a top-rated podcast so you can in-
terview them and allow them to share their knowledge and expertise with your 
audience. By doing so, you will learn directly from the experts—and—you will 
expand your inner circle in the process. Your personal network and your sphere of 
influence will grow, and it is likely that new business development opportunities 
will find their way to you. 

[ x ]
foreword
You are holding in your hands a precise blueprint to make the above a reality. 
Profitable Podcasting does not include marketing hyperbole. You must be willing 
to do the work. Stephen Woessner and his Predictive ROI team have shared 
in full transparency all the practical knowledge you need to create, launch, and 
monetize a top-rated podcast that can accelerate your business. The success clues 
have been distilled into specific strategies and step-by-step instructions that you 
and your team can immediately apply.
You will learn how your podcast can become an “all access pass” to the knowl-
edge of others if you are courageous enough to knock on the doors and ask the 
questions. Stephen will also teach you how your podcast can become a distinc-
tive business development strategy to grow your revenue. He calls it the “Trojan 
Horse of Sales,” and I have seen him do it for Predictive ROI and repeat the 
same success for its clients. 
I am a firm believer that greatness is available to all of us if we are willing to 
do the common things uncommonly well. But, there is no such thing as an over-
night success. So I also want to share some behind-the-scenes context with you. 
In addition to being close friends, Stephen and I are weekly accountability 
partners; we talk every Friday morning and share our wins and losses for the week 
and how we expect to get better as a result of what we learned. We have rinsed 
and repeated this weekly process since August of 2012. I remember our Friday 
call back in May 2015 when he shared his inspiration behind Onward Nation 
and what he and his team had decided to do. He explained their goal to launch 
a daily show for business owners. I thought their plan was ambitious but was 
excited to hear the enthusiasm in Stephen’s voice. I know what can happen when 
business owners are intentional about surrounding themselves with winners.
As an award-winning keynote speaker, business leadership coach, and long-
time associate editor for Sports Illustrated, I have experienced firsthand how 
spending time with thought leaders and learning from the best can dramatically 
impact the trajectory of one’s business and life. I knew Stephen would be suc-
cessful if he and his team could be consistent with their strategy and had the 
discipline to remain consistent in their pursuit of greatness.
The results are now clear.

[ xi ]
foreword
Onward Nation has generated over $2 million in revenue for Predictive 
ROI—and—I have watched Stephen’s personal network expand to include some 
of today’s top business owners, thought leaders, and authors. Onward Nation is 
now listened to in more than one hundred countries, it has received exceptional 
ratings and reviews, and there is a three-month waiting list to appear as a guest.
There are no secrets to being successful at podcasting and using it as a busi-
ness development strategy to move onward to that next level. It is all here for 
you in this book. You simply need to be willing to do the common things un-
commonly well. 
As Coach John Wooden said, “Make each day your masterpiece.”
—DON YAEGER 
Nine-time New York Times bestselling author

PROFITABLE 
PODCASTING

[ 1 ]
INTRODUCTION 
HOW A PODCAST CAN BE YOUR  
TROJAN HORSE OF SELLING
We learn by doing. So, if you desire to master the principles you are study-
ing in this book, do something about them. Apply these rules at every 
opportunity. If you don’t you will forget them quickly. Only knowledge that 
is used sticks in your mind.
—DALE CARNEGIE, How to Win Friends and Influence People
M
y name is Stephen Woessner. I am the CEO of Predictive ROI (a content 
marketing and lead agency) and the host of Onward Nation, a daily pod-
cast for business owners. Our mission at Onward Nation is to be America’s 
number one podcast for learning how today’s top business owners think, act, and 
achieve. We immediately struck a powerful chord with listeners: Onward Nation 
became a top-ranked podcast within iTunes’ New and Noteworthy in multiple 
categories just three weeks after airing Episode 1 with author Scott McKain on 
June 15, 2015. 
Onward Nation is now listened to in more than 200 countries, has received 
100,000+ downloads of its episodes, and will generate $2 million in revenue for 
Predictive ROI over the next twelve months.
But how did we do all of that? We learned Onward Nation could become our 
Trojan horse.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 2 ]
Your Trojan Horse of Selling
T
he legend of the Trojan horse comes from the story of the Trojan War be-
tween the Greeks and Troy chronicled in the Odyssey, written by Homer near 
the end of the 8th century BC. The story—which could be fact or fiction—is a 
great illustration of strategy and subterfuge.
According to the legend, the Trojan War ended in a stalemate because Greece 
was unable to devise a strategy to circumvent the city walls of Troy. The ten-
year battle ended and the Greek army made what looked to be a retreat to their 
homeland. 
The Trojan army investigated and found the beach abandoned. The Greek 
armada was gone and a large wooden horse was all that remained on the desolate 
shore. The Trojans believed the Greeks had left the horse as a peace offering. 
They gleefully accepted the offering and pulled the horse from the beach, past 
their impenetrable city gates, into the city square, and began to celebrate their 
victory over the Greeks.
However, a little due diligence by the Trojans would have been prudent. Per-
haps they would have found the Greek strike force tucked inside the horse. The 
Greeks seized their opportunity late that night when they sneaked quietly out 
of the horse and opened the city gates so the balance of their army could enter 
unencumbered.
The Greeks proceeded to sack the city. The story gave birth to the expression 
“Beware a Greek bearing gifts.”
The monetization strategy behind your podcast, if executed properly, will 
work in a similar way. For example, a typical salesperson may have access to a 
decision-maker within a dream prospect’s company blocked by a “gatekeeper.” 
Any sort of sales opportunity is thwarted, and the salesperson may be forced to 
move on to her next prospect.
However, what if you happen to be the host of a top-rated podcast and you 
are getting in touch with the decision-maker because you would like to interview 
him about his journey, his secrets to success, and the wisdom he could share with 

[ 3 ]
introduction
others in his industry or the broader business community? Well, now, you just 
changed the entire dynamic of the situation, didn’t you? Your podcast increased 
the probability of a one-on-one, private, sixty-minute conversation with your 
ideal prospect.
But how did your podcast give you this “all-access pass”? Your podcast changed 
the game because you are no longer perceived as a business owner looking for a new 
account. You are now perceived as a journalist and your show is a media channel—a 
conduit—to an audience the guests on your show want to reach and influence. 
It’s as simple as letting the decision-maker at your dream prospect wheel 
the horse past the company’s gatekeeper—and park it right in the center of the 
C-suite. You now have an opportunity to dazzle your dream prospect with your 
brilliance and intimate industry and company knowledge during the interview. 
Your podcast has done its job. It’s time for you to do yours. Sell!
Our Story and Why You Need This Book
I
t was a quiet Sunday afternoon in the middle of May 2015. I was sitting at 
my dining room table looking out the front window at my daughter and her 
friends having fun at our neighborhood playground. All was well outside—but 
not inside. I was under a great deal of stress.
We had just lost a client. And although every company experiences this from 
time to time, what made this particular loss so painful was that we were over-
staffed. The loss in revenue made our reality even more excruciating.
I had purchased the domain name OnwardNation.com about twelve months 
earlier but had no idea why. No strategy; I just felt compelled to make the pur-
chase. Funny how God whispers the seeds of inspiration into your ear sometimes 
and then just lets them sit until He is ready for them to germinate into some-
thing remarkable. 
That Sunday must have been germination day. As I sat there at my dining 
room table, I remembered the OnwardNation.com purchase and made the de-
cision that we would create and launch a daily podcast using that name. Next, 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 4 ]
I crafted an enthusiastic, optimistic email explaining that Onward Nation was 
the solution we’d been seeking to turn Predictive ROI lead generation and sales 
activity around (mind you, I had zero strategy, only unbridled optimism). In the 
email I set an aggressive launch date of June 15. I closed the lid to my MacBook, 
and somehow felt good about the decision (or chaos) that I had just initiated. 
Why chaos, you ask? Well, I should probably share that the decision to create 
and launch a podcast in thirty days was made in complete and utter ignorance. I 
knew nothing about creating or launching a podcast.
Sure, I had been a guest on a couple of podcasts such as EOFire with John 
Lee Dumas and ReLaunch with Joel Boggess and Dr. Pei Kang. So I knew how 
to put on a headset and open Skype, which constituted my entire body of knowl-
edge in the podcast world up to that point.
Let’s fast-forward to launch day, Monday, June 15. Remarkably, we launched 
on schedule and the first day of Onward Nation ran smoothly. We aired three 
episodes on launch day: Episode 1 with Scott McKain, Episode 2 with sports 
journalist and author Don Yaeger, and Episode 3 with leadership coach Stacey 
Alcorn. All three guests are rock stars, and Onward Nation was off and running.
Several weeks later, I attended my Agency Management Institute mas-
termind group. By then, Onward Nation had aired forty-seven episodes, daily 
downloads were steadily increasing, and we had scored top rankings in iTunes. I 
was feeling proud about our accomplishments. We had gone from zero to sixty 
in about 3.5 seconds. Not bad. But we were missing a vital outcome: revenue!
My mastermind group—all exceptional agency owners from across the 
country—asked me how I was going to make money from Onward Nation. Ex-
cellent question, but I had no idea of the answer. “I don’t know,” I said. “But we 
will figure it out.”
Then providence set in. Two of our Onward Nation guests got in touch with 
me and asked, “Hey, could you do that for me?” 
“Do what for you?” I asked. 
“Build me a podcast!” they said.
Like any enthusiastic entrepreneur in need of revenue, I said, “Yes, I think 
we can!”

[ 5 ]
introduction
So my team and I stripped out the branding and content from the Onward 
Nation system and replaced everything with our client’s branding, episodes, con-
tent—and voila! We launched two more podcasts and earned $26,000 for our 
effort. Rock-solid awesome!
Now, a smart businessperson would have said, “Hey, we might be onto 
something here. This could be worth pursuing.” But I didn’t say that. Instead, I 
returned to thinking about how we were overstaffed and needed to grow rev-
enue. Ironic, isn’t it? I often say that if God wants me to get the message, He 
needs to take out a billboard or hit me over the head with a brick. Subtlety is 
lost on me.
In late October, one of those clients (Drew McLellan, host of the Build a 
Better Agency podcast) said to me, “The podcast you built for me is awesome. And 
Onward Nation is awesome. Why in the world are you not building more of these?” 
In my brilliance, I said, “For who?” Drew rolled his eyes and said, “There have to 
be more Onward Nation guests who would love to have a podcast of their own!”
He took the lesson he was teaching me deeper, adding, “Look, here’s what 
you do. You create a Silver, Gold, and Platinum Elite package . . . you charge this 
much, this much, and this much, and get out there and sell them to guests.”
Brilliant. My team and I immediately got to work creating the packages 
Drew had recommended.
And then providence struck a second time. On November 17, 2015, I inter-
viewed Wendy Keller, literary agent extraordinaire, for Episode 106 of Onward 
Nation. The conversation started out lovely—just what I had envisioned. Then, 
suddenly, I felt like I’d been punched in the stomach and the air knocked right 
out of me. Wendy told her emotional and devastating story about the tragic car 
accident that she and her husband, along with their two children, were in while 
on vacation in Europe. Her children were killed, she was critically injured, and 
her life was changed in an instant. My legs felt weak. In shock, I didn’t know 
what to say. Wendy had to be the strongest person I’d ever met. After continuing 
for a few minutes, she paused and gave me a moment to catch my breath. Then 
we continued the interview. I was captivated by Wendy’s courage, her commit-
ment, and her resolve. What could stop this woman?

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 6 ]
When we finished the interview, she turned the tables on me, asking about 
Onward Nation. Why was I doing it? What was the endgame? I told her I was 
planning to write a book that distilled all the wisdom collected during the episodes 
of the podcast. I could practically feel her smile on the other end of our Skype con-
nection. And then she asked me a life-altering question: “Hmm . . .  Why don’t you 
write a book about how business owners can use podcasting to grow revenue and 
their business? That’s where the real opportunity is for a book.” Bam. Providence!
Following the interview with Wendy, my Predictive ROI team made it a vital 
priority to accelerate the sales of our newly minted Silver, Gold, and Platinum 
Elite packages. We were on a mission to create a bona fide monetization strategy. 
Our goal was to grow revenue, and at the same time, create a compelling proof of 
concept for the system that would eventually become this book. 
We grew podcast-related revenue to $223,000 between November 17 and 
December 31, 2015, and built a sales pipeline of $380,000 during Q1 2016. We 
scaled our production and sales teams and created step-by-step documentation 
of our system. Currently, we predict $2 million in podcast-related revenue during 
the next twelve months.
We accomplished this thanks in part to several amazing mentors who stepped 
into our path. We listened to them, and we did exactly what they recommended. 
We are now building a network of B2B-focused podcasts—the “Onward Nation 
Network.” By the end of 2017, we expect Predictive ROI to be the company 
behind approximately a hundred top-ranked business podcasts with millions of 
listeners worldwide. 
It has been an amazing adventure. But your story of growing your busi-
ness, expanding your platform, and building a nation of true fans can be just 
as amazing. This book will serve as your comprehensive guide to making your 
dream a reality—and in the process you will learn how to avoid all of the mis-
takes we made along the way.
This comprehensive, research-based book will share our full blueprint or 
“recipe” for podcast success with you. Each and every step we took along the way 
is presented in complete transparency. Not a single step has been hidden from 
you. It’s all here, in plain sight.

[ 7 ]
introduction
Within these pages, you will walk behind the green curtains of Onward 
Nation and Predictive ROI so you can learn our proven system. You will also 
have access to in-depth insights from ten business owners just like you. Each 
of them decided to create a podcast to change the game—and then did it. Their 
impressive stories will be shared in full transparency, too.
But why write such a comprehensive book? Because you deserve a resource 
that eliminates the guesswork, demystifies the process, and gives you a clear and 
concise strategy for going from zero to launch in about thirty days.
Only limited resources were available when my Predictive ROI team and I 
decided to create Onward Nation. Sure, there were plenty of e-books and we-
binars that led me into the sales funnels of information marketers, but those 
resources lacked depth, and, candidly, they lacked business acumen. We quickly 
consumed the resources and were left with more questions than answers. 
Plus, the resources lacked full transparency. They typically provided just 
enough to get you interested in learning more and then pitched a $997 online 
training or mastermind program.
All of which drove me crazy and didn’t solve our problem. Not awesome.
But there is another reason I decided to go as deep as possible with this book. 
In my opinion, podcasting—as a medium—deserves a long-form guide, an en-
cyclopedia of how to do it right. When I interviewed Gary Vaynerchuk before 
the release of his social media book Jab, Jab, Jab, Right Hook, we discussed how 
it wasn’t just a social media book, but a business book that would elevate social 
media to a new level of legitimacy.1 
My hope is that this book will raise the bar for podcasting just as Gary did 
for social media marketing. On the surface, Profitable Podcasting looks like a pod-
casting book. But it’s actually a business book about how business owners are using 
podcasting to grow their companies, expand their platforms, and build nations of 
true fans. Each chapter includes step-by-step instructions so you can create, launch, 
market, and monetize your own podcast. The book includes checklists, production 
schedules, weekly goal tracking, social media strategies with visual examples, pro-
motional emails, guest invitations, exclusive access to private online video tutorials, 
and other resources including time-saving third-party tools. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 8 ]
I am excited to share this resource because small business has been my focus 
for twenty-three years. This is my third book devoted to helping small-business 
owners succeed. 
Helping small-business owners is deeply rewarding for several reasons. First, 
having owned five small businesses, I know that in today’s economy if one wants 
to have an impact (as I strive to do), then small business represents a tremendous 
opportunity. Small-business owners are the lifeblood of our economy. 
Second, the 28 million small businesses operating in the United States today, 
according to the Small Business Administration, account for 55 percent of all 
jobs and 54 percent of total revenue generated.2 I want to help as many business 
owners as possible grow so they can create more jobs and improve the lives of 
their families, employees, and communities.
Third, this book tackles the top challenge facing most business owners: Ac-
cording to a recent survey of 1,100 small business owners, 43 percent of respon-
dents identified growing revenue as a top challenge facing U.S. businesses in 2016.3 
That’s more than 12 million businesses expected to face the same challenge.4 
Driving this number down is a worthy goal of this book.
Podcasting Is Still in Rapid-Growth Mode
B
efore we dive into the system, I want to take a moment to share some im-
portant data points to give you the confidence to move forward and launch 
your own podcast. I don’t want you to fall into the tempting mental trap of 
thinking that you “waited too long to get started” and, because of that time lost, 
you somehow “missed your window of opportunity.” Cast low-quality thoughts 
like this aside.
Rest assured, you have not missed the podcasting wave. The sun has not set 
on your opportunity. This is the perfect time for you to get started. 
In fact, this may be the perfect time to get started because the trailblazers 
have gone before you. A path has been marked, and you can learn from their 

[ 9 ]
introduction
successes and failures. Your learning curve will be shorter so that growing your 
business, expanding your platform, and building your nation of true fans will be 
the most efficient it has been for any business owner up to this point.
Sounds awesome, doesn’t it?
Podcasting, despite all of its recent growth, is still in its infancy. Getting 
started now means you still have the opportunity to ride the momentum of what 
is now a proven medium—and you can use that momentum for your benefit.
Here are some highlights from independent, third-party research that re-
inforces the importance of getting started now. Thank you to Tom Webster and 
the team at Edison Research and Triton for generously providing the research.
Figure I-1 illustrates the steady increase in monthly podcast listening. In-
terestingly, for the five-year period from 2009 through 2013, around 12 percent 
of the total U.S. population age 12 and over listened to podcasts. In 2016, that 
number increased to 21 percent, which represents a 75 percent jump in just three 
years. Impressive.
FIGURE I-1

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 10 ]
Bottom line: Monthly podcast listening continues to grow and is trending 
higher as the ease of listening to podcasts on mobile devices continues to improve.
Edison and Triton also worked to quantify annual household income of pod-
cast listeners as compared to the household income of the total U.S. population age 
18 and over. In Figure I-2, we can see that median annual household income in 
the U.S. population is $53,000. However, the median annual household income of 
podcast consumers—within the same age range—is $63,000, which represents an 
increase of 18.86 percent. But even more striking, 41 percent of podcast listeners 
earn annual household incomes of $75,000 or more, with 15 percent of listeners 
earning $150,000 or more, versus 9 percent for non-podcast consumers.
FIGURE I-2
Bottom line: Podcast consumers are affluent and likely have disposable income 
to spend on your products and services.
The percentage of the U.S. population listening to podcasts and the afflu-
ence of that audience are compelling points, but how much time do consumers 
actually spend listening to podcasts? In Figure I-3 we can see that 12 percent of 
podcast listeners spend ten hours or more per week, with the majority spending 

[ 11 ]
introduction
FIGURE I-3
one to three hours per week. That is a lot of listening and likely speaks to the 
increasing popularity of on-demand content based on the specific topics we as 
consumers want to learn more about.
We will likely see more shows going even more niche to cater to smaller 
audiences who are extremely passionate about the content being delivered. This 
is your opportunity to create your nation of true fans. 
Bottom line: If you aired one high-quality podcast episode per week, and your 
episode was thirty to forty-five minutes long, the majority of your listeners could 
easily fit that into their schedule. 
You can review the full report from Edison Research at: http://www.edison-
research.com/media-research/podcast-research/.
Why Write This Book?
I 
mentioned earlier that helping small-business owners succeed is deeply re-
warding to me for several reasons. But it gets more personal than that. I was 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 12 ]
raised in my family’s restaurants, where I learned entrepreneurial lessons that I 
still rely on today. I had the privilege and honor to work alongside my mother, 
aunts, uncles, and cousins while growing up. My grandfather, Peter Maronitis, 
gave us that gift.
He grew up in Istanbul, Turkey, and was forced to drop out of the third grade 
to take care of his mother and two younger siblings when his father was tragi-
cally killed. That one devastating event changed the future of my entire family. 
He became the man of the house and had to earn an income so the family could 
survive. He succeeded, and through the adversity, sparked a dream to make his 
way to America. 
He got his chance when he was 18 years old. With ten dollars in his pocket 
he arrived in New York City and then eventually settled in Canton, Ohio, where 
a large Greek community was already flourishing. 
He found work in a restaurant where he would clean dishes and cut lettuce 
on the night shift. After just six years, he had managed to save enough money to 
open The Ideal Restaurant in downtown Canton.
The year was 1926—just three years before The Great Depression. Not a 
wise time to open a business. But his business plan was simple, “If you take care 
of your customers, they will take care of you. Everyone has to eat.” He met his future 
wife, Julia, they got married, ran the restaurant through the Depression, and had 
four amazing kids along the way. They built a life based on hard work, grit, per-
sistence, tenacity, and a commitment to family. 
My grandfather taught us how to be good people by sharing all we have with 
anyone who needs it. This book represents an opportunity for me to help the 
millions of small-business owners by sharing how to overcome the challenge of 
growing revenue. This book is—in some small way—part of his legacy.
I want to say thank you for picking up a copy of this book. It is an honor. I 
am delighted you chose this book to be what you study and implement into your 
business.
Onward with gusto!
—Stephen Woessner

[ 13 ]
CHAPTER 1 
OVERCOME YOUR  
BIGGEST OBSTACLES  
TO SUCCESS
O
n the surface, this book looks a lot like a book about podcasting—which it 
is. But it’s more than that. My team and I worked tirelessly to make this the 
deepest, most comprehensive resource we could assemble on the topic of 
podcasting for small-business owners trying to grow their businesses. I promise 
you will find that every aspect of creating, producing, launching, and promoting 
your podcast to grow your business is covered in precise detail within these pages.
Each of the technical systems are dissected, including every piece of software, 
the specific content in template form you will need for the systems, the guest 
advocacy process, how to set up distribution channels, site traffic, and analytics 
and why they matter, along with what it all means. We’ve even included success 
stories from a number of small-business owners who are using podcasting as a 
strategy to grow revenue and build true fans. Each story examines the business 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 14 ]
model and specifically how podcasting is adding value so you can apply the same 
principles to your business. 
Nothing has been left out. It’s all here.
But there is more—much more—that a small-business owner needs to know 
about podcasting before jumping into the deep end of the pool.
A podcast is just a tool. It’s just a platform. A platform is simply a conduit 
for distributing or sharing content. No platform in and of itself will help your 
business grow revenue. 
Therefore, in order for your podcast to be of value to your business, there needs 
to be purpose behind the guests you invite to be on your show. There needs to 
be purpose behind the questions you ask your guests. There needs to be purpose 
behind how you nurture and take care of your guests before their interviews and 
after their episodes have aired. Ultimately, you need a strategy for how your podcast 
will grow your business, expand your platform, and build your nation of true fans.
Having interviewed nearly 600 of today’s top business owners—and having 
talked with, consulted with, or worked with many of them in producing and 
launching their own podcasts—I can say with certainty that there are typically 
three primary challenges that arise in the mind of a business owner who is con-
sidering podcasting. Some business owners need to confront all three, others 
perhaps just two. But every business owner will need to confront at least one. 
1.  How will my podcast make money and help grow my business?
2.  How much time will this take me?
3.  How will I get guests? (Or, the variation: What if no one accepts my 
invitation to be a guest on the show?)
We will address the revenue question throughout the book. But, we will dive 
deep into questions 2 and 3 right now because they are critically important to 
getting your mindset right before heading down the podcasting path. If you don’t 
get your mindset right, I assure you, there will be setbacks and challenges along 
the way. Without the correct preparation you will be tempted to quit—and you 
likely will. However, if I help you properly set expectations, when the challenges 

OVERCOME YOUR BIGGEST OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS  
[ 15 ]
come your way, instead of being tempted to quit, you can confidently say to 
yourself, “Ah, Stephen said this would happen and that I’d feel this way,” and you 
will push forward. 
Don’t ever quit. 
Avoid the Time Trap
O
ne of the questions I am asked most often by business owners who have con-
sidered a podcast for their business is, “How much time will having a podcast 
take out of my schedule?” It’s a great question because we should all protect our 
schedules.
Most business owners assume the answer is ten hours a week—and that the 
solution will require them to add staff and make other investments. But here’s 
the reality: You can have an awesome, top-rated podcast in iTunes by investing 
less than four hours per month. Yes. Four hours. The system described in this book 
illustrates our entire process and shows how to duplicate the strategy and the 
results in as little as four hours per month.
Would you grow revenues faster if you invested more time? Likely yes, but 
four hours a month is an excellent place to start.
So why would business owners assume that my answer would be ten hours a 
week? Because then it would be easy for them to justify why they hadn’t pursued 
it more seriously. But in fact, it isn’t the perceived time commitment that stops a 
small-business owner from having a podcast.
It is fear.
Fear often rears its ugly head in an attempt to derail the entrepreneurial 
journey you’re on. Fear will beat you to your knees if you let it. Fear will cheat 
you out of success in all aspects of your business, including developing a great 
platform like a podcast so you can grow revenue and build a nation of true fans.
Once business owners are assured that their time investment will be only 
about four hours per month, a second challenge typically comes to mind—one 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 16 ]
with the subconscious goal of thwarting the podcast from gaining any additional 
momentum, to snuff out the fire that was building.
Your Biggest, Most Painful Challenge
“S
tephen, how will I get guests?” Or the variation: “What if no one accepts 
the invitation to be on my show?” These two fear-laden questions should 
serve as warning signs that something sinister is lurking. If you let them, they 
will keep you in check and prevent you from moving forward. The truth is, we all 
face such challenges. It’s just that some people are better than others at pushing 
themselves past them.
In my opinion, this challenge may be blocking your success not just with 
podcasting, but in other areas of your business as well.
The challenge is known as the “impostor syndrome.”
Clinical psychologists Pauline R. Clance and Suzanne Imes coined the term 
in 1978 to describe high-achieving individuals who are unable to internalize their 
accomplishments and who consequently fear being exposed as a “fraud.” Actual, 
objective evidence of their competence doesn’t matter to those who exhibit the 
syndrome. They remain convinced that they’re frauds. They feel that they don’t 
deserve the success they have achieved. Calling it “luck” or “good timing,” they 
never take credit for their accomplishments. Perhaps they believe that they’ve 
tricked others into thinking they are more intelligent and competent than they 
actually are. 
Now let’s take that definition and break it down into its two core ingredients.
Ingredient #1: the inability to internalize accomplishments and a persistent fear 
of being exposed as a “fraud.”
Have you ever walked into a meeting and felt that you weren’t worthy—
or that you didn’t belong there? Perhaps someone on the selection committee, 
award committee, or board of directors had made a mistake in selecting you. 
Heck, maybe even some of your colleagues, family members, or friends validated 

OVERCOME YOUR BIGGEST OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS  
[ 17 ]
your own suspicions and asked you the seemingly innocent question, “So why 
did they pick you?”
I began to learn about the impostor syndrome back in 2009, around the time 
my first book was published. I was an academic staff member at the University 
of Wisconsin–La Crosse. After my book became popular with small-business 
owners, several of the UW campuses around the state asked me to teach a class 
at their respective campuses. Awesome. One day I mentioned this opportunity 
to a family friend: I told him I was headed to the University of Wisconsin– 
Green Bay the next day to teach a class based on my search engine optimization 
(SEO) book. 
My friend looked at me and said, “Well, why are they having you teach the 
class? Couldn’t they find someone in Green Bay to teach it?”
My friend was not trying to be hurtful—not in the least. But those com-
ments hit me hard. Never mind that my SEO book was number 3 in the United 
States, or that I had just been interviewed for Inc. Magazine, or any of the other 
credibility indicators. When he asked me that question, I actually paused and 
thought about it. “Yeah, why are they hiring me to teach? Am I good enough? 
Do I have what it takes? Am I the best they could bring in? Do I deserve to be 
there? Am I a fraud? Do I even know what I’m talking about?”
There is nothing unique about my story. We have all had experiences where 
we begin to hear the voice in our heads whispering—or in some cases shout-
ing—“Who do you think you are?” 
The impostor syndrome will work hard to hold you back. 
High performers with impostor syndrome may work obsessively to prevent 
people from discovering that they’re “impostors.” And talk about a vicious cycle: 
The hard work leads to more praise and success, which only perpetuates the 
impostor feelings, leading the “impostor” to work even harder, which can lead to 
sleep deprivation, burnout, and worse.
Ingredient #2: The “impostor” takes the proof of success and passes it off as luck, 
timing, or the result of deceiving others into thinking he or she is more intelli-
gent and competent than the person believes.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 18 ]
Has your business ever gone through a growth spurt that you couldn’t ex-
plain? Have you ever looked around your office and suddenly realized you have 
some amazing people working for you and looking to you for leadership—and, 
yet, you cannot figure out what they see in you? Have you ever felt uncomfort-
able before a presentation with a new client? Did you wonder why the client 
invited you to the table?
Why do we ask ourselves such lousy and unfair questions?
Here’s the important point that I really want you to get. When you ask 
yourself, “How on earth were we able to hire such amazing employees? Don’t 
they know that we don’t know what in the world we’re doing?” your brain does a 
funny thing . . . it gives you an answer.
It’s a crummy answer but it’s an answer. Your brain doesn’t want to make you 
out to be a liar—so it gives you the answer to fit your story.
You start hearing things like, “Yeah, you really pulled the wool over their eyes 
on that one. Hope Becky doesn’t figure it out—because if she leaves—then Tom 
is sure to leave the company, too.” Or, “Why did client X invite us here? We don’t 
really have a shot at winning this pitch, do we?”
The answer you get back might be something like, “Nope, we have no chance 
of winning—especially if they knew about all the mistakes we made just last 
week on client Z’s account. We are lucky to have kept client Z; I hope X doesn’t 
ask for references. Maybe we ought to back out of the process now.”
What nonsense. You were invited into the evaluation process because you 
have a stellar network—perhaps stellar credentials—and you deserve to be at 
the table. The voice on your shoulder—the voice whispering in your ear—is the 
impostor syndrome.
And we all deal with it. It doesn’t matter who you are thinking of right now. 
Tim Ferriss, bestselling author of The 4-Hour Workweek, has dealt with it. Joel 
Osteen has dealt with it. All of the incredible business leaders who grace the 
cover of Entrepreneur magazine deal with it. Every business owner—every polit-
ical leader—every leader throughout history has dealt with this. George Wash-
ington did not feel he was worthy to be this country’s first president. No one is 
immune from impostor syndrome.

OVERCOME YOUR BIGGEST OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS  
[ 19 ]
But what is unique—and what is special—is when someone faces the fear of 
potential rejection. To quote the beautiful words of educator and behavior expert 
Dr. Marcie Beigel, a two-time Onward Nation guest, “Stephen . . . be scared, and 
then do it anyway!” I loved that.
Because it is oftentimes fear—which is another way of describing impostor 
syndrome—that gets in your way more than anything else. You may be your own 
biggest constraint. Not your ability to schedule guests on your show, not your 
ability to sell, not the market, not your lack of customers, not your pricing, not 
your product quality. No, it is you. You, as the owner, set the pace and tempo of 
your company: either fast or slow.
I asked Dr. Marcie to share how business owners can reach that elusive next 
level. She was kind enough to map it out in three simple steps:
1.  Get clear on what the next level is—how will you know when  
you’re there?
2.  Walk through your fear; make a plan—and just do it.
3.  Find a mentor—we learn best from the people who have been there.
And let’s look at all three of these.
First, get clear on what the next level is for you and your business. Well, if im-
postor syndrome (aka fear) is making you believe that you are not even worthy of 
your current level of success, then how could you possibly believe you’re worthy 
of being the host of a top-ranked podcast?
Great question, right? Instead, perhaps you need to spend some time being 
thankful for what you have already accomplished by consciously acknowledging 
that what you have achieved has been well deserved because you worked hard 
and you applied your God-given gifts and talents to get there.
Now, to realize your full potential, it’s time to leap off your current plateau 
and move onward to that next level. You deserve to be at the next level. You’re an 
expert. The first step is to give yourself permission to define that next level so you 
know when you, your podcast, and your business have arrived.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 20 ]
Second, be scared about the next level . . . and do it anyway. Kick fear to the 
curb. What’s the worst that could happen? Prospective customers could say no. 
You might make a bad decision and lose some money. An employee or a group 
of employees may disagree with how you’re redirecting the company and could 
decide to leave.
Okay. Are any of these life-threatening situations? Did anyone die? No? 
Then move on!
Stop making each decision more than it has to be. Just make a decision. Then 
move on. It doesn’t have to be more complicated than that. As Dr. Marcie said, 
“Be scared and then do it anyway.” 
Finally, find a mentor to learn from, as Don Yaeger recommended in the 
Foreword of this book. More specifically, find a mentor or group of mentors who 
are all moving at a pace and tempo that is faster than you are. It matters who 
you spend your time with; if you spend your time with people who are moving at 
your current pace—or slower—those people may make you feel comfortable to 
be around, they may not challenge you, they may not push you or ask you tough 
questions, and it is easy to relax and unwind.
Why? Because as Coach John Wooden once said, “You will never outper-
form your inner circle.” That’s just human nature.
So you need to make sure the mentors you select are operating at a com-
pletely different level than you—a level to which you can reach and stretch. You 
want to get into a group of people where you don’t currently belong and then 
work like crazy not to get left behind. In the process you’ll expand and grow. You 
will then be able to leap from your current plateau onto the next rung.
As Onward Nation guest Scott McKain taught me, “Stephen, you cannot 
reach that next rung unless you are willing to let go of the current one you are 
hanging on to.” Wise words.
You were meant for greatness. You are instilled with an infinite abundance 
of talent and gifts. Don’t let something as small as fear limit all you were meant 
to be.

OVERCOME YOUR BIGGEST OBSTACLES TO SUCCESS  
[ 21 ]
✓ 
YOUR SUCCESS CHECKLIST 
✓
Proactively confront the three primary challenges you will face while em-
barking on production and launch of your podcast:
❑
❑
How will my podcast make money and help grow my business? You 
need a clearly defined monetization strategy, and “I’m going to sell 
ads” isn’t it.
❑
❑
How much time will this take me? You must be able to invest at least 
four hours per month toward your podcast.
❑
❑
How will I get guests? Defeating the impostor syndrome by following 
Dr. Marcie Beigel’s three simple steps is your key to success. And 
they are:
1.  Get clear on what the next level is—how will you know when 
you’re there?
2.  Walk through your fear; make a plan—and just do it.
3.  Find a mentor—we learn best from the people who have been 
there.
And, lastly, follow the advice of Coach John Wooden and “protect your inner 
circle.”

[ 23 ]
CHAPTER 2
TAKE YOUR  
VITALS
T
his chapter will help bring into focus what we at Onward Nation and Pre-
dictive ROI refer to as the vital metrics controlling the growth of a business. 
I learned the vital metrics principle directly from Darren Hardy, former 
publisher of SUCCESS Magazine. Darren, a former member of our Predictive 
ROI Board of Advisors, has been one of my most influential mentors in business.
Darren taught me how “vitals” represent a snapshot and oftentimes a visu-
alization regarding the overall health of a business at any given moment. This 
chapter includes the comprehensive Evaluation of Predictive Success Metrics 
(EPSM) as a tool to complete later to provide a snapshot view of the sales and 
marketing “vitals” in any business. This evaluation will help diagnose any critical 
areas that may need attention before you receive an inflow of new leads and sales 
opportunities from your podcast or any proactive marketing system.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 24 ]
I met Darren when I was invited to attend one of his original High- 
Performance Forums held at Torrey Pines in La Jolla, California. I was one of 
twenty-three CEOs of fast-growth companies invited to spend two and a half 
days with Darren. We spent the time together working through the latest in sales 
and marketing strategies with some intense masterminding.
To say I was nervous would be an understatement. But by the time the 
weekend was over, Darren had accepted my invitation to speak at an upcoming 
live event Predictive ROI was hosting. Darren and I also worked out an agree-
ment for him to join our board of advisers for twelve months, during which he 
would personally mentor me on growing our business and new directions we 
ought to consider. It was the most intense year of my business career and exactly 
what I needed to learn, even though the process was challenging and sometimes 
painful. A great mentor pushes even when the last thing you want is to be pushed. 
Darren used a portion of the forum to teach all of us about the importance 
of our “success vitals.” What were they? How to measure them? How to assess 
our current business health? The lessons I learned were so impactful and have 
added so much value into Predictive ROI and our ability to generate revenue 
from Onward Nation that I wanted to devote this chapter to sharing the most 
relevant insights.
At Darren’s forum I met Don Yaeger, New York Times bestselling author, 
owner of three companies, outstanding man of faith, devoted husband, and one 
of the most rock star fathers I have seen in action. After that weekend Don 
and I became accountability partners, agreeing to call each other every Friday 
morning at seven thirty to report our Wins, Losses, AHAs, and Fixes. We have 
maintained that weekly accountability for nearly four years. In that time, Don 
has become one of my best friends and trusted advisers. 
My hope is that this chapter will help bring into focus the vital metrics 
controlling the growth of a business. Your “vitals” represent a snapshot of your 
business’s overall health at any given moment.
To assist in this process, I included our comprehensive Evaluation of Predic-
tive Success Metrics (EPSM) as a tool for you to use. Your score will give you a 
quick view of the sales and marketing vitals in your business.

TAKE YOUR VITALS 
[ 25 ]
Why is your EPSM score important as it relates to launching your podcast? 
This evaluation will help you diagnose any critical areas that may need attention 
before your business is ready to properly handle an inflow of new leads and sales 
opportunities as a result of your podcast. In addition, your outcomes/score may 
indicate several corrective actions that need to be addressed so your podcast has 
the highest probability of success.
The corrective actions are also important because increasing the flow of leads 
and sales into an inefficient, ineffective, or absent system within your business is 
a recipe that could spell disaster. More companies go out of business from indi-
gestion than from starvation. In other words, the problem is that there are too 
many opportunities, not too few. Having the right systems in place at the outset 
is essential to your long-term success. 
Let’s begin with several definitions to make sure we get the terminology 
right.
We will focus on vital priorities, vital functions, and vital metrics.
I will show you how to identify the five or six most relevant vital metrics for 
ensuring that your overall sales and marketing strategies are turning your busi-
ness into what I like to call a “Sales-Generating Machine.”
The first term we need to define is vital priorities. What are they and why are 
they . . . vital?
Let’s think of vital priorities as your big goals over the next twelve months. 
If you were to accomplish nothing else, the year will still be a success because 
your vital priorities will have been checked off the list. On the other hand, if you 
don’t accomplish these vital few, then other accomplishments won’t really matter.
What are the vital priorities in your business right now?
Then there are the vital functions. These are the skills and the talents that 
make you the best person in your company at a certain set of tasks, processes, or 
projects. Vital functions are the tasks you cannot delegate and you cannot hire 
out. Not only are you good at them, but also you drive business growth by per-
forming them.
Take a moment to consider your vital functions. What functions are critically 
important to the success of your business and cannot be delegated away? Resist 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 26 ]
the temptation to let yourself say things like: bookkeeping, answering the phone, 
emailing customers, preparing proposals, and a variety of other functions. Are all 
of those important? Yes. Are they vital? Yes. Can they be delegated? Yes! 
What are you world class at? Or what could you be world class at if you 
dedicated the right amount of time and energy to it? What could you achieve 
world-class proficiency in that would move the business along a completely dif-
ferent trajectory? The answers are your vital functions.
Then there are the vital metrics. These metrics are how you will quantifiably 
measure your success toward accomplishing your vital priorities.
Before I share the vital metrics with you—let me try to preempt a question 
that tends to hook business owners and prevent them from moving forward.  
I am often asked, “Stephen, this sounds great but I have people on my team  
who are in charge of these metrics. Why do I need to care about these? I don’t 
want to learn this stuff, and I certainly don’t want this to become my vital 
function.”
Excellent question. Consider this: You don’t need to be the one who pulls the 
levers or turns the knobs. These metrics do not need to become your vital functions. 
But if you don’t pay attention to them or care about them, no one else will either.
In my opinion, your Sales-Generating Podcast has six vital metrics that you 
need to monitor consistently:
1.  Change (increase/decrease) in unique website visitors to your pod-
cast’s website
2.  Change (increase/decrease) in conversion rate of unique website 
visitors into email opt-ins (list building to be used to increase size of 
audience/listeners to your podcast)
3.  Change (increase/decrease) in conversion rate of guests into leads 
4.  Change (increase/decrease) in conversion rate of guest-leads into 
proposals
5.  Change (increase/decrease) in conversion rate of guest-proposals 
into sales
6.  Total podcast-related revenue and total business revenue

TAKE YOUR VITALS 
[ 27 ]
Are you currently tracking and monitoring vital metrics similar to these in 
your business? If you are, well done! You and your business may already be a su-
perstar at growing revenue from your podcast strategy.
But if you’re not already paying attention to these vital metrics, the resources 
in this book will help guide you through making the necessary adjustments so 
you can put precise checklists and ROI scorecards into place to ensure a regular 
rhythm of evaluation. 
Evaluating Your Vitals
A
re you ready to take your evaluation of your vitals even deeper? Figure 2-1 pro-
vides our comprehensive Evaluation of Predictive Success Metrics (EPSM) 
as a tool to provide a snapshot view of the sales and marketing “vitals” in any 
business. This evaluation will help diagnose any critical areas that may need at-
tending to before new leads and sales opportunities flow into a business from 
your podcast.
Just answer the questions and then tally your score at the end.
Q1: Do you know the main reason your clients buy from you over your competitors?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q2: Could you make a list with first name, last name, title, and company for your 
Dream 50 prospects?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q3: Do you have a fixed budget or percentage of sales allocated to marketing?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
FIGURE 2-1

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 28 ]
Q4: Do you know your conversion rate of leads into clients: out of X number of 
leads, you get Y number of clients or sales that deliver $Z in profit?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q5: Do you know the average cost to acquire a new client?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q6: What is the average revenue that a client’s initial sale/purchase represents for 
your business?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q7: Do you have a nurturing content marketing system that delivers consistent 
communications that add value to your clients?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q8: Does anyone on your team review Google Analytics data on a monthly basis 
and make proactive recommendations based on the findings?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q9: If yes, does your Google Analytics account include conversion goals that track 
your opt-ins and lead gen?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q10: Could you verbally articulate in two sentences or less what makes your 
company distinctive from any competitor?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)

TAKE YOUR VITALS 
[ 29 ]
Q11: Do you know what your annual rescission rate is with clients and why they 
stop buying from you?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q12: Do you use a CRM like Infusionsoft, ACT!, Salesforce, Hubspot, or other plat-
forms to act as the central repository for leads, prospect lists, and customer lists?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q13: Do you actively use all the data mentioned above to target segments of 
prospects and customers in different ways for the various products or services you 
offer?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q14: Do you know where your biggest source of untapped new business is and 
how to ultimately mine it?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q15: How many client testimonials and success stories do you have?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q16: Do you incorporate testimonials in all your marketing, advertising, and sales 
efforts?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q17: Do you have experts in your industry who endorse you and your company? 
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 30 ]
Q18: Do you have any strategic alliances/joint venture relationships you are 
currently doing promotions with right now?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q19: Do you know the lifetime value of a new client/customer?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q20: Do you use a bold guarantee to create distinctiveness for your business?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q21: Do you offer bonuses as an incentive to purchase your product or service?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q22: Do you have an active PR program to do interviews on radio, on TV, in 
newspapers, or in magazines?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q23: Do you use excerpts of these activities within your marketing?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q24: Do you write articles, special reports, e-books, or books to share your 
expertise?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)

TAKE YOUR VITALS 
[ 31 ]
Q25: Do you have a strategy in place that continually adds new prospects into your 
database for your sales team to mine?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q26: How often do you send relevant, content-rich emails delivering value to 
clients and prospects?
                Never (0 points)                   Twice per year (1 point)                  Every month (3 points)
Q27: Does your current website receive at least 60 percent of its traffic from 
organic search?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q28: Do you hold, run, or host special events such as seminars or workshops 
where you invite clients and prospects to attend?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q29: Do you personally talk to your buyers, prospects, and clients regularly to 
learn what they want and then build relationships with them?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q30: Do you regularly shop your competitors to see what they do differently?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
Q31: Do you know the Top 10 objections prospects have about your product or 
service?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 32 ]
Q32: Do you and your team know the answers to those Top 10 objections?
                   Don’t know (0 points)                         Some (1 point)                         Yes (3 points)
How Did You Do?
If you scored 33–50 . . . ugh. But no problem—this book will be a great guide 
for you.
If you scored 51–75 . . . congratulations. You have a solid foundation and the 
sky’s the limit.
If you scored 76–85 . . . You feel that? It’s momentum—and it feels awesome!
And if you scored 86–96 . . . rock solid awesome. You better send me an email 
(Stephen@onwardnation.com) because I want to interview you on Onward 
Nation! Well done.
Congratulations on your completion of the first two chapters in this book. Why 
am I offering you a congratulatory comment when there is still a lot left to learn 
and master?
Because most people will stop reading a book—any book—somewhere in 
the middle of Chapter 2. But you didn’t stop! You are already ahead of the ma-
jority of your competitors. And if they stopped at Chapter 2, I can almost cer-
tainly guarantee they will not complete the work in the next chapters. You have 
already set yourself apart as a high achiever!
Now, are you ready to create, launch, promote, and monetize your very own 
podcast?

TAKE YOUR VITALS 
[ 33 ]
✓ 
YOUR VITALS CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Identify the vital priorities for your business, and your podcast, over 
the next twelve months. Ideally, the two lists will intersect.
❑
❑
Identify your personal vital functions.
❑
❑
Identify the baselines for the six vital metrics in this chapter so you 
can measure your impact in each area going forward.
❑
❑
Complete the Evaluation of Predictive Success Metrics (EPSM) in 
this chapter to provide a snapshot view of the sales and marketing 
“vitals” in your business.
❑
❑
Score your results and review with your team.
❑
❑
Revise your list of vital priorities in order to immediately address each 
area highlighted from the EPSM.

[ 35 ]
CHAPTER 3
SYSTEM OVERVIEW—— 
YOUR RECIPE FOR SUCCESS
Analysis of several hundred people who had accumulated fortunes well 
beyond the million dollar mark disclosed the fact that every one of them 
had the habit of reaching decisions promptly, and of changing these deci-
sions slowly, if, and when they were changed. People who fail to accumu-
late money, without exception, have the habit of reaching decisions, if at 
all, very slowly and of changing these decisions quickly and often.
—NAPOLEON HILL1
B
eing successful at podcasting requires a variety of competencies and 
skills—all of which are covered in precise detail in this book. But the 
most important skills you must master in order to build a profitable pod-
cast are making a decision, setting a course, and then remaining focused on 
moving toward your destination. Growing revenue, expanding your platform, 
and building a network of true fans through your podcast requires patience over 
a sustained period of time.
The Profitable Podcast System is not a get-rich-quick scheme. It’s going to 
take hundreds of hours of your time to perfect your podcasting skills. But, this 
comprehensive resource will shorten your learning curve because you will be 
able to avoid the mistakes and reach profitability faster.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 36 ]
Your opportunity for success will increase if you keep Napoleon Hill’s  
wise words front and center: Reach a decision quickly, be slow to change it,  
and relentlessly pursue your destination. Master this principle and you will 
create significant outcomes for your business as a result of the system offered 
in this book.
At a high level, the Profitable Podcast System includes twenty steps that 
stretch across multiple technical systems, software, and people, all of which 
must be properly coordinated and aligned with the desired outcomes. This 
chapter will provide you with a 30,000-foot view of the overall system before 
stepping deep into the weeds of strategy in the 7 Stages of Production. The 
stages in the book will provide you with access to a complete tool kit of tem-
plates, guides, email swipe files, spreadsheets, schedules, and checklists to guide 
you every step of the way.
A few words of caution: As we move deeper into the system, it may begin to 
feel too complicated to integrate into your business. Yes, the system is complex, 
with many moving parts. However, rest assured, all the parts are not moving 
at the same time. The Profitable Podcast System is just like any other business 
system. It starts off seeming complex and confusing, but as time goes by you will 
develop mastery and nimbleness in making it all work for you.
At first, the system will feel a bit like trying to fly the space shuttle. There 
will be lots of “switches,” “controls,” “gauges,” and “levers” inside the cockpit. But 
there is something very important to remember about flying the space shuttle. 
At any given time, there are only a couple of levers that need to be pulled—and a 
couple of buttons that need to be pushed. Everything else can be ignored.
The same principle applies here, too. Please don’t get overwhelmed—don’t 
get frustrated. Mastery will come.
I believe that the wise Archimedes had it right when he said, “Give me a 
lever and a place to stand and I will move the earth.” 
So, what will be your lever as you work through implementation and mastery 
of this system? You guessed it: chocolate cake! 
I know, chocolate cake sounds silly. But let me explain why this metaphor 
makes so much sense for what you are about to learn. 

[ 37 ]
SYSTEM OVERVIEW—YOUR RECIPE FOR SUCCESS
Let’s say that I happen to make the world’s best chocolate cake—the abso-
lute best. I have spent the last twenty years perfecting my process. Then one day 
you ask me to teach you how to make my cake—the one that took me twenty 
years to master!
How could this be possible? How could someone other than me even come 
close to duplicating my chocolate cake? Especially if you haven’t dedicated your-
self to mastering your baking skills as I have.
Is there something I could give you—to help prepare you—to help ensure 
your success? Well, I could give you my recipe, right?
If you have an opportunity to study and review my recipe, you’ll see my full 
process—the strategy behind the chocolate cake. You’ll begin to get the overall 
picture of what needs to happen.
But, what else do you need beyond the recipe? Exactly! You need the actual 
ingredients.
You can put it all together if you have access to the recipe (strategy) and the 
ingredients (tactics). You can see the entire project at a high level, especially if the 
recipe includes a photo of the finished cake. You have documentation regarding 
the right amount of each ingredient—at the right time—and how long to bake 
the cake at the right temperature. 
If you follow the recipe—and if I didn’t accidentally leave any steps or ingre-
dients out of the recipe—you now have a decent shot at replicating my success.
In fact, replicating my success becomes easy if you are willing to make the 
effort and to put in the hard work. The cake won’t bake itself. But you now have 
a clear path to follow. Just like this book will do for your podcast.
The system contains twenty core and interdependent steps:
A  
A
Ingredient 1: Internal Kickoff Meeting. You meet with your team to discuss 
production strategy, roles, prioritization, monetization goals, and vital 
metrics.
EE The kickoff meeting is where you and your team will get specific 
about your goals, vital metrics, discussing the avatar of your ideal 
prospect and customer, as well as the avatar of your prospective 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 38 ]
listener. This is where you will name your show, crystalize how the 
show will drive leads and revenue for your business, and assemble 
your Dream 50 list of prospects, which represents the clients you 
would most like to serve in your industry.
EE Your list of Dream 50 prospects will serve as the guest list for your 
podcast along with subject matter experts from a variety of rele-
vant and complementary fields such as C-suite executives, business 
leaders, and other noncompetitive thought leaders.
EE You will want to prioritize the selection of guests so your podcast 
can achieve the shortest path to revenue.
A  
A
Ingredient 2: Question Flow. This is where you and your team will collab-
orate to prepare the preliminary question set for review and critique. Then 
create the final version, which will become the Question Flow used with 
guests on the show.
A  
A
Ingredient 3: Guest Advocacy System. This is where you will implement 
our top-rated Guest Advocacy System, which includes setting up an online 
scheduling system, calendar integration, creation of interview reminders to 
guests, and the preparation of equipment recommendations for guests. All 
of the templates and resources you need for Guest Advocacy have been in-
cluded in the book.
A  
A
Ingredient 4: Guest Invitations. This is where you and your team will col-
laborate to create and finalize a guest invitation email with links to the online 
scheduling system. Again, a template has been provided.
A  
A
Ingredient 5: Invite Distribution. This is where you, as the host of the podcast, 
will send the invitation emails to prospective guests and answer questions if 
necessary (this step initiates high-level dialogue with your Dream 50).
A  
A
Ingredient 6: Intro/Outro Scripted. This is where you and your team will 
want to collaborate to create the script for your show’s recorded intro and 

[ 39 ]
SYSTEM OVERVIEW—YOUR RECIPE FOR SUCCESS
outro. Organizing your thoughts, and being organized, will save you time 
and money when it comes time to work with a producer on recording your 
intro and outro.
A  
A
Ingredient 7: Audio Production.This is where you will want to connect with 
an audio producer to create the intro and outro for your show. 
A  
A
Ingredient 8: Show Artwork. This is where you will want to connect with 
a graphic designer, either on your team or a freelancer, to create your show 
artwork/thumbnail images for iTunes, Stitcher, website assets, etc. All design 
guidelines have been included in the book.
A  
A
Ingredient 9: Podcast Website. You and your team should consider creating 
a website for your show. The website will serve as the podcast’s headquarters 
complete with podcast player, social media plug-ins, and hosting (www.on-
wardnation.com as example).
A  
A
Ingredient 10: Podcast Hosting. There are a number of providers to choose 
from with respect to hosting the audio files for your show. However, Libsyn 
is an industry leader and my Predictive ROI team has never experienced a 
problem with the company. This is where you will create your hosting ac-
count, including show description, details for iTunes, Stitcher, Google Play, 
and RSS feed.
A  
A
Ingredient 11: Show Notes. This is where you will create your Show Notes 
template for your podcast so that each episode will have its own blog post 
with the embedded audio file ready for your website visitors.
A  
A
Ingredient 12: iTunes. This is where you will set up your podcast in iTunes.
A  
A
Ingredient 13: Stitcher. This is where you will set up your podcast in Stitcher.
A  
A
Ingredient 14: Google Play. This is where you will set up your podcast in 
Google Play.
A  
A
Ingredient 15: Airing Schedule. Following the template in the book, you 
will be able to create and maintain your own Show Airing Schedule complete 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 40 ]
with show titles, production schedule, airing dates, Show Notes links, and 
other logistics.
A  
A
Ingredient 16: Audio Editing and Episode Airing. This is where learning all 
things audio will pay off—editing your actual episodes. This book includes a 
complete audio production guide. You will likely want to air at least one new 
episode per week so your audience can see that you are serious and you can 
begin to build your nation of true fans. You will want to provide your guests 
with email reminders, social media distribution, and promotional links so 
they can help spread the word of your great show.
A  
A
Ingredient 17: Launch Day. This is where you and your team will want to 
follow our launch recipe so you can dominate iTunes in your respective cat-
egories immediately upon launch of the podcast. For example, we recently 
assisted one of our Predictive ROI clients in reaching the top of iTunes. The 
show was ranked the number 1 podcast in Management and Marketing, 
number 2 in Education, number 2 in Careers, number 3 in Business, and the 
number 10 podcast in all of iTunes.
A  
A
Ingredient 18: Social Engagement with Guests. This is where you will want 
to follow our recipe for creating Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter posts to 
promote each episode. We have a unique social media recipe that will warm 
up your guests for your sales opportunity that systematically shares their ex-
pertise from the episode. For example, you will learn how to create a library 
of ten tweets per episode. Each tweet will share valuable highlights from 
the episode and include the Twitter handle of the guest who contributed 
the highlight. The library of tweets will be auto-distributed at random on 
a regular schedule. This encourages guests to re-tweet their episode to their 
respective followers. Examples of social media posts have been provided in 
Chapter 4, “Grow Your Revenue.”
A  
A
Ingredient 19: iTunes What’s Hot Rank Continuity. After eight weeks, your 
podcast will fall out of iTunes’ New and Noteworthy rankings and move into 
What’s Hot. You should follow our recipe for keeping a steady stream of 

[ 41 ]
SYSTEM OVERVIEW—YOUR RECIPE FOR SUCCESS
ratings and reviews flowing into iTunes. This will keep your organic down-
loads as high as possible.
A  
A
Ingredient 20: Continuous Review of Vital Metrics. Schedule a tactical 
Checkpoint Meeting with your team every fourteen days to ensure that the 
podcast is running smoothly and to review/revise/expand the Dream 50 list, 
review feedback from guests, etc. And schedule an ROI Scorecard Meeting 
every thirty days to evaluate vital metrics including lead gen success and to 
discuss adjustments.
Timing and Expectations
W
e went from zero to launch in thirty days when Onward Nation went live on 
June 15, 2015. It’s possible for you and your team to follow the recipe in this 
book and replicate our timeline. However, based on our experience in creating, 
launching, and producing more than fifty podcasts for Predictive ROI clients, I 
recommend you and your team give yourselves between seven and eight weeks 
to go from zero to launch.

[ 43 ]
CHAPTER 4
GROW  
YOUR REVENUE
W
hen executed properly, your podcast will be uniquely suited to accom-
plish three vital priorities: grow revenue, expand your platform, and 
build a nation of true fans. The next three chapters will provide you 
with the specific recipes and ingredients you need to accomplish all three. The 
recipes build upon one another—but the recipes are also “interdependent.” As 
the late Stephen R. Covey wrote in The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, with 
interdependence, “you and I working together can accomplish far more than, 
even at my best, I could accomplish alone.” The next three chapters are inter-
dependent because they work in unison, and together they create synergistic 
momentum for your business. As your platform grows, so will your nation of 
true fans, and as your nation grows, so will your opportunity to further grow 
the revenue of your business.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 44 ]
Your opportunity to grow revenue will likely fit into three primary categories: 
 
Premium-priced services to the business owners who have appeared 
as guests on your show
 
Less expensive, entry-level programs to your concentric circles of 
lesser fans (see Chapter 6 for lesser fans)
 
Sponsorships to boost revenue and credibility with your listeners 
(see Chapter 16)
In my opinion, you will have a healthy core business if selling your services 
directly to your guests represents the majority of your podcast-related revenue. 
This sales strategy will ensure that there is ample revenue flowing into your core 
business to cover overhead, generate profit, provide ample funds to reinvest, and 
further expand by introducing new services to continue the life cycle of a bal-
anced business. It is important for your podcast to feed your core business. It is 
also important for you not to become distracted with creating a passive revenue 
income as your first step. Passive revenue streams can be helpful and provide 
high-margin sources of revenue. However, it can sometimes be tempting to want 
to create a passive revenue stream first because it feels less like selling. Wouldn’t 
it be wonderful to wake up each morning and see all of the successful credit card 
transaction receipts in your in-box? Of course it would. But not at the expense of 
your core team not having enough work to do. If you pursue the goal of creating 
a passive revenue stream for your business—before you address the lead gen and 
revenue needs of your core business—you run the risk of losing valuable time 
and getting sidetracked. And that could be expensive. 
Rather than devoting a section of this chapter to a passive revenue recipe, I 
have included our complete recipe including several promotional launch plans as 
a free download at http://PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Passive-Revenue. 
Let’s focus our attention back to your guests. You will maximize your rev-
enue opportunity, and ensure the health of your core business, if you quickly 
begin using your podcast as your Trojan horse of selling as we discussed in the 
Introduction of this book.

GROW YOUR REVENUE 
[ 45 ]
Selling directly to your guests represents your lowest hanging fruit, your 
shortest path to revenue, and it is not a complex sales strategy. It could be as 
simple as sharing ideas with a guest following your interview, in an informal 
manner, looping back to the guest after you flesh out the ideas further, and then 
asking for permission to proceed. Lee Caraher, host of the Focus Is Your Friend 
podcast, shared her sales strategy with me. 
Stephen, there’s usually fifteen minutes before we start the interview where 
I say, “Oh my gosh, hi. Blah, blah, blah.” Then afterwards, I am sharing with 
them, “I have an idea for you,” which is where I’m really good. That’s one 
of my strengths. “Oh, here’s an idea! Or, here’s a different idea!” I share the 
ideas after the interview is over. Depending on how my guest reacts, if they 
say, “Oh that’d be a great idea. How do I do that?” Then I say, “Let me think 
about it some more.”
A week or two later, I’ll noodle on the idea a little more. Then I’ll email 
them with, “You know, I thought about that idea. Here is how I think you 
could implement it. Here is what I think the lift will be. Here is what I 
think the cost will be. We can’t do that for you—or—we can do that for 
you.” Of that, 25 percent of the time the ideas are coming back to us in 
some sort of project. Our podcast been super helpful in growing revenue 
for Double Forte.
Ingredient #1: The Campfire Pitch
Lee has developed a straightforward sales strategy. Her podcast opened the door 
with the right decision-maker, she conducted a rock-solid interview, and then 
she enthusiastically shared ideas with her guest. I call this the Campfire Pitch. 
When you were a kid, did you ever go camping with family or friends, or have a 
bonfire in your backyard? Maybe you sat around the fire, feeling warm, and sharing 
stories with your friends. The energy of the group was awesome. But then the 
party was over, it was time for bed, and when you woke up the next morning, the 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 46 ]
same people were with you but the energy of the moment was gone. That’s what 
entrepreneur and brand expert Chris Smith calls the Campfire Effect. It happens in 
business—after a great interview, for example—and it happens in social situations. 
Lee knows this and has astutely aligned her sales strategy to the Campfire 
Effect. When the energy of the interview has climaxed, she smartly shares an 
idea or two. The prospective client (guest) on the other end of the Skype connec-
tion is receptive to the ideas because of several key ingredients: For one thing, 
Lee is brilliant at what she does and she is sharing excellent ideas. Also, the guest 
is receptive because of the Campfire Effect and the value Lee has just shared by 
inviting the client onto her show.
Lee is airing approximately fifty to seventy guest interviews per year—so if 
her team continues to close 25 percent of the opportunities, then her podcast 
will help Double Forte on-board approximately fifteen new projects every twelve 
months. Think about that in terms of your core business and revenue model. 
If you could take on fifteen new projects from clients within the next twelve 
months, how would your business change? No doubt it is substantial.
One of the reasons Lee has been successful with her Campfire Pitch sales 
strategy is because she doesn’t approach the conversations with her guests as 
selling at all. She enthusiastically shares ideas with the goal of delivering value. 
One Onward Nation guest told me, “Selling is simply the transference of your en-
thusiasm over to your prospect.” Lee has mastered this principle. Her guests don’t 
feel “sold.” In fact, the exact opposite happens: They feel fortunate to have had 
the opportunity to be a guest on her show. Lee’s ideas were a value-added bonus. 
Ingredient #2: The Social Media Warm-Up
The Campfire Pitch Lee Caraher uses is masterful. But, I also realize it might not 
be for everyone because not everyone feels comfortable about sharing ideas and 
selling so early in the relationship. I respect that. So I wanted to share a second 
sales strategy with you. We call it the Social Media Warm-Up.
The Social Media Warm-Up sales strategy is already baked into the overall 
recipe of your Profitable Podcast. In Chapter 11, you will learn how to promote 

GROW YOUR REVENUE 
[ 47 ]
the airing of each of your guest’s episodes via social media using two key 
ingredients: 
 
Promoting the airing of each episode and the wisdom shared by 
your guest to your social media community.
 
Tagging your guests in each post whenever possible so they are 
nudged to share and re-tweet your content. This helps build your 
nation of true fans by exposing their community to your content.
But your social media strategy does more than help you promote your epi-
sodes and build your nation. By highlighting your guest’s wisdom in each tweet, 
and by tagging the guest, you are continually reminding your guests of the value 
they shared with your community. This makes your guests feel good—and rightly 
so. After all, they delivered massive value—you recognized that—and you are 
now shouting it from the rooftops. By doing so, you are continually stoking the 
Campfire Effect with each of your guests.
With some of your guests, the fire will begin burning hot so that when you 
reach back out to them to discuss how your core business might be able to help 
their business, one of the first things they may say to you at the onset of the call 
is, “Thanks for all of the tweets!” Then you will know that your Social Media 
Warm-Up opened the door exactly as you intended. I always smile when it hap-
pens. Rock-solid awesome!
However, there’s a key ingredient missing, isn’t there? How should you reach 
back out to your guests to reopen the door, tee up the potential sales opportunity, 
and then schedule the call to discuss? I am going to share the “door-opening 
email” we developed at Predictive ROI so you can revise the content to match 
your business model and sales process.
Figure 4-1 is a screenshot of the email responsible for opening the door to $2 
million of revenue flowing into Predictive ROI over the next twelve months. The 
recipients of the email are Onward Nation guests. Onward Nation is our daily 
podcast for business owners, but my core business, Predictive ROI, is a content 
marketing and lead generation agency. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 48 ]
FIGURE 4-1
Good Evening Lee . . . hope all is well with you, my friend. Thank you again 
for sharing your wisdom and expertise during Episode 180 of Onward 
Nation!
I really appreciate it. Would love to have you back for an ENCORE! Just let 
me know.
Wanted to share some exciting news . . . 
Recently . . . our team tested the waters to see if we could produce multiple 
podcasts simultaneously.
It worked—and—we perfected our iTunes Marketing Strategy in the process.
For example . . . we launched the Business Rescue Road Map podcast 
with Stacy Tuschl—and—she became the #1 ranked podcast in her iTunes 
category in just 48-hours.
So we took a deep breath . . . carefully reviewed our system . . . liked what we 
saw . . . and began to privately introduce our Sales Generating  
Podcast System to some friends of Onward Nation.
It is now a complete done-for-you podcasting and sales generating system.
Our system will help you:
•  Build relationships with your dream prospects
•  Deliver high-quality content consistently to your audience
•  Leverage your thought leadership to further grow your audience
•  And most importantly—it will accelerate your leads and sales 
It would be an honor to talk with you about how we might be able to do the 
same for you.
We are sharing this with a small group of friends—including special pricing—
until June 1st.
I’d love to talk with you about it.

GROW YOUR REVENUE 
[ 49 ]
Would you have time one day next week for a brief call?
Onward with gusto!
Stephen Woessner
Host of the Onward Nation Podcast
CEO of Predictive ROI
M: 608-498-5165
One Predictive ROI core service is helping owners of business-to-business 
professional services firms create and launch their own podcasts so they can grow 
revenue, expand their platform, and build a nation of true fans. So it seems rea-
sonable that if a business owner was comfortable enough to be my guest on 
Onward Nation, then there may be some interest on behalf of some guests to 
have their own podcast, which is exactly what has happened. 
Let’s walk through a tangible example. When Lee Caraher was my guest 
on Onward Nation, she crushed it. Wow. We had an incredible conversation 
so it was easy to see that Lee would be an incredible host if she had her own 
podcast. We aired on February 26, 2016. In March, April, and May we had no 
openings. Our production capacity was full because we had just on-boarded 
several new podcasting clients. But around mid-May we could begin to fore-
cast availability in June. My team and I also wanted to increase our pricing to 
improve our margins. 
So, I began reaching out to more Onward Nation guests to gauge interest in 
two things: Would they like to come back for an encore interview? And would 
they like to have a conversation about how our podcasting system might deliver 
value to their businesses?
I sent the email in Figure 4-1 to Lee on Sunday, May 15, 2016. She got 
back to me the next day with the email you see in Figure 4-2. Lee and her team 
move at an uncommon pace, so we swiftly scheduled a brief call to consider the 
opportunity.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 50 ]
FIGURE 4-2
Hi Stephen—good to hear from you.
1. I’d love to return to your show—I think I mentioned my next book comes out 
next April—can we schedule this in conjunction with this rollout? This fall or 
early next year—unless of course you want me 3 times!!! 
2. I’d love to talk with you more about your podcast biz—I’m ccing my  
colleague Liz O’Donnell here who is in charge of making our podcast a  
reality—I’d like to have her on the phone too—ok?
3. Ccing David here to help with scheduling
Thanks
Have a great day
Lee
SAN FRANCISCO | BOSTON | NEW YORK
Lee McEnany Caraher | President & CEO
T: 415.500.0602 | M:650.302.3457
Twitter: @leecaraher |@DoubleFortePR
E: lcaraher@double-forte.com | W: double-forte.com
Meanwhile, I worked with Lee’s assistant to schedule the encore interview, 
which took place at the end of June. When Lee and I connected, she let me know 
they were just a few days away from making a final decision about their own 
podcast. Awesome.
And as promised, she looped back to me with her project approval before our 
new pricing strategy went into effect. 
The Social Media Warm-Up is an efficient sales process for three key reasons: 
 
Onward Nation guests are successful leaders and business owners 
in their industries, so they can fund a program like what we are 
offering.

GROW YOUR REVENUE 
[ 51 ]
 
We provided an exceptional experience for them as guests on our 
show and now they have the opportunity to put that same system 
into place for their businesses.
 
We stoked the Campfire Effect via social media and shared the 
wisdom and expertise from their Onward Nation episodes with our 
ever-growing community.
All of which equals significant value leading into the sales process. 
Before we close out this chapter, I want to offer some important words of 
caution. The Campfire Pitch and Social Media Warm-Up sales strategies are 
simple to execute, simple to measure (you either sold something or you didn’t), 
and simple to adjust and modify. Plus, they produce results quickly. But don’t let 
the simplicity fool you. Some business owners think the strategies are too simple 
to be effective. “How can these strategies deliver results without having to rely 
on complex systems or software?” Then the business owners go down the path 
of creating databases, marketing automation tools, landing pages, webinars, and 
a variety of other systems instead of concentrating on the vital priorities right in 
front of them. 
Don’t let this be you.
Your podcast is your Trojan horse of sales. The sales strategies do not have to 
be complicated. Keep them simple. And by doing so, you will grow your revenue.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 52 ]
✓ 
SALES STRATEGY CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Have you crafted your monetization strategy? Remember, “I’m going 
to sell ads” likely isn’t it.
❑
❑
Have you completed the EPSM found in Chapter 2? If not, go back 
and complete this step because it will be extremely challenging to suc-
ceed in generating new leads and revenue if your current vital metrics 
are askew.
❑
❑
You and your team should review the twenty steps in the launch pro-
cess outlined in Chapter 3 and then decide who will accomplish what 
vital function.
❑
❑
Decide if the Campfire Pitch or the Social Media Warm-Up will 
become your sales strategy.

[ 53 ]
CHAPTER 5
EXPAND  
YOUR PLATFORM
I
n my opinion, there are two sides to expanding your platform. There is the tech-
nical nuts and bolts side, which we will cover in this book’s production-related 
chapters. There is also the content side, which we will cover in this chapter. The 
quality of your content, and your intention for creating the content in the first 
place, are key ingredients in determining your ability to expand your platform. 
Expanding your platform is not about spending large amounts of money on 
Facebook campaigns, buying email lists, running Google AdWords campaigns, 
or investing in the myriad other ways you could buy traffic to your website. In-
stead, it’s about having an intentional strategy for creating and delivering valu-
able content to your audience (your nation!) in such a way that a relationship is 
formed with an audience who loves you and what your platform represents. 
Expanding your platform through your podcast will give you the opportu-
nity to attract an audience who will ultimately become your nation of true fans 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 54 ]
(Chapter 6) if you execute and expand properly. The more and better-qualified 
traffic flowing into your platform, the better your revenue opportunity will be. 
This chapter will take you through the definition of what a platform is, why 
expanding your platform matters to your business and your audience, and how 
your podcast represents an excellent content marketing and platform expansion 
opportunity all rolled into one. 
Let’s begin by defining the term platform. My good friend Wendy Keller is 
the author of the brilliant book Ultimate Guide to Platform Building. In it, she 
shares a practical and tactical definition for platform that in my opinion is spot 
on for every business owner:
Platform = traffic
Traffic = money
Therefore, platform = money
Get a platform, get money
Wendy also shares several helpful criteria I recommend you consider as you 
evaluate whether to expand your platform:
 
You want to grow your business by attracting new customers and clients.
 
You have a new business you are trying to launch.
 
Your sales are slumping—or never got off the ground.
 
You want to introduce a product or service to the market.
 
You would like to attract investors or partners.
 
You yearn to expand your brand.
 
You are searching for new streams of revenue.
 
You want to distinguish your career.
 
You are being eaten alive by the competition.
 
You are a speaker, coach, or consultant (or want to be) and you are 
putting your game plan together.
 
You just want to make more money.
I suspect most business owners who review Wendy’s criteria would agree 
that expanding their platform as a means to achieving all or a portion of that list 

EXPAND YOUR PLATFORM 
[ 55 ]
would be a worthy pursuit. So to take this platform discussion deeper, I sat down 
with Drew McLellan, top dog at the Agency Management Institute and host 
of the podcast Build a Better Agency. Drew is also a three-time alum on Onward 
Nation. (If you go to OnwardNation.com and type the word Drew into our 
search bar, all of his episodes will appear so you can listen.) 
During his third visit, I asked Drew to share more about why a business 
owner ought to build a platform as a means to serve and add value to others, not 
just to drive financial results—and why a person’s intention should come from 
the right place. Here’s what Drew had to say. It’s masterful. 
Any platform I have, whether it’s a blog or if I’m speaking, and certainly the 
podcast is one of my critical platforms, but for me every platform should 
be a place where I am being helpful, where I am using my expertise, my 
connection, my experiences to teach someone how to do something better. 
Ultimately that’s really the whole point of Agency Management Institute—
helping people run their businesses better. That’s very much my mindset; 
plus, when you think about all of the information that’s out there in all 
of the different platforms, blogs, webinars, podcasts, videos, or whatever it 
is, it’s not like people don’t have choices. So why in the world would they 
choose to give you their time over someone else?
They’re only going to do that if (A) you’re super entertaining, which I’m 
not. Or (B), you are helpful and you add value so that hour is an investment 
on their part where they get more out of the hour than it costs them to give 
you the hour, or whatever the time of consumption is.
When I add that kind of value and when I stay super focused on deliv-
ering, it comes back to me business-wise in spades. In marketing we often 
talk about how it is whoever is trying to sell something who is the one who 
has to provide value first so you have to sort of demonstrate your commit-
ment to the audience.
You have to help them get where they want to go so that they can know, 
like, and trust you. Really that’s what platform building is about. Giving 
people an opportunity to get to know you and over time because, as your 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 56 ]
listeners have experienced, they do get a sense of who you are and what you 
are about.
So for some listeners they gravitate toward that, and they, like you and 
other listeners probably on my podcast, go, for whatever reason, “I don’t 
really love him so I’m going to stop listening.” After you get through the 
know and like, then over time when you consistently deliver value and good 
advice and good counsel, then they become ready to trust you and when 
they’re ready to trust you, not only does that mean that they will keep con-
suming my content. It also means that they are going to be open to an 
AMI workshop or one of the other things that we do that we actually make 
money at. It’s all part of a continuum, I think.
Ultimately, you’re doing it for a business purpose, but I think you’re doing 
it with integrity. I always want my clients to feel like they get more from me 
than they give me, whether it’s money, or time, or whatever. I’m modeling 
that all the way through my content creation. I always want to give more 
than somebody is in essence paying for because then whatever I’m charging 
them feels like a bargain and to them it is a bargain; the value proposition 
and the value transfer falls in their favor. To me that’s smart business and 
so, yes, I’m doing it because it builds my business but I know that probably 
90 percent of, for example, my podcast audience may or may not ever buy 
anything from me and that’s fine.
A lot of my current customers who were customers before I started the 
podcast are avid podcast listeners, so now that’s added value for them. Be-
cause they’re part of the AMI family they knew about the podcast and 
they listen and for them that’s like bonus value. For somebody who’s never 
bought anything from us or doesn’t know who I am, or doesn’t know how 
we can help their agency, this is a way for us to introduce ourselves.
The other reason why I think everybody should have a platform is be-
cause especially when you sell something and you say you’re an expert in 
something, saying you’re an expert is one thing, demonstrating week after 
week that you’re an expert is a completely different gig.

EXPAND YOUR PLATFORM 
[ 57 ]
Again, it’s critically important for you to understand that your skill in ex-
panding your platform is not about mastering tech but about building a relation-
ship with your audience. And that relationship deepens based on the value of the 
content you deliver on a consistent basis. The value of the content you deliver is 
high when your intention is in the right place. Your audience will know if you are 
solely focused on conversion rates and revenue. Consequently, you will not grow 
your revenue and you will likely fall short of your goals.
Earlier in this chapter, I mentioned that your podcast represents an excel-
lent content marketing and platform expansion opportunity all rolled into one. 
I am going to share several content marketing ingredients you should consider, 
but first, let’s bring in Joe Pulizzi, founder of the Content Marketing Institute 
(CMI), to define content marketing. CMI defines content marketing as “the 
practice of creating relevant and compelling content in a consistent fashion to a 
targeted buyer, focusing on all stages of the buying process, from brand aware-
ness through to brand evangelism.”1
Joe and his team at CMI have been the leaders in content marketing ed-
ucation and training for nearly a decade. This chapter is not intended to make 
you a content marketing expert. Instead, it will provide you with several tangible 
examples so you can see how you can get more value and content distribution 
mileage out of your episodes beyond just an audio file that’s available for down-
load inside iTunes. 
Ingredient #1: Build Your Email List
One of the best ways to build your email list is by offering visitors to your pod-
cast website what I like to call a “screaming cool value exchange,” or a freemium. 
Something your website visitors consider to be so amazingly awesome and valu-
able that, when they see it, they exclaim to themselves, “Heck yeah, I want that,” 
and happily share their email address with you to get it. You will know you have 
the value proposition correct when between 6 and 13 percent of your website 
visitors opt in to get their hands on your value exchange. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 58 ]
Ingredient #2: Increase Organic Search Traffic to  
Your Podcast Website 
Google loves content pages that are at least 500 words in length but typically 
not longer than 1,000 words. An efficient way to boost word count to your Show 
Notes pages (Show Notes are covered in detail in Chapter 12) is to add the full 
or partial transcript below the Show Notes for each episode—and then optimize 
the entire page for search.
Ingredient #3: Put Podcast Interviews on Your YouTube Channel
Lewis Howes is a business owner who has mastered all three vital priorities in this 
book: growing revenue, expanding the platform, and building a nation of true fans. 
When Lewis talks strategy and execution, I really pay attention. Recently he began 
to conduct his podcast interviews on video in his studio and then air the content 
as a video on his YouTube channel before sending the audio-only version out to 
iTunes, Stitcher, Google Play, etc. as a traditional podcast. It’s a smart strategy for 
creating compelling and valuable content for your nation of true fans. You can find 
Lewis on YouTube here: https://www.youtube.com/user/lewishowes.
Ingredient #4: Turn Your Audio into Video
Kinetic typography is an outstanding visual strategy for converting short snip-
pets of audio into video that can be shared on YouTube, Facebook, or other social 
media. The downside is that the time investment to create the typography is 
significant. For example, if you go to http://bit.ly/2eHJD7d you will see a short 
clip that my team produced following my guest appearance on EOFire with John 
Lee Dumas. This clip took about forty hours to produce, but it created an inter-
esting twist on the lesson I shared during the interview with JLD.
Ingredient #5: Send Weekly Emails to Your Nation of Fans
Not everyone in your audience (your nation of true fans) will download and 
listen to every podcast episode as soon as it airs. Sending a weekly email sum-
mary of the highlights is an excellent way to keep your audience engaged and 

EXPAND YOUR PLATFORM 
[ 59 ]
informed. You will also begin to build a reputation as a valuable curator of high-
quality content. Kelly Hatfield, host of the Absolute Advantage Podcast, sends a 
weekly email similar to what is shown in Figure 5-1. Within the first several 
weeks of sending the emails, one of Kelly’s Dream 50 prospects replied with a 
new business opportunity for Kelly and her firm. They successfully closed the 
deal, and the project generated nearly immediate ROI for the investment Kelly 
had made in launching her podcast. Rock-solid awesome!
FIGURE 5-1

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 60 ]
Ingredient #6: Write Your Book with Your Podcast Episodes
Writing a book tends to be a common aspiration of most business owners, but 
the thought of investing all of the hours toward writing the book seems incom-
prehensible to be able to fit into one’s schedule. Is writing a book one of your 
vital priorities? If so, I encourage you to let your podcast create all of the content 
for you. Onward Nation guest John Livesay did exactly that. He had ten of the 
best interviews from his The Successful Pitch podcast transcribed, then he edited 
them into chapters, and they became the core chapters of his book, The Successful 
Pitch: Conversations About Going from Invisible to Investable.
These six ingredients represent a small sampling of content marketing strat-
egies you can employ to leverage each of your podcast episodes into more value 
for your audience and a platform expansion for your business!
✓ 
YOUR PLATFORM EXPANSION CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Build your email list.
❑
❑
Increase organic search traffic to your podcast website. 
❑
❑
Put podcast interviews on your YouTube channel.
❑
❑
Turn your audio into video.
❑
❑
Send weekly emails to your nation of fans.
❑
❑
Write your book with your podcast episodes.

[ 61 ]
CHAPTER 6
BUILD YOUR NATION  
OF TRUE FANS
D
ownloaded more than 100,000 times, Onward Nation has listeners in nearly 
200 countries around the world. These metrics are gratifying to my team 
and myself. I feel blessed and honored to have the opportunity to do what 
we love to do. 
However, these metrics—as fun as they are to see in a data dashboard—
do not represent the true economic engine behind Onward Nation, just as the 
number of countries, downloads, etc., will likely not represent a driving force of 
revenue into your business either. Instead, the way your podcast can potentially 
generate millions of dollars in new revenue is through creating and nurturing 
long-term relationships with your podcast guests. These relationships are what 
Wired magazine founder Kevin Kelly calls “True Fans.”1 True fans represent your 
ROI Scorecard’s ultimate vital metric.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 62 ]
To paraphrase Kelly, any business owner can create a solid revenue stream 
around a community of approximately 1,000 people when they are “True Fans” 
of what the company sells and when there is a connection between the company 
and its fans based on the value provided. This chapter will illustrate how a con-
sistent effort toward the production of your podcast can create a nation of true 
fans for your company.
Even if you didn’t generate any direct or indirect revenue from your lis-
teners through advertising, sponsorships, or offering up programs for sales—
and focused only on converting guests into clients—you would reach 1,000 
true fans in just three and a half years by airing one new episode per day. 
Onward Nation is already halfway there; in less than two years of airing, our 
podcast has generated approximately $2 million in revenue for Predictive ROI 
over twelve months. 
The tactical steps for accomplishing this result were covered in detail in 
Chapter 4. But the outcome would not be possible if we had not invested the 
time—and continue to invest the time—to build a nation of fans who share 
their insights on how we can continually improve and move onward to that 
next level. 
Your nation of true fans will be fans of you, fans of your message, and fans 
of your business. Your fans will support you because of the sacred bond you have 
built with them and because you consistently delivered massive value through 
your podcast content. 
Whether you air a new episode every day or every week, no matter what 
airing schedule you decide upon, no matter the rhythm, the fact that you are 
consistent is the critical piece. 
Now, let’s get dialed in on building your nation of true fans: a sense of com-
munity, collaboration, and profitability around the purpose of your business.
We’ll begin by breaking down the phrase “Build a nation of true fans” into its 
three core components: (1) Build, (2) Nation, and (3) True Fans.

BUILD YOUR NATION OF TRUE FANS 
[ 63 ]
Ingredient #1: Build (as in Your Platform—See Chapter 5)
How would you begin to “Build” a nation of true fans? You’d begin with a plat-
form, such as:
 
Podcast
 
Speaking
 
Blog
 
YouTube channel/vlog
 
Instagram stories
 
Facebook Live
The platform you choose is irrelevant from a tech perspective. Any or all of the 
above can help you build a nation of true fans. The tech behind it is relatively easy. 
Is there a learning curve? Sure there is. Will you at times feel like you are trying 
to fly the space shuttle, as I mentioned in Chapter 3? Sure. How does Facebook 
Live work? What time of day should I create a story on Instagram? What kind of 
camera and microphone are best if I want to become a serious YouTuber?
All of these are tech questions that can be answered in an afternoon with 
your old friend Google. You can solve those problems and find the answers as 
long as you don’t let the fear of the unknown paralyze you.
So, let’s shift our focus away from the tech and toward the value you will be 
providing through those channels. What’s your story? How will you serve your 
audience? How will you make what you are doing so valuable to their businesses 
or their lives that they actually consider you indispensable? 
How will you become so consistent in over-delivering help, advice, recom-
mendations, and value that you begin to build deposits in their emotional bank 
accounts, that your guests and your audience trust you, and then like you, and 
then get even closer as they begin to actually know you?
Your first step in building your nation of true fans has nothing to do with the 
actual content delivery platform, and everything to do with the value of what you 
will be delivering, because your nation of true fans is built on value. And if you 
get that recipe right, then the actual platform, or the “conduit” through which 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 64 ]
you share and distribute your value, will fall into place. The entire process will 
begin to feel less stressful because the value you were called to create and deliver 
will then be in the driver’s seat. You will become unstoppable.
Ingredient #2: Nation
Now let’s shift our attention to the word nation and break that down. And I want 
to make sure we address this because we live in a world where bigger lists, bigger 
subscribers, massive downloads, huge customer lists, etc., etc., etc., are what at-
tract headlines and massive attention.
You don’t need an email list of 100,000 people to build your nation. You don’t 
need to have a podcast that gets a million downloads a month. You don’t need to 
have a list of 20,000 prospects.
Nope. You don’t.
That’s not your nation.
What you need—depending on the size of your business—is somewhere 
between 100 and 1,000 highly qualified prospects. In fact, your knowledge with 
some of your prospects should be so deep that you can boldly claim them as your 
Dream 50 prospects.
If you need a refresher on why your Dream 50 matter, you can go to Chapter 
7, where I map it all out: how to figure out who your Dream 50 are and how to 
romance your Dream 50 so they understand how important they are to you.
To take this point deeper, I want to share a tangible example of a company 
that grew from zero to a multi-billion-dollar-a-year business. Yes, billion with a 
capital B.
Earlier, I mentioned my mentor, Darren Hardy, former publisher of SUC-
CESS Magazine. A while back, he decided to interview my friend Cody Foster, 
cofounder of Advisors Excel, and share the interview on the March 2014 edition 
of the SUCCESS CD that rides along with the magazine.
During the interview with Darren, Cody shared several personal stories of 
very humble beginnings—stories that helped shape the kind of company Advi-
sors Excel has become.

BUILD YOUR NATION OF TRUE FANS 
[ 65 ]
Advisors Excel is packed full of incredible people. The team’s sole aim is to 
deliver more and more value every day to financial advisers around the country. 
The Advisors Excel team does it masterfully well. They built their platform on a 
solid foundation of value.
But, did they build this platform by trying to serve the 60,000 financial ad-
visers located in the state of Florida alone? No. How about all of the financial 
advisers up and down the West Coast? Nope.
Did they focus on spending large amounts of advertising dollars trying  
to reach everyone they could with their message of value, value, value? Not  
at all.
Instead, they meticulously selected 1,000 of the very best financial advisers 
whom they wanted to earn the opportunity to serve. Cody shared with Darren 
that they built a list of 1,000 financial advisers and then went to work to deliver 
more value than the other insurance marketing organizations in the industry to 
those 1,000.
The 1,000 advisers became their nation, and the advisers outside of their 
nation ceased to exist. Advisors Excel dedicated themselves to being the best 
they could be for this small group of prospects.
The outcome? Advisors Excel reached more than $4 billion in revenue by the 
end of year six in the business.
When they are the right prospects, you need only a small, passionate group 
of fans to make your business amazingly successful and profitable. Highly qual-
ified prospects—whom you can support, and to whom you can add value—will 
be excited to do for you some of what you already did for them.
Ingredient #3: True Fans
Let’s take the number 1,000 deeper, because it is a magical number and a vital 
priority in your business.
According to Kevin Kelly, if a business created a base of customers who 
were more like fans—1,000 true fans—then that business could become sus-
tainable and profitable by simply focusing on the needs of its true fans.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 66 ]
The full text of Kevin Kelly’s blog post as well as the long tail curve he 
created to illustrate the 1,000 true fans strategy can be found at http://kk.org/
thetechnium/1000-true-fans/.
Kelly describes true fans as customers who will help you mobilize and move 
your business to that next level. They are true fans of you, true fans of your mes-
sage, true fans of your business.
As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, they will support you because of the 
sacred bond you have built with them, a bond that was built upon—and continues 
to be built upon—the foundation of the value you consistently create and deliver.
Whether you do that every day or every week—no matter what the 
schedule, no matter what the rhythm—the fact that you are consistent is what 
is important.
According to Kevin, “A True Fan” is defined as someone who will purchase 
anything and everything you produce. True fans will drive 200 miles to visit your 
location. They will buy the super deluxe version of your product even though they 
already own the standard version.
They have a Google Alert set for your name. They have bookmarked your 
website.
They come to your product announcements or your ribbon-cutting ceremo-
nies. They come to your book signings and ask for you to sign their copies.
They cannot wait for your next webinar, your next podcast episode, your next 
event, or your next release.
The best way to increase sales for your company is to connect with your True 
Fans directly. All you need is a podcast built on value. See? I keep coming back 
to that foundational truth.
A nation of 100 true fans is a reasonable number. As Kevin explains in his 
brilliant blog post: “If you added one fan a day, it would take only three years. 
True ‘fanship’ is doable. Pleasing a True Fan is pleasurable, and invigorating.”
The key challenge is that you have to maintain direct contact with your 1,000 
true fans. And you do that through building your platform—delivering value—
and making sure you are using the right conduit so it reaches your 1,000 true fans 
on a consistent basis.

BUILD YOUR NATION OF TRUE FANS 
[ 67 ]
Again, it doesn’t matter if you use a podcast, blog, robust LNKD profile and 
LNKD publishing, long-form posts on Medium, Instagram stories, Facebook 
Live, or any other format. What’s important to identify isn’t the platform on 
which you are most comfortable, but the platform your fans use the most. What 
is the best conduit to them?
For me, it’s our Onward Nation podcast, my LinkedIn account, email cam-
paigns, and webinars.
But there’s another element to the recipe for building your nation of true 
fans. You will also build concentric circles of “lesser fans.” Lesser fans might not 
seek out direct contact with you or your business, nor will they buy everything 
you produce. But they will buy much of what you produce.
The content, offerings, products, and processes you develop to feed your true 
fans will also nurture your lesser fans. As you build your nation of 1,000 true fans, 
you will also add many more lesser fans.
Lastly, as you are building, don’t miss or avoid the opportunity to go deep—
to develop intimacy with your audience. In fact, intimacy is one of the reasons 
why I ask for feedback in each of my Onward Nation “solocasts” (a solocast is an 
episode without a guest—just the host) and share my email address. My team 
and I legitimately want to get better, but I also want to hear from our audience 
and learn from them so that we can deliver even more value.
You now have a tangible recipe for building your own nation of true fans—
and when you do, your nation will become this amazing, awesome, wonderful, 
beautiful, incredible community of people who are generous with their feedback 
and help guide your business in the right direction to deliver value.
Consider Kevin Kelly’s lesson as you build your podcast. Ask yourself how 
you can continually add more and more value like Cody Foster and his team at 
Advisors Excel. Because when you build your nation, your business, your team, 
and your life will move onward to a completely new level.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 68 ]
✓ 
YOUR NATION-BUILDING CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Kick the impostor syndrome to the curb. 
❑
❑
Create and consistently deliver value, value, and more value through 
your platform—no way around this—value first.
❑
❑
Ask for feedback, reply, and say thank you.
❑
❑
Implement the recommendations you receive from your nation and 
publicly ask for more feedback.
❑
❑
Your podcast guests are your nation so be sure to treat them like the 
VIPs they are.

[ 69 ]
CHAPTER 7
YOUR AVATAR, DREAM 50,  
AND MY $2 MILLION MISTAKE
T
he lessons in this chapter will help you solve one of the most expensive 
money-draining mistakes businesses make. The mistake occurs when there 
is ambiguity around identifying whom the business intends to serve as its 
customers. Business owners who think “everyone” is their prospect tend to spend 
more on marketing (often in the wrong media) and attend “networking” events 
that are not laser-focused. 
Many business owners today are using expensive guesswork and trial and 
error. This chapter solves that problem. 
You can eliminate the guesswork by getting a clear view of your ideal client 
and podcast listener. Not from a crystal ball but by asking yourself and your team 
the right questions. The outcome will be a clear view of your “client avatar”—an 
accurate representation of the people you want to attract to your podcast. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 70 ]
This chapter will remove the mystical dark magic voodoo to creating/ 
defining your client avatar by giving you all the questions you need to answer. 
After defining your avatar, we will dig in and create your “Dream 50.” Your 
Dream 50 prospect list represents the clients you would most like to serve in your 
industry. If you had the opportunity to serve them, it would be a game changer 
for your business.
In my experience, however, business owners tend to answer the question of 
“Who are your Dream 50?” with, “I would like to work with Harley Davidson, 
IBM, or our regional health-care provider network.” But when business owners 
are asked to put pen to paper and write out the first name, last name, and title 
of the decision-maker at each of their Dream 50 businesses, their list-making 
momentum ends abruptly.
Who are they? Why do they matter to you? And once you know, what should 
you do with your Dream 50 list? 
To help cement into place the importance of the Dream 50 lesson, I will 
share a painful $2 million mistake that I made, which could have ruined our 
business because I didn’t pay attention to the lessons that were directly in front 
of me.
Apply the recipes in this chapter and you will remove the stress, pressure, 
and self-doubt you may be feeling about who you are intended to serve with 
your business.
When you don’t define your avatar, when you don’t define your Dream 50, 
and when you don’t create a system for attracting those 50—what happens? You 
lose major amounts of opportunity in your business.
Here’s the story of how I know this to be true.
Because of my ego and pride, I refused to listen to lessons Darren Hardy was 
trying to teach me during our monthly phone calls and in-person meetings.
I ignored my mentor’s recommendations to precisely define our “Dream 50 
Attendees”—the people we most wanted to attend our “Predictive ROI LIVE” 
event in January 2014, to connect this pool of VIPs back to the “avatar” of our 
ideal attendee, and then to craft a value proposition our avatar would care enough 
about to attend our live event.

YOUR AVATAR, DREAM 50, AND MY $2 MILLION MISTAKE 
[ 71 ]
I completed none of these.
It’s not that Darren didn’t tell, even urge me, to get this done. It’s not that he 
didn’t mentor me through the process. I had access to all of the help and support 
I needed, yet I still didn’t take action.
I was paralyzed with fear. Plus, I was arrogant in thinking that prospective 
attendees would simply figure out our value proposition on their own.
Consequently, after selling a grand total of three seats for an event that had a 
$2 million operating budget, and shelling out $200,000 in expenses, we canceled 
Predictive ROI LIVE. Not awesome.
My hope is that you will learn from my mistakes—and how we fixed them—
so you don’t have to learn the same painful lesson.
Let’s begin by looking at where we got off the path.
I was unwilling to face my fear and take the necessary time to answer three 
simple questions. Had I answered them, there would have been a completely 
different outcome.
Your answers to the three questions will guide your overall communication 
strategy with customers and prospects. Even deeper, your answers will establish 
your expertise and why your message is relevant and deserves to be heard.
But it is critically important that your answers come from the perspective of 
your client, not your ego. After all, those are vastly different perspectives.
I am also going to share with you a set of ten questions designed to help ensure 
that you are speaking to your avatar. Again, the ten questions are the same questions 
my team and I use at Predictive ROI to help our clients define their client avatar.
Had I taken the time to answer these questions—in precise detail—we likely 
would not have failed with our event. We would have either had a much more 
precisely defined value proposition or we would have discovered that, at that 
point in time, the scale of the event we were planning was way too large. We 
were swinging for the fences when we should have been paying closer attention 
to getting on base and scoring some runs.
Before we review the three questions to guide your overall communication 
strategy with customers and prospects, remember that your customers will not 
remember what you said, but how you made them feel.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 72 ]
In order for them to feel something as a result of what you said, you need 
to have established credibility in their mind’s eye so you have permission to say 
what needs to be said.
Throughout the entire conversation—heck, you may even be doing it now as 
you read these words—your audience will ask themselves three simple questions, 
and you must answer them. Or the conversation is over.
 
Question 1: Who are you?
 
Question 2: Why do I care?
 
Question 3: What’s in it for me?
Now, you may not like the questions. They may be too direct for your par-
ticular communication style, but they are, in reality, the essence of what your 
customers are asking themselves as they listen to you.
The first two questions of “Who are you?” and “Why should I care?” are core 
credibility indicator questions. When beginning a conversation—especially with 
someone new—you need to answer these two questions as succinctly as possible.
The third question, “What’s in it for me?” is the ultimate value proposition 
question. One of the reasons our Predictive ROI LIVE event failed was because 
I personally could never explain or define why a business owner would want to 
invest $7,000 and head to the Ritz-Carlton in Orlando, Florida, for four days to 
learn about digital marketing strategies.
The pricing was off, the value proposition was nonexistent, and the worst 
part was that Darren had asked me this same question during every call:
“Stephen, why would anyone want to come to this thing?”
I never set my ego aside. I never listened. I never answered his very simple 
question.
Once you have your core message defined, it’s time to crystallize with whom 
you are going to share your message (your avatar!) and how to create an emo-
tional impact with your audience by answering ten questions you and your team 
need to ask one another. No surface answers. Challenge yourself and your team. 
Dig deep and find specific examples of situations that reinforce or contradict 
what is currently believed to be true.

YOUR AVATAR, DREAM 50, AND MY $2 MILLION MISTAKE 
[ 73 ]
1.  What are our customers’ challenges right now?
2.  What are our customers’ emotional fears or worries?
3.  What are their dreams and aspirations?
4.  What are their pain points?
5.  What are their values—and are they the same as ours?
6.  Whom do they want to impress the most?
7.  What frustrates them about our business or others like us in the 
industry?
8.  What do they want from our business?
9.  What’s the one result that, if you could guarantee it, your customers 
would pay a premium for?
10.  Finish this sentence on behalf of your customers as if they were 
saying this to you: “You will gain my trust and comfort by . . .”
Once you have collected that data, you will have all you need in order to create 
your avatar.
Some words of caution: Your avatar is one person. Not an email list of 25,000 
people. Every piece of communication you send to your customers and prospect 
lists needs to speak directly to your avatar. And because of that you should give 
your avatar a name. Think of it as though you were having a one-on-one conver-
sation with each email you send or social media post you create.
Hang a photo of your avatar on your conference room wall, and every time 
you write an email campaign or shoot a video, speak directly to it!
Let me take you inside Predictive ROI to illustrate this point. Our client av-
atars are named “Harry” and “Sally.” We chose those names because When Harry 
Met Sally is one of my favorite movies of all time.
All of our conversations with Harry and Sally are personal—they are emo-
tional—and they are always authentic.
This is Sally:
 
She and her team are ambitious and want to learn new things.
 
She knows there is more opportunity and growth “out there” and is 
frustrated she does not know how to capitalize on it, faster.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 74 ]
 
She reads lots of books but doesn’t know a good idea from a  
bad one.
 
She is uncertain and afraid to fail.
 
She has been fooled before and does not know whom to believe.
 
She thinks everything sounds too good to be true.
 
She has said to me, “Stephen, I want to trust that you can do what 
you say you can do. Show me the evidence quickly that it is working 
and that you are delivering on your promises.”
During more than one presentation to a prospective client, “Sally” has said 
to me, “My goodness, that’s me!” I love it when that happens because I know we 
just made a powerful, emotional connection.
Now what?
The final recipe in this lesson is another principle Darren taught me. He 
called it “Romancing Your Dream 50.”
Your Dream 50 prospects fit two criteria: (1) They were aligned with your 
avatar so you are able to connect with them on an emotional level because you 
really understand them, and (2) They are the easiest to reach, they are the fastest 
to make a decision, they are the most profitable, and it would be your absolute 
dream to call these 50 your clients. The people who make it to your Dream 50 list 
likely represent your best buyer profile.
So how will you romance them? How will you show them how much they 
mean to you? How much value can you deliver to them—before you are working 
with or for them?
 
Interview each of your Dream 50 on your podcast—and then quote 
and share their wisdom over social media and with your email list. 
Your email list will appreciate the additional insights, and your guest 
will think it’s awesome how you spread the word. Great things will 
happen! 
 
Create an industry research report and ask your Dream 50 to partic-
ipate in exchange for giving them a free copy of the report when the 
project is complete.

YOUR AVATAR, DREAM 50, AND MY $2 MILLION MISTAKE 
[ 75 ]
 
Invite members of your Dream 50 to co-teach a webinar with you. 
This adds value to your list while giving you an exceptional opportu-
nity to connect with your top prospects in a completely different way.
 
Host a party, wine tasting, dinner, or similar event.
 
Or, maybe you’re a power connector with a titanium Rolodex. You 
effortlessly make connections. Awesome. Then solve the problems 
of your Dream 50 by introducing them to people who could help—
people they would love to do business with. This adds tremendous 
value to your prospective clients. As a result, they may be open to 
doing business with you because of how you delivered and solved 
their needs first!
Those are just a few quick strategies for how you can “Romance Your Dream 50.” 
I wish you the best in applying them and taking the definition of your avatar 
deeper than ever before.
✓ 
YOUR AVATAR CREATION CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Answer the questions of “Who are you?” “Why do I care?” and “What’s 
in it for me?” on behalf of your audience because your answers will 
form the foundation of your podcast’s value proposition.
❑
❑
Complete the avatar exercise in this chapter.
❑
❑
Give your avatar a name and introduce him or her to your team.
❑
❑
Work with your team to define your Dream 50. Be specific with first 
names, last names, email addresses, and companies. “We’re going to 
target the market leaders in the XYZ industry” is not sufficient.
❑
❑
Describe how you will romance your Dream 50 and show them how 
much they mean to you.
❑
❑
Review the plan with your team.

[ 77 ]
CHAPTER 8
STAGE 1:  
STRATEGIC PLANNING AND  
PRODUCTION KICKOFF
W
elcome to the seven stages of production for your profitable podcast. The 
next seven chapters provide all of the technical step-by-step recipes and 
ingredients you need to create and launch your podcast. Each stage con-
tains several interdependent recipes all woven together into a cohesive produc-
tion process.
Please trust the process—even if the order of a particular recipe seems out of 
place. For example, why would you begin website groundwork in Stage 2 when 
you haven’t recorded any interviews yet? Rest assured, my team at Predictive 
ROI created this process from scratch, has made several comprehensive revisions 
to it, and has perfected it over hundreds of executions. Each recipe has been 
placed into the production process at the exact position to make the overall flow 
as smooth as possible. The launch of your podcast website will require several 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 78 ]
weeks of production time, so completing the groundwork early on in Stage 2 
will help ensure that once your episodes are finished in post-production, they can 
be uploaded into Libsyn, and then immediately pulled into your website, which 
should be fully functional by then.
The beginning of each chapter includes a high-level illustration of that 
stage’s major production milestones and overarching goal. In the case of Stage 1, 
your goal will be to complete the “Project Sheet” with all the details necessary to 
move on to Stage 2.
Let’s move into Stage 1—Strategic Planning and Production Kickoff. Figure 
8-1 illustrates the highlights of the production process in this stage. 
The Project Sheet template (see Figure 8-2, pp. 80–82) is available for your 
free download at PredictiveROI.com/resources/Stage-1. It is a Google Sheets 
template so you can copy it into your Google Docs account and then share the 
file with all of the members of your team who are involved with the production 
of your podcast. The Project Sheet is designed to help you and your team keep all 
of the tasks in Stage 1 moving along efficiently. 
You and your team should be able to accomplish all of the tasks with the 
Stage 1 Project Sheet during a ninety-minute kickoff.

STAGE 1: STRATEGIC PLANNING AND PRODUCTION KICKOFF  
[ 79 ]
FIGURE 8-1

[ 80 ]
STAGE 1
Company Name–Name of Podcast
 
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
Example Assets
 
Recipe 1: Contact Information
 
 
At Meeting
Address for billing
 
 
At Meeting
Your time zone for settings
 
 
At Meeting
Phone number to reach you
 
 
At Meeting
Phone number for guests to reach you
 
 
At Meeting
Phone number to put on website
 
 
At Meeting
Email to reach you
 
 
At Meeting
Email for guests to reach you
 
 
At Meeting
Email to put on the website
 
 
At Meeting
Email you want as a forwarding address from 
the email account listed above
 
 
At Meeting
Email you want publicly on the podcast 
website
 
 
At Meeting
Your Skype handle
 
 
At Meeting
Legal business name for disclosures
 
 
At Meeting
Email setup for sending out emails on your 
behalf: YourNamePodcast@Gmail.com
 
 
FIGURE 8-2

[ 81 ]
At Meeting
Email address YourNamePodcast@Gmail.com 
should forward to?
 
 
At Meeting
Email address YourNamePodcast@Gmail.com 
should look like?
 
 
 
Recipe 2: Details
 
 
Via Email
Credit card info for third-party purchases 
 
 
At Meeting
Do you use a Mac or PC?
 
 
At Meeting
Confirm how many epsiodes per week
 
 
At Meeting
Choose day of week for episodes to be 
posted
 
 
At Meeting
Determine how many podcasts need to be 
recorded and in the can before launch (4 for 
launch + 1 month of episodes. Minimum 10)
 
 
At Meeting
Which social media platforms are you currently 
using? LinkedIn, Twitter, Facebook. 
 
 
At Meeting
Which social media platforms will you be 
posting podcast-related content to? Linkedin, 
Twitter, Facebook. 
 
 
At Meeting
Will you be sending a guest alert email to let 
them know their “podcast is live”?
 
 
 
Recipe 3: Avatar, Monetization, Vital Pri-
ority, and Vital Metrics
 
 
At Meeting
Kickoff Meeting: Discuss branding, topics for 
content (what do you want to learn?), and 
questions that will lead to research or content 
marketing assets.
 
 
FIGURE 8-2  (continued)

[ 82 ]
At Meeting
Review Dream 50 list
 
 
At Meeting
Complete the avatar exercise
 
 
STAGE 1
Company Name–Name of Podcast
 
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
Example Assets
At Meeting
Choose podcast name
 
 
At Meeting
Create podcast tagline (10 words or fewer)
 
 
At Meeting
Decide on vital priority for podcast (grow 
revenue, expand platform, build nation of true 
fans, etc.)
 
 
At Meeting
Identify three vital metrics that will be used 
to evaluate progress toward the vital priority 
(sales, email opt-ins, new social media con-
nection, etc.)
 
 
At Meeting
Vital metric 1: 
 
 
At Meeting
Vital metric 2: 
 
 
At Meeting
Vital metric 3:
 
 
At Meeting
Who is your customer? Guest or audience?
 
 
At Meeting
Create bookmarks in your web browser for 
Project Sheet, Airing Schedule, and social 
media folder.
 
 
At Meeting
How would you describe your podcast to 
someone who knows nothing about it? 
Think elevator pitch for your podcast. X-Y-Z 
statement.
 
 
FIGURE 8-2  (continued)

STAGE 1: STRATEGIC PLANNING AND PRODUCTION KICKOFF  
[ 83 ]
Recipe 1: Contact Information
Contact Information on the Project Sheet will take you or someone on your 
team only a few minutes to fill out before your kickoff meeting. 
Recipe 2: Details
Details continues with the tactical gathering of information into one location 
so you and your team won’t have to continually search and hunt for the data 
points you will need on a consistent basis. The Google Sheet shown in Figure 
8-3 (see next page) can be found as a template for free download at Predictive 
ROI.com/Resources/Stage-1 and will help you keep track of any third-party  
expenses associated with your podcast, whether they be monthly or onetime fees.
Recipe 3: Avatar, Monetization, Vital Priority, and Vital Metrics
This recipe involves several key strategic decisions that are important to make 
during the kickoff meeting because changing direction down the line will extend 
your timeline and potentially increase cost. For example, you and your team 
should also consider and answer the following questions:
 
What topics do we want to use the podcast to help us learn more 
about so we can create content and thought leadership?
 
What questions would help us collect the right information?
 
Will the show be branded as its own platform, e.g., Onward Nation 
not The Predictive ROI Podcast? Or will your podcast and company 
brands be interchangeable? 
 
Next come decisions regarding interview type. What type of show 
format aligns best with our goals? Here are some questions to 
consider:
•  Are you the type of person who likes to keep conversations free 
flowing, open-ended, and spontaneous? If so, you may want to 
consider scripting out several questions for each guest in 

[ 84 ]
Credit Card
Name on Card
Number
Expiration 
Date
CVV
Billing Address 
and Zip
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Program
Link
Cost
Monthly or 
Onetime
Username
Password
Setup 
Complete?
Schedule Once
 
$50.00
Monthly
 
 
 
Libsyn
 
$20.00
Monthly
 
 
 
Smart Podcast Player
 
$12.00
Monthly
 
 
 
Stitcher
 
0
 
 
 
 
iTunes
 
0
 
 
 
 
Google Play
 
0
 
 
 
 
Website hosting
 
$40.00
Monthly
 
 
 
Website domain name
 
 
 
 
Website security and 
support
 
 
 
 
Hootsuite
 
$35.00
Monthly
 
 
 
Professional recorded 
intro/outro
 
$350 to 
$600
Onetime
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Add-ons
 
 
 
 
 
 
Photos for e-books
 
$40.00
Monthly
 
 
 
FIGURE 8-3

STAGE 1: STRATEGIC PLANNING AND PRODUCTION KICKOFF  
[ 85 ]
•  advance by doing your research but letting your guest know you 
plan to “go off script” and head down paths that come up during 
discussion.
•  Or, you may want to follow a specific interview flow with prede-
termined questions you can email to your guests in advance for 
their review. The majority of Onward Nation guests appreciate 
having an opportunity to review the questions as well as prepare 
their answers in advance of the interview. The rare exceptions are 
guests like author Gary Vaynerchuk or marketing expert Chris 
Brogan who prefer to be 100 percent spontaneous in their an-
swers during the interview. That is not a good fit for the majority 
of guests. We recommend you prepare a specific list of questions, 
save it as a PDF, and provide it to your guests in the invitation as 
well as one of the interview reminders. We will cover the details 
of this process during Stage 2.
•  Do you want to use your podcast purely as a “solocast”? This is 
ideal for thought leadership–focused podcasts where the host is 
the star. But, this format will limit your opportunity to use your 
podcast to grow revenue because, as we discussed in Chapter 
4, your Dream 50 prospect list would not make their way onto 
your show. Or, perhaps you and your team would prefer a hybrid 
method where you offer your audience an occasional solocast for 
thought leadership but the majority of your episodes will con-
sist of interviews with your Dream 50 prospects as your guests. 
Regardless of your preference, the kickoff meeting is the time to 
make your decision regarding show format.
 
“Avatar” is listed as an ingredient in Recipe 3. However, if you’ve 
been working through this book in a linear process, you will have 
already completed your Avatar exercise back in Chapter 7.
 
What will you name your podcast? Is there a domain name available 
for the podcast name you like the most?

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 86 ]
•  We recommend the title of your show be something indepen-
dent of your company and sync up well with the interests of 
your Dream 50. For example, our client avatar at Predictive ROI 
(Sally) is ambitious, and she wants to learn new things and is 
looking for practical and tactical strategies for moving her busi-
ness onward to that next level. Because we know this about Sally, 
we decided to name our podcast Onward Nation and give it the 
tagline, “Learn how to think, act, & achieve like today’s top busi-
ness owners.” Develop a name for your show that your Dream 50 
will be drawn toward.
•  You also ought to consider filing for a federal trademark to 
protect your show name. The last thing you want is to build a 
popular podcast only to find out the hard way that you infringed 
on an existing trademark in the process.
•  Once you know the trademark is clear, register the domain name 
for your podcast.
 
Next you will need to define the “vital priority” and “vital metrics” of 
your podcast. Both of these topics were covered in depth in Chapter 
2; now you’ll need to enter them into your Project Sheet. 
 
The final ingredient—being able to describe your podcast to 
someone who is not familiar with it—is important because your 
approach to this will be used as the foundation for your intro and 
outro scripts in Chapter 10: Stage 3.

STAGE 1: STRATEGIC PLANNING AND PRODUCTION KICKOFF  
[ 87 ]
✓ 
YOUR STRATEGIC PLANNING CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Schedule a ninety-minute kickoff session with you and your team.
❑
❑
Be prepared to lead a discussion around the content and thought lead-
ership the podcast should create in order to align with the vital prior-
ities you defined earlier.
❑
❑
Work with your team to define the vital metrics for the podcast. How 
will success be defined and measured?
❑
❑
Enter all of the data into your Project Sheet and share it with your 
team. 

[ 89 ]
CHAPTER 9
STAGE 2:  
GUEST EXPERIENCE  
AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK
W
elcome to Stage 2 of production for your profitable podcast. Your over-
arching goal for completing Stage 2 is to put a system into place that 
ensures that your guests have a good experience leading up to their in-
terview. We call this the Guest Advocacy System. It’s a strategic process that 
cares for your guests between when they register for an interview on your show 
and when the interview takes place. The Guest Advocacy System will help your 
guests prepare for their interviews.
The strategy consists of an easy-to-use online registration system, automated 
thank-you and reminder emails that feel personal, reminders via text message, 
a question list, an equipment list to make sure guests sound as great as pos-
sible, and a marketing guide guests can use to help them get maximum exposure 
from their interview. In total, the Guest Advocacy System consists of numerous 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 90 ]
communications designed to make guests feel well cared for and to help build 
anticipation for the interview. 
This chapter also includes instructions for how to set up the scheduling soft-
ware and email templates, as well as examples of checklists so you can have a 
top-notch Guest Advocacy System at the ready.
In addition, Stage 2 will guide you through the process of collecting the ini-
tial website groundwork so your team can begin building a site that will serve as 
your podcast’s digital headquarters. 
Lastly, all emails, Question Flows, and other templates are available in their 
native file formats for you to download for free at PredictiveROI.com/Resources/
Stage-2.
Now, let’s move into Stage 2. Figure 9-1 highlights this stage’s production 
process.
The Project Sheet template in Figure 9-2 (see pp. 92–93) is available for your 
free download at PredictiveROI.com/resources/Stage-2. As with documents in 
Stage 1, it, too, is a Google Sheet template so you can copy it into your Google 
Docs account and then share the file with all of the members of your team who 
are involved with the production of your podcast. The Project Sheet is designed 
to help you and your team keep all of the tasks within Stage 2 moving along effi-
ciently. There are many moving parts in Stage 2 so the Project Sheet is a valuable 
asset for keeping the process organized. 
You and your team will likely need one to two weeks to complete Stage 2. 

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 91 ]
FIGURE 9-1

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 92 ]
STAGE 2
Company Name–Name of Podcast
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
 
Recipe 1: Initial Documents
 
Email
Prepare first draft of Question Flow
 
Email
Write guest confirmation email
 
Email
Write guest reminder email
 
Email
Create “Sound Brilliant” Guide
 
Email
Create your legal disclosure 
 
Email
Decide ScheduleOnce fields needed for guest 
registration
 
 
Recipe 2: ScheduleOnce Setup
 
Meeting
Gmail account associated with calendar is connected
 
Meeting
Build custom form fields based on selections in  
Recipe 1
 
Meeting
Put guest confirmation email from Recipe 1 into place
 
Meeting 
Put guest reminder emails from Recipe 1 into place
 
Meeting
Add legal disclosure from Recipe 1 to end of confir-
mation emails
 
Meeting
Select and install headshot photo of host
 
Meeting
Decide SMS package to purchase. This is for text 
alerts to you and/or your guests.
 
Meeting
Reminder texts built
 
Meeting
Attach final version of Question Flow and Sound 
Brilliant Guide to confirmation emails 
 
Meeting
Send registration link to host
 
Meeting
Decide who on the team is in charge of the host’s 
calendar
 
Meeting
Select interview availability: time slots made available 
for interviewing guests
 
FIGURE 9-2

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 93 ]
STAGE 2
Company Name–Name of Podcast
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
 
Recipe 3: Website Groundwork
 
Meeting
Need to determine URL for website
 
Meeting
Hosting company selected
 
Meeting
Name of hosting company
 
Meeting
  Username
 
Meeting
  Password
 
Meeting
Domain name purchased
 
Meeting
   Name of domain company
 
Meeting
   Username
 
Meeting
   Password
 
Meeting
Who will do maintenance?
 
Recipe 1: Initial Documents
This is where you will create the majority of assets necessary to complete Stage 2. 
For example, you and your team will create your Question Flow for guests as 
well as a series of confirmation emails and a sound guide; you’ll also make some 
decisions regarding a third-party scheduling software that will enable you to 
automate much of your Guest Advocacy System. 
In my opinion, a top-notch Guest Advocacy System includes an online 
scheduling system, calendar integration, and the creation of interview reminders 
and equipment recommendations for guests. It not only provides your guests 
with what they need in order to be great on your show, but also provides you as 
the host with the critical information you need in order to facilitate an excellent 
interview.
All of the sample emails in this chapter are available as templates that you 
can download for free at PredictiveROI.com/resources/Stage-2.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 94 ]
Let’s begin with your Question Flow, which is your list of questions in the 
order you plan to ask them during your interviews with guests. This is not a 
random set of discussion points or poorly crafted, amateur questions that are 
interesting only on the surface. You need to be strategic. Every question matters 
when putting your best foot forward with your guests. 
Your questions must be top shelf so that when prospective guests review 
them as they consider whether to accept or reject your invitation, they will be 
impressed by your business acumen. Write questions that are not typical and 
organize them into a flow that makes logical sense.
Begin by asking a couple of “break the ice” questions. Then after some rapport 
has been built, you can take the discussion deeper with your third question. Ul-
timately, your questions need to sync up with the topics you want to learn more 
about and the knowledge you want to pass on to your audience. The answers your 
guests provide should help you better understand their businesses so you can eval-
uate if there could be an opportunity between your two companies in the future.
Figure 9-3 and Figure 9-4 are examples of the two Question Flows we use 
at Onward Nation. Figure 9-3 shows the standard set of questions that we have 
used for the majority of our episodes. However, there have been a number of 
guests whom we have invited back to the show for a special encore interview. 
In those instances, we want to ask them a completely different set of questions 
(Figure 9-4). But the encore questions build on the momentum created during 
their first interview. 
I encourage you to follow a similar process. Your guests and your audience 
will appreciate your attention to detail.
Recipe 1 continues with the creation of several confirmation emails each of 
your Dream 50 prospects will receive once they complete the registration process to 
appear as a guest on your show. We recommend using ScheduleOnce as your sched-
uling software and as your primary distribution point for the confirmation emails. 
We selected ScheduleOnce for the system because of its ease of integration 
with Gmail, Google Calendar, and Infusionsoft (our preferred CRM). We have 
found ScheduleOnce to be easy to work with, offer great support, and straight-
forward to install and set up.

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 95 ]
FIGURE 9-3

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 96 ]
FIGURE 9-4

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 97 ]
You and your team should also take the opportunity to integrate Schedule- 
Once with a Gmail and Google account for the host so that when interviews are 
booked, they are dynamically added to the host’s calendar.
We interact with each of our Onward Nation guests as many as ten times 
before and immediately following the interview:
 
Touch 1: personalized guest invitation from me including interview 
Question Flow sample attached. I will provide you with a template 
of the invitation in one of the upcoming stages.
 
Touch 2: booking confirmation email sent via ScheduleOnce with 
interview questions attached for a second time. The guest received 
the questions the first time via my initial invitation (see Figure 9-5).
FIGURE 9-5
Title of email should be: Booking Confirmation V1.
Everything in brackets and bolded is a variable that needs to be changed 
manually by you or your team.
Font sizes for paragraph text is size 12.
Everything in brackets not bolded is a system dynamic field.
Delete interviewer headshot space from email template.
The guest headshot is an attachment type field in the form build.
Subject: Your interview time with [Name of interviewer or podcast] is set!
Your interview booking is confirmed.
Dear [Customer name],
Your interview booking is confirmed. Please see below for more information. 
DOUBLE CHECK TO MAKE SURE YOUR CALENDAR’S TIME ZONE IS 
ACCURATE.
Here is the [list of questions] I will be asking you. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 98 ]
In addition, [here is a guide] to make sure we make the most out of our time 
and make sure you sound great!
Booking details:
Time:
[Starting date and time in customer’s time zone]
Calendar event:
If the event is not already in your calendar, you may add it from here: 
[Calendar images and links]
Your information:
Your name: [customer name]
Your company: [customer company]
Your mobile phone number: [customer phone]
 
Touch 3: booking confirmation email sent to guests along with inter-
view questions and “Sound Brilliant” recommendations. Please note: 
We attach the questions on multiple occasions because when we did 
it only twice early on some guests commented that they didn’t re-
ceive the questions. However, once we moved to three distributions 
we have not received another complaint (see Figure 9-6).
FIGURE 9-6
Your booking is confirmed
Dear Stephen Woessner,
Your booking is confirmed. Please see below for more information. DOUBLE- 
CHECK TO MAKE SURE YOUR CALENDAR’S TIME ZONE IS 
ACCURATE.
Here is the list of questions I will be asking you. 

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 99 ]
In addition, here is a great document detailing how to make your interview 
sound amazing!
Booking details
Time:
Thu, Jan 7, 2016, 01:00pm–02:00pm
United States; Central time (GMT-6)
Cancel/Reschedule
Calendar event
If the event is not already in your calendar, you may add it from here: 
Your information
Your name:
Stephen Woessner
Company:
Predictive ROI
Your mobile phone:
+1 (608) 498-5165
Please note: By participating in the Business Rescue Roadmap interview, you 
agree to allow Stacy Tuschl, LLC to record, distribute, and disseminate the 
podcast in any manner. You also agree to allow Stacy Tuschl, LLC to retain 
rights to the produced media for potential future use in speeches, books, and 
in all other public distribution.	
Add to 
Outlook Calendar 
Add to 
Google Calendar 
Add to 
Calendar
Add to  
other Calendars 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 100 ]
 
Touch 4: twenty-four-hour reminder email sent via Infusionsoft  
(or whatever email distribution/CRM system you decide to use). 
We integrated ScheduleOnce with our Infusionsoft account, 
which pulls all of our guest information into our CRM system  
so we can easily send future follow-ups and promotional cam-
paigns to our guests—and only our guests (see Figure 9-7). Please 
note: ScheduleOnce integrates with several other platforms. 
Infusionsoft is not a prerequisite to being successful in using 
ScheduleOnce.
FIGURE 9-7
Title of email(s) should be: Customer Notification One Week V1, Customer 
Notification One Day. V1, Customer Notification One Hour V1.
Everything in brackets and bolded is a variable that needs to be changed 
manually.
Font sizes for paragraph text is size 12.
Everything in brackets not bolded is a system dynamic field.
Delete interviewer headshot from email template.
The guest headshot is an attachment type field in the form build.
Subject: Your interview with [Name of interviewer or podcast] starts at 
[Time and date]
Your interview is starting at [Time and date]
Dear [Customer name],
Your interview is starting in just [x number of days or hours] at [Starting 
date and time in customer’s time zone]. It is going to be AWESOME! Please 
see below for more information. Any questions you have, feel free to reach out 
to [interviewer email].
In case you need a reminder of the questions, you can go here. 

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 101 ]
Also, if you didn’t have a chance to look before, here is a guide to help make 
sure your interview goes smoothly and sounds great. 
Booking details:
[Starting date and time in customer’s time zone]
Calendar event:
If the event is not already in your calendar, you may add it from here: [Calendar 
images and links]
Your information:
Your name: [customer name]
Company: [customer company]
Your mobile phone: [customer mobile phone]
Please note: By participating in the [Podcast Name] interview, you agree to 
allow [Legal name of entity] to record, distribute, and disseminate the podcast 
in any manner. You also agree to allow [Legal name of entity] to retain rights 
to the produced media for potential future use in speeches, books, and in all 
other public distribution.
 
Touch 5: forty-eight-hour reminder text. Guests have told us they 
value the interview reminders we send via text in addition to the 
email reminders. We have had only one guest miss an interview due 
to forgetting.
 
Touch 6: twenty-four-hour reminder text.
 
Touch 7: sixty-minute reminder text.
 
Touch 8: Send a “Thank You” email immediately following the interview.
 
Touch 9: Send a “Preview Links” twenty-four hours before the 
guest’s interview airs.
 
Touch 10: Send a “You’re Live on [Insert Your Show Name]!” the 
morning a guest’s show airs along with the link on your website 
where they can find their show.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 102 ]
We developed the following “Sound Brilliant” Guide as a way to help 
guests get prepared for the interview from a technical perspective. You will 
want your guests to sound as crystal clear as possible. The quality of their audio 
affects your listeners’ willingness to continue listening to your episode. If your 
guest has a bad headset, no headset, noise in the background, or any of the 
myriad of other noisy distractions that can occur, your listeners will move on 
to another podcast. 
Sound Brilliant!
T
hanks again for agreeing to be a guest on my podcast, [insert name of 
your podcast here]. I want you to sound as brilliant as I know you are. 
Part of that’s on me as your interviewer. But part of it is as simple as having 
the right equipment to record the conversation.
I want you and your brand to be represented in the best possible light, so 
please read through the list below and make any of the suggested adjust-
ments you are able to make prior to our conversation. Following these sug-
gestions will enable us to make the most of our time.
The Environment
NOTE! If it is a bad audio recording we can do only so much in post- 
production editing! Remember, garbage in, garbage out. So please make 
sure you review this so my team and I can make you sound great. 
Turn off all nonessential programs on your computer to enable our recording 
to happen with less potential for technical glitches or unplanned pings or 
chimes.
Find a quiet place for our conversation.
Make sure all potential noisemakers are turned off or taken care of ahead of 
time (phones, email, kids, pets, etc.).

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 103 ]
While we’re doing our interview, please don’t bump the table, scoot things 
around your desk, click pens, or anything else that might make noise. It’s 
amazing what the mic can pick up. 
Have a glass of water nearby during our chat . . . you may need it.
The Equipment
The microphone and speakers that are built in on your computer won’t 
provide the sound quality we need. They’ll mess with your volume/tone, and 
we’ll get feedback. So please don’t use them. 
Even a microphone that is built in to your earbuds is better than your com-
puter microphone.
I’m not suggesting that you need to buy a microphone or headset. But if you 
do a fair amount of these kinds of interviews, you may want to consider it. If 
not, ask around. You probably know someone who owns this sort of equip-
ment and would lend it to you.
Make sure your computer speakers are turned completely down and you’ve 
set your computer’s preferences to know that you’re going to hear sound 
through headphones or earbuds instead. This will help us avoid feedback and 
electronic echo in the recording. 
I know it’s the twenty-first century, but if you can, please use a wired com-
puter connection (not wireless) if at all possible.
Thanks again for agreeing to chat with me. I can’t wait to connect my audi-
ence to you and your smarts. I promise I will do my best to make you sound 
brilliant!
[Your Name]
[Your Company]
[Youremail@youremail.com]

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 104 ]
Each of the emails you send via your Guest Advocacy System should include 
a legal disclaimer. You want to ensure that you have clearly stated, multiple times, 
that you are free to use and distribute the content from the recorded episodes.
Recipe 2: ScheduleOnce Account Setup
It is time to complete your ScheduleOnce account setup so you can pull in the 
content you created as part of Recipe 1. The outcome of these simple steps will 
be a confirmation email. 
As a host, I find it helpful to have all of a guest’s contact information at my 
fingertips (see Figure 9-8). On multiple occasions, due to a simple mix-up, I 
have attempted to connect with our guest via Skype and the person didn’t pick 
up. But the guest did answer a cell phone. You can’t be nimble on your feet like 
that if you don’t have the mobile numbers handy. In addition, if you don’t have 
guests’ mobile numbers, you won’t be able to use ScheduleOnce to send SMS 
text reminders of your interview. 
FIGURE 9-8
Your Dream 50 prospects should go through a formal registration process to 
get “booked” for an appearance as a guest on your show.
Below is a list of fields we typically ask guests to complete. These fields are 
guidelines. Please feel free to modify them based on the data points you 
would like to collect from each of your Dream 50 prospects.
We recommend that you do keep the fields marked as **Mandatory**. These 
fields will be helpful to you during the interview and to your team as they pro-
duce the Show Notes for each episode.
•  Your name **Mandatory**
•  Your email **Mandatory**
•  Your mobile phone **Mandatory**
•  Your title
•  Your company

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 105 ]
•  Your website URL
•  Your Twitter handle (This helps us promote your episode to our social media 
community) 
•  Your Skype handle (This helps us connect on Skype for the interview) 
**Mandatory**
•  Your public/business/personal Facebook page link (This lets us add a link 
to your Facebook page when we promote your episode on Facebook for 
increased downloads)
•  Your mailing address
•  Would you like something promoted in the Show Notes (e.g., product 
launch, book release, upcoming speech, etc.)? **Mandatory**
•  Your bio/story (This is used for the website and during the podcast intro) 
**Mandatory**
•  Your headshot (This is for the website) **Mandatory**
Providing your Dream 50 list with a properly organized and structured 
reservation system also creates an excellent first impression with the business 
leaders who also represent your prospective clients. If your Guest Advocacy 
System is top notch, you will leave an excellent impression. If it’s lackluster, 
what does that tell your Dream 50 about what it may be like to work with you 
and your team?
Finishing your ScheduleOnce setup requires you to select which fields are 
mandatory during the registration process. Figure 9-9 illustrates how we have our 
Onward Nation account configured as well as how we configure the Schedule- 
Once accounts for the majority of our clients. Following the same process will 
save you some valuable setup time. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 106 ]
FIGURE 9-9
Below are the final details for completing the setup for your ScheduleOnce 
account. 
In addition, here is a rundown of what you will be doing at this step in the 
recipe: 
1. You or your team will be setting up a piece of software called Schedule- 
Once. If you already have this software, you can use your existing 
account.
2. What is the email you want your team to have people reach out to if 
they have questions during or after the registration?
3. What is one other email address (aside from what you listed 
above) that you would like alerted if someone registers, cancels, or 
reschedules? 
4. What is the phone number you want registrants to be able to reach 
you at?
5. Your team will need a headshot of you to use in the scheduling soft-
ware and on the website.
Your headshot will be used in several places:
#1: Within your scheduling software
#2: On your “About” page on the website
#3: If you do any solocasts (episodes without a guest)
Your headshot should be current and something you are comfortable with. It 
can show your personality as well! 
The size just has to be smaller than 3MB. 
The picture can be either square or portrait but not landscape. 
6. Who on your team is going to be involved in your scheduling software 
and managing your calendar? 

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 107 ]
Recipe 2 is also where you need to decide if you will use the SMS text option 
available in ScheduleOnce to send the reminders outlined earlier in Touch 5, 6, 
and 7 of Recipe 1. In addition, you will need to complete and pull in final ver-
sions of your Question Flow and Sound Brilliant Guide and link them to your 
guest confirmation emails. 
The final ingredient for finishing your ScheduleOnce setup is managing your 
availability to conduct interviews. You will include your general registration link 
to your interview calendar (managed via ScheduleOnce) within your invitation 
to your prospective guests. They will click on the link and attempt to find a day/
time on your interview schedule that is convenient for them. But you will want 
to preset your inventory so you specify how many interviews you are open to re-
cording each week—and on what days and during which time slots. For example, 
some of our clients open up four to five interview slots on the first Tuesday of the 
month, record all four interviews on that one day, and then they are done with 
recording for the entire month. For Onward Nation, I record interviews only on 
Tuesdays, and because we air a daily show, there are times where I may have eight 
interviews scheduled on a Tuesday. But in one day, I have recorded nearly two 
weeks of airing inventory.
Managing your availability within ScheduleOnce is easy. But to ensure that 
the scheduling, rescheduling, canceling, etc., process is as efficient as possible, 
you and your team need to integrate ScheduleOnce with your Google calendar 
so that reservations are automatically added and removed from your calendar by 
guests without any intervention on your part, assuming you have managed your 
inventory properly.
You can manage your availability within ScheduleOnce using the following 
steps:
1.  Log into your ScheduleOnce account.
2.  Once logged in, click on the “Configuration” link in the upper left 
navigation menu.
3.  You will then be presented with a long vertical list of options in the 
center of your screen. Click on the option entitled “Availability.”

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 108 ]
4.  This will take you to the week-by-week calendar. When you drag 
your mouse over a time slot, ScheduleOnce will highlight the time 
slot in green. You can highlight time slots in thirty-minute incre-
ments. You can highlight as many time slots as you like. And then in 
the lower left of the calendar screen you will see a forward and back-
ward arrow. You can move one week forward or one week backward 
by clicking the respective arrows.
5.  Be sure to click the orange “Save” button before leaving Schedule- 
Once, otherwise all of the inventory changes you made will be lost. 
Now that you’re finished with your inventory availability, when prospective 
guests visit your scheduling link, they will see a screen similar to what is shown 
in Figure 9-10.
FIGURE 9-10

STAGE 2: GUEST EXPERIENCE AND WEBSITE GROUNDWORK  
[ 109 ]
Recipe 3: Website Groundwork
Stage 2 concludes with you and your team thinking through several groundwork 
discussion points regarding what will eventually become the website for your 
podcast. Your podcast website will essentially be the digital headquarters for your 
show. It will house all of your episodes, any content marketing assets leveraged 
from your audio (Chapter 4), and your contact information. 
You and your team should consider creating your podcast website using 
WordPress because of the podcast-friendly plug-ins you will be able to access. 
For example, the Smart Podcast Player is the leading player in the industry,  
user-friendly, and professional. At present, the player works only in WordPress.
✓ 
WEBSITE GROUNDWORK CHECKLIST 
✓
As you complete your groundwork, I recommend that you take some time 
to consider the following:
❑
❑
Decide on a website URL (you may have already completed this 
during Stage 1).
❑
❑
Decide who you will use as a hosting company—it could be your ex-
isting hosting company
❑
❑
Purchase the domain name.
❑
❑
Decide who on your team will serve as the point person for mainte-
nance regarding the website and the hosting account, that is, Word-
Press updates, security, plug-in updates, etc.
Time to move onward to Stage 3!

[ 111 ]
CHAPTER 10
STAGE 3:  
AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS,  
AND DESIGN
W
elcome to Stage 3 of production for your profitable podcast. Your overar-
ching goal for completing this stage is to make sure you are prepared to 
conduct great interviews and capture listeners with a polished podcast feel. 
Stage 3 is where the auditory and visual elements of your podcast will come 
to life. You and your team will be able to follow our recipes for how to write 
your intro and outro scripts along with completing the final prep work so you 
are ready to begin recording interviews with your guests. We have included our 
Interview Prep Guide to share insights and processes we have collected after 
having conducted, or produced, nearly 1,000 episodes across the Onward Nation 
Network over the past twenty-four months.
We also included our design guidelines and specifications you will need to 
create the visual representation for your podcast on your website and in iTunes, 
social media, or any other public touch point.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 112 ]
Lastly, this chapter also includes a framework for helping you select your 
podcast’s format while giving you several things to consider as you think about 
which iTunes categories will be the most relevant for your show.
As in the previous chapters, I encourage you to visit PredictiveROI.com/
resources/Stage-3 for a variety of downloadable resources, guides, and templates.
Figure 10-1 illustrates the highlights of the production process in this stage.
FIGURE 10-1

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 113 ]
The Stage 3 Project Sheet (Figure 10-2) template is available for your free 
download at PredictiveROI.com/resources/Stage-3. As with the Stages 1 and 2 
Project Sheets, it’s a Google Sheet template so you can copy it into your Google 
Docs account and then share the file with all of the members of your team who 
are involved in the production of your podcast. 
FIGURE 10-2
STAGE 3
Company Name–Name of Podcast
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
 
Recipe 1: Design
 
Meeting
Designate a designer/contact person as the go-to 
person for image assets, logos, headshots, etc.
 
Meeting
Do you have anything special about your logo or 
name? Fonts, images, etc.? 
 
Meeting
Any color schemes, style guides, slogans, or 
other items that would be helpful when creating 
the website and logos? 
 
Meeting
What is the font style you want if you have a pref-
erence? Example: the same font as your current 
website, etc. 
 
Meeting
What are the color codes you have on your web-
site and/or want to reuse? 
 
 
Recipe 2: Assets to Create/Review
 
Meeting
Create intro/outro scripts
 
Meeting
Review intro/outro questions
 
Meeting
Review and select episode structure
 
Meeting
Review Interview Prep Guide
 
Meeting
Review and select iTunes categories
 
You and your team will likely need a week or two to complete Stage 3. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 114 ]
Recipe 1: Show Artwork and Digital Design Assets
You will need to create several digital assets that play various roles in the distri-
bution of your show. The Digital Design Asset Guide in this chapter (Figures 
10-3 and 10-4) includes all of the design specifications you and your team will 
need to consider when designing each asset.
FIGURE 10-3

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 115 ]
FIGURE 10-4
First, you’ll need to design a logo for your podcast. The logo will be used on 
your website as well as on any other collateral materials you decide to produce to 
promote your show.
Second, create your show artwork. This will be your podcast’s logo in iTunes, 
on your podcast player, and on your listeners’ devices. Three key elements of your 
show artwork are your show name, tagline, and host name. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 116 ]
Third, depending on your podcast’s website design, you will likely need to 
create some sort of banner that contains your show’s tagline. Also consider in-
cluding the iTunes and Stitcher logos as visual credibility indicators within the 
banner.
Fourth, consider creating a series of website sidebar graphics to promote 
your archives, special downloads to build your email list, rate and review requests, 
etc. Again, OnwardNation.com will provide you with visual examples to follow. 
You and your team will be ready to move on to producing your podcast’s 
website once you have all of the visual assets complete.
Recipe 2: Audio Assets to Create and Review
I recommend that you have a professional intro and outro produced for your 
podcast if you want your show to be a legitimate source of leads and revenue 
for your business. Value and brevity are the keys to creating a quality intro and 
outro. Your audience may feel as they were thrown into the episode if your intro 
is too short. Or, they may begin to get impatient if your intro runs for sixty sec-
onds without providing any substance. It has been our experience that intros and 
outros of twenty to thirty seconds tend to be ideal.
The following questions will help you think through the basics—and a few 
specifics—for your intro and outro scripts. 
The Basics
1.  What is the name of your show?
2.  What is the format of your show (e.g., interview vs. solo or 
co-hosted)?
3.  What is the general category of your show (e.g., business, comedy, 
news, religion)?
4.  Who is your target audience (e.g., your listener “avatar”)? 
5.  What is the tone and vibe of your show (e.g., educational and re-
served vs. rockin’ and irreverent)?

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 117 ]
6.  How long have you been in this field? What is your background in 
this subject area?
7.  What made you decide to go down the path of education/
podcasting? 
About Your Introduction
1.  Do you have examples of other podcast introductions that you like? 
Dislike?
2.  Do you have any specific taglines or dialogue you want to use in 
your intro (e.g., “join the tribe”)?
3.  How do you want to be introduced as the host (e.g., “The Deco-
rating Diva” or “Today’s High-Tech Handyman,” etc.)?
About Your Outro
1.  Do you have examples of other podcast outros you like or dislike?
2.  Do you have a specific call-to-action you want to include (e.g., sub-
scribe on iTunes, sign up for our email list, Twitter/Facebook, etc.)?
About Your Music
1.  Can you find some examples of music you like in an intro or outro? 
2.  Can you give a feel for the type of music you would like to have 
(rock, classical, etc.)?
Sometimes having a tangible, visual example can be the best way for a recipe 
to be the most useful. Two intros and outros from different podcasts targeting 
completely different avatars are presented to give you a balance of perspectives 
to consider.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 118 ]
Intro and Outro Script Examples
Onward Nation
Intro: Get ready to find your recipe for success from America’s top business owners here 
at Onward Nation, with your host, Stephen Woessner.
Outro: This episode is complete, so head over to OnwardNation.com for Show Notes 
and more food to fuel your ambition. Continue to find your recipe for success here at 
Onward Nation.
Build a Better Agency
Intro: If you’re going to take the risk of running an agency, shouldn’t you get the ben-
efits, too? Welcome to Build a Better Agency, where we show you how to build an 
agency that can scale and grow with better clients, invested employees, and, best of all, 
more money to the bottom line. Bringing his twenty-five+ years of expertise as both an 
agency owner and agency consultant to you, please welcome your host, Drew McLellan.
Outro: That’s all for this episode of Build a Better Agency. Be sure to visit  
AgencyManagementInstitute.com to learn more about our workshops and other ways 
we serve small to midsized agencies. While you’re there, sign up for our e-newsletter, 
grab our free e-book, and check out the blog. Growing a bigger, better agency that makes 
more money, attracts bigger clients, and doesn’t consume your life is possible, here on 
Build a Better Agency.
Episode Flow
Now that you have your intro and outro completed, you’re ready to move on to 
making decisions regarding the overall structure and flow of your episodes. For 
example, will you want to include a midroll? Will you want to announce your 
episode number to signify the beginning of each episode? Will you be recording 
solocasts or always episodes where you are interviewing a guest?

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 119 ]
There are no right or wrong answers to those questions. Simply considering 
them will allow you to create the right experience for your listeners.
Caution: I strongly recommend that your initial ten episodes do not include 
any of the bells and whistles we are about to cover. For your initial ten, concen-
trate on the intro, editing and producing a high-quality interview and inserting 
it after the intro, and then inserting your outro at the close of the interview. 
This will help keep the editing as straightforward as possible while you learn 
the system. The simplicity will also help you focus on the episode flow. Then, 
after doing several recordings, you can decide what you want to add. Experiment 
with extra elements after Episode 10. Building a profitable podcast is a complex 
project. The initial simplicity will help you launch quickly and smoothly.
Here are some possible segments to consider. Think of these as little audio 
modules. Each module should have an audio pause before and after it begins for 
editing. For example, the host announces the episode number. Then pauses. Then 
introduces the guest. Then pauses. Then records the first half of the show. Then 
pauses. Then records the second half of the show. Then pauses.
Pausing is critical through the recording of an interview. You can always edit 
out a pause. However, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to add a pause 
into the middle of a conversation without it sounding awkward. 
Definitions
Episode number: This is not a requirement. Announce the episode number 
as part of the recording only if you know the number and it has been 
added to your airing schedule. 
Intro: This is prerecorded and edited. All you need to do is give a pause in 
the audio so you or your team can later edit it into your episodes. 
Sound effect: With an audio pause in the right place, you can opt to edit 
in a sound effect. While this isn’t common, it’s certainly possible.
Sub-Intro: This is recorded in your own voice. While the intro will stay 
the same for a long time, the sub-intro is something that could be 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 120 ]
changed every ten episodes, especially if you are promoting a webinar or 
free download. A good sub-intro would be something like “Remember! 
If you go to [my podcast’s website] before July 31st, you can download 
a free guide that will help you to X-Y-Z!” This is a limited-time call-to-
action (CTA). This CTA can be for something you want to offer to grow 
your list, or a CTA for a sponsor. You decide. Again, this is optional. 
First half of show: This is where you dive into your episode and then 
choose a place about halfway through to add a pause. You can introduce 
this pause. (“And now a word from our sponsors! *Pause*” for example.) 
Or, simply add a silent pause. Remember, you can always remove dead 
air, but you can’t add it to conversation without it sounding awkward. 
Midroll: This is traditionally where you insert a commercial from a 
sponsor. But you don’t have to. You could exclude a midroll, or you could 
promote something of your own in this position. The midroll is similar to 
the sub-intro—a place to put a semi-temporary CTA and then replace it 
with another prerecorded audio when you want to change up your offer.
Second half of show: This is just like the first half except when you end 
the second half, you will need to pause to give some dead air space so 
the pre-outro and/or the outro can be added. Then you can start chatting 
with your guest again with no issues or just end the call. You decide what 
you think provides your listeners with the right experience. 
Pre-Outro: The pre-outro is essentially the same as the sub-intro or the 
midroll. It is a third spot to be able to place a CTA. You can think about 
a CTA that is not going to always be in place and put it here. This could 
be a monthly offering, a class that is starting, or perhaps a webinar you 
will be launching.
Solocast: As I mentioned earlier, a solocast is simply an episode you 
record without a guest. You can record on your own schedule, and the 
show can be about a topic of your choice. This is a chance for you to shine 
and share your thought leadership. Simply pick a topic you want to cover 

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 121 ]
and go for it. Keep in mind: A solocast doesn’t need to be just you. If you 
have a business partner and you want to record things together like Car 
Talk’s Click and Clack, then go for it.
Example #1: Solocast Flow
 
Podcaster talks, does own intro, no music
 
Insert sound effect
 
Intro (prerecorded and edited)
 
The whole podcast
 
Podcaster talks, does own outro, CTA, no music
 
Outro (prerecorded and edited)
Example #2: Guest Interview Flow
 
Podcaster announces episode number (optional) 
 
Intro (prerecorded and edited)
 
Sub-intro (introduce guest; recorded by podcaster) (CTA prere-
corded) (optional)
 
First half of show
 
Midroll (CTA recorded by podcaster; recommended to treat a 
product or your company as a sponsor) (optional) (prerecorded)
 
Second half of show
 
Pre-outro (CTA recorded by podcaster) (prerecorded) (optional)
 
Outro (prerecorded and edited)
CTA examples: subscribe, email me, call me, download X, rate and review, 
purchase product, or purchase book.
This is how example #2 would work:
 
Episode number . . . pause.
 
Guest introduction . . . pause.
 
Then start in with episode. Do first half.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 122 ]
 
Pause and introduce midroll.
 
Pause and continue interview.
 
End the interview with some dead air so the pre-outro and outro 
can be added later. 
 
Then continue chatting with your guest about anything that will not 
be part of the episode anymore.
How to Prepare for an Interview
Below are some brief recommendations for how to prepare for and conduct a 
professional interview with your guests. This should be modified based on the 
episode flow you select from the recipes in the preceding section.
1.  Write down or print out a small script to use for introducing your guest. 
2.  Make sure you and the guest have added each other as Skype contacts. 
3.  Break down the guest’s name phonetically and spell it out in your script in 
a way you can easily pronounce so you don’t make a mistake during your 
introduction. Here’s a tip: Go to YouTube to hear someone else introduce 
your guest! For instance: “Stephen Woessner” is pronounced “Stee-ven 
Wess-ner.” Otherwise, you might accidentally say “Steff-en Whoaz-ner.”
4.  Prepare your show script/interview questions/interview flow, that is, the guide 
you will use to walk your way through the interview. I recommend storing this 
in Google Drive or some other location where you can easily access the file. 
5.  Customize the Show Notes for the guest you will be interviewing with 
the following:
EE Your introduction for your guests. This should be the bio they 
provided while booking the interview. Also add in any products or 
services they want pitched, which, again, they will have provided 
when they registered.

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 123 ]
EE The date the episode will be airing. Everyone wants to know. This 
should be in your Airing Schedule document. You don’t need to 
have this in your recording, but your guests will likely ask at the 
beginning of the interview.
EE The episode number. Here is a chance to make guests feel special 
as new guests (or impressed by your experience, depending on how 
many episodes you have produced).
EE A request to promote the podcast. Let your guests know you 
would be grateful if they shared the episode when it airs. Most are 
delighted to promote their episode as a great way to share their 
wisdom with their nations of fans, who then become your concen-
tric circles of lesser fans. Awesome, right?
6.  Use this as an opportunity to talk to your guest about business! Re-
member, these are your Dream 50 prospects. The interview is your “all 
access pass,” so make the most of it! 
7.  Open your Airing Schedule and keep it open throughout the interview. 
As you conduct the interview, you can then say things like: “Oh! That 
is so insightful! That reminds me of some advice [name of past guest] 
gave back in Episode [number of episode]! So when have you used this 
method in a powerful way?” You will sound like you have all the infor-
mation of all your guests memorized. You, too, can sound like an infor-
mation wizard with that simple trick. Bam!
8.  Split your screen so your browser (housing your script and Airing 
Schedule documents in different tabs) is on one side of your computer 
screen and the Skype box on the other side of the screen. Keep your 
Skype window open enough to see your guest’s first name. I know this 
may seem odd, but there will be times when you will have a brain freeze 
and cannot remember the name of the guest you are speaking with. So 
have it in your show script and in the Skype window. That way you never 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 124 ]
end up like the rock singer who says: “Hey, Detroit! So happy to be here!” 
when the band’s actually playing a gig in St. Louis. Ouch!
9.  Have your recording software toolbar visible between the two applica-
tions so you can easily start the recording when you need to. 
10.  Do a test call! Skype lets you check that your mic and headset are working 
properly during a test call. Do this before every interview! If you notice 
a problem, go to Skype’s settings, then to audio & video, and change the 
input and output for your audio to your headset or appropriate devices. 
11.  Dial up your guest on Skype.
12.  Click the “record” button as soon as your guest answers. This prevents 
you from having an engaging pre-interview chat and then rolling into 
the actual interview, and forgetting to turn on the recorder. Not awesome. 
13.  When the interview is finished, be sure to leave some dead air for a few 
seconds before you begin your post-interview chat. The dead space is an 
edit point for your team. 
14.  Continue the conversation. Thank your guest for investing the time. 
This is an opportunity to build rapport and potentially open business 
conversations. 
15.  Fill out your Airing Schedule with the name of the guest, mark that the 
interview is completed, and let your team know where to find the audio 
file so they can edit it. Also, if you have a preference for the episode 
airing date or episode number, put it in the correct row on the document 
so your team remains informed.
iTunes Categories and Subcategories
iTunes represents approximately 60 percent of all podcast downloads. In a later 
chapter we will cover the process for getting your podcast into iTunes. But for 

STAGE 3: AUDIO INTROS, OUTROS, AND DESIGN  
[ 125 ]
now, I simply want you to review the titles of the sixteen main categories and their 
subcategories so you can decide where your podcast best fits. Libsyn permits you 
to select up to three iTunes categories for your show. The categories could be a 
main category like “Business”—or—a subcategory like “Careers.” The subcatego-
ries tend to be a bit less competitive if part of your strategy happens to be scoring 
a high ranking as quickly as possible in your eight weeks of New and Noteworthy 
inclusion. I will cover launch strategy in detail in Chapter 14. 
Arts
1.  Design
2.  Fashion & Beauty
3.  Food
4.  Literature
5.  Performing Arts
6.  Visual Arts
Business
1.  Business News
2.  Careers
3.  Investing
4.  Management & Marketing
5.  Shopping
Comedy
Education
1.  Educational Technology
2.  Higher Education
3.  K–12
4.  Language Courses
5.  Training
Games & Hobbies
1.  Automotive
2.  Aviation
3.  Hobbies
4.  Other Games
5.  Video Games
Government & Organizations
1.  Local
2.  National
3.  Nonprofit
4.  Regional
Health
1.  Alternative Health
2.  Fitness & Nutrition
3.  Self-Help
4.  Sexuality

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 126 ]
Kids & Family
Music
News & Politics
Religion & Spirituality
1.  Buddhism
2.  Christianity
3.  Hinduism
4.  Islam
5.  Judaism
6.  Other
7.  Spirituality
Science & Medicine
1.  Medicine
2.  Natural Sciences
3.  Social Sciences
Society & Culture
1.  History
2.  Personal Journals
3.  Philosophy
4.  Places & Travel
Sports & Recreation
1.  Amateur
2.  College & High School
3.  Outdoor
4.  Professional
5.  TV & Film
Technology
1.  Gadgets
2.  Podcasting
3.  Software How-To
4.  Tech News
Look at you—zooming through the process!
Rock-solid awesome. Onward to Stage 4!

[ 127 ]
CHAPTER 11
STAGE 4:  
SOCIAL MEDIA,  
RECORDING SOFTWARE, AND FIRST  
ROUND OF GUEST INTERVIEWS
T
his chapter covers the remaining system work you should complete before 
you schedule interviews with your first round of guests. For example, this 
is the ideal time to complete the remaining aspects of your social media 
strategy so you can make any necessary adjustments regarding the content you 
need to collect from guests to promote their episodes. Working through the 
process now will help you avoid having to go back to your guests and make a 
request—after you have already recorded the interview.
This chapter also covers the installation and setup of your recording software. 
It’s a simple and efficient process, so you will be ready to begin recording your 
interviews in no time at all.
The largest chunk of this chapter is dedicated to the invitations you send 
to your guests. Your invitation is critical and must accomplish four important 
objectives:

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 128 ]
1.  Introduce the show and pique their interest in being a part of it.
2.  Explain in detail how you will promote their episodes so they get 
some exposure—instead of the guests having to do all of the hard 
work.
3.  Provide social proof either through links, videos, or a list of other 
guests you have interviewed.
4.  Include a link to the podcast’s online scheduling calendar so guests 
can book their interviews as effortlessly as possible. 
We have provided an invitation template and examples so you can modify 
the content to fit your own style. You’ll then have a top-notch invitation at the 
ready that will likely result in an 80 percent acceptance rate by your prospective 
guests. 
Figure 11-1 illustrates the highlights of the production process in Stage 4.
The Stage 4 Project Sheet template (Figure 11-2) is available for your free 
download at PredictiveROI.com/resources/Stage-4. As with the earlier Project 
Sheets, it’s a Google Sheet template so you can copy it into your Google Docs 
account and share it with all of the members of your team. 
Recipe #1: Social Media Setup
I would like to start off by setting some expectations regarding your social media 
activity as it relates to your podcast. The recipe covered in this chapter is intended 
to augment your current social media strategy. This chapter is not intended to 
replace what you are currently doing on social media. Recipe #1 is specifically 
focused on sharing your guests’ wisdom and encouraging your guests to share 
the content with their social media communities, all of which will expand your 
concentric circles of lesser fans.
You and your team will likely need one to two days to complete Stage 4. 

[ 129 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
FIGURE 11-1

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 130 ]
STAGE 4
Company Name—Name of Podcast
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
 
Recipe 1: Social Media Setup
 
Meeting
Social media post style/design approved
 
Meeting
Twitter login confirmed:
 
Meeting
Username
 
Meeting
Password
 
Meeting
Facebook login confirmed:
 
Meeting
Username
 
Meeting
Password
 
Meeting
LinkedIn login confirmed:
 
Meeting
Username
 
Meeting
Password
 
Meeting
Hootsuite login confirmed:
 
Meeting
Username
 
Meeting
Password
 
Meeting
SocialOomph login confirmed:
 
Meeting
Username
 
Meeting
Password
 
 
Recipe 2: Set Up Recording Software
 
Meeting
Skype installed and client can log in
 
Email
Recording software installed and settings configured
 
Meeting
Test the recording software—conduct mock interview
 
Email/ 
video
Review Airing Schedule as destination for audio files
 
FIGURE 11-2

[ 131 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
STAGE 2
Company Name—Name of Podcast
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
 
Recipe 3: Prepare Guest Invite
 
Email
Guest invitation approved
 
Email
Distribute invitation for first round of guests (not your 
Dream 50)
 
SOCIAL MEDIA PROTOCOLS
This is the process we use for Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn. 
We recommend connecting your social media profiles to a Hootsuite ac-
count to simplify the work and save time.
Twitter
We use Twitter in three ways:
 
We post through Hootsuite on the day an episode airs. We recom-
mend adding an image to each of these posts to help them stand out 
in your followers’ feeds. Figure 11-3 is an example of an Air Day tweet.
FIGURE 11-3
FIGURE 11-2  (continued)

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 132 ]
 
We listen to the audio and create one tweet that highlights the 
wisdom a guest shared while answering each question during the 
interview. These tweets (which we then add to our Twitter library 
sheet) contain:
EE Content about the episode 
EE The guest’s Twitter handle 
EE A link to the episode (shortened using “bit.ly”)
 
We compile the Air Day tweet, along with the nine other tweets 
written to support the episode, and load them into SocialOomph as 
a .txt file to reuse and recycle as part of our ongoing content- 
marketing library. We send one randomized tweet from our library 
every forty-two minutes. This strategy has helped us organically 
attract and engage with thousands of new followers. As Figure 11-3 
shows, we include the Twitter handle of our guest, which encourages 
the like, reply, and re-tweet as in Figure 11-4.
FIGURE 11-4
Facebook Posts
 
We take the content from the show title field in the Airing 
Schedule. Then we match it to the Tweet that best represents that 
title. If none match, we create some new content. We remove the 

[ 133 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
Twitter handle. We massage that content to be clear and interesting 
(see Figure 11-5).
FIGURE 11-5
 
We take the image of the guest from ScheduleOnce and create the 
FB post image. 
 
We insert the copy and then the image into Hootsuite. 
 
We change the title of the post to match what is in the Airing 
Schedule.
 
We schedule the posts on Hootsuite.
LinkedIn Posts
 
We reuse the content from the Facebook posts.
 
We post to LinkedIn, scheduling it for the same time as the FB posts.
DISTRIBUTION SCHEDULE
 
Podcast audio goes live at 4 a.m. CST on Libsyn.
 
New Episode Tweets will be posted between 8 and 9 a.m. in your 
time zone.
 
Tweets go out at least once in the morning and once in the evening. 
At Onward Nation, our Tweet library has grown to nearly 3,500 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 134 ]
tweets so we can send a new tweet every forty-two minutes and not 
repeat a tweet for weeks.
 
FB posts go out between 8 and 9 a.m. CST.
 
LinkedIn posts go out between 8 and 9 a.m. CST.
Recipe #2: Set Up Recording Software
You are very close to being ready to invite your first round of guests to schedule 
interviews. Working through the setup of your Skype account and installation of 
your recording software is an efficient process. But please complete this step, test 
it, conduct a mock interview, and then invite your guests to schedule an inter-
view. You don’t want to be installing software and testing Skype on the morning 
of your first interview.
My team and I created several brief tutorial videos that you can find at Pre-
dictiveROI.com/Stage-4 to help this recipe go as smoothly as possible.
This recipe is divided into three ingredients. Ingredient #1 covers what you 
will need to know about Skype as it relates to recording your interviews. You will 
connect with all of your guests via Skype to conduct the interviews.
Ingredient #2 is for you if you are using a Mac. Ingredient #3 is for you if you 
are using a PC. After Ingredient #1, and if you will be recording your interviews 
on a Mac, go to Ingredient #2. Or, go to Ingredient #3 if you will be recording 
your interviews on a PC. 
INGREDIENT #1: SKYPE
You will need to install and learn how to use Skype regardless of whether you’re 
using a Mac or PC.
Installation is easy. Go to https://www.skype.com/en/download-skype/
skype-for-computer/ and be sure to select the version for either Mac or PC. 
During installation, you will need to set up a profile if you do not already 
have one, or create a new one if you want your Skype account for your podcast to 
be different from your personal one. 

[ 135 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
Follow the instructions and keep an eye out for when it tries to make Bing 
your default browser (Skype is owned by Microsoft).
You can find more installation-specific directions from Skype here:
For PC: https://support.skype.com/en/faq/FA11098/how-do-i-download-and- 
install-skype-for-windows-desktop
For Mac:  https://support.skype.com/en/faq/FA12015/getting-started-with-skype- 
for-mac
INGREDIENT #2: MAC
If you plan to record your podcast on a Mac, you’ll be using a piece of software called 
Ecamm Call Recorder For Skype. This is a short section because the installation is 
efficient and the video tutorial we created for you in our Resources section visually 
demonstrates each of the steps if you would like an additional point of reference.
1.  Go here: http://www.ecamm.com/mac/callrecorder/.
2.  Click the “buy” button.
3.  Pay with credit card if possible instead of PayPal.
4.  Follow the instructions Ecamm provides for purchasing, accessing, 
and downloading the software. 
5.  Once you can start Ecamm on your computer, watch this video: https: 
//drive.google.com/open?id=0B552kT0gTG8nY3ZMZEFqRWx4VVE.
6.  If you run into any kind of trouble, let me know!
INGREDIENT #3: PC
If you are using a PC, you’ll need to download and install a different call recorder. 
The software is called Pamela, and you can find it here: https://www.pamela.biz/.
We divided the installation process into three sections and created a tutorial 
video for each. You can find them here: PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Stage-4.
1.  Downloading Pamela
2.  Installing Pamela
3.  Settings for Pamela

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 136 ]
Recipe #3: Prepare Your Guest Invitation
For some business owners, the prospect of sending out invitations to their Dream 
50 list of prospects can feel daunting. Plus, you are using new technology, new 
questions, and a new platform. Rest assured, this recipe will help reduce any 
potential anxiety you may be feeling by giving you a proven framework you can 
copy and begin using right away. These assets, along with confidence, are really 
all you need in order to book great guests on your show. 
So how will you send out the guest invitation email?
1.  Make sure you have your list of prospective interviewees handy.
2.  Select those whom you feel you’ll be comfortable interviewing and 
will provide good content. One or the other isn’t a great choice. For 
instance, you may be very comfortable with your aunt Marge, but 
she probably lacks the subject matter expertise you want to share 
with your audience. Similarly, picking a subject-matter master whom 
you are afraid to interview will lead to an unsuccessful show. 
3.  Modify the email template to include something personal about 
each of the individuals you are emailing and why you think that 
person will do a good job. 
4.  Double-check that all the links within your email template are 
working. 
5.  Click “Send.”
6.  Don’t expect an immediate response. This can be hard at first, but 
you are asking busy people to make time for you. You need to adopt 
the mindset of a salesperson. You are now in a sales process. You 
want these individuals to spend time on your show. Do follow-ups, 
keep asking, and be persistent. 
7.  As your list of aired interviews grows, you will begin receiving 
requests from prospective guests who want to be on your show. 
That is a very good feeling. Be sure to post your archive link some-
place prominently within your invitation as well as on your website. 
Here’s what Onward Nation’s looks like: http://onwardnation.com/
podcast-archives/.

[ 137 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
8.  Figure 11-6 is a screenshot of what your invitation will look like as 
your guest opens it.
FIGURE 11-6
Chris . . . thank you for accepting my invitation to be on Onward Nation . . . 
am looking forward to our time together.
Here are some additional details . . . 
Our interviews are conducted via Skype and are audio-only. 
Attached are the questions I ask each guest—however—I will create a custom 
set of questions for you so we can be finished in twenty minutes.
We will promote your episode via:
1. Episode-specific email campaigns to our Predictive ROI list
2. Distribution across our three Facebook profiles
3. Posts to my LNKD connections
4. Posts to my Twitter followers
5. Targeted ads on Facebook to drive traffic to your “Show Notes” page 
at OnwardNation.com
6. Your “Show Notes” page will include highlights from your interview as 
well as include links to resources, etc., that you suggest/recommend 
during our discussion.
You can learn more about my background from the video interview that Darren 
Hardy and I did at: https://youtu.be/Mg5J_ZGJazY.
You can schedule your interview at: http://www.meetme.so/OnwardNation.
I am thrilled to have you on the show, Chris!
Sincerely Yours,
Stephen Woessner
Host of The Onward Nation Podcast
CEO of Predictive ROI
M: 608-498-5165

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 138 ]
Template: Guest Invitation
The invitation template includes several critical ingredients to help establish cred-
ibility and “social proof” in the hearts and minds of your prospective guests—and 
to assure them that being a guest on your show will expand their own platforms. 
Let’s dive deeper into both.
The first three sentences following “Here are the details to consider” are all 
designed as credibility indicators. Including the number of countries where your 
podcast is listened to (even if the number is 10) let your guest know you are 
building an international reach. My team and I tested this message on Facebook 
when Onward Nation reached 83 countries, and we received some wonderful 
comments. As soon as we reached 100 countries we made it an even bigger deal. 
I now include “200 countries” in all of our invitations.
Include a link to the names of all your past guests and their interviews. Guests 
may recognize some names and may even listen to a few snippets of some of your 
interviews. This is another excellent credibility indicator.
And speaking of credibility indicators, if you have a video of you being inter-
viewed by someone else, the invitation is a perfect place to add it. When I sent out 
my first several invitations for Onward Nation, we had zero international exposure 
and we did not have an archive of interviews with past guests. But what I did have—
and what I included a link to—was a rockin’ awesome video of Darren Hardy 
(who at the time was the publisher of SUCCESS Magazine), interviewing me about 
money-draining mistakes most business owners make. Have you ever been inter-
viewed regarding your areas of expertise? If so, include the link within the invitation. 
The credibility indicators will have done their job if your prospective guest 
reads on. So now I would like to direct your attention to the five bullet points 
toward the middle of the invitation. These are the “platform-building” bullets 
that tell your prospective guests how you will promote their episodes and drive 
more traffic your way. Yes, you want their help in promoting the episode—and 
most of your guests will go out of their way to help you. But being a guest on 
your show will begin to feel like a lot of work on their part if you don’t articulate 
how you will bring an audience to them.

[ 139 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
It has been our experience that the size of the email list behind a show 
provides guests with assurance that the host has some marketing horsepower 
behind him or her. The email list doesn’t need to have 100,000 names. Even 
several thousand highly targeted email subscribers will be impressive to most 
guests. And be sure to revise the number in your invitation upward as your email 
list grows.
The bullet points should also include your plan for social media distribution.
The following template is the core of what we have used at Onward Nation 
to book interviews with hundreds of today’s top business owners. In addition, all 
of our podcasting clients at Predictive ROI are using modified variations of this 
same invitation. It works extremely well.
Please note: Any content bolded in the template should be revised to fit your 
show. 
Subject: [Podcast Name] Invitation
Good Morning [Guest], I hope you are doing well. [I really enjoyed our conver-
sation several years ago—wow—time flies by].
I would be honored, [Guest], if you joined me as my guest on our top-ranked 
daily podcast for business owners called [Podcast Name].
Here are the details to consider . . . 
[Podcast Name] is listened to in [XXX] countries.
You can find our full guest list here: [Link to archive page on your podcast 
website.]
You can learn more about my background from the video interview that 
Darren Hardy (former publisher of SUCCESS Magazine) and I did at: https://
youtube/Mg5J_ZGJazY.
The interviews are conducted via [Connection platform being used (e.g., 
Skype, Zoom, GTM, etc.)] and are audio-only. 
Attached are the questions I ask each guest. [Link to questions list]
Each interview lasts approximately [Time in minutes].

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 140 ]
We will promote your episode via:
•  Episode-specific email campaigns to our [Specific number of people 
on your email list] email list
•  Distribution on our Facebook profile
•  Posts to my LNKD connections
•  Posts to my Twitter followers
•  Targeted ads on Facebook to drive traffic to your “Show Notes” 
page at [Podcast Name]
Your Show Notes page will include highlights from your interview as well 
as include links to resources, etc., that you suggest/recommend during our 
discussion.
If you are interested, you can schedule your interview at: [Link to Schedule- 
Once booking page].
I would be thrilled to have you on the show!
Your thoughts, [Guest First Name]?
Show Them You’re Serious
An excellent confidence-building strategy is to record your initial set of ten in-
terviews, launch your show, and then begin reaching out to invite members of 
your Dream 50 list to join you as a guest on your show. Social proof is critically 
important: Your show being live, receiving reviews in iTunes, social media posts 
being distributed, and your archive of interviews beginning to fill up are all excel-
lent credibility indicators that you are serious about your show. Then, accepting 
your invitation is an easy “yes” for your Dream 50.

[ 141 ]
stage 4: social media, recording software, and first round . . .
✓ 
SOCIAL MEDIA AND RECORDING CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
Identify two to three pieces of social proof you can include within your 
invitation to a prospective guest.
❑
❑
Customize the invitation template provided in this chapter to save you 
some time.
❑
❑
Review the posting/airing schedule for social media and episodes with 
your team to make sure everyone is on the same page.
❑
❑
Set up and test your recording software by conducting a mock inter-
view with a member of your team via Skype.
❑
❑
Record your first round of ten interviews so you have ample inventory 
when you launch your podcast.

[ 143 ]
CHAPTER 12
STAGE 5:  
FINAL WEBSITE CONTENT  
AND SHOW NOTES
T
he pre-launch production of your podcast is quickly coming to an end. Soon 
your vital priorities will switch to romancing your Dream 50, promoting 
your show with excellence and tenacity, and selling! But before we tackle 
new priorities, you need to select a Show Notes template for your podcast web-
site, consider several guest-friendly content pages for your website, and set up 
your Libsyn account along with your distribution linkages into iTunes, Stitcher, 
and Google Play.
We have included easy-to-download templates for the Show Notes, FAQs, 
and About Host content pages at PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Stage-5. 
Figure 12-1 illustrates the highlights of the production process in Stage 5.
Bonus Training: Being an Infusionsoft subscriber is not a requirement for 
creating a successful podcast. However, if you are looking to take your guest 
advocacy system to the highest level of automation, then you will want to visit
PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Stage-5 for our comprehensive (free) tutorial on 
best practices. The tutorials include Infusionsoft campaigns to help ensure that

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 144 ]
FIGURE 12-1

STAGE 5: FINAL WEBSITE CONTENT AND SHOW NOTES  
[ 145 ]
revenue-generating opportunities with your guests are captured. Our online Re-
sources library is continually updated in order to keep pace with the new features 
at Infusionsoft and ScheduleOnce. Our tutorials cover topics such as:
 
How to integrate Infusionsoft with ScheduleOnce
 
How to create guest advocacy campaigns in Infusionsoft
 
How to tag guests in Infusionsoft upon registration
 
How to create and distribute marketing automation campaigns to 
your guests
 
How to build and edit lists
 
How to build and embed Infusionsoft forms into your podcast web-
site forms
 
And much more
The Stage 5 Project Sheet template (Figure 12-2, p.146–147) is available for 
your free download at PredictiveROI.com/resources/Stage-5. As with the earlier 
Project Sheets, it is a Google Sheet template so you can copy it into your Google 
Docs account and share it with all of the members of your team. 
Completing Stage 5 should take you and your team one or two days. 
Recipe #1: Documents for Review
INGREDIENT #1: SHOW NOTES TEMPLATES
You or your team should write a “Show Notes” summary highlighting each ep-
isode’s key lessons or discussion points. Think of your Show Notes as an indi-
vidual blog post created to house each of your episodes on your podcast website. 
A Show Notes page is not a full transcript of the episode; it is just enough infor-
mation to pique the reader’s interest in listening to the full episode. 
We typically produce Show Notes for clients using one of two templates: 
Style A (Bullets) or Style B (Q&A). Using an A/B template will save a lot of 
time. Your clients will be able to listen to the recording, take notes, jump from 
question to question, select a highlight, and then move on to the next section in 
the Show Notes.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 146 ]
 Stage 5
Client Name—Name of Podcast
 
 
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
Example Assets
 Documents For Review—Stage #5
Meeting
What style of Show Notes would 
you like? 
 
 
Meeting
Approve FAQ page
 
 
Meeting
Approve host biography
 
 
Meeting
Approve podcast description
 
 
Meeting
Approve “Request for Review” email
 
 
Loose Ends—Stage #5
Meeting
Need logo for ScheduleOnce page
 
 
Meeting
Is this Gmail being redirected to any 
other email account? 
 
 
Meeting
What is the email it will redirect 
toward?
 
 
Meeting
Redirect complete
 
 
Meeting
List of 60–75 people who will rate 
and review you within first two 
weeks of launch
 
 
Meeting
Dream 50 list completed
 
 
 Do Before Meeting—Stage #5
Internal
Launch email written
 
 
Internal
Launch email approved
 
 
Internal
Write podcast description if needed
 
 
FIGURE 12-2

STAGE 5: FINAL WEBSITE CONTENT AND SHOW NOTES  
[ 147 ]
Productivity Tip: Encourage your team to create hidden placeholder pages in 
the podcast website for each upcoming episode once you decide on the template/ 
style of Show Notes. For example, your team could have twenty fully completed 
episodes “in the can.” They would include audio edited and uploaded to Libsyn 
and scheduled for distribution, Show Notes created for each episode and sched-
uled in WordPress to match up with the Libsyn air dates, and social media posts 
preloaded/scheduled into Hootsuite and SocialOomph. When your team can 
put this predictable and repeatable system into place, it will begin to feel as 
though your podcast were running on autopilot. Working ahead like this helps 
you, as the host and business owner, shift your attention toward developing rela-
tionships with your Dream 50.
Libsyn, iTunes, Stitcher, and HootSuite—Stage #5
 
Job/Task
Status/Questions
Example Assets
Internal 
After 
Meeting
Create Stitcher account
 
 
Internal 
After 
Meeting
Create Libsyn account
 
 
Internal 
After 
Meeting
Create iTunes account
 
 
Internal 
After 
Meeting
Connect iTunes and Stitcher to 
Libsyn
 
 
Internal 
After 
Meeting
Hootsuite connection confirmed
 
 
FIGURE 12-2  (continued)

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 148 ]
Style A Show Notes: Bullets
Episode Title, with Guest’s Full Name
You can find an example here: http://buildabetteragency.com/scott-monty/.
The first paragraph in your Show Notes introduces the guest, regardless of 
Show Notes format. Typically, three to seven sentences long, this is most often 
the bio that the guest provides, either via ScheduleOnce or through email. If this 
episode is a solocast, then we’re talking about your bio. 
What you’ll learn about in this episode:
 
Topic 1
 
Topic 2
 
Topic 3
 
Etc.—through every topic discussed in the episode
Ways to Contact [Guest’s First Name]:
 
Website
 
Email
 
Twitter
 
Etc.—Whatever your guest provides
P
redictive ROI Note: The biggest advantage to Style A is that it is the 
shortest template. It showcases what each episode offers rather than 
giving it away in text. This urges anyone reading your Show Notes page 
to take the next step and listen to the episode. This is our recommended 
format for most podcasts.

STAGE 5: FINAL WEBSITE CONTENT AND SHOW NOTES  
[ 149 ]
Style B Show Notes: Q&A
Episode Title, with Guest’s Full Name
You can find an example here: http://onwardnation.com/jay-baer/.
As with Style A, the first paragraph in your Show Notes introduces the guest 
in a three-to-seven-sentence bio.
Following the first paragraph, this style of Show Notes will feature every 
question from your official question list and the answers your guest provides.
Example:
A question could be: 
Is there a secret, time-saving technique that helps you focus and tackle your 
most vital priorities each day?
We could put that exact question into the Show Notes or abbreviate it as:
Secret time-saving technique
And then the answer would follow. This style would repeat for every question 
in your question list.
Ways to Contact [Guest’s First Name]:
 
Website
 
Email
 
Twitter
 
Etc.—Whatever your guest provides
P
redictive ROI Note: Style B is intended for podcasts that will use the 
same questions week-to-week.
INGREDIENT #2: PODCAST WEBSITE CONTENT PAGE FAQS
You can find an example here: http://focusisyourfriend.com/faq/.
Thank you so much for agreeing to be a guest on [Podcast Name]. I ab-
solutely cannot wait to speak with you. But first, here’s everything you need  

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 150 ]
to know to make sure our conversation can happen without any mishaps— 
technological or otherwise.
[Podcast Name] is focused on [Description of podcast].
Schedule Your Interview
Please click the link below to schedule your interview. I normally record inter-
views at specific times, but I can be flexible if need be. If none of the times on 
the schedule work for you, shoot me an email at [Email Address], and we’ll work 
something out.
[Schedule your interview button] 
What I Need from You
When you schedule your interview through the above link, I’m going to need the 
following information from you:
1.  Name
2.  Email 
3.  Company Name
4.  Role in Company
5.  Website
6.  Twitter Handle (makes sure we connect with the right person/ac-
count via social media) 
7.  Skype Handle (helps you connect on Skype)
8.  Phone Number
9.  Mailing Address (for mailing thank yous, future communications, 
or gifts)
10.  Links to whatever you would like us to promote in your Show 
Notes page
11.  Guest bio (for the website and use as an intro)
12.  Headshot (for website and social media)

STAGE 5: FINAL WEBSITE CONTENT AND SHOW NOTES  
[ 151 ]
The Interview
We will record our interview on Skype, and it’ll take about forty-five to sixty 
minutes of your time, depending on how in-depth we get with our conversation. 
We’ll talk for a few minutes before we start the recording so that we can get to 
know each other a little bit and check the sound. I’ll also answer any questions 
you might have, and I’ll have you pronounce your name for me. After that, we’ll 
begin the recording.
Technical Details
[Podcast Name] is an audio-only podcast, recorded on Skype. If you do not have 
a Skype account, please sign up for a free one by clicking here and downloading 
the software to your computer. My Skype name is [Skype Name], and you’ll 
need to add me to your contact list. I will call you via Skype at the time that we’ve 
scheduled for our interview.
To make sure our interview sounds great, please review my sound guide PDF.
[Sound Guide: Click Here]
You’ll also need to:
 
Sit in a quiet place for the interview (e.g., not a coffee shop).
 
Silence your phone(s).
 
Connect Skype to your headset/microphone.
 
Silence your Skype notifications (here’s how: Windows and Mac 
[include links]).
 
Turn off other on-screen applications that might be running on your 
computer.
 
Use a headset with a built-in microphone or a stand-alone mic with 
earbuds.
Interview Promotion
After our interview, I will promote your podcast episode extensively on social 
media and through my email list. I encourage you to do the same thing. Promo-
tion on your part isn’t a requirement for being a guest, but I highly recommend 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 152 ]
that you bring our interview to your audience’s attention. I’ve created a guide to 
help with that, which you can download here [Download link]. The day before 
your episode airs, you will be sent links for all of your episode information.
Thanks, and I can’t wait to speak with you!
INGREDIENT #3: DESCRIPTION FOR ITUNES
There are two options for how to complete this section on preparing your de-
scription that will be displayed in iTunes (see Figure 12-3). 
FIGURE 12-3
 
Write down, in your own words, what you think is the right de-
scription for the podcast. Explain what you hope to achieve and 
why people should listen. Ultimately, you’ll answer the question for 
readers of, “What’s in it for me?” 
 
Simply record your thoughts and goals for the podcast and what 
people will be getting out of it. Our team will then take that audio 
and pull it apart to write a podcast description for you to review. 

STAGE 5: FINAL WEBSITE CONTENT AND SHOW NOTES  
[ 153 ]
Recipe #2: Libsyn, iTunes, Stitcher, and Google Play Setup
Your final step before recording your interview is to set up your Libsyn account 
so it is ready for you to upload your completed episodes. Hosting more than 
25,000 podcasts, Libsyn has been a leading podcast-hosting company over the 
past ten years. At the time of this writing, we have produced, uploaded, and 
distributed nearly 1,000 episodes through Libsyn and have never had a single 
problem. We’ve never even had to connect with their support department. Their 
platform is that stable! 
You may be asking yourself, “Why do I need a podcast host if I want my 
episodes to be available inside iTunes?” Excellent question. I wondered the same 
thing when we were working through the Onward Nation launch process.
Libsyn is where you will upload, store, or “host” all of your audio files 
(your episodes). When each upload is complete, Libsyn will give you a URL 
for where you can find the episode. For example, you can find my interview 
with Gary Vaynerchuk here in Libsyn: http://traffic.libsyn.com/onwardnation/
Gary_Vaynerchuk_Interview.mp3. Or, you can find the same interview at On-
wardNation.com/Gary-Vaynerchuk. Either way, it’s the same audio file. The only 
difference: OnwardNation.com is pulling the audio file from Libsyn into our 
website to give it a better presentation. But the content is still coming from 
Libsyn. 
Plus, with each episode you upload, Libsyn will automatically update the 
RSS feed for your show. Your podcast will run on an RSS feed similar to a blog. 
When a new episode is available in Libsyn, and the publishing day and time you 
set inside Libsyn has arrived, Libsyn will add your latest episode to your RSS 
feed. Once added, your latest episode will quickly appear in iTunes, Stitcher, and 
Google Play because your RSS feed is a new immediate conduit of content into 
those platforms. 
Setting up your Libsyn account is simple. We created a step-by-step tutorial 
for setting it up: PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Stage-5.
And PredictiveROI.com/Resource/Launch includes tutorials on how to set 
up your iTunes, Stitcher, and Google Play accounts. However, don’t set up those 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 154 ]
accounts until you’re ready to launch. That’s because once you provide iTunes 
with your RSS feed, it’s out of your hands; iTunes will immediately get to work 
in creating your iTunes channel and making your content available in its di-
rectory. That’s why setting up iTunes, Stitcher, and Google Play are part of our 
launch recipe. 
For now, please create your Libsyn account and then move on to Stage 6 to 
master all things audio. 

[ 155 ]
T
his chapter will provide you with specific equipment recommendations so 
you can begin recording the audio for your episodes for less than $300. 
We’re also including our full audio editing recipe so you can follow the 
same process used by our Predictive ROI team. We will cover how to record each 
interview, where to save the recorded files, and how to edit an interview into an 
episode using Adobe Audition. When you finish this chapter, you’ll be ready to 
produce your first episode and upload into iTunes for the whole world to hear!
Equipment Overview
Business owners might actually be surprised to find out that they don’t need 
an expensive studio to create an awesome podcast. It’s also easy to fall into the 
CHAPTER 13
STAGE 6:  
EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE,  
AND EDITING YOUR INTERVIEWS

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 156 ]
mental trap of thinking all the equipment is going to be confusing to hook up 
in a certain way, but I’m going to share a simple list you can just purchase from 
Amazon.
To start off, you will need a computer—it doesn’t matter if it’s a PC or a Mac. 
But I strongly recommend a computer with a lot of memory. 
Invest in an external hard drive to save all your audio, because whether you 
are doing one, three, or five episodes a week, you are going to be using up a lot of 
memory on your computer.
It’s better to get an external hard drive, so you can store all that audio and all 
of your edits on there. 
You will also need editing software. There are several options to consider, 
including: 
 
Adobe Audition
 
GarageBand
 
Audacity
 If you want to use a free version, go with Audacity.
At the time of this writing we have used Adobe Audition—on which the 
editing checklist in this chapter is based—to edit nearly 1,000 episodes. It is 
awesome and a good investment. The monthly cost is approximately $20 through 
Adobe’s Creative Cloud. 
You’ll need to purchase a tool that helps remove the echo in your audio. It is 
called DeVerberate. You can buy it from Acon Digital for about $100. You can 
find it here: https://acondigital.com/products/deverberate/.
Most important, you will need a high-quality microphone. At Onward 
Nation, we use the Audio-Technica 2100, or ATR 2100 for short. You can find 
it on Amazon for around $80. But you definitely need a microphone. Do not try 
to record your episodes using your computer’s built-in mic.

STAGE 6: EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE, AND EDITING YOUR INTERVIEWS  
[ 157 ]
Recording and Editing
Let’s say that I interview a guest on Skype, and because I’m using a Mac, I in-
stalled the Ecamm Call Recorder, which is a onetime $30 expense. It works like a 
plug-in that bolts onto Skype so whenever I open Skype to connect with a guest, 
Ecamm automatically opens and is ready to record. And when my guest and I 
end our Skype session, and I close down Skype, Ecamm captures the audio and 
saves it directly into my Onward Nation Dropbox folder. Then my team can grab 
the audio file and begin the editing process.
Stay organized by getting in the habit of creating folders with your guest 
name as the title of each folder. It’s pretty basic. Just go to your external hard 
drive and create a simple folder you’ll call “Joe Smith.” Then, you’ll take your 
audio file from your interview and put it in Joe Smith’s folder. Then open your 
Adobe Audition, and once that is up, you’ll place the file for your interview into 
your left window where it says “Files.”
Then, simply go up to “Edit” at the top of the window and click “Split into 
Mono Files.” You are going to want to do this, because if you are recording cor-
rectly, you should end up with a “dual track” where you have your voice at the top 
and your guest’s voice at the bottom.
This will be awesome, because then you can go into that file and touch up the 
voices and make sure everything sounds clean. You can go in there and fix the 
audio track. When you do that, just make sure you split it into mono files. Your 
audio files should either say “Joe Smith left” or “Joe Smith right.” It’s going to 
split that up or it’s going to say “one” and “two,” but you’ll be able to tell which 
“one” is your audio and which is your guest’s audio.
Once that is split up, remove anything before your introduction to the ep-
isode. I tend to begin Onward Nation episodes with, “Good Morning, Onward 
Nation, I’m Stephen Woessner.” So that is my team’s audio cue: Delete every-
thing before that marker, such as chitchat with guests.
Also, you should apply your noise reduction. Remove annoying static. That’s 
key to just a nice, clean audio. Here’s how: Go to your “Effects” and then go 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 158 ]
to “Noise Reduction.” Once you are there, select an area right before you start 
speaking in your podcast. Before you speak in your audio track, before you say, 
“Hello. This is my podcast,” you are going to want to take a sample of your audio, 
copy it, and then select your whole audio to get rid of that static.
Once you are done with static, locate the volume tool on your track and 
lower the volume during the silences when your guest isn’t talking. 
Also be sure of your own audio wave as the host. Suppose you hear yourself 
saying, “Aah” or “Mm-hmm”—you may want to edit that out. If you do, just be 
aware: You don’t want to accidentally get rid of the part after the “Mm-hmm” 
where you said, “Yeah. I definitely agree with your answer,” or something else 
that’s relevant.
Once you are done going through the whole track, go to the “Effects” menu. 
Select “VST.” Then right-click your mouse. It’s going to read “VST” a couple of 
times.
That’s where you will find the DeVerberate tool you purchased. Click De-
Verberate to open it. Once you do, you will see a window pop up. There are going 
to be some dials. One setting reads, “Reduce Ambiance” at the top. Just make 
sure that’s your setting. The dials on the bottom left are where you will change 
your echo.
Be a little sensitive in this area. Try not to make yourself sound like you’re in 
a tube. If you are left with a little bit of an echo, don’t freak out. It’s going to be 
better than when you first had the audio.
Next, reapply “Match Loudness,” or if you have an older version of Adobe 
Audition, use “Match Volume.”
Now it’s time to lower your volume down to -16 LUFS. This level is an ideal 
setting for a podcast. It’s the standard. 
Then you apply the same recipe to your guest’s audio.
When listening to your guest’s audio, listen for the part where you know 
they’re saying, “Thank you for having me on the show,” which represents the start 
of the interview. Delete everything before that. Then, go through and apply the 
noise reduction tool again, finding that one piece where it’s just static. Copy that, 
and select the whole file. Apply it so it gets rid of all that static. Then go through 

STAGE 6: EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE, AND EDITING YOUR INTERVIEWS  
[ 159 ]
and delete the waves of audio that are just little noises. Even on the guest’s end, 
you might hear them clicking or tapping on the desk, or drinking a glass of 
water. We’ve heard—and gotten rid of—a lot of things that come through on 
the guest’s end.
After the noise reduction process, don’t apply the DeVerberate tool right 
away. I find that it’s better to wait until the “Multitrack” stage in Audition. 
Next, just do the “Match Loudness” or “Match Volume” and go to -16 LUFS 
again. We’ll have the screenshot for all the settings on how you get to -16 LUFS. 
The good news is that you’re done with the hard part!
The entire process should take you about thirty to forty-five minutes.
Once you have all that together, take a look at your Multitrack session. It 
should read, “Host, Interview, Sound Effects, Music Bed, and Master.” You’re 
going to want to go into your “Effects Rack” on the left. Once there, go to “Track 
Effects.” For your Master, Interview, and Host rows, turn off all the effects. We 
find this easier because, depending on the quality of your guest’s audio compared 
to yours, there may be obvious differences so, ideally, keep them the same level. 
Sometimes if you have your audio very advanced and your guest’s audio is dif-
ferent, there might have been some connect troubles. Your audience is going to 
be able to tell, so it is best to keep them similar, at the same level, same effects.
Once you’ve removed those, take a look at your left panel and double-check 
again that you have all your files. Then go ahead and set your audio file into the 
host—because you are a host. Then set your guest into the interview row, and 
then set your intro into the sound effects. It is okay to keep your track effects in 
the sound effects, because you probably had a professional make them, and, thus, 
their files are likely compatible with that. 
Once you have your intro into the row, and you have all your other audio 
pieces in there, you’re going to want to fit them like a puzzle, because the pieces 
are not going to be perfectly aligned. Take a listen to make sure that your audio is 
falling into the same place when you are talking, as when your guest is speaking.
Go ahead and line that up. You may notice delays when you are looking 
through your audio, say maybe a few five-second pauses. Double-check those 
pauses; if there is some sort of awkward pause in between conversations, cut it. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 160 ]
You will see the eraser tool at the top left. It looks like an actual eraser. You can 
go through and give your audio a nice cut with your mouse. Select both rows and 
move the eraser over them. Just take your time with this, so you make sure that 
everything continues to follow through. 
Once you’ve gone through and made those cuts, select all the audio that you 
have in there. With “Command A,” all your audio is going to be selected—and 
you can listen at up to +65 percent speed and take out cell phone rings, reminder 
beeps, lags, glitches, and other extraneous noises.
Unfortunately, depending on how bad the glitch or lag is, you might not be 
able to remove it. If you don’t want to seek out professional help for the fix, be 
sure you let your guest know.
Once you have listened to all of it at that speed, click all of your audio again. 
Stretch it back to 100 percent.
Once it is back to normal, you can go to your “Mixdown Session” and then 
to “New File” and click “Entire Session.” This might take a minute depending 
on how big your file is, but just give it a minute. Once it’s all mixed together, you 
will be able to “Export” the file.
The file name is going to read “Mixdown 1.” Delete the “Mixdown 1” and leave 
the name you gave it originally. That’s going to end up on your desktop, and you 
just throw it into your Google Drive, which is what we use, and put it into Libsyn.
If you’re new to this, editing an entire episode could take a couple of hours. 
But once you have it down, you should be able to edit an hour podcast in sixty 
minutes. For a thirty-minute show, editing should take only thirty minutes.

STAGE 6: EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE, AND EDITING YOUR INTERVIEWS  
[ 161 ]
✓ 
YOUR AUDIO EDITING CHECKLIST 
✓
❑
❑
1. Create a folder on your computer desktop and name it using your 
guest’s name (Example: Joe Smith).
❑
❑
2. Place your recorded audio file from your interview (.mov file) into 
the guest folder.
❑ 
❑
3. Open Adobe Audition.
❑ 
❑
4. Import .mov file into Adobe Audition.
❑ 
❑
5. Select the .mov file, go to “Edit,” then to “Split into Mono Files.”
❑ 
❑
6. Keep your audio (as the host) on an L (1) and the audio for your 
guest on an R (3).
❑ 
❑
7. Edit your audio first.
❑ 
❑
8. Delete all audio before the point where you say your countdown to 
the episode beginning. To use Onward Nation as an example, I let 
our guest know we are about to get started by saying, “Okay, let’s get 
started in 3 . . . 2 . . . 1, Good Morning, Onward Nation, I’m Stephen 
Woessner.” This is an audio cue to my guest that we are about to 
begin the interview. It also serves as an audio cue to my team that 
any audio (the pre-interview chat) that comes before my “3 . . . 2 . . .  
1” can be deleted.
❑ 
❑
9. Delete all audio after you and the guest say good-bye. You do not 
want any of your post-interview chat accidentally sneaking its way 
into your episode. 
❑
❑
10. Apply “Noise Reduction” to your audio—not your guest’s. We are 
still focusing on just your audio for right now.
❑
❑
11. Go through and lower the volume on the pieces of audio in be-
tween you talking. Be sure to listen to the small audio waves!

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 162 ]
❑
❑
12. Apply the “DeVerberate” tool to the audio once you have thoroughly 
gone through the audio and removed any noises you don’t want.
❑
❑
13. Apply “Match Loudness” so it is -16 db (-3).
❑
❑
14. Now you are ready to edit your guest’s audio.
❑
❑
15. Delete all audio before your guest says, “Thanks, Stephen! Happy 
to be on Onward Nation . . .” As with Step 8, this eliminates any 
audio from your guest that may have been recorded during your 
pre-interview chat.
❑
❑
16. Delete all audio at the close of the interview. Delete everything 
after your guest thanks you for being invited onto your show.
❑
❑
17. Apply “Noise Reduction” to audio.
❑
❑
18. Go through and delete the waves of audio in between the guest 
talking. Please listen to the audio waves first. They could be im-
portant responses to questions you asked during the interview.
❑
❑
19. Apply “Match Loudness” so it is -16 db (-3).
❑
❑
20. Once you have applied the “Match Loudness” (Match Volume) to 
your guest’s audio, please go to “File” and click on “File” > “New” > 
“Multitrack Session.”
❑
❑
21. A window will pop up, and you will want to name the file. We use 
the file format ON_GuestName_Month(00)_Date(00) (Example: 
ON_JoeSmith_08_15). We use “ON” to signify Onward Nation so 
we don’t get audio files confused with one of the files for a client’s 
podcast.
❑
❑
22. Be sure your setting is set to “Podcast.” Adobe Audition has a time-
saving template specifically designed for podcasters to use when 
editing audio. Awesome.

STAGE 6: EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE, AND EDITING YOUR INTERVIEWS  
[ 163 ]
❑
❑
23. For “Folder Location” please make sure that you click “Browse” and 
select the folder you created for this episode back in Step 1.
❑
❑
24. Click “Okay” and set up your “Multitrack” session.
❑
❑
25. Place your audio file in as “Host.”
❑
❑
26. Place your guest’s audio in the “Interview.”
❑
❑
27. Place your intro audio into “Sound FX.”
❑
❑
28. Turn off the “Track Effects” for Host, Interview, and Master in the 
“Track Effects” section to the left of the panel.
❑
❑
29. Make sure that in your “Files” section on the left of your panel, you 
have your audio intro, audio outro, R, L, .mov, and .sesx files together.
❑
❑
30. When you start editing on the timeline in your Multitrack session, 
please be sure that your audio number is first. Cut it (Command K) 
it from the audio and separate it. 
❑
❑
31. In the Sound FX, have your intro align with the ending of your 
audio number. 
❑
❑
32. Align your guest’s audio with your audio—it fits together like a 
puzzle piece.
❑
❑
33. Keeping everything aligned, cut the audio in between pauses of 
conversation, and bring them closer together. Apply this through- 
out the entire interview.
❑
❑
34. Once you have gone through the entire interview, go back and listen 
to the full episode. This is a crucial quality-control step to ensure that 
you catch any audio problems that may have been missed in earlier 
editing. You can listen to the audio at +65 percent speed to save time.
EE To adjust the playback speed, go to the area above your “Host” 
audio and click on “Toggle Global Clip Stretching” to be sure 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 164 ]
it is activated. It looks like an alarm clock with an arrow under-
neath. Once you see that it is blue, click “Command A” in your 
Multitrack, and all of your audio should look bright green.
EE If all of your audio in your Multitrack is bright green, then 
go to the top left of your “Host” file and click on the white 
triangle you see in the corner and drag it toward the middle. 
Your audio should be squeezed together at this point and a 
percentage should be displayed. 
EE Once you see that it’s at 65 percent, stop, and take a listen to 
the audio. It should take you a minimum of thirty minutes to 
listen to the audio if the full episode plays at normal speed in 
around sixty minutes. 
❑
❑
35. After you have listened to the audio, and made any fixes necessary, 
add the outro at the end.
❑
❑
36. Once you have added your audio outro, go up to “Multitrack” > 
“Mixdown Session to New File” > “Entire Session.”
❑
❑
37. You should now see the audio look completely even all the way 
through. 
❑
❑
38. Once you have completed the “Mixdown” for your session, go to 
“File” > “Export” > “File.”
❑
❑
39. When you export your file, the file name should read “ON_Guest-
Name_Month(00)_Date(00) Mixdown 1.mp3.” Be sure to delete 
the “Mixdown 1” from the file name to keep things clean. If one of 
your listeners downloads your full episode from your Smart Pod-
cast Player on your website, the “Mixdown 1” will be the file name 
they receive unless you delete it.
❑
❑
40. Your final name should be similar to this: ON_GuestName_
Month(00)_Date(00).mp3.

STAGE 6: EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE, AND EDITING YOUR INTERVIEWS  
[ 165 ]
❑
❑
41. Then click “Export” and upload it to Google Drive, Dropbox, or 
your external hard drive for storage. The episode is now ready for 
uploading into Libsyn.
This wraps up the production-related stages. We recommend getting ten fully 
edited episodes loaded into Libsyn before launching a one-day-per-week  
podcast—and twenty-five episodes before launching a daily podcast. The inven-
tory will protect you in case you need to travel for a client, get sick, or want to 
take a vacation. Otherwise, you may find yourself scrambling to get an episode 
done that needs to air the next day.
You are now ready to launch your podcast.

[ 167 ]
C
ongratulations on completing the production of your very own Profitable 
Podcast. The launch recipe in this chapter will provide you with the tactical 
ingredients to get your podcast to the top of iTunes’ New and Noteworthy 
category. New and Noteworthy is the section of iTunes reserved for podcasts 
launched during the most recent eight-week time period. When a podcast’s 
eight weeks of New and Noteworthy eligibility expires, iTunes will relocate it to 
its “What’s Hot” category along with all of the other popular top-rated podcasts. 
This chapter will help you boost your iTunes rankings, because at the time 
of this writing, iTunes is still the market leader for podcast distribution. How-
ever, the market continues to change as iHeartRadio, Spotify, Google Play, and 
others become players. In my opinion, the podcast distribution market is ripe for 
disruption, consolidation, or new advancements in how content is curated for 
listeners.
CHAPTER 14
STAGE 7:  
LAUNCH STRATEGY:  
HOW TO REACH THE TOP OF ITUNES

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 168 ]
Until that time comes, we will focus on iTunes.
Our team has run point on dozens and dozens of podcast launches for our 
clients. And that experience has time and time again dispelled the myth that 
a podcast needs to have tens of thousands of downloads, or even thousands of 
downloads, in order to dominate iTunes’ New and Noteworthy rankings. In fact, 
we have seen podcasts with fewer than 200 downloads per day become number-
one-ranked shows in iTunes. You simply need to execute well as it relates to 
iTunes’ vital metrics:
 
High-quality audio for your episodes
 
Ratings and reviews
 
Daily downloads
Your audio quality will be high if you follow the editing recipe shared in the 
previous chapters. And if you consistently direct your audience to listen to and 
download your episodes from iTunes, you should be all set with this vital metric, 
as well.
But it has been our experience that getting ratings and reviews for your 
show is not as straightforward as it seems. For example, through our research, 
we have seen that fifty ratings and reviews seems to be the “magic” number 
to secure a number one ranking in iTunes. However, if your show were to 
collect fifty ratings and reviews over a six-week period versus fifty ratings and 
reviews in the first forty-eight hours of launch, that would be a big difference: 
iTunes will rank the forty-eight-hour podcast much higher and likely award it 
a number one ranking.
So, part of the ratings and reviews recipe is with what time period you com-
press your ratings and reviews. The best way to capitalize on this vital metric is 
by making a list of fifty to seventy people who you know will listen to your show 
and then give you a rating and review—and ask them to do it between X day and 
Y day so you can take advantage of the compression.
In addition, our team has a theory that the social footprint of the person who 
writes a review for your show matters to the iTunes algorithm. So if one of your 

STAGE 7: LAUNCH STRATEGY: HOW TO REACH THE TOP OF ITUNES  
[ 169 ]
guests writes a review that’s perceived to be high quality, you get points. On the 
other hand, if you pay a freelancer through Fiverr to boost your rating and re-
views, iTunes will recognize the poor quality, and you will not receive the benefit. 
Thus, be sure to ask for ratings and reviews from credible sources. 
Ingredient #1: Register your podcast with iTunes,  
Stitcher, and Google Play
Earlier, we covered how iTunes and the other platforms are able to access your 
audio from Libsyn and the RSS feed Libsyn provides you. Now that you are 
ready to launch, it’s time to give iTunes your RSS feed. But please know, once 
you do so, any and all episodes you have published in Libsyn will become avail-
able in iTunes as soon as your podcast has been approved. So it is very important 
not to provide iTunes with your RSS feed, and not to publish episodes in Libsyn 
until you are 100 percent ready to go live. 
The sign-up processes for iTunes, Stitcher, and Google Play continue to 
evolve and get better. Consequently, we know that the step-by-step process as it 
exists today will be obsolete by the time this book makes its way to you. So my 
team and I created a three-part tutorial video series that we update each time the 
process changes. You can find the free video series at: 
1.  PredictiveROI.com/Resource/iTunes-Setup
2.  PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Stitcher-Setup
3.  PredictiveROI.com/Resources/Google-Play-Setup
Ingredient #2: “Your Interview Is LIVE!” Email to Guests
You or your team should send an email like the following to each guest on the 
morning their interview goes live so they will know when and how to promote 
their episodes. Please note: The bracketed sections of the template indicate the 
content areas you will need to customize for your podcast. 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 170 ]
Subject Line: Your Interview Is LIVE!
~Contact.FirstName~
Your interview is LIVE!
You really rocked the interview. I am grateful. Thank you so much!
I would be honored if you would share our interview with your audience! 
Some easy ways to do that are to share the links below:
[YourPodcast.com]: Click Here
iTunes: Click Here
Stitcher: Click Here
Google Play: Click Here
Be sure to check out your Show Notes page as [Your Podcast] listeners will 
be posting comments—and please feel free to jump into the conversation.
Sincerely Yours,
[Your Name]
[Host of Your Podcast]
[CEO of Your Company]
Ingredient #3: Rate and Review Request Email
I recommend that you and your team send an email similar to the following to 
your full email list about two weeks after your show launches. The email provides 
your audience with the step-by-step process for giving your show a rating and 
writing a review on your behalf. We created this template, and use it for all of our 
clients during launch, because the process of rating and reviewing on iTunes can 
be confusing. Your audience is doing you a big favor, so you want to make it as 
easy as possible for them.

STAGE 7: LAUNCH STRATEGY: HOW TO REACH THE TOP OF ITUNES  
[ 171 ]
Subject: I need your help
Good Morning [First Name],
Thank you so much for listening to my new podcast, [Name of Podcast]. 
The response over the last few weeks has been nothing short of incredible.
I am writing today to ask for your help in getting the podcast to the top of 
the iTunes charts so others can learn lessons from my guests, some of the 
world’s most successful entrepreneurs, leaders, and achievers who are oper-
ating at the top of their game.
[Name of Podcast] has quickly become a community of leaders, but I need 
your help in helping that community to grow.
To get [Name of Podcast] to the top of the iTunes charts, we need to get as 
many reviews as possible.
Would you please do me a favor and leave a review?
The process is quick and simple. Please go to [this link] and click the blue 
button that reads “View in iTunes.”
Next, click on the link titled “Ratings and Reviews.”
Next, click on “Write a Review.”
If you are not signed in to iTunes, you will be asked to sign in. If you are al-
ready signed in to iTunes, it is likely that you will skip this step.
Finally, you will be able to leave a review. Don’t forget the star rating!
I really appreciate your help with this! 
Sincerely,
[Your Name]

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 172 ]
FIGURE 14-1
FIGURE 14-2

STAGE 7: LAUNCH STRATEGY: HOW TO REACH THE TOP OF ITUNES  
[ 173 ]
FIGURE 14-3
FIGURE 14-4

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 174 ]
FIGURE 14-5
Figures 14-1, 14-2, 14-3, 14-4, and 14-5 depict the steps for writing a review in 
iTunes.
I want to share a final thought for you to consider as part of your launch. 
Should you spend money on Google AdWords or Facebook campaigns to 
announce the launch of your podcast? Although tempting to consider—and 
I encourage you to test paid ads during your launch—the campaigns we have 
tested in the past did not result in measurable increases to daily downloads.
However, we have had great success in paid Facebook campaigns offering 
a screaming cool value exchange with email address opt-in. This is an excellent 
strategy for building your email list, and once you have the subscriber’s email 
address, you can promote your show via email for much less cost and with greater 
benefit. 
I wish you the best of success with your launch!

[ 175 ]
CHAPTER 15
HOW TO BE  
AN EXCELLENT HOST
B
y the time this book goes to press, Onward Nation will have aired nearly 600 
episodes. In the process, we have had the incredible opportunity to learn 
directly from today’s top business owners. The depth of knowledge, wisdom, 
and expertise generously shared by our guests never ceases to amaze me. They 
freely take us inside their businesses, their hopes, their dreams, their aspirations, 
their failures, and then weave it all together in this wonderful, beautiful tapestry 
that we call an episode.
My vital priority during these conversations is not to get in the way of my 
guests doing what they are there to do. I learned early on that the show is not at 
all about me. Our guests are the stars, and when the host can demonstrate that 
fact throughout the conversation, the result will be an epic interview.
This chapter will serve as your practical guide to becoming an excellent host. 
I will share several of my insights that I have learned along the way as well as 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 176 ]
what I learned from two Onward Nation guests and fellow podcasters: Drew 
McLellan and John Livesay.
Drew McLellan, top dog at the Agency Management Institute, is the host 
of the brilliant podcast Build a Better Agency. Drew has owned and operated his 
own agency for the past twenty years. He also works with more than 250 small to 
midsize agencies a year in a variety of ways: peer network groups, workshops for 
owners and their leadership teams, on-site consulting, and one-to-one coaching 
with owners.
John Livesay is the host of the successful podcast The Successful Pitch. Inc. 
magazine calls John the “Pitch Whisperer.” He is the author of the book also 
entitled The Successful Pitch. John helps CEOs craft a compelling pitch to inves-
tors in a way that inspires them to join a start-up’s team. Also, John and Judy 
Robinett are business partners in Crack the Funding Code, a webinar/workbook 
that gets founders funded fast.
Let’s get started.
In fiction, a “foil” is a character who contrasts with another character (usually 
the protagonist) in order to highlight particular qualities of the other character. 
In my opinion, your ability to play the role of the foil will determine whether you 
are an excellent or a mediocre host. You need to use your podcast to help your 
guests advance their agendas by sharing their wisdom and expertise—not yours.
Avoid telling stories about yourself even if they support what your guest just 
said. Your role is not to validate what your guest just said. Your guests don’t need 
you to validate their experience. Attempting to do so can be seen as arrogant; it 
could look like you’re trying to steal the show. Don’t do that. Instead, summarize, 
reflect back to your guests the impactful highlights of what they have just shared, 
add a comment or two from what you have seen in your experience, and then ask 
your guest if you got all of that correct.
By asking the question, “Did I get all of that correct, Sally?” you do three things:
 
Demonstrate to Sally that you are listening to every word she shares
 
Show that what she said mattered because you connected it to your 
own experience
 
Prompt Sally to go deeper with her examples and experience sharing

HOW TO BE AN EXCELLENT HOST 
[ 177 ]
Start out the conversation with some light questions; build trust and rapport 
in the first few minutes. Be engaging, be personable, and if you are able to make 
your guest laugh in the first couple of minutes, congratulations—you’re building 
rapport. Avoid asking deep, emotionally charged questions early on in the inter-
view. It will not go well. Your guest will likely think you are trying to move too 
deep too quickly. 
I asked Drew McLellan for his insights on the most critical things business 
owners need to master to be successful at podcasting. Drew shared that he be-
lieves it is a combination of skills, the most important of which is for the host 
to check their ego at the door. “My job when I’m hosting is to augment and put 
the spotlight on my guest and their expertise,” Drew said. “I do that by listening 
really hard to what they say and running it through my filter of, ‘What else 
would an agency owner want to know about that?’ I’m not talking over them, I’m 
not trying to jump in and show how much I know about the topic. I am listening 
super hard. I am asking what I hope are great follow-up questions. I’m really 
trying to stay out of the guest’s way so they have as much airtime as possible to 
share their expertise.
“I think part of listening with real intent is to be able to ask the question that 
I’m always thinking, ‘If somebody is driving while they’re listening to this, or 
walking on the treadmill, or whatever, what would they want me to ask?’ Or, do I 
frustrate them by not asking the follow-up questions that they want me to ask? 
I’m always listening with that intent. ‘What should I be asking next? What did 
somebody want to hear more about or how would they want to drill deeper into 
this?’ I’m trying to ask those questions because I don’t want any of my listeners 
thinking, ‘I can’t believe he didn’t ask X!’”
I also asked John Livesay for his insights on critical skills. He explained 
to me why and how he uses empathy and listening to make connections with 
guests. “One of the investors on my show told me that the more empathy you 
show for your customer, the more the customer feels like you understand that 
customer and can solve that problem,” John said. “I think what makes you have 
empathy for someone is your ability to listen to them and put yourself in their 
shoes. The more you can do that with your guests and respond to what they’re 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 178 ]
saying and make them feel heard and then summarize what you’re hearing for 
your audience as the takeaways, that, in my opinion, is what it takes to be really 
great as a podcast host.”
One of the best ways to ensure your excellence as a host is in how you help 
a guest prepare to be a great guest on your show. You can do that by imple-
menting the Guest Advocacy System illustrated earlier in this book. You ought 
to supplement this system by personally setting expectations with guests. In 
my opinion, Drew does this masterfully well. Drew shared with me, “What 
I discovered is, that the minute I checked my ego at the door, I realized the 
show wasn’t about somebody listening to me, it was about me cultivating this 
great list of guests and serving guests well, which serves my audience well. So 
if I allow my guests to have the spotlight, and I allow them to really share their 
expertise, and I prep them properly, so it’s like, ‘Look, there is no selling, this is 
not about you getting clients, this is about you generously sharing your exper-
tise. Here are the kind of questions I’m going to ask; if you’re not comfortable 
answering those questions, don’t come on the show.’ None of that was about 
me. It’s about serving up the best content possible for my audience by putting 
my guest in the best possible light.”

HOW TO BE AN EXCELLENT HOST 
[ 179 ]
✓ 
CHECKLIST FOR HOSTING WITH EXCELLENCE 
✓
❑
❑
Check your ego at the door. Your show is about making your guest the 
star. Your show should not be about you. 
❑
❑
Study. Listen to other hosts and hear how they interact with their guests.
❑
❑
Keep the conversation casual yet focused on the results you want to 
deliver to your audience.
❑
❑
Help your guests prepare by implementing a Guest Advocacy System 
so they receive email and text reminders before your interview as well 
as tips on how to sound their best during the recording.
❑
❑
Also help your guests prepare by emailing them your questions in ad-
vance along with some insights regarding your audience so your guests 
have context and know how best to answer your questions.
❑
❑
Begin on time and end on time. This shows respect for your guest’s 
schedule.
❑
❑
Turn off your email, your cell phone, and all social media, and listen 
intently to your guest so you can think of follow-up questions your 
audience would want you to ask.
❑
❑
Summarize and recap your guest’s awesomeness during the interview. 
Then ask your guest if you got the summary right or if you’ve missed 
something. This is the perfect invitation to a guest to go deeper and 
share even more value with your audience.
❑
❑
Thank the guest before the interview, during the interview, and after 
the interview for taking the time to generously share their wisdom 
with your audience.
❑
❑
Have confidence. You are good enough to do this. You are worthy. 
You will make a difference in the world by sharing the wisdom of 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 180 ]
your guests. You are building a nation of true fans. Kick the impostor 
syndrome to the curb by remembering the wise words of Walter D. 
Wintle, quoted by Napoleon Hill, author of Think and Grow Rich:
If you think you are beaten, you are,
If you think you dare not, you don’t.
If you like to win, but you think you can’t,
It is almost certain you won’t.
If you think you’ll lose, you’re lost,
For out of the world we find,
Success begins with a person’s will—
It’s all in the state of mind.
If you think you’re outclassed, you are,
You’ve got to think high to rise,
You’ve got to be sure of yourself before
You can ever win a prize.
Life’s battles don’t always go
To the stronger or faster man
But soon or late the one who wins
Is the one WHO THINKS HE CAN!
—Walter D. Wintle

[ 181 ]
CHAPTER 16
HOW TO ATTRACT SPONSORSHIPS
Interview with Linda Hollander
I 
learned everything I know about the ins and outs of sponsor strategy—or the 
best practices for properly positioning a podcast so it can be sold to a top-tier 
corporate sponsor—by interviewing Linda Hollander, one of today’s leading 
authorities on the topic of sponsorships. Both Inc. magazine and Entrepreneur 
magazine have featured Linda as the industry leader in how to sell corporate 
sponsorships. Linda has more than twenty years of experience as a business 
owner. Her clients and sponsors include Microsoft, FedEx, Citibank, Mattel, 
Bank of America, Marriott, Health Net, American Airlines, IBM, and Walmart. 
Her client list reads like a “Who’s Who” in corporate sponsorship. You can find 
Linda at www.sponsorconcierge.com.
This chapter distills the Q&A between Linda Hollander and me. I wanted 
you to read in Linda’s own words how she became today’s leading authority in 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 182 ]
sponsorships. Her story is compelling because she did it even though she was 
starting at zero.
You can do the same if you follow the master blueprint she provides in this 
chapter.
Q: Linda, take us back to the beginning and your first event so business owners 
reading this can have the full context of what you have accomplished.
Linda: I’ve had the privilege of working with some great “Top Tier” sponsors but it 
wasn’t always that way. Many of our clients early on in our business were women so I 
wanted to start the Women’s Small Business Expo to deliver even more value to our 
clients. But I needed sponsors because putting on an event is cash intensive. Ultimately, 
my first sponsors were Bank of America, Walmart, and IBM. 
I had never done an event in my life. I had no idea how to do an event. I had no ex-
perience. I had no following. I had my parents on my email list. I put my brother-in-law on 
my email list. They weren’t going to tell me no. If I could have put my cat on there, I would 
have. But despite how I started out, I was able to attract several top-tier sponsors. 
And when our event attendees came, they would ask me, “How the heck are you 
getting these sponsors? I thought you had to be a big company and have all this experi-
ence and track record,” and I said, “Absolutely no.” Then I knew there was a need in the 
marketplace for training business owners on how to attract sponsors.
I lost a lot of time and money when I started to learn the sponsorship game. It took 
me six months to get my first proposal together. I lost $75,000 in the process. It was 
painful; it was excruciating. Some people wouldn’t even talk to me because I was a 
micro-business. But, there were also people who said, “You know what? I’ll talk to you. 
I’ll help you.” Then I said to myself, “When I learn this stuff, I’m going to teach other 
business owners how to do it.”

HOW TO ATTRACT SPONSORSHIPS
[ 183 ]
Q: Let’s start off with some definitions. When we hear “sponsor,” that could 
mean different things depending upon someone’s business model. What does 
sponsorship mean, what does a sponsor want to sponsor, are they programs, 
events, or businesses?
Linda: The definition of sponsorship is “Connecting a company with people who can 
buy things.” If you know people who can buy stuff, then you can get sponsors. It is a lot 
simpler than what most business owners think.
If you have a business—that could be sponsored. If you host a radio show, or a pod-
cast, or a television show, YouTube show, or a blog—all of that can be sponsored. Of 
course, if you do an event you can get sponsors because sponsors love events.
If you’re a speaker or an author, you can get sponsored, because as a speaker and 
an author you have access to an audience—a fan base of people—who know your work 
and know your book, and as a speaker you command the platform. Companies don’t 
have people who can speak, who can command a platform, or capture the attention of 
an audience.
Q: What are some of the biggest mistakes you see business owners making  
time and time again as they pursue sponsorships?
Linda: There are a few mistakes, and I’ve made all of them, so I can share from experi-
ence. The first mistake, believe it or not, is not asking for enough money.
Asking for too little money can hurt a business owner because they are, in effect, 
telling a sponsor they don’t have anything of value to offer. I often get calls from 
business owners who are trying to sell their $500 sponsor package. They’re going 
to be presenting to a busy, stressed-out person inside a company, who, if they see a 
sponsor package priced at $500, they’re going to think the business owner doesn’t 
have anything of value. 
In the sponsorship process, you have what’s called your “Champion,” and this is the 
person in the sponsoring company who loves you, but they have to sell you and your 
program to their colleagues, their team, and their boss, and maybe the people working 
under them to get it approved. Your pricing strategy needs to communicate value in order 
for them to do that. For most of our clients, what we see them typically get is between 
$10,000 and $100,000 in annual sponsor fees.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 184 ]
If you do an event, if you have a podcast, or something else that is episode-to- 
episode, bundle everything together for the year and sell an annual sponsorship 
because you’re going to be more successful in properly positioning yourself with 
sponsors.
The second mistake business owners make is not using an industry standard  
proposal.
Your sponsor proposal is one of the most important but least understood docu-
ments. You have to use an industry standard format or you will not get funded. Your 
proposal must look amazing and have the right compelling benefits. The two biggest 
mistakes are asking for too little money and not having a good proposal.
Q: Let’s say you’re a podcaster. Sounds like you would try to sell an annual 
sponsorship of your show instead of weekly episodes, but you would also package 
in your entire platform including social media, email lists, webinars, events,  
etc., right?
Linda: Yes, you want them to sponsor your entire brand—not a single show. It took me 
a while to figure this out, because at first I started to have sponsors for my events and 
then I thought, “Wait a minute, I’ve got a whole brand here.” When I had them sponsor 
my brand, I made a whole lot more money. Instead of a business owner saying, “I’m a 
podcaster,” you should brand yourself as a “media company” who does podcasting 
because sponsors are not quite in love with podcasting yet. It’s still new. It’s still cutting 
edge. But if you say you’re a media company, then their ears are going to perk up. Then 
they’re going to be interested.
Talk about your podcast, but then talk about the other things you do, such as email 
blasts, social media, maybe even YouTube, etc. Talk about all of the touch points you 
have. Let’s go back to the definition of sponsorship: “Connecting a company to people 
who buy things.”  Tell them how you can connect them to people who could buy their 
stuff.

HOW TO ATTRACT SPONSORSHIPS
[ 185 ]
Q: Do I diminish my own brand if I go get a sponsor?
Linda: I’m asked that question a lot, because as business owners, we want to be in-
dependent, we don’t want to have a company influence what we’re going to say, and 
we don’t want the appearance that we’re biased. I have never had a sponsor try to 
influence my content in sixteen years of doing this. And if they ever did, I would just say, 
“Hey, that’s not part of the program.” You design your program—the sponsor writes the 
check—that’s what goes on with sponsorships.
Also, the promotion of your sponsor does not have to be outlandish or in your 
face. The promotion can be elegant and understated, such as signage, banner ads, or 
things you put on your website. And if you do recommend a company like when I was 
working with, let’s say, Citibank, and I would recommend Citibank, then I disclosed it 
by saying, “I need to disclose that Citibank is my sponsor,” and then you are in integrity 
by disclosing it.
Q: Are there any secrets to success business owners need to apply in order  
to be successful in attracting a sponsor?
Linda: It would be to make the sponsor the star. Most business owners when they try 
to get a sponsor, they fall into the trap of talking about what their business does; they 
might say things like, “I have this great podcast, I have this great book, I have a great 
business, I have a great nonprofit, or event, etc.” Business owners can sometimes talk 
about themselves and that’s not the way to get a sponsor.
The way to get a sponsor is to talk to the sponsor about what you can do for them. 
Say, “Hey, Mr., Ms. Sponsor, I’m going to educate people about your products and your 
services. I’m going to help you increase your product and your brand loyalty. I’m going 
to help you grow your customer base. I’m going to help you drive sales and traffic.”
Do you see the difference?
You’re saying, “Hey, the sponsor is the star,” and your prospective sponsor is going 
to look at that and say, “Hey, this business owner understands that it’s about me and not 
about them.” You’ll tell them a little bit about what you do because they have to understand 
it, but mostly what you’re going to tell the sponsor is, “Here’s how I’m going to benefit your 
company; here’s what I’m going to do for you.”

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 186 ]
Q: Let’s talk timelines. How fast does, or maybe how long is, the sales cycle you 
typically see for attracting $10,000 to $100,000 sponsorships?
Linda: Sponsorships are a relationship business. You need time to develop relation-
ships with companies. Here’s where it’s going to be maybe a little bit of a shock to 
business owners. I recommend eight months to a year before you need the funding to 
start approaching prospective sponsors. Let me tell you why. If you’re approaching Mi-
crosoft, FedEx, Staples (those are called the “Top Tier” sponsors), they have a process. 
You have to apply and you have to wait for them to approve it. They like to have a lot of 
lead time because whatever you are doing you have to talk about how you are going to 
work with their company, what kind of a program you are going to build together, and it 
takes time to develop that depth of relationship.
It will take time to get your first sponsor. Now, let me tell you how you could do 
it quicker. There are “Top Tier” sponsors and then there are “Second Tier” sponsors. 
In the banking industry (and banks are a great place to go to get sponsorship) I’ve 
worked with Bank of America and I’ve worked with Citibank. They are Top Tier. But 
there may be a local community bank where you live. There may be an up-and-coming 
player in the banking industry you might want to work with. That won’t take as long 
because it’s easier to get to the decision-makers and to get that process of sponsor-
ship started.
The amazing thing about sponsorship being a relationship business is that there is 
something called renewals in sponsorship. And renewals are magic. Renewals are your 
cash machine, because if a sponsor likes you, they can fund you this year, next year, 
and the next year. I’ve sold multiyear sponsorships with FedEx and Citibank. My clients 
have had multiyear contracts with Verizon, Dole Foods, and Black and Decker just to 
name a few.
It’s not a quick-cash strategy. It is a long-term strategy to fund your business.
That’s why we tell business owners to go for a one-year contract because 
one year is about enough time to really analyze the relationship and if the sponsor 
wants to continue. If your sponsorship is from event-to-event, or episode-to- 
episode, a sponsor is not going to see that much growth as far as return on investment, 
so they are less likely to renew.

HOW TO ATTRACT SPONSORSHIPS
[ 187 ]
Q: Let’s get tactical and think about key steps in the process, the action plan, 
things that are going to improve the probability of success. If you were to give 
business owners one, two, or three things they need to do, what would those  
steps be?
Linda: I’m going to share a three-step process to attracting a sponsor.
The first part is to do what we call the “Sponsor Wish List.” The wish list is the list of 
companies that you would like to have as sponsors. Remember in your sponsor wish list 
to include both Top Tier and the Second Tier sponsors. Most business owners when they 
start their wish list think only of Top Tier sponsors. Go deeper. We’ve already talked about 
the banking industry, so let’s talk insurance. I know I’m talking about boring companies 
like banking and insurance when most business owners want glam sponsors like fashion, 
cosmetics, and accessories. But the boring companies have the money.
Let’s take the insurance category, you’re going to think of State Farm, and Aflac, 
and all the ones that have paid to be top of mind. Then go a little deeper by doing 
some Google searches into smaller insurance companies, the up-and-coming brands, 
because the up-and-coming brands need you to get their name out. They don’t have the 
brand awareness of the big brands.
I’ll give you an example of that. I worked with a company called Evolution Insurance 
Brokers. Nobody has ever heard of Evolution Insurance Brokers, and that is exactly why 
they sponsored me. They wanted to get the word out about their company. They’re not 
Aflac, they’re not State Farm, they’re not the big players in the industry.
The Second Tiers have money to invest. I can’t disclose exactly the value of the 
sponsorship, but it was five figures.
Step two is preparing your professional proposal. You want to write that industry- 
standard sponsor proposal. 
The full sponsor proposal is about eight to ten pages in length, and here’s what it 
includes:
•  A description of your “property.” Write down the word property because 
what you do now is called the “property.” Your podcast is a property. Your 
book is a property. Your speaking business is a property. Your business, 
your event, your nonprofit, whatever you are doing is called a property. You 
want to describe that.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 188 ]
•  You should include your sponsor’s goals, which should be similar to what 
we talked about earlier in this chapter, such as increasing brand loyalty 
and customer base, educating people, and driving traffic and sales, and  
all that.
•  You should include a one-page marketing plan. It includes all the ways 
you’re going to get the word out about the sponsor. Sponsors are inter-
ested in this because marketing is the difference between a good idea 
someone has in their head and something that actually has legs and  
is sustainable. 
•  You should include your demographics. Whether your demographics are 
mothers, the parent market, the entrepreneurial market, the urban youth, the 
baby boomer market, you need to describe your demographics. Include any 
testimonials you have.
•  You should include your sponsor fees like the ones we’ve talked about.
•  The last thing, and here is how we write proposals differently from anyone 
else in the country, is storytelling.
You want to have good storytelling inside your proposal. We call it “passion 
points” in the sponsor industry. I’ve sold sponsors because I didn’t just put in the 
proposal what’s called your “pretty bio.” The pretty bio is your education, and the 
awards you won, and your experience. All of that is nice but what you want is to be 
vulnerable; you need to make a human connection, because you’re not just pitching 
to a faceless cooperation. You are pitching to a person, a human being, and you want 
to show your humanity.
In my story, I talk about how I was in the poverty trap. I talk about how I was in an 
abusive relationship. My story has helped me secure sponsors because you want them 
to see you as a real person. The emotional connection is so important. You want to put 
beautiful storytelling in there. If you don’t want to include your own story, put the story 
of someone you’ve helped through the work you do.
Be sure to include some emotion. Business owners often make the mistake of 
thinking, “Oh, I’m going to impress them, and I’m going to put facts, and figures, and 

HOW TO ATTRACT SPONSORSHIPS
[ 189 ]
statistics in there.” But unfortunately, that is not going to help you rise above the com-
petition. Be human.
Q: Are there any other tools, any other resources you think business owners 
ought to study to make this process as efficient and effective as possible?
Linda: My website is www.sponsorconcierge.com, and there are two free gifts. One is 
the “Number 1 Secret to Getting Corporate Sponsors.” And the second is that I do free 
sponsor strategy sessions with business owners so they can book a sponsor strategy 
session with me, and I will take a look at what they are currently doing, and together, we 
will develop a success strategy to get them sponsors. 
Q: Any final advice you want to share or anything you think we might  
have missed?
Linda: I want business owners to know they can do this. The number one question 
I am asked is, “Why would a sponsor want to work with little ol’ me? I’m just getting 
started. I’m not a big company. I don’t have a track record. I don’t have a big following.” 
Please know you can do this. You have value. You have things a sponsor is going to be 
attracted to. You just need to package it in the right way.
Here’s a quick story about how I got a sponsor. I live in Los Angeles, California, so 
when I first had the idea to do my initial event, I was driving around in my clunker car, and 
I’m of course stuck in a traffic jam. I look up and see a billboard for Bank of America and 
there’s a woman featured within the billboard design, so I think to myself, “Okay, they’re 
trying to get the women’s market.”
Immediately, I start doing self-sabotaging and thinking, “Why the heck would they 
talk to me? I’m just working from my home from my kitchen table. I’m not a big company. 
What the heck am I going to offer Bank of America?”
But my dream and mission to help people was so strong that I couldn’t get it out 
of my head. So I got the courage to make a call to Bank of America and finally got the 
person who could green-light the sponsorships. I finished my proposal, got everything 
done, and had an appointment at their office. Thank goodness there was a desk be-
tween him and me because my knees were knocking.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 190 ]
Then he said to me, “Well, let’s see your proposal,” and I handed it to him. And he 
said, “Okay, well we’re going to go for this level of sponsorship,” and it was a five-figure 
sponsorship. I had to act like I did this all the time so I said, “Oh, great,” and I had to 
shake his hand, but my hand was so clammy I had to wipe it off!
I got back in my car and did the happy dance right there in the parking lot! I drove 
home, and I waved to all the Bank of America branches on my way home.
You never know what’s going to happen. It all starts with a thought. It starts with 
a dream. It starts with a vision. We’re taught to have these big dreams but we’re not 
taught how to finance the dreams, and dreams take money, and that’s where sponsors 
come in.
You can do this! Hold your head up high. Know that you have quality and you bring 
value to your sponsors, and—you can fund your dreams. 

[ 191 ]
CHAPTER 17
GETTING IT ALL DONE:  
RECRUIT ROCK STAR UNPAID INTERNS
Y
ou will need a team of highly productive people working alongside you 
to help create and launch your profitable podcast. But this doesn’t mean 
you have to hire several full-time employees or virtual assistants. Instead, I 
recommend that you consider recruiting and hiring a team of A Players who are 
not paid members of your team, but unpaid interns. Yes, I did just recommend 
unpaid interns.
At Predictive ROI, we have built an outstanding internship program that has 
provided twenty-four unpaid internships to students in their senior year of study 
at Duke University, Purdue University, The Ohio State University, University 
of Northern Iowa, University of Wisconsin–La Crosse, and other universities 
throughout the country.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 192 ]
I decided to include this chapter on how to recruit rock star interns for a 
couple of reasons:
 
Business owners tend not to have a process in place for recruiting 
rock star interns. They often recruit interns who are not motivated, 
who are looking to augment their résumés, and who did just the 
bare minimum during the semester. These are not the high per-
formers you need on your team—or the type of interns you will 
recruit if you follow this recipe. 
 
Because of the less-than-stellar performance from past interns, busi-
ness owners either abandon their internship programs, or they come 
to believe that it is unrealistic to recruit a team of unpaid interns. 
This is a myth. Two years ago, we recruited a team of six unpaid in-
terns to work on a specific social media lead gen project. Katherine 
Bartlett on my team managed the day-to-day activity of each of the 
six interns. Katherine, at the time, was also an intern. She is now a 
member of my leadership team at Predictive ROI, where she over-
sees all of our agency’s content development. 
Our recipe for recruiting rock star interns is exceptional. I am going to share 
all of the ingredients so you can implement it into your business right away.
But before I do, I want you to meet several rock stars from our Predictive 
ROI team who pull the levers to the day-to-day production behind Onward 
Nation.
Let me first share more about Katherine. She is the wizard behind all of our 
episodes—how they sound and how they look on social media. Katherine has 
grown so much over the last several years that she is now our vice president of 
content marketing at Predictive ROI and now leads our team of content devel-
opment experts. Any content produced for Predictive ROI clients is the result of 
Katherine and her team. 
We knew we had a high performer on our hands with Katherine because 
she is one of those people who raises her hand and says—“Um, I know that I 

[ 193 ]
GETTING IT ALL DONE: RECRUIT ROCK STAR UNPAID INTERNS 
am only required to do ten hours per week for this internship. But, could I do  
more?” 
Our response was, “Oh my. Yes, please!”
When her internship was complete, we transitioned Katherine to what we 
call a “Super Intern” while she finished her final semester at the University of 
Northern Iowa. She received a small financial stipend while she focused on her 
remaining education. And when she graduated, she became a full-time member 
of our team. Katherine is a rock star.
Then there is Louie Schuth. Louie is our rock star in charge of writing all our 
Show Notes, creating and sending email campaigns, writing blog posts, imple-
menting our Twitter strategy, and posting our LinkedIn articles.
We are thrilled to have Louie as a member of our team because he and Kath-
erine are cut from the same “Can I do more?” cloth.
We started Louie with a variety of writing projects and he quickly excelled. 
He then asked if he could allocate a portion of his time to WordPress and man-
aging some of our websites. We said, “Um, yes please!”
No surprise—Louie excelled there, too.
He is the one who stays up late with me Tuesday nights before each solo- 
cast airs the next day to make sure the Show Notes and audio file are set  
correctly.
An amazing writer and a graduate of the University of Wisconsin–La Crosse, 
Louie finished his internship and is now a full-time member of our team just like 
Katherine. We have big plans for Louie. 
Then there is Jessica Zickert, who, at the time of this writing, is finishing 
her final semester at the University of Wisconsin–La Crosse. Jessica is part of 
Katherine’s content marketing team and has been successfully mentored through 
our production process. Jessica is such a rock star that she has assumed the day-
to-day editing of Onward Nation episodes from Katherine. She has followed 
Kat’s recipe flawlessly.
Jessica’s level of proactivity is also off the charts. For example, when I make 
a mistake while recording an interview with a guest, I try to immediately loop 
back to Jessica to let her know so she can try to clean up my mistake in post- 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 194 ]
production editing. But, when I did that recently, she let me know that she had 
already found my mistake and corrected it. Bam! That’s proactive.
Last but not least, I’d like to introduce you to Erik Jensen, our vice president 
of client services at Predictive ROI. Erik, who is also a member of both our lead-
ership and ownership teams, oversees all of our operations. 
I met Erik while I was serving as a member of the academic staff at the 
University of Wisconsin–La Crosse. One day, the chair of our marketing de-
partment in the College of Business suggested to Erik that he should come see 
me regarding a business plan he and his business partner were developing for a 
competition at Duke University. We met, and I was blown away by Erik’s profes-
sionalism. Later that night, I said to my wife, “Wow, this guy is amazing. He and 
I are going to work together on something someday.”
Several years later, Erik became our first intern at Predictive ROI. Later, he 
joined our team as full-time employee number three with the title of “Associate.” 
In less than a year, we promoted Erik to engagement manager, then to our lead-
ership team, and then to vice president of client services.
Erik is a rock star in the truest sense. He helped set the standard by which 
we evaluate and measure all interns. He invested a full-time schedule toward his 
internship even though it wasn’t required. That’s the type of heart you are looking 
for in your interns, too.
Create a demanding internship program. Treat your unpaid interns exactly 
the way you treat your full-time members. Tell your candidates they are inter-
viewing for the “Marine Corps of Internships,” and you will get a higher level of 
production and proactivity.
Here’s our recipe.
First, we accept only students in their senior year of school. While we have 
had positive experiences with juniors and graduates, too, we decided to recruit 
only seniors going forward because we found them to be the most motivated, 
eager to learn, and hungry to gain experience. After all, graduation is looming 
and so are their job searches.

GETTING IT ALL DONE: RECRUIT ROCK STAR UNPAID INTERNS 
[ 195 ]
Ingredient #1
 Define your culture with your leadership team and employees and post a page 
on your website for candidates to study.
On our culture page for Predictive ROI, we define with the following phrases 
(and more):
We promise to provide our clients with the very best, most outstanding 
consulting and training services available.
We are so committed to being outstanding that we deliver a minimum of 
200 percent financial return on investment to clients. We take it further by 
guaranteeing each client’s ROI.
And refund our fee if we do not deliver what we promise.
We demand a standard of excellence of ourselves and are committed to 
delivering that standard to clients 100 percent of the time. No excuses or 
exceptions.
We are a team. We work hard. We rise together—because as our clients 
succeed—we succeed.
You can find our full culture description here: http://predictiveroi.com/
culture/.
Ingredient #2
 Write a position description that is in line with your culture and post it on your 
website.
We clearly define who and what we’re looking for in our position descrip-
tions. Here’s how we begin our description of what we do—and who exactly we 
are looking for:
Predictive ROI is a growing content marketing and lead gen agency that 
works with an array of visionary businesses in many industries. We work 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 196 ]
with our clients to help them achieve explosive growth by reaching their 
digital goals. This includes increasing their ROI and enhancing their brand 
across many platforms/mediums. We are looking for candidates who 
embody our standard of excellence and our culture of teamwork, and who 
are enthusiastic about learning while delivering their best work. We offer 
the flexibility of working remotely, a robust on-boarding program, training 
through our Predictive ROI Institute, a team of like-minded high achievers, 
and opportunities for advancement.
If you are a member of the Predictive team, or a client, you are family. We 
work together to achieve our goals; we care, and we go all in to get it done.
You can find full position descriptions here: http://predictiveroi.com/digital- 
marketing-careers/.
Ingredient #3
Post testimonials/social proof on your website because “A Players” want to work 
with other “A Players”—or where other “A Players” have worked.
“The team at Predictive ROI is incredible. They are so talented and pas-
sionate about this industry, and that really makes such a difference. I feel like 
I have learned much more through this internship than I ever expected. With 
every step of the way, I felt involved in the process and that my thoughts and 
ideas mattered. Through the help of some pretty great mentors, I was able 
to not only learn more about this industry, but was able to apply what I was 
learning first-hand.”—Whitney Puent
“There’s one word that comes to mind when looking to describe the Pre-
dictive ROI internship: special. Predictive ROI gives you the opportunity 
to do great work that has an impact. But, more importantly, at Predictive 
ROI you work with the greatest team you could ever ask for, a team that will 
have your back and guide you so that you’re better prepared for the working 
world, and better prepared for life. If you’re willing to put in the hard work, 

GETTING IT ALL DONE: RECRUIT ROCK STAR UNPAID INTERNS 
[ 197 ]
don’t think twice about applying for an internship with Predictive ROI. You 
won’t regret it.”—Louie Schuth
“Applying for an internship with Predictive ROI was the best decision 
I’ve made in a long time. Going into my final semester of college, I knew I 
wanted an internship that would allow me to hone and develop my profes-
sional skills by making impactful contributions within an organization. An 
internship with Predictive ROI gives you exactly that. At Predictive ROI, 
you are given the opportunity to work with an unbelievable team that will 
teach you the tools and skills needed to be successful in your career.”
—Alex Krupski
Ingredient #4
Weed out B and C Players by sending a prequalifying email with challenging, 
thought-provoking questions to each candidate.
We send the following email immediately after receiving someone’s 
application/résumé:
[Candidate’s First Name], thank you for your interest in our internship!
As the first step in our process, please review the following questions and 
email us back your thoughts for each.
Your answers to each question will give our team an opportunity to: (1) under-
stand how we can create the right internship experience for you and ensure 
that you learn everything you want to learn, (2) evaluate your written communi-
cation skills, and (3) assess your depth of interest in joining our team.
1. Please introduce yourself (beyond what we can learn by reading your 
résumé) and discuss why our internship is of interest to you.
2. Please describe the top three things you would like to learn during 
this internship. We encourage you to be as specific as possible.
3. Tell us about your digital marketing experience up to this point (and if 
it is zero . . . that is okay).

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 198 ]
4. Things we cannot teach are work ethic, commitment to teammates, 
integrity, and excellence. Please share an example of when you con-
sistently demonstrated excellence in your work.
5. Please share an example of when you demonstrated integrity.
6. What are the attributes or qualities you look for in teammates?
7. How can we help support your growth and development during this 
internship?
8. This is my direct email address—please feel free to reply here.
We look forward to talking with you.
Please let me know if you have any questions or concerns.
Sincerely Yours,
Stephen Woessner
Host of the Onward Nation podcast
CEO of Predictive ROI
Ingredient #5
Conduct an initial call to assess cultural fit and subject matter expertise deep 
dive.
If the answers provided back meet our standard of excellence, we schedule a 
subject matter expertise–focused phone call in order to assess:
 
Cultural fit
 
Depth of technical/content marketing knowledge
The candidate’s current knowledge is not a deal breaker because we train our 
interns—but it is good to have a baseline. I also make a decision—along with 
the candidate—on whether or not there is a good enough fit to move on to In-
gredient #6.

GETTING IT ALL DONE: RECRUIT ROCK STAR UNPAID INTERNS 
[ 199 ]
Ingredient #6
Conduct a team interview with the candidate.
We then schedule and conduct team interviews with candidates. Kath-
erine, Erik, Alex Krupski (also a former intern who is now our full-time search 
engine optimization and systems specialist), and I conduct each interview. Our 
aim during this interview is to answer any questions from the candidate about 
Predictive ROI, the internship, and where the company is headed. We ask a 
lot of questions about teamwork, proactivity, independent working, and critical 
thinking. It’s important to note that I have one vote of four during the debrief 
sessions following each interview. Making decisions as a team is part of our cul-
ture. So is giving Katherine, Erik, and Alex the same decision-making authority 
as me during the process. I am a firm believer that they should select their new 
teammates. 
Ingredient #7
Make a go or no-go decision—then send “Congratulations” email.
Good Morning [Candidate’s First Name], thank you again for your time yes-
terday afternoon!
I am excited to give you a very warm welcome to the Predictive ROI team.
Katherine, Erik, Alex, and I thoroughly enjoyed our time with you yesterday and 
look forward to having your contribution to the work we are all doing.
I am preparing a formal acceptance letter that will detail initial responsibilities, 
internship duration, etc. I will email it to you on Friday for your review and 
approval.
But at this point . . . would Monday be a good start date for you?
And would you be able to attend our 8:45 a.m. kick-start meeting via Zoom?
Onward with gusto!

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 200 ]
Ingredient #8
Kick off the semester-long internship.
After the candidate has accepted our internship, we bring her into our daily 
kick-start meetings every morning at 8:45. We all work on four issues:
1.  My three most vital priorities for the day are . . . 
2.  What I didn’t get done yesterday but should have (not a judgment 
question—but an ask for teamwork)
3.  This is where I need some help . . . 
4.  I do/don’t have available time today
Lastly, your probability of creating a solid internship program rests in your 
willingness to take vital projects off your plate and give them to your interns. I 
encourage you to put them on the front lines with clients and task them with 
meaningful work. They will love you for it, and you will continue to recruit rock 
star unpaid interns.

[ 201 ]
EPILOGUE 
DON’T QUIT—WIN THE OSCAR INSTEAD
C
ongratulations on making it to the end of this book. I know it wasn’t easy. 
But now you need to keep building the momentum and launch your 
own profitable podcast. The only way you can do that is to push yourself 
to think past the thoughts of quitting that will soon be crashing against you—if 
they haven’t already started. If you are feeling that right now—rest assured—that 
is the impostor syndrome just trying to steal your destiny from you. 
Rather than quitting, my hope for you is that you will win the Oscar instead. 
I will illustrate the tenacity you need through this lesson I learned from Tony 
Robbins. It is a story you may already know—a story about grit, perseverance, 
and about being so committed to what you want to do—what you believe in—
that you work desperately to create it.
The story is about Sylvester Stallone—one of Hollywood’s most successful 
actors. But Stallone didn’t have success handed to him; he had to earn it. He had 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 202 ]
to knock down obstacles and barriers to prove he was worthy. He had to starve, 
he had to endure hardship, he had to freeze in his New York City apartment, he 
had to go without everything, and he had to find warmth in the public library.
He faced more than 1,500 brutal and cruel rejections from talent scouts and 
agents. And yet, he did not quit.
Sylvester Stallone had been listening to some of Tony’s audio programs and 
really liked them. So Stallone did what any of us would do—he invited Tony 
over to dinner so they could talk things over.
Before dinner, Tony said to Stallone, “You know, I have heard your story 
from other people, but I would really love to hear it from the horse’s mouth. I 
don’t know how much is mythology or urban myth or how much is true.”
Stallone agreed to share his life story with Tony. He had always known what 
he wanted to do—ever since he was very young. He wanted to be in the movie 
business. Period. Not TV, but the movies. Being in the movies was an opportu-
nity to help people escape the realities of their day. But more than that, it was an 
opportunity to inspire audiences.
Stallone’s drive—his passion—is what makes his movies inspiring. He helps 
audiences see how they could overcome unbelievable obstacles, because in his 
own life, he feels that he has done that.
For example, Stallone told Tony that when he was born he was pulled out of 
his mother’s womb with forceps. That’s why he looks and talks the way he does. 
With resolve in his voice, he said to Tony, “I really wanted to do this—to be in 
the movies. I know why I wanted to do it and I wasn’t going to settle for any- 
thing else.”
Stallone went out to try to get acting jobs. But it’s not like he went, “Yo, 
Adrian,” and the casting directors said, “Oh, wait, you’re a star.” In fact, the early 
years of Stallone’s career didn’t work out real well. He was alone, hungry, and 
grinding it out—just to survive.
Casting directors looked at Stallone and said things like, “You’re stupid looking; 
do something else.” They made fun of the way Stallone talked, and they told him 
that there was no place for him in the movies. They said, “You’re never going to be 
a star. You’re insane. No one is going to want to listen to someone who looks and 

[ 203 ]
epilogue
sounds dopey, and talks out the side of their mouth.” Imagine if someone said that 
to you. How would you feel? What would you do? Would you quit?
Stallone received no, after no, after no . . . after no. He told Tony that he was 
thrown out of more than 1,500 agent offices in New York. Tony said, “Hey, wait 
a minute; there aren’t 1,500 agents in New York.” 
Stallone said, “Yeah, I know . . . I’ve been to all of them five, six, seven, eight, 
or nine times.”
He then shared with Tony a time he had made it to an agent’s office at four 
in the afternoon and the agent wouldn’t agree to see Stallone. Stallone refused 
to leave. He stayed there all night until the agent came back the next morning. 
His persistence paid off. He landed his first movie role. Tony said, “Oh really, 
I thought Rocky was your first movie?” He said this other movie that Tony had 
never heard of was his first movie. Tony asked him what character he played, and 
Stallone said, “Oh, well, I was in it for about twenty seconds, and I was a thug 
that somebody beat up because they made me feel like people hate your guts so 
you getting beat up will be a good thing.”
He did three movies like that but didn’t get anything more. Yet, he kept 
going out to look. He received only rejection, rejection, and more rejection. Did 
he give up? Did he quit? Heck no!
Finally Stallone realized that it wasn’t working. So he changed his approach. 
He was desperate. He was starving. He couldn’t afford to heat his apartment. His 
wife was screaming at him every day to go get a job.
So Tony asked him, “Well, why didn’t you go out and get a job?”
Stallone said, “Because I knew that if I got a job, I would get seduced back, 
and I would lose my hunger. And the only way that I could do this was if it 
was the only choice—and that I had burned all other bridges. Because if I got a 
normal job, pretty soon, I would be caught up in that rhythm and would start to 
feel okay about my life—and I would feel that my dream would just gradually 
disappear. And I wanted to keep that hunger, keep that hunger burning. Because 
hunger was the only thing that I thought was my advantage.”
Stallone said his wife didn’t understand that at all. They had vicious fights. It 
was freezing; they had no money. One day he went to the New York City public 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 204 ]
library because it was warm. He didn’t plan on actually reading anything, but he 
was hanging out there and sat down on a chair near where someone had left a 
book. It was the poems and stories of Edgar Alan Poe.
Stallone started reading it and totally got into it. How Poe had lived, how he 
died, what really happened, Stallone studied all of the details. Tony asked him, 
“Well, what did Poe do for you?” Stallone told Tony, “Poe got me out of myself. 
He got me to think about how I could touch other people—not worry about 
myself so much. And that made me want to become a writer.”
Stallone began to write screenplays but nothing worked, and he and his wife 
were still broke. He didn’t even have $50 to his name. But finally, he sold a script 
called Paradise Alley. Big success! He told Tony he sold it for $100 and that felt 
like a ton of money. Stallone was so thrilled and thought, “Yes, I am on my way.”
Unfortunately, selling that script actually never led to anything (although 
he did produce Paradise Alley many years later). Stallone kept going and going 
and going and going. Finally, he was so broke he sold his wife’s jewelry. He said, 
“Tony, there are some things in life you should never do . . . and that was basically 
the end of our relationship.”
She hated his guts so much. Broke, they had no food, no money, and the one 
thing Stallone loved most in the world was his dog.
This is where the story gets really good. It is painful but a great illustration 
of why you should never quit.
Stallone was so broke he couldn’t even feed his dog. It was the lowest day in 
his life. He stood outside a liquor store and he tried to sell his dog to strangers 
for $50. Finally, one guy negotiated with him to buy his dog—his best friend in 
the whole world—for $25.
Stallone walked away from there and just cried. Heart wrenching. But he 
still wouldn’t quit.
Then providence set in. Two weeks later, he was watching a fight between 
Muhammad Ali and Chuck Wepner, who was getting bludgeoned but kept on 
coming back for more. He wouldn’t give up. And Stallone had an idea. He started 
writing as soon as the fight ended, and he didn’t stop. He didn’t sleep. He wrote 
the entire movie script in twenty hours straight.

[ 205 ]
epilogue
Right then and there. He saw the fight. Wrote the movie. Whole thing. Done. 
Stallone told Tony he was so excited that he was shaking. He really knew what he 
wanted. He knew why he wanted it. And he took massive action to get it.
But now that he had the script to Rocky, he still had to sell it to an agent. Some 
read it and said, “This is predictable, this is stupid, and this is sappy.” Stallone said 
that he wrote down all the things they said and that he read them the night of the 
Oscars when they won. The greatest revenge can sometimes be massive success.
He kept going and trying to sell it and no one would buy it—and he was 
still broke.
But finally, he met two agents who read the script and believed in it. They 
loved it, and they offered Stallone $125,000 for it. Wait! What? Tony told Stal-
lone: “My word, you must have been out of your mind.”
Stallone definitely was. But he said to the agents, “Just one thing though, 
guys—you have a deal based on one thing. I gotta star in the movie.” They were 
like, “What? What are you talking about? You’re a writer!” Stallone pushed back, 
“No, I’m an actor.” And they said, “No, no, no . . . you’re a writer.” He pushed back 
to them again, “No, I’m an actor. That is my story . . . and I’m Rocky. I gotta play 
Rocky. I gotta play the starring role.”
They said, “Look, there’s no way that we’re going to pay you $125,000 and 
take some no-name actor and stick you in the movie and then throw our money 
away. We need a star. Take it or leave it.” So, as Stallone left the room he said, “If 
that’s what you believe, then you don’t get my script.”
Again, this is a man who was dirt broke, and $125,000 was more money than 
he had seen in his lifetime. Yet he walked away, because he knew his destiny and 
why he was committed to it.
The agents called Stallone a few weeks later, brought him back to their office, 
and offered him a quarter of a million dollars for his script, but he still couldn’t 
star in his own movie. Stallone turned it down. The agents came back with their 
final offer of $325,000. They really wanted this script. But Stallone said, “Not 
without me in it.” They said no.
They finally compromised, and they gave him $35,000—as well as a rev-
enue share in the movie so that Stallone would share in the risk with them. The 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 206 ]
bottom line for the agents was that they didn’t think the movie would work so 
they were not willing to spend a bunch of money on it.
They invested only $1 million to produce Rocky. It grossed $200 million. 
But here’s where it gets really interesting. Tony asked Stallone, “So what did 
you do? Even at $35,000, it’s not a quarter million but it’s still a lot of money 
when you don’t have $25. What’s the first thing you did?”
Tony figured Stallone went out and partied or something. But he didn’t. He 
told Tony that he went to that liquor store where he had sold his dog and stood 
there for three straight days hoping the guy who bought his dog would come 
back. He wanted to buy back his dog.
On the third day the guy walked by. Stallone couldn’t believe it. And there 
was his dog, too! Stallone looked at him and said, “Sir, you remember me?” It had 
been about a month and a half since he had sold him his dog.
The guy said, “Yeah, yeah, I remember.” 
Stallone said, “Look, I was so broke; I was so starved. He’s my best friend; 
I’m sure you love him, too . . . but I gotta have him back, please; I will pay you 
$100 for the dog. I know you paid me $25; I will give you $100.”
And the man said, “Absolutely not, no way. It’s my dog now; you can’t buy 
him back.”
And Stallone said to Tony, “You know how you say, ‘you gotta know your 
outcome’? Well, I knew mine, so I kept changing my approach. I offered him 
$500 for the dog.”
The guy said absolutely no way. Stallone offered him $1,000 for the dog. The 
guy said, “No amount of money will ever get this dog for you.”
Tony asked him, “So what did you do?” Stallone said, “I knew my outcome 
so I decided to take massive action. I just kept changing my approach until I got 
my dog.”
Tony asked him, “So what did it cost you?” Stallone said, “$15,000 and a part 
in the movie Rocky!”
The dog in Rocky, “Butkus,” was Stallone’s real dog. That’s the dog he bought 
back for $15,000.

[ 207 ]
epilogue
If you’re committed, there is always a way. You just have to keep changing your 
approach.
You were meant for greatness. You are instilled with an abundance of talent 
and gifts. Please don’t let something so small as fear—or your circumstances—
limit all you were meant to be.
As my mentor Don Yaeger says, “Greatness is available to all of us if you are 
willing to do the common things uncommonly well.”
Don’t ever quit!

[ 209 ]
APPENDIX 
SUCCESS STORIES FROM BUSINESS OWNERS
Each person’s definition of success can and should be different. The word success 
is a difficult word for business owners to define. Sometimes having models or 
examples to consider—or insights from a mentor—can make all the difference 
in sorting out the outcomes that matter.
The business owners I interviewed for this section are using their podcasts 
to grow revenue, expand their platform, and build their nation of true fans. But 
what I found so compelling during these conversations was that while each had 
similar goals, they also had their own personalized strategies to get there. My 
hope for you is that their stories will help you gain clarity on your vital priorities 
and, most important, how you define what a successful podcast looks like for you.
John Livesay, host of The Successful Pitch
John is a funding strategist who helps CEOs craft compelling pitches that engage 
investors in a way that inspires them to join a start-up’s team. He partners with 
Judy Robinett at Crack the Funding Code, which gets founders funded fast. He 
hosts The Successful Pitch with investors around the world. As I noted earlier, Inc. 
magazine calls John the “Pitch Whisperer.” 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 210 ]
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
John: I was helping tech start-ups with their pitch and they kept telling me, “This is great. 
I definitely need help and what I also need are warm introductions to investors now that I 
have this great pitch.” I kept saying, “I don’t do that. I don’t know any investors.” Enough 
people kept saying it to me that I thought maybe I should follow my own advice, and that 
is if your customers and clients are telling you something that they want and are willing 
to pay for, then maybe you should figure out how to get it for them. My podcast was my 
way of building up my network of investors so I could introduce my clients.
But, before I even started, I had to overcome what I call the “Three Faces of Fear.” 
When I get afraid to do something outside of my comfort zone, I need to put a face 
on it; otherwise it’s just so overwhelming and so fearful. For me, the first fear was the 
Fear of Rejection, where I would say to myself, “Well, what if I invite someone to be 
on my podcast and they say, ‘No thanks,’ or ‘Let’s hear several other episodes before 
I accept.’ I’ve learned from being in sales for the majority of my career that the key to 
rejection is you just cannot take it personally. I take it one step further and tell my clients, 
“Never reject yourself.”
The second fear I had to overcome was the Fear of Failure. When you’re starting a 
podcast or a business or anything, the Fear of Failure will knock on your door and say, 
“What if you invest all this time and all this money and nobody downloads an episode? 
Won’t that be humiliating? Won’t that be a waste of time and money?” Luckily for me, 
one of my guests was Jay Samit, who wrote a book called Disrupt You. In it he writes, 
“Failure is just feedback. Keep going until you get a zombie idea so great it won’t die.” 
Then the third fear is the Fear of the Unknown. The list of things I didn’t know about 
starting a podcast was a mile long, including what microphone do I buy? How do I edit 
this thing? How do I promote it? What questions should I ask? I’d been a guest on many 
shows, but I’d never hosted one, and it’s very different being on the other side of the mic. 
I found the number of technology things overwhelming, and I thought, “That could be the 
thing that stops me from doing it.” Then, I found someone who does it for you. Collabora-
tion is the secret to overcoming the Fear of the Unknown.

[ 211 ]
appendix
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
John: It separates you from everybody else. When I used to go to events, and people 
would say, “Oh, what do you do?” I always said, “I help start-ups craft a pitch and make 
introductions to investors.” Now, I say, “I host a podcast where I interview investors who 
share with me their criteria on what they look for when they hear a pitch. The response 
is now, “Oh. You’re a journalist?” That was a big ah-ha for me. That part really changes 
how you position yourself. 
The biggest impact was I got to meet the amazing and wonderful Judy Robinett 
as my second guest. Judy wrote a book called How to Be a Power Connector and 
has been doing venture capital funding and helping people for over twenty years. She 
started sending me people to help with the pitch . . . and they started getting great 
results. Then she said, “Why don’t we go into business together and start Crack the 
Funding Code? You’re all about the pitch and the storytelling and the selling and I’m all 
about strategic introductions and the financials.”
Second, the guests that I’ve interviewed are amazing. Like Guy Spear, who along 
with another investor, paid over $600,000 at a charity auction to have lunch with Warren 
Buffett. And I interviewed him. I would never have gotten to talk to somebody like Guy if 
I didn’t have a podcast. Guy said, “Well, how can I help you?” I said, “We’re looking for 
start-ups who need help with their funding and help with their pitch.” He said, “I started 
Entrepreneurs’ Organization Israel, let me introduce you.” 
Third, I turned ten of my favorite episodes into a book called The Successful Pitch: 
Conversations on Going from Invisible to Investible because it really is eavesdropping 
in on those conversations with people that you would never be able to have a conver-
sation with, but you get to eavesdrop in on the book from me interviewing them on the 
podcast.
Q3: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
John: I would say the most critical skills are empathy and listening. One of the inves-
tors told me on my podcast that the more empathy you show for your customer, the 
more you understand that customer and can solve that problem. The more you can put 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 212 ]
yourself in the shoes of your guests and respond to what they’re saying, make them feel 
heard, and then summarize what you’re hearing for the audience as the takeaways, that, 
in my opinion, is what it takes to be really great as a podcast host.
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
John: I would say the biggest challenge, after I got over the Three Faces of Fear and 
was actually starting to do it, was letting go of the need to be perfect. The irony is that 
I constantly coach my clients to let go of perfectionism and focus on progress, that is, 
be a “progression-ist” not a “perfectionist.” When I took my own advice, I said, “I’m not 
going to be great the first few probably. I won’t embarrass myself or make the guests 
feel uncomfortable, but I’m not probably going to hit it out of the park the first two or 
three.” Just be gentle with yourself when you start anything new. Nobody starts off 
perfect.
Q5: What has been your most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
John: That there would be a book and I would be on TV. I’ve never dreamed that dream. 
That was beyond anything I could’ve even imagined. I just wanted to do it to build my 
network of investors so people would hire me to help them with a pitch and make those 
introductions. I never dreamed I would meet my business partner, turn it into a book, or 
that I’d be going to Nashville, Tulsa, and Portland and doing TV here in Los Angeles all 
because of the podcast.
Q6: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
John: Just start—take action and don’t do things that aren’t in your sweet spot. Keep 
your intention on how can you can serve your listeners.

[ 213 ]
appendix
Vera Fischer, host of System Execution
Vera began her career in residential real estate, working her way up from leasing agent 
to property manager. She segued to operations manager for the first privately held 
cognitive rehabilitation clinic in Austin, Texas. In 1993, Vera launched her career 
at GSD&M, an internationally known advertising agency. After various positions 
within several Austin-area agencies, Vera went client-side to Forgent Networks. 
There she managed and implemented a multi-million-dollar marketing budget for 
several years. In 2004, Vera founded her agency, 97 Degrees West, in Austin.
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Vera: The podcast focuses on systems and processes for successful companies. Be-
cause of what I do in the marketing and branding world, I’ve met with hundreds of busi-
ness owners. And the recurring theme in the discussions is that getting certain ideas or 
implementing a new product or implementing a new service is quite difficult from a pro-
cess perspective, especially if they’re not used to processes, or they get overwhelmed, 
or they’re not into logistics. 
I love processes, and I like systems, so one of my best gifts on my bucket list would 
be to go see the Amazon warehouse and how they actually get things packaged up. 
That’s highly interesting to me. Also realizing that there wasn’t a lot out there from a pod-
cast perspective, so I said, “Hey, that’s a great subject matter, and it’s something that 
can keep going, and it’s very personable because lots of people do it different ways. 
There’s no one right way to do systems.”
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Vera: I had been really doing a lot of research the past year before I actually launched 
it and really tried to understand how to get something like that off the ground. Through 
that research, I realized that podcasting is a new medium and I felt like there was an 
opportunity to be on the front end of it.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 214 ]
Also what is fascinating about it is that I have a very specific type of audience 
so it’s this one tool I can use to have a deep connection with my audience and my 
guests. In the world of business, for most of us, unless of course you’re Apple, you’re 
not trying to reach the masses. You should be trying to reach a very specific type of 
audience that fits your criteria. It also gave me a voice as a business owner and as the 
brand of an individual. It allowed me to really research and explore what I like and also 
have an opinion about it.
The impact it’s had on my business has been amazing. My network has exploded. I 
spend a good amount of my time following up with all of the opportunity. That’s another 
key is that when you are starting something like this, you’ve got to be ready to follow up 
on every opportunity, every connection, and every introduction. 
There is no way I could have met the people who I’m connecting with now and in-
terviewing had I not started the podcast. Now I’m bringing value to these folks.
I get to be my own media channel because rather than walking up to the folks and 
saying, “Hey, this is what I do,” I literally can say, “I’d love for you to be on my show.” 
People get so excited about that. I have no plans to stop. I think it’s just going to get 
better and better.
Q3: What do you think is the most critical skill for a business owner  
to master in order to be successful at podcasting?
Vera: You have to want to educate—especially from a business perspective. You’re 
there to teach your listeners something: a skill, how to approach life, how to approach 
business, how to do something within their business, and if that doesn’t come as an 
innate talent to you, or desire, it won’t be fun. It’s supposed to be fun. You should be 
energized by it.
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
Vera: It’s hard to get guests at the beginning, and you should launch with at least ten 
podcasts in your queue. When you don’t have a website or your podcast is brand 
new . . . you really have to find people willing to be interviewed without really knowing 

[ 215 ]
appendix
or seeing a lot of information about your podcast. But don’t give up. Just keep going. 
In the beginning I literally, if there was a prominent business person I connected with, 
I wanted to interview them regardless of whether or not they were the right fit from an 
industry perspective. Just to help build some initial credibility.
Once I get them to sign up through my online scheduling link, and by the time that 
I get on Skype with them, they had already been communicated with several different 
times via email and text. We have a very professional Guest Advocacy System. By the 
time I get on Skype with them, they already know that it is a credible situation. I’ve never 
had anyone say, “I just don’t think this is the right thing for me. I don’t want to do the 
interview.”
I solved this initial challenge in an interesting way. In my business, my role is sales, 
marketing, and finance. I spend a good part of my day understanding digital and really 
participating in that. I think that has made a huge difference. Through that, because 
I monitor our company’s Twitter and my personal Twitter accounts, I started inviting 
people via Twitter, and shockingly they said yes. I couldn’t believe it at first. Now it’s 
even easier because I have a proven concept.
Q5: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Vera: My guests are my vital priority. I probably spend two hours a week recruiting 
guests. It’s getting easier because people know about my show. Whoever gets inter-
viewed, I have a really great referral as well. Guests say to me, “Oh, I have a great 
person who would want to be on your show,” and they’ll send them to me. That part 
is getting easier, and I’m not spending as much time. As far as the interviews are con-
cerned, they are usually anywhere from thirty minutes to sixty minutes and it depends 
on how many I have scheduled for the week, so it could be one hour or five hours out 
of my week.
The key is that I am not involved in the execution of all of this stuff. My role is to con-
nect, have the interview, focus on that, and then my team takes care of everything else. I 
can’t imagine if I had to do it on my own and do all of the editing, and the promoting, and 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 216 ]
everything like that. That would probably take up twenty hours a week. In my opinion, it’s 
critical that you have a team that’s managing and executing on all of that, where you’re 
just focused on the good stuff—the interviewing and the guests.
Q6: What has been your most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
Vera: That all of these incredibly intelligent people who have so many accolades and all 
of the cred, if you will, that goes with those people, they’re just regular people. They’re 
funny, and they deal with crazy schedules just like everybody else, and they’ve got kids, 
and they’ve got life things that are going on. They say to me, “What can I do for you? 
How can I help you?” Wow.
Q7: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
Vera: Podcasting is like taking a left turn. If you are taking a left turn and you see a car 
coming, you’ve got to commit. You can’t stop in the middle of the road—you must follow 
through. Podcasting is definitely a commitment. It’s not a toe dip. You’re either in or 
you’re out. Once you’re ready to go—commit.
Drew McLellan, host of Build a Better Agency
Drew is the top dog at Agency Management Institute (AMI). He has also 
owned and operated his own agency over the past twenty years. All through the 
year, he straddles the fence of working in his own agency and working with 250+ 
small to midsize agencies in a variety of ways. He works with agency owners in 
peer network groups, he teaches workshops for owners and their teams, and he 
does consulting. His Build a Better Agency podcast reached number one in iTunes’ 
New and Noteworthy shortly after launch.

[ 217 ]
appendix
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Drew: My podcast is an offshoot of my business, Agency Management Institute, and 
so as one might infer from the word agency being in both of those names, my audience 
is narrow. I serve agency owners and agency leaders in advertising, marketing, PR, 
media—those kinds of agencies that are what I call small to midsized. They might have 
one employee up to about three hundred employees. They are privately owned so the 
owners are still invested in the business, not only financially but it’s where they spend 
their days.
My guests then are equally focused. When I sort of screen for who would make a 
good guest the question I ask myself is, “What could they teach an agency owner?” 
For me that gets easy because not only do I have that business, but I still own my own 
agency. I’m able to look at it from the lens of, “Can I learn something from these people 
in terms of running my agency?” That means my audience can as well. My guests have 
ranged. They’re really a wide array of people in terms of their skill set, so everyone from 
CPAs who can talk about how to build your agency’s value before you sell it, to an 
intellectual property attorney who talked about protecting trademarks, to people who 
own an agency, who’ve built an agency from scratch, or who’ve left a big agency to go 
out on their own.
So I really try to come at it in terms of who can help agencies be better, be more 
profitable, build a better entity, have better employee relationships. Anybody who can 
talk about any of those topics is game for me as a guest.
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Drew: I think like most things in business there are intended consequences and then 
there are surprises, so my intended consequence was to broaden AMI’s digital foot-
print—to create a platform that was more interactive and allowed me to share with my 
audience expertise beyond my own expertise. I’ve owned my own agency for twenty- 
one years, and I’ve been doing this AMI gig for almost a decade, so it’s not that I don’t 
have a lot of knowledge around running a better agency, but there are certain things that 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 218 ]
guest Sharon Toerek knows because of her expertise as an IP attorney that I’m never 
going to be able to speak to with the same influence and authority she can.
I wanted to add even more value than I’m capable of doing on my own; hence, I 
need super-smart guests who have expertise outside of my own small sphere of knowl-
edge. That’s some of the unintended consequences, so I knew that I’d be exposed to 
more people. I knew that that would over time trickle into workshop registrations and 
other things, consulting gigs, all that sort of thing. A couple of things came out of it that 
I really hadn’t expected.
Number one, the trickle of opportunity from podcast guests to workshop attendee 
has been greater and faster than I thought it would. So that’s awesome.
It’s not just workshops, it’s consulting gigs, and AMI runs peer networks where 
agency owners come together and become like a Vistage group, but everybody is an 
agency owner. There have been more members joining. All of the things that AMI offers 
have benefited from the podcast, but some of the unintended or what I didn’t really think 
about, or maybe went out of my primary goals are, I now have deeper connections with 
all of those guests, and that serves my audience in a couple ways. One, I have people 
I can connect agency owners to when they need a specific thing. I’m a much better 
referral source now to be able to connect them to these experts.
Number two, at a lot of the workshops and AMI peer networks and some of the 
other things we do, I need great speakers, so the podcast has been a way for me to 
audition, if you will, the speakers to see if they would be good as a guest.
Number three, it’s opened up some really interesting partnerships between me and 
some guests. We’ve been able to collaborate on things together. Projects that serve a 
lot of them also serve the same audience. It’s deepened my friendship with those folks, 
and it’s got me a lot more invites into industry events, so that’s been great.
There’s not been a downside—there’s been much more benefit than I ever expected.
I think the model you teach, which is the Trojan horse of sales, where you’re inviting 
as guests to your show people you would like to do business with, I think that’s brilliant. 
It’s just not what I decided to do. As you know, I’m talking to other folks about it all the 
time and suggesting that they think about doing that and that they talk to you. Because 
I do think it’s spot on.

[ 219 ]
appendix
I guess I would put it this way—I’m accidentally getting more business out of my 
podcast guests because of how and who they are. I think when you have great intention 
about who you invite on your show you can do it at an exponentially faster and better 
rate, but that wasn’t my goal so it’s not the way I built my podcast, but I certainly think 
it’s a smart way to build a podcast.
Q3: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
Drew: I think it’s a combination of skills, but I think the most important skill is that the 
host needs to be able to check their ego at the door. My job is to augment and put 
the spotlight on my guest and their expertise. I do that by listening really hard to what 
they say and running it through my filter of, “What else would an agency owner want 
to know about that?” I’m not talking over them. I’m not trying to jump in and show how 
much I know about it, but I am listening super hard. I am asking follow-up questions 
and trying to stay out of the guest’s way so they have as much airtime as possible to 
share expertise.
I’m always listening like, “What should I be asking next? What did somebody want to 
hear more about that or how would they want to drill deeper into this?” I’m trying to ask 
those questions because I don’t want somebody going, “I can’t believe he didn’t ask X!” 
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success, like reaching number one in iTunes’ 
New and Noteworthy during your launch. But, what do you consider to be your 
biggest obstacle or challenge to building momentum?
Drew: I’m sure I have the same doubts that everybody had. “What if I suck? What if 
nobody listens? What if no one wants to be a guest?” At first there was the, “How much 
work is it going to take?” For me it was really, I don’t want to say a confidence issue, but 
it’s a new venture, “What if I’m not good at it?” You’re in essence doing it live, so what 
if I say something silly? How do I recover from that?
What I discovered is, that the minute I again checked my ego at the door, I realized 
that it wasn’t about somebody listening to me, it was about me cultivating this great list 
of guests and serving the guests well, which serves my audience. So, I allow my guests 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 220 ]
to have the spotlight and I allow them to really share their expertise and I prep them 
properly so it’s like, “Look, there is no selling; this is not about you getting clients, this 
is about you generously sharing your expertise. Here are the kind of questions I’m going 
to ask. If you’re not comfortable answering those questions, don’t come on the show.” 
None of that was about me. It was about serving up the best content for the audience 
by putting the guests in the best possible light.
It wasn’t really until I had fifteen or twenty episodes in the can that I really knew that 
this was something that was going to catch on and take off even though the numbers 
were already suggesting that that was the case. I needed that sort of, “Wow, all of my 
guests are consistently really good.”
I had my own rhythm in terms of how I approached an interview, and then it was 
like, I can’t possibly stop doing this because it’s so awesome and successful and 
people love it, and it’s serving my business so well, why in the world would I stop? The 
only advice I have is, you kind of push through it because it’s good for your business, 
it’s good for your customer or clients, and it’s good for you as a person, too. I learned 
so much from my podcast guests. It just makes me a better professional. It makes me 
a better person, so there’s nothing bad about it. You just have to get over yourself to 
get it done.
Q5: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Drew: The time factor was really my biggest fear. “Will I have time for this?” I own and 
run three different companies. I am the primary caregiver for my mom, who is in late 
stages of dementia, and I have a twenty-three-year-old daughter, who, any of you who 
are a parent know, requires time and care and attention as well. My life is very sched-
uled. I am going at a full speed all the time. The idea of sitting and watching a television 
show without doing something else—I don’t know what that’s like.
I was very concerned about shoving something else into my calendar. So I will 
say this, and again in full disclosure, I quickly partnered with Predictive ROI to do the 

[ 221 ]
appendix
back end of my podcast. I’m a firm believer in recognizing where my own strengths and 
weaknesses are and doing what I do best where I can get the greatest return, whether 
that’s in a personal relationship or that’s money in a business or whatever it is, and rec-
ognizing that I cannot be all things to all people and so I need to pay for expertise that 
I don’t have. 
I had no desire to learn how to create a relationship with iTunes and do all the ed-
iting of the podcast and all of that so I turned to Predictive ROI and said, “I want you to 
produce my podcast for me. I will source the guests; I will interview the guests. I’ll help 
with the Show Notes and things like that, but the whole technical side of it, I don’t have 
the time nor do I have the expertise to do that really well.”
The time investment on the front end was greater. We had to get all that stuff set up 
and even though I didn’t do most of it, I had to sort of at least vote on some things. I was 
worried because of my schedule and, I guess, let’s add to my, “Here is what my life looks 
like.” I was on 188 planes in 2015, so I also travel a ton and I’m in a lot of all-day meetings, 
so I was really worried about having enough interviews so I didn’t go dry one week. My 
podcast is a once-a-week podcast, so I wanted to have twenty or thirty interviews in the 
can before we went live, and I think I ended up with about twenty-five.
Obviously the time investment to do that was greater, but for me that’s half a year’s 
worth of podcasts. After the initial push, there are some weeks where I do little to 
nothing. I might approve the Show Notes that someone else has written for me. I might 
write a little intro that is going out on my blog or on Facebook when the show goes live, 
but there are some weeks that I don’t do anything. For every podcast episode I would 
say I invest about thirty minutes to the guest, send the guest an email, which is a preset 
email that I just fill in a couple of blanks and sign them, inviting them to be a guest.
Then your team has everything automated so they go and find my schedule, they 
choose the time that works for them, they sign up for the interview. It gets out into my 
calendar so I know they’ve signed up, and then they’re automatically sent the questions 
and reminders and all kinds of stuff that I don’t have to think about at all. I will have about 
thirty minutes of prep to get the intro ready and to get my list of potential questions 
ready and all that sort of thing. Then I spend forty-five minutes or an hour or so doing 
the actual podcast interview.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 222 ]
I upload that into Dropbox and then I’m done. Then my team, which is your team, 
edits the podcasts; gets it ready; and submits it to Google, Stitcher, and iTunes; writes 
all the Show Notes; does all of the stuff in the background that I would never have time 
to do. Makes sure that the audio quality is great and coaches me on things that I can do 
better, all of those things.
With today’s technology I have recorded podcasts in probably every state of the 
union. I have a really high-quality microphone, and it’s very portable. I can take it with me 
and so (A) the podcast is fluid and flexible enough that it works around the rest of my 
life and (B) it’s easy to do anywhere.
I will say this, if I can pull off a weekly podcast episode, anybody should be able 
to—not because I’m superhuman, but my life is just so calendared and scheduled that if 
I can figure out a way to fit it in, it really can’t be that big of a burden.
I thought it would take more time than it did.
It flows nicely with the rest of my world, and now literally I’m at a conference or 
whatever and I’m saying to somebody, “Oh, you know what? You’d be a great podcast 
guest,” and I am from my phone shooting them the template email, and boom they are 
signing up while we’re standing there talking, and it’s all so easy and seamless and the 
value proposition for me.
It’s been so good for my business. I can’t even imagine how good it’s going to be 
for my business three and four years from now. So the time investment is really minus-
cule compared to the value. I also can’t even imagine how valuable it would be to me 
if I were interviewing prospects I wanted to have as clients. The value would be even 
greater. It’s just not my business model. Even in doing it my way, the value is exponential 
compared to the time investment.
Q6: What has been your most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
Drew: People are reaching out to me now to be on the podcast. I have people asking if 
they would be good guests, which is awesome. I’m getting more opportunity to speak at 
conferences and other podcasts, so again, remembering that one of my goals was sort 
of to expand my digital footprint, and today in marketing anybody who is not thinking 
about how to really amp up their thought leadership and demonstrate their expertise is 

[ 223 ]
appendix
missing the boat. In terms of a thought-leadership tool or a marketing tactic, this has 
been spectacular. It’s rippled a lot of other benefits for me in terms of exposure. Fast 
Company, Inc. magazine, and other places like that—I’m being invited on a regular basis 
to write for because of the podcast.
It’s a rare marketing tactic that there is sort of no downside. There really has been 
no downside to this. It’s exceeded my expectations in every way possible.
Q7: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
Drew: The hardest part is getting started, it’s having the courage to start, to have enough 
faith in yourself that you can do this and do it well. Whether you’re going to do the back 
end yourself or you’re going to hire a company to do it, however that works out for you, 
you’ve got to have the courage to step into this because it is an amazing business tool.
I have not talked to any podcasters who’ve actually done it, and stuck with it, and 
don’t get more value out of their podcast than they put time and effort in. So it’s a very 
rare investment on any scale where you’re guaranteed a greater return than what you 
invest. I believe that podcasting is one of those things that if you do it with the right 
intention and you do it with the right level of professionalism there is no way you’re not 
going to get more from it than what you put into it.
It has exceeded every one of my expectations, and I can’t imagine a business that 
wouldn’t benefit from it. So if you’re thinking about doing it, I’m telling you, you should.
Stacy Tuschl, host of She’s Building Her Empire
Stacy is a speaker, business coach, and the owner of the Academy of Performing 
Arts in Wisconsin. She is the author of Is Your Business Worth Saving?, where 
she reveals proven strategies for pulling entrepreneurs out of a rut and launching 
them toward business success. She is also the host of the brilliant podcast She’s 
Building Her Empire, which became the number one podcast in iTunes’ New and 
Noteworthy just forty-eight hours after launch!

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 224 ]
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Stacy: I do three podcasts a week: Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and for two of 
them, Monday and Wednesday, I interview high-achieving entrepreneurs and then Friday 
is my solocast day. I love getting in front of these entrepreneurs, asking them, “Do you 
believe in work/life balance? Does it exist? Define that for me?” I love it because you 
get such different answers each and every week from everybody, and I think that is one 
of the best things that I’m doing is making sure that my answers aren’t something that 
I’m going to get this typical cliché answer every time.
I love mixing it up, and giving my audience just something different every single time.
Q2: When you and I talked about platform building in Episode 174 of Onward 
Nation, you shared your three steps of collection, engagement, and conversion. 
Give us some more foundation. How do you define each of these steps and what 
are some of the ways they tie into the success of your podcast?
Stacy: Those three words sound so easy and everybody thinks they’re doing it, but they’re 
not doing it at the level they need to see that conversion they want. For me, the collection 
is the opt-in. You know, always having something of such value that people are surprised 
and just blown away that you’re giving it away for free. That’s for sure step number one.
Then, once you have that freebie out there, they’re opting in; now you’ve really got 
to engage, and I think that’s where people start to fall short. They don’t have the funnel 
setup, they don’t have the sequence actor, and one of my big things I do with my free-
mium, my freebie, is I’ve got a private Facebook community and now these are getting 
to be a little overwhelming for people. 
Monday through Friday, I’m giving content so people say, “I’ve got to check it out 
today. I’ve got to see what she’s putting out.” That’s such a great place to engage be-
cause they’re there, they’re commenting. I can comment back, so I make it part of my 
daily routine where I’m in Facebook Live, giving a free video training inside that group 
and then engaging with everybody that’s commenting and sharing and liking. Then, 
once you have that setup and they’re engaged, if you can do number one and number 
two really well, number three of selling and converting them is so simple because they’re 

[ 225 ]
appendix
ready and willing because your free stuff is so great. They can’t imagine what you’re 
going to over-deliver on with the paid version.
Q3: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Stacy: I was already listening to podcasts and getting such amazing value out of the 
people I was listening to, so I immediately saw it as this amazing platform to give value 
to my community. That was really what made me think, “Okay, this could be something 
I could do.” I wasn’t positive if I would be good at it or if I would like it, but I just knew 
that I should try it and see where it goes. The biggest impact I’m going to tell you are 
the relationships that I’m building with my guests. It’s unbelievable the people that I’ve 
interviewed on my show.
These are the people I’ve actually looked into some of them to consult with. I would 
have to pay $500 an hour to get on the phone with some of these people that I’m inter-
viewing, and it’s crazy that I get to, for free, pick their brain for thirty to forty-five minutes. 
It’s just unbelievable, the content and the information that they’re giving to me. It’s like 
free mentorship with these incredible, high-achieving millionaires.
I think another thing, too, with this is the opportunities that are coming out of it, 
when they go, “Hey, would you like to be on my podcast?” So now they’re on my show, 
they’re starting to like me and go, “She could really give value to my audience, too,” so 
I’m getting opportunities like that and then affiliate opportunities. People are emailing 
me and saying, “Hey, I loved your show. I love your audience. Would you mind doing this 
type of promotion coming up and be a partner with me and get an affiliate?”
It’s just amazing what has come off of this. My foot is now in the door to getting into 
an hour with them over lunch or just something to work my way in that I don’t know that 
I would have the opportunity if I didn’t have that podcast.
And last week alone, I had two different people email and say, “Hey, I’ve got this 
going on. Are you interested in partnering?” These were just two occurrences that hap-
pened last week as a result of the podcast.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 226 ]
Q4: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
Stacy: I struggled in the beginning with how much do I say, how little do I say, what 
should you be giving out, and I think if you could practice interviewing somebody, it 
doesn’t have to be on a podcast. Practice is crucial. I’m at episode number 90 right 
now, and I can just tell when I’m listening, when I’m going back and listening to certain 
podcasts, how comfortable I’m feeling talking with somebody and communicating and 
it’s really just a conversation between two friends. If I could have understood that in the 
beginning, I would have realized how much I should be talking, should I give my point 
of view, or do I say, “Oh, very interesting. Next question.” It was just that balance of how 
much I say, how much do I give, and you have to realize people are listening to your show.
Q5: You’ve had some impressive success like reaching number one in iTunes 
within forty-eight hours of your launch. But, what do you consider to be your 
biggest obstacle or challenge to building momentum?
Stacy: Understand that everything is a system, everything is strategy, and you just have 
to have the right people on your team, and the right guidance.
Hitting number one in iTunes wasn’t something that just happened. That was a 
strategy. That was me really putting a system in place and pushing, and to hit number 
one, and to try to be on that top of the charts, it all comes down to four things and it’s 
rating, reviews, subscribers, and downloads. You’ve got to create that list before you 
even launch. I made a list of all these different people that I could personally email, 
personally reach out to, and write emails that didn’t feel like a mass email. It felt like I 
was one-on-one saying, “Hey, Stephen, is there any chance you could go and rate and 
review my show?”
There was just that conversation, too, to really sit back and go, “I know I need to hit 
X amount of people and I know I need to try to get that credibility of having ratings and 
reviews,” because let me tell you, I’ve been trying to get on certain podcasts or have 
people on my show, and they’ll say, “We don’t get on a certain podcast until they have 
at least fifty ratings and reviews,” and not in a way that they’re better than me, but they’re 
saying, “A lot of podcasters will start and they’ll stop and this just shows that they’re 
sticking around, they’re serious about it, and this podcast is really going to get aired.”

[ 227 ]
appendix
Q6: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Stacy: I have been doing just once a week on Wednesdays. That’s my podcast day 
and I batch them. I just find that when you’re in the groove and you’ve got that set of 
interview questions, it’s just so easy to flow from one interview to the next versus trying 
to do this actually one on Monday, one on Wednesday. Batching has been great. I typ-
ically interview three people a week to keep me staying on top of my calendar. Now, 
even though only two air a week, you’d be surprised how many people reschedule at 
the last minute, apologize, and say, “Hey, I’m so sorry. I can’t do this today, but I’m on 
your calendar for next week.”
Q7: What has been the most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
Stacy: I think we all have that self-doubt of, “Am I going to be good enough? Do people 
want to listen to me? Will guests want to be on my show?” We don’t give ourselves 
enough credit. I thought in the beginning, “Who am I going to get on the show when I 
don’t have anything out there, there is no podcast, and I’m asking people to be inter-
viewed on a podcast?” but I mean, even right out of the gate, I was able to get some 
amazing people in episodes 1 through 10. Don’t sell yourselves short. People will look 
into you, they’ll look into other things that you’re doing, so they were checking out my 
live broadcast and my website, and my book, and that was giving me credibility.
Q8: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
Stacy: One of the big things people don’t realize is that that first email invitation needs 
to look so professional and it needs to have everything in it. I get so many of these 
emails now because people are asking me to be on their show. I can’t believe some-
times that I have to email back and say, “Well, who is your audience? What questions? 
What can I bring? I need to know what I can bring to your audience, because I don’t 
want to waste your time and I don’t want to waste my time either.”

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 228 ]
I jam-pack my invite email with everything. I get so many people who don’t respond 
to the email—they just immediately book with me. 
 Lori Jones, host of Integrate & Ignite
President and CEO of Avocet Communications, Lori brings top retail, con-
sumer product, business-to-business, and nonprofit organization knowledge and 
experience in all aspects of integrated marketing to clients. Her experience with 
Fortune 500 brands and entrepreneurial start-ups enables her to contribute a 
keen understanding of the intricacies of today’s businesses. Lori is also the host 
of the brilliant podcast Integrate and Ignite.
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Lori: I explore the nature of what it means to be an entrepreneur. Every episode is 
crafted to make people think, and spark some of those aha moments, or just to illus-
trate how important a truly integrated business and marketing strategy is, and really 
provide a solid blueprint for people to lead to success and longevity. At the end of 
the day, our guests are a mix of start-up entrepreneurs, and Fortune 500 CEOs from 
different industries. If our listeners seek out the advice, inspiration, or gain a good 
laugh, or just one of those kicks in the pants that they might need, then I feel that we’re 
pushing out good content.
We explore several different topics through each interview. We talk about philos-
ophy, and leadership, and what qualities it takes to succeed in today’s fast-changing 
business climate. We then get into approach. What is their approach to leadership? 
How do they integrate their internal departments, and, more important, which is the 
premise behind the podcast, what are they doing from an integrative marketing stand-
point? What has worked? What hasn’t? What can they share with our listeners? We 
then move into the third segment of the interview, which deals with obstacles. We’ve 
all had a lot of obstacles in our business lives, in our personal lives—and challenging 

[ 229 ]
appendix
times that could have devastated us. We glean insight from these CEOs and business 
leaders on what they did to overcome those obstacles. We end the podcast with suc-
cess and defining what success means to them as an individual, as an organization, 
and talk through some of the processes that they deploy on a day-to-day basis for 
big wins.
I love it. I get so excited when I get to record a podcast, talk with a CEO, or a 
business leader, or a start-up entrepreneur about what is in their head. I’m constantly 
learning, which is important to the mindset I have with all of our team members as well.
Q2: What does a “personal brand” mean to you and how can a business owner 
use that to create differentiation?
Lori: Personal branding is about making a full-time commitment to the journey of de-
fining yourself, as a leader, and how it shapes the manner in which you serve others. It 
should represent your value, and consistently deliver to those whom you serve, or those 
whom you report to, or those, ultimately, whom you want to be able to impact positively. 
The most important thing about personal branding is that it’s not about self-promotion.
People don’t care about all the accolades, and all the awards, or anything like that. 
You don’t showcase yourself. You showcase your passion. Managing your personal 
brand requires that you be a great role model, that you be a mentor, that you’ve got a 
voice, that people can learn, grow, and depend on.
Q3: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Lori: I’m very inquisitive, and I love to learn. I always want to know more. From a busi-
ness standpoint there have been several benefits from my podcast. Here are a few: It’s 
all about building top of mind awareness, or “TOMA,” surrounding integrative marketing 
approaches for small and big businesses. My podcast has enhanced our agency’s po-
sition as a leader in our space. You cannot dream up the quality of content we are now 
producing from our episodes. The content was a major reason I knew going into this 
that the podcast would benefit our business. 
The other point I want to make is we’re able to open up doors that probably would 
not have been opened without the podcast. In our industry, there are Fortune 500 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 230 ]
companies that get contacted consistently—and constantly—from marketing firms like 
mine. This has allowed me an entrée that is unique and different, it establishes credi-
bility out of the shoot, and it builds context for the prospect. All of that would be very 
difficult to do otherwise.
Q4: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
Lori: I have a script going into every podcast, but I have to be able to think on my feet 
and ask questions throughout the interview that are poignant and relevant based on a 
response that has been given by my guest. I listened to many, many podcasts, and this 
is something that you do very well—you pivot. 
I’ve got my script going into each interview, and I plan to ask similar questions in 
each episode, but 50 percent of the content generated is typically based on questions 
that have been asked while I am pivoting in response to what a guest shared.
Q5: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
Lori: I don’t believe most people are fully aware of the strength of podcasting. They 
might even be a little afraid of it. They might even ask themselves, “What is a podcast?” 
Despite the explanation that I provide guests up front, some prospective guests are 
afraid about the amount of prep time they might need. So our podcast has become a 
good litmus test. If people we talk to, if there’s a great brand out there that ultimately we 
want to become a part of, and they don’t understand what a podcast is, that’s a good 
litmus test for us to know. Maybe they’re not quite up to this sort of solution. That has 
been a big epiphany since we started the podcast.
Also, guests are very busy. Case in point, we found out two and a half weeks ago 
that one of our clients was going to appear on ABC’s Shark Tank. We had two weeks 
to finalize the plans and get ready for the show. I ended up having to cancel a couple of 
podcasts that week, which I felt horrible about, because we were stretched in getting 
ready for a viewing party with 250 people, all of the media relations, and press that were 
coming through my office that week. I felt horrible for having to cancel, which was one 

[ 231 ]
appendix
of my mantras going into this is—that I would never do that. But the point is also this: 
Your guests will end up rescheduling, and canceling, some of them two and three times, 
because of the same reasons. They get so busy that they end up having to reschedule 
things. Don’t take it personally. It’s going to happen and just stay on top of it.
So back to our client and Shark Tank for just a minute . . . 
It was one of the most amazing things I’ve ever been through in my business career. 
I mean, how often does that happen? That one of your clients ends up on Shark Tank! 
So we used our podcast to help introduce it.
We did an encore interview with our client. We did a pre-show interview. We knew 
that the Shark Tank episode was going to air on October 7th—so the week before ABC 
aired the episode we aired our podcast based on four simple questions ABC would 
allow us to ask and talk about.
That helped to raise awareness about how our client was going to have their ap-
pearance on the 7th. The press leading up to it won interview after interview. It was 
a total blast. After the show aired, the following morning, we did another interview, 
post-Tank, and talked through what we knew, what we could talk through at that time, 
regarding the fact that they had won, and that they had been funded. I asked what it was 
like being in front of the audience that night. What are you going to do going forward? 
All these great nuggets of content shared by our client.
We recorded that podcast the Saturday after the show, and we released it Monday 
morning. We also released a newsletter a week later. We wrote a story about what you 
need to consider when you are going on a show like Shark Tank. What you need to be 
aware of. What you can say. What you can’t say. It was just an incredibly exciting op-
portunity for my agency. We had a blast, but what I’m also going to let you know is, off 
of this podcast, we got a call from another company that is going to be airing on Shark 
Tank, and we’re going to be promoting their show as well, which all happened because 
of the podcast. Now, it’s not just one—we’re on number two!
And lastly, on the night of the event, we created an experience. Our entire marketing 
team was there, and we were live-streaming Google Analytics and social media data to 
the audience. They could see these huge spikes as the show was airing from coast to 
coast. We delivered an integrated plan, but we also created experiential components 
the night of the event.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 232 ]
Q6: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Lori: I personally invest around ten hours a week with interviews, reviewing content, 
and prospecting additional guests I’d like to have on the show. My vital priorities include 
getting the big brands, and the big leaders on the show, which can really take months 
to accomplish. Our team invests about fifteen hours a week creating the content, news-
letter, Show Notes, and the actual podcast episodes from a production standpoint. All 
in, it’s about twenty-five hours a week for our entire team. 
Q7: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
Lori: We all, for the most part, have these incredible personable brands out there, but 
they’re on paper. They’re words. They’re visual. They might have a voice, but there’s 
nothing better than the actual voice. Your actual voice delivering content! To me, a per-
son’s voice adds that personal connection to their brand, and to their content—and that 
is very valuable to the personal brand.
Kelly Hatfield, host of Absolute Advantage
Kelly is a cofounder of Enginuity Advantage. She has been in the recruiting 
and HR field for twenty years and loves serving others. Kelly and her busi-
ness partner have built three successful companies with the purpose of helping 
others succeed and delivering remarkable results. Kelly and her team strate-
gically align themselves as the “Partner of Choice” with clients and strive to 
be the first place to call when clients are looking for extraordinary service, 
quality, and reliability. Kelly is also the host of the outstanding podcast Absolute 
Advantage.

[ 233 ]
appendix
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Kelly: The Absolute Advantage podcast is for entrepreneurs, leaders, achievers, and 
emerging leaders. Our goal of it is to shorten our audience’s path to success. We’re 
gathering insights and learning from the world’s most successful entrepreneurs, leaders, 
and achievers at the top of their game. One of the reasons I started the podcast was 
because I realized that as entrepreneurs or leaders, it can be a lonely place or you’re 
questioning yourself a lot: “Gosh, am I doing the right thing?”
I think hearing from other leaders and entrepreneurs—their stories, their concepts, 
their insights—with the goal being if every person can take away one pearl of wisdom 
each episode that they can apply and improve their business, improve their leadership 
skills, then it was a win. We talk a lot about leadership, cultivating people, building 
teams, personal development. These topics are all relevant to who our audience is.
But there is something else. In our business, we own a couple of recruiting firms, 
so we’ve gained a unique perspective from being entrepreneurs, building our teams, 
scaling, and doing those things. And we also meet with thousands of companies who 
are our clients and we hear their pain and we hear what they’re going through or we 
may be having conversations and can identify some of their pain before they even 
realize what it is.
That perspective and background uncovered some common themes, which are 
leadership, cultivating people, building teams, and building culture. A lot of our discus-
sions—because, again, our business as recruiting is about attracting talent and retaining 
talent—so our podcast serves two things, which is as an entrepreneur and feeling like 
that circle shrinks a little bit the more successful you get, so these discussions have 
become a bit of a system of support and encouragement. 
And then there was the aspect of, “Gosh, all of these people, including ourselves, 
are going through a similar kind of pain, or the same kind of situations or issues keep 
arising.” I wanted to help solve for that. Through our podcast, we are building a commu-
nity around that.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 234 ]
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Kelly: I have spent over twenty years in the recruiting business and really was looking 
for something and seeking something that would allow me to make more of an impact on 
people than I already was—to be able to reach more people and have a greater impact.
The second thing was to build a community where people weren’t feeling like they 
were alone, where we were covering a lot of topics that many people were going through.
Then I thought, “Okay, well, how can we do this? How can I accomplish this and 
bring more value to our clients as well?” That’s really where the whole idea of doing 
the podcast spawned with the goal of creating more impact and wanting to bring more 
value to our clients.
The feedback I’m getting in terms of the topics, people reaching back out and saying, 
“Hey, I just listened today to your duo cast about hiring slow and firing fast. Some of that 
information that you shared, can we talk a little bit more about it?” They’re really starting 
to look to us even more so than they ever did. Some are clients we have worked with for 
a long time while others are clients who are fairly new where they’re looking to us as the 
experts in our field. The podcast is positioning us as subject matter experts.
Q3: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
Kelly: I would have to say active listening, being engaged and present in the conversa-
tion with your guest, hearing what they say, reflecting it back to them and/or highlighting 
some key points they shared and making sure you have clarity about what it is they’re 
saying for your audience and to help your guest shine.
Having been a guest on podcasts myself, there have been times where I felt like, 
“Okay, I’m in the right place. This host is hearing what I have to say. They’re trying to get 
the best out of me for the audience. What I’m saying matters. They’re getting it.” Helping 
a guest feel comfortable is a way to go a little bit deeper with the conversation; maybe 
your guest will then share another example, another kind of pearl, or another layer of 
information. The great podcast hosts are the ones who really pull the best out of their 
guests, which means they engage at another level.

[ 235 ]
appendix
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
Kelly: That darn impostor syndrome! For me, it was overcoming something in myself 
that was saying, “Okay, what is it that you’ve got to bring to the table?” I’m interviewing 
these amazing people and at the same time thinking, “Okay, why are they going to want 
to talk to me?”
On the flip side, too, one of the things that I didn’t realize is that 90 percent of the 
people who are guests on the show are thinking the very same thing. I’ve reached out to 
some amazing business owners in my network; it’s been a challenge getting them to be 
a guest because they’re having the very same thoughts, like, “Oh, yeah. Well, I’ve built 
this great business but I’m not sure what I am going to have to bring to the conversa-
tion.” And I have said right back to them, “Well, that’s exactly why I want you to be my 
guest, because you’ve built this amazing business and started out of your garage, and 
it’s this multi-million-dollar business now with hundreds of employees.”
Checking ego at the door is huge. I have a business coach and we were having 
a conversation about the show. It was like getting a glass of cold water thrown in my 
face when he said, “When did this become about you?” I said, “You know what? You’re 
right,” and he said, “Where’s the Kelly who is always about bringing value to people 
and about this being about the audience and key points that need to be made with the 
audience and in giving of yourself and giving to the audience? When did this become 
about you and how you feel?”
It’s all about the audience and the guests. This isn’t about me in any way.
Q5: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Kelly: Five to six hours a week for our two episodes. My vital priorities are prepping 
for the shows and the recording time. Because we’re partnering with a team like Pre-
dictive ROI, once I’m done recording the interview, all I’m doing then is uploading that 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 236 ]
recording into an Airing Schedule, and then my production team takes it from there. I 
don’t have to do all of the other things associated with the podcast.
That was one of the things that was really important to me, too, as, first of all, I didn’t 
have the time to learn about everything there is to learn about podcasting. There are 
professionals out there who can do all of these, and I would have paid double, triple, 
quadruple the amount had I tried to do it on my own, screwed it up, and then had some-
body come and fix it for me. It’s a fantastic production, and I’ve got a great team who 
supports me.
Q6: What has been your most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
Kelly: We’ve had some amazing guests on the show who are masters at building an 
awesome culture within a company. Applying some of those lessons and seeing the 
results internally with our team as a result of implementing the thoughts and ideas from 
our guests has been awesome.
Q7: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
Kelly: Don’t let fear get in your way. If this is something that you are seriously consid-
ering, and are excited about, don’t let fear get in the way. Push yourself outside your 
comfort zone. There have only been upsides to doing this podcast for me. I can’t think 
of one negative thing. It’s only brought positive things to my life and to my business. 
Just because you want to do a podcast doesn’t mean that you need to know every-
thing, all of the technical aspects, and all of the marketing components. There are 
people out there like Predictive ROI who can help you with that. I haven’t seen any 
downside. Just do it.

[ 237 ]
appendix
David Mammano, host of Avanti Entrepreneur
David has started seven businesses from scratch, was named to Inc. magazine’s 
list of the 5,000 fastest-growing companies in America, is host of the Avanti 
Entrepreneur podcast, and is a TEDx speaker, author, and adjunct professor at 
the University of Rochester. 
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
David: I started the podcast because I kind of wanted to have a forum, a conversation, 
for “the rest of us.” I love reading Inc. magazine, SUCCESS Magazine, Forbes, and For-
tune, etc. Often you’ll see on the covers these massive superstars, the founder of Uber, 
or the founder of Go Daddy. I mean all great entrepreneurs, don’t get me wrong—I want 
to be them tomorrow; there’s no doubt. But the fact is I’m reading these articles and 
I’m thinking, “That’s just not me right now.” I’m not going to go out and get $100 million 
of venture capital. I think most people reading these articles are probably a lot like me. 
They’ve created businesses from scratch, maybe bought a franchise, maybe took over 
a business, but at the end of the day, we’re not the sophisticated venture capital dudes 
in Silicon Valley.
We’re main-street entrepreneurs who roll up our sleeves and work our freaking tails 
off, and our investment money that we get from the outside is from making sales. The 
certain realities are, we’re out on the streets, we’re making it happen, we’re getting our 
MBAs in the streets. I wanted a podcast for “the rest of us,” meaning, let’s share some 
really good practical advice and experiences from people like me or a few steps ahead 
of me.
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
David: I’m a lifelong learner. My podcast really is, at the end of the day, a very selfish 
way for me to learn. I’m getting guests on whom I really love and respect, and kind of 
want to suck their brain for knowledge, so I just get to ask them tons of things that I’m 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 238 ]
wondering about their success. Taking notes as I’m talking to them, asking questions, 
and listening—so I’m learning. 
Second, my podcast is really good for my business. One of my main businesses is 
the Avanti Entrepreneur Group, where I help business owners either grow their busi-
ness or I help people start their business. I have a whole strategic process on taking 
businesses to the next level. I’m a coach for business owners. It turns out that I get a lot 
of people asking how they can start working with me, so my podcast has been good for 
attracting prospects and customers.
Q3: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
David: I think what I’ve learned so far is just becoming a really good interviewer. Really 
paying attention, being curious about the path, the way the conversation is going, and 
asking good questions because what you get out of guests is amazing. The first few 
podcasts I felt like I was talking too much because that’s what I do, but now that I’ve 
kind of learned a little bit, what makes a better podcast in my opinion is when I’m actually 
doing very little talking. So I would say become a really good questioner.
I’ve taken Dale Carnegie courses, and one of their top things that they teach is: 
The way to get people interested in you is to become interested in them. People love to 
talk about themselves and their successes and share experiences. People end up liking 
you more as a person, and respect you more, if you ask them really good questions and 
allow them to talk and share their experiences. It just makes a person feel good when 
they’re able to talk about themselves and even their failures, if it’s a learning lesson, 
because they’ll feel good about helping others.
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
David: Well, I’m 100 percent a salesperson. I love people, and it’s my superpower. I 
should probably be selling 99 percent. But, when it comes to technology, and the pro-
cess that goes along with the behind-the-scenes tech, I’m terrible. I get anxiety about 
it. I can picture myself breaking out in hives. I know what I do best. I sell, I coach, and 

[ 239 ]
appendix
I love content. I love to write, and do videos, so I should be spending most of my time 
doing that, like the podcast. Developing relationships with guests and asking questions 
during the interviews.
So working with [the] Predictive ROI team—I did not have to do any of the stuff that 
I’m not good at, which was such a joy. I probably would not have launched a podcast on 
my own because of all the production and technology involved. 
Q5: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
David: I’m spending probably two hours—three hours at the most—per week on my pod-
cast. There’s about forty-five minutes to an hour of doing the podcast. Then I would say 
there’s another hour or so when it comes to finding guests for the show, then sending 
them some prep material so that we’re good to go.
Q6: What has been your most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
David: How much I freaking love it! In fact, Diana on my team, she has said, “I think 
you found your calling.” When I ask people what I’m really good at, I often hear that I’m 
a connector, a host, and this is kind of the perfect role for somebody like that. I feel 
like if I could become the Jimmy Fallon of entrepreneurial podcasting, then I’ll be a 
happy man. I don’t have to be the star—I can be the host. It feels natural to me. I want 
to do more.
I also didn’t expect how good it would be for my business. It’s a really nice piece 
of what we’re doing here. Now, I don’t think somebody should get into podcasting just 
with the sole purpose of increasing business because you probably won’t be focusing 
on good quality content, and I think that you have to have very good quality content from 
the heart so people want to listen to you.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 240 ]
Q7: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
David: There’s no reason why you shouldn’t give it a shot. At the very least you’re going 
to learn a ton from the people you’re interviewing. 
Just do it. You’ll get energy from it, you’ll build your network, you’ll build your repu-
tation, and you’ll build your credibility as a business owner.
Mitch Stephen, host of Real Estate Investor Summit
A nationally known real estate entrepreneur, trainer, and consultant, Mitch has 
purchased more than 1,300 houses in his hometown of San Antonio, Texas. He 
is also the author of two books, My Life & 1,000 Houses: Failing Forward to 
Financial Freedom and My Life & 1,000 Houses: 200+ Ways to Find Bargain Prop-
erties. Mitch is a high school graduate who never stopped learning from books, 
seminars, and webinars and is a fine example of what “on-the-job-training” can 
produce in a person. Mitch now teaches others how to become financially inde-
pendent and invest for more than just the typical lump-sum check.
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Mitch: I was just trying to find a place for the people in my niche, which is flipping 
houses or creating cash flow, so they can become financially independent. I wanted to 
have a place they could go to—I wanted to reach the world as much as I just wanted 
to reach my niche. We are attracting people who I think we can help—people who are 
looking to be financially free.
I started the podcast because I know just like with my Tuesday night coaching call (I 
held a call every Tuesday night for the last six or seven years), it has made me a smarter 
person as well as delivered value to attendees. It’s like the teacher gets the benefit: I 
might bring ninety-nine pieces to the puzzle; because I’ve been in the business a long 
time, I’ve got a lot of pieces of the puzzle already figured out. But every now and then, 

[ 241 ]
appendix
someone raises their hand in the room and gives me an extra piece that I didn’t know 
existed. Then I’m thinking, “Oh my gosh, this changes everything.” Or, “How in the world 
did you figure that out?” Or, “Where are you finding this list of people?” Then I think, “I 
have to start doing that!”
If you think the guys who are listening to me are getting smart, I’m getting really 
smart by listening to everybody. And the podcast helps me in the same way.
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Mitch: I was trying to get more people into my mentoring program. I was trying to move 
from thirty to forty people a year to fifty or sixty to seventy people a year, just to see if I 
could. If you do all this stuff just for the money, it becomes kind of a drudgery or it’s an 
obligation. I just recognize in my life that activity begets activity. The more active you are 
and the more things you’re trying or doing, just the more people you bump into, and the 
more possibilities and the more options come to you.
I thought, “Well, I haven’t done this before, I wonder what this would bring me?” 
And I have no idea exactly what it’ll bring me. I knew my goals were to get my sales up 
and to get some more followers, but what kind of followers am I going to find? What 
kind of opportunity will they have in store for me? I don’t know, but it’s fun to go out 
there and try it and see what happens.
Then the other thing about it is, if you ask a really successful CPA to go to lunch so 
you can rake his brain, get some tax advantages from him, he’ll say no. If you tell him you 
want to interview him, he’ll run to your door. It’s the same conversation, but one is I’m 
stealing from him and the other one is I’m honoring him. If you want to talk to them as 
an interview, they’ll talk to you for two hours. If you want to rake their brain, they’re not 
going to talk to you—they want your money.
Q3: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
Mitch: You have to listen. Listening is the hardest thing I’ll ever do because I like to 
talk. Listening is hard for me. I recommend slowing down. To let my guests take the 
conversation where they want to go and for me to shut up and let them finish. That’s 

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 242 ]
my personal challenge. I’m kind of ADD; some people would call me high strung, or 
tightly wound.
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
Mitch: My biggest challenge is that I would like to interview some more famous people. 
We often think of them as unattainable because we are not a TV station or some other 
media channel. I decided this year I was going to make this a goal. As a matter of fact, 
I just got off the phone trying to contact Doug Flutie because I wanted to have a con-
versation with him about underdogs. I talk to a lot of people who are underdogs. I love 
a good comeback, and you know who was the king of comebacks in the NFL? Doug 
Flutie! He was small for the giants he was playing around. 
Someone said, “Well, how in the world is his story going to relate to real estate?” 
I said, “Well, his story’s a little broader; it’s not about real estate, it’s about overcoming 
the odds, incredible odds.” How did he do that? 
Q5: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast?  
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Mitch: The setup was the hardest part. After the initial setup it’s three to five hours per 
week because we air three episodes per week, and I invest about one-and-a-half hours 
per episode.
I don’t have to do a lot of rehearsal or scripting because I live the subject that I’m 
talking about with our guests. And my guests live the subject, too, so they don’t need 
a script either.
Usually what we do is we map out the initial four questions, just so we get off to a 
smooth start. I also spend a little bit of time reading their bio, how I’m going to introduce 
them, and then we’re off.

[ 243 ]
appendix
Q6: Do you have any final advice—anything else you want to share with business 
owners who may be considering starting their own podcast?
Mitch: Yeah, don’t do it by yourself. Don’t think you have to do it all. There are experts 
out there—find them to help you.
The reason I never did it sooner is because I thought I had to do everything myself. 
Now that I have a team in place—and for only three hours a week of my time to have 
three episodes go out per week, that’s an incredible reach. That’s not too much to 
ask—three hours a week to be available to the world and to build this body of work and 
content. When I complete the first year, it will be 150 interviews. What are the chances 
that I hold 150 interviews and something good doesn’t happen? I think the odds are in 
my favor. Something is going to happen!
Lee Caraher, host of Focus Is Your Friend
Lee started Double Forte in 2002 as a new kind of communications firm de-
signed to provide the best service in the business. Previously executive vice 
president at Weber Shandwick, president and founder of Red Whistle Com-
munications, and vice president of SEGA, Lee has managed multiple offices 
and hundreds of people of all ages and was named in the “40 under 40” by 
PRWeek magazine. 
Q1: Give us an overview of your podcast and the advice shared during  
a typical episode.
Lee: The purpose is really to help marketing people who are just bombarded with, you 
know, tactic, after tactic, after tactic. Do this, do this, do this, and do this, right? No com-
pany, and I’ve talked to companies who now are $10 billion companies or $100 million 
companies or haven’t-made-revenue-yet companies, and no one has enough money. No 
one has enough time. No one has enough people. There’s always more to do, no matter 
what size the company is, more to do than you can do. The purpose of the show is to 
focus on what matters so you can actually get traction.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 244 ]
My guests are chief marketing officers, chief revenue officers, chief communication 
officers, or CEOs. It sort of depends on the size of the company. Those people who 
are responsible for connecting a company with its audience and causing them to act. 
Sometimes at Google it’s a director. If you get a director at Google, that’s an “interga-
lactic president of something else” at another company. It just really depends on the size 
of the company, but the responsibility is to communicate and engage an audience that 
moves that audience to act.
My favorite question I ask everybody is, “If you had a hundred dollars and you had 
two activities and the two tasks, the two programs, cost $70 each, what would you do?” 
Frankly, I have a point of view, which is clear in the title of the podcast, Focus Is Your 
Friend, that you should do one thing. However, no one is really paying attention to that 
when I talk to them. I’ve gotten every answer from do one thing and save the $30, take 
the $70 and add $30 to it to do that one thing, do both, negotiate. I mean everyone!
It’s really interesting to see the wide range of answers on that very simple question 
that I thought I would get the same answer. There’s a rationale for everything!
Q2: Why did you start your podcast and what are two or three of the biggest 
impacts it has had on your business?
Lee: There are two reasons I had to start my podcast. One is to provide a place where 
my employees can tap into the wisdom and insights that I’m bringing. It’s important they 
get to hear me—the bigger we get and the farther away we are. Right now I’m in New 
York, and we have an office in Boston, and we have an office in San Francisco. My pod-
cast allows me to be present on topics important to our business.
Then the second purpose was I get asked a lot by people, “Lee, can I pick your 
brain? Can I pick your brain?” I’m like, “You know, I got no more brain to pick, frankly.” 
This podcast allows me to do that as well.
Then third, what’s been so far with the people I’ve interviewed, they’re all people 
I know. I mean I’ve been around the business for a long time. I’m that old. I’ve worked 
at really large companies that have really large clients so I’ve had a lot of contacts. I 
don’t have an excuse to talk to them all the time. This has been a great excuse to talk 
to those people and to (A) find out what they’re doing, and (B) almost half the time I 

[ 245 ]
appendix
have an idea for these companies after I talk with these people. We may not be the 
ones who implement it, but that person on the other side I’m interviewing has always 
said, “Thank you, that’s a great idea.” Then sometimes it comes back, “Could you guys 
do that for us?” Sometimes we can, sometimes we can’t. When you are in the service 
business, which most of us are, being helpful is the key to staying on top of mind.
Q3: What is the most critical skill for a business owner to master in order  
to be successful at podcasting?
Lee: I think it’s the same skill you need to be a good leader, which is listening, and not 
listening to respond, but listening to hear. This has been the hardest thing for me—to not 
talk over my guests. All I want to do is, “Oh, yes, great idea.” My early interviews are not 
as good as my later ones. I’m always listening for the nugget. Then trying not to talk over 
the person when I find it.
Then when you’re doing that, listening between the lines, it sounds like you’re taking 
that in, resisting the temptation to talk over or to jump enthusiastically into the conversa-
tion. Then you reflect back what you took out of that piece as the nugget.
And at the end of the show I’m summing it up by saying, “Here are the three things 
I’m taking away from this. You have something totally different, but what I’m taking from 
this show is bum, bum, bum.” I try to be reflective that way. When that process is fol-
lowed—from the beginning of the interview to the end—rapport is growing.
Q4: You’ve had some impressive success with your podcast. So, let’s flip that. 
What do you consider to be your biggest obstacle or challenge to building 
momentum?
Lee: Time is challenging. Then making sure I don’t ask too much of our guests before 
they show up. I’ve been a guest on over 450 podcasts. Some of them want pre-calls, 
and “Can you fill out this big form with all this stuff.” As a podcast guest, I’m already 
giving you an hour of my time. I try to keep being a guest on my show simple.
Then sort of getting over the fear of asking people to be on the podcast. Like, 
“They’re not going to want to be on my podcast.” You know what? Sure, why wouldn’t 
they? They like talking to me.

PROFITABLE PODCASTING
[ 246 ]
Q5: I know you track where you invest your time as well as your productivity— 
so how many hours do you typically invest each week toward your podcast? 
Where are you spending the time? What are your vital priorities as it relates  
to your show?
Lee: What I do is probably three to five hours a week. Three to five hours a week re-
cording because I always want to be a little bit ahead. I record the interview and then 
as much as I can I record the Friday episode right after the interview so it’s fresh in my 
mind. It’s forty-five minutes of recording.
Then once a week I’m looking at where I am in the cycle and who hasn’t said “yes” 
yet and adding people to that. Probably three to five hours of recording in my little studio 
looking at the questions, getting ready, preparing, understanding who’s coming, who’s 
my guest, what do I need to know about them, and then actually recording the two 
shows. Then fifteen to twenty minutes to approve the Show Notes and the promotional 
tweets for each show and probably another hour to just make sure that I’m on track with 
everything. Like, do I have the right guests? What am I missing? Do we have to mix it 
up a little bit? 
It’s a lot of time. It’s not insignificant.
Q6: What has been your most unexpected surprise during your podcasting 
journey so far?
Lee: Some people really come prepared. They really take it seriously. I did all the thinking 
beforehand, right? I did a lot of thinking before I even wanted to do this. It took a lot of 
time to think about it. But my guests are really taking it seriously and some of them are 
nervous. People are nervous about talking on podcasts, which is really ironic. Impostor 
syndrome—lack of confidence abounds.

[ 247 ]
NOTES
Introduction
1. https://youtu.be/ABCNDZIdKa0.
2. https://www.sba.gov/content/small-business-trends-impact.
3. http://www.waspbarcode.com/small-business-report.
4. https://www.sba.gov/content/small-business-trends-impact.
Chapter 3
1. Hill, Napoleon. (1937). Think & Grow Rich. New York: The Ralston Press.
Chapter 5
1. http://contentmarketinginstitute.com/2011/11/content-marketing-inbound-marketing/.
Chapter 6
1. http://kk.org/thetechnium/1000-true-fans/.

[ 249 ]
About Host page, 143
Absolute Advantage, 59, 232–236
Academy of Performing Arts, 
Wisconsin, 223–228
accomplishments, not taking credit  
for, 17–18
Acon Digital, 156
active listening, 234
adding value, 55, 56
Adobe Audition, 156
Advisors Excel, 64–65
Agency Management Institute (AMI), 
55, 216–218
Agency Management Institute 
mastermind group, 4
Airing Schedule, 39–40, 123, 124
Alcorn, Stacey, 4
AMI (Agency Management Institute), 
55, 216–218
Archimedes, on levers, 36
attracting sponsorships, 181–190
Audacity, 156
audience
basic questions of, 72
relationship building with, 55–57
who become true fans, 53–54
Audio Intros, Outros, and Design 
(Stage 3), 111–126
audio assets in, 116–124
highlights of, 112
and iTunes categories and 
subcategories, 124–126
Project Sheet template for, 113
show artwork and digital design 
assets in, 114–116
audio production, 39
Audio-Technica 2100 microphone,  
156
availability to conduct interviews, 
107–108
Avanti Entrepreneur, 237–240
Avanti Entrepreneur Group, 238
avatar, see client avatar
Avocet Communications, 228
Bank of America, 182, 186, 189–190
banner, of tagline, 116
Bartlett, Katherine, 192–193, 199
Beigel, Marcie, 19, 20
Boggess, Joel, 4
book, writing, 60
booking confirmation email, 97–99
brand, personal, 229, 232
Brogan, Chris, 85
Build a Better Agency, 55, 118, 176, 
216–223
INDEX

[ 250 ]
index
building your true fans nation, 61–68
build ingredient in, 63–64
nation ingredient in, 64–65
true fans ingredient in, 65–67
business revenue, total, 26
calendar integration, 97, 107–108
call-to-action (CTA), 120, 121
Campfire Effect, 46, 47, 51
Campfire Pitch, 45–46, 51
Caraher, Lee, 243–246
“door-opening email” to, 49–50
on her sales strategy, 45, 46
Carnegie, Dale, on learning, 1
champion, 183
Checkpoint Meeting, 41
Citibank, 186
Clance, Pauline R., 16
client avatar, 69–75, 85
importance of, 70–71
naming, 73
questions ensuring that you speak to, 
71–73
see also Dream 50
CMI (Content Marketing Institute), 57
commercials, 120
commitment, 216
computer, 156
confirmation emails, 94, 97–99
contact information, 83
content marketing, 57–60
Content Marketing Institute (CMI), 57
Covey, Stephen R., on working 
together, 43
Crack the Funding Code (John Livesay 
and Judy Robinett), 176, 209, 211
credibility, 72
credibility indicators, 138
CTA (call-to-action), 120, 121
culture page, 195
customers, identifying, see client avatar
DeVerberate, 156, 158, 159
Digital Design Asset Guide, 114–116
distribution schedule, for social media, 
133–134
domain name, 86
“door-opening email,” 47–51
Double Forte, 46, 243
Dream 50 (prospect list), 70
assembling list of, 38
importance of defining your, 70
in nation of true fans, 64
as podcast guests, 85
reservation system for, 105
romancing your, 74–75
Dumas, John Lee, 4, 58
Ecamm Call Recorder, 157
Edison Research and Triton, 9, 10
editing podcasts, 40, 157–165
checklist for, 161–165
steps in, 157–160
editing software, 156
ego, 219, 235
email list, building, 57, 174
email opt-ins
in Facebook campaigns, 174
unique website visitors converted 
into, 26
emails
confirmation, 94, 97–99
to congratulate new interns, 199
“door-opening,” 47–51
downloading templates for, 90, 93
for intern prequalification, 197–198
legal disclaimer in, 104
post-interview, 101

[ 251 ]
index
rate and review request, 170–174
reminder, 100–101, 107, 169–170
weekly, to nation of fans, 58–59
“Your Interview is LIVE,” 169–170
empathy, 177–178, 211–212
Enginuity Advantage, 232
enthusiasm, 46
entry-level programs, 44
EOFire, 58
episode number, 119
episodes
airing, 40
initial, 119
inventory of, 165
promoting, 140, 151–152
structure and flow of, 118–122
writing a book with, 60
EPSM (Evaluation of Predictive 
Success Metrics), 23–25, 27–32
Equipment, Software, and Editing Your 
Interviews (Stage 6), 155–165
equipment overview for, 155–156
recording and editing in, 157–165
Evaluation of Predictive Success 
Metrics (EPSM), 23–25, 27–32
Evolution Insurance Brokers, 187
expanding your platform, 53–60
ingredients for, 57–60
production side of, 53, see also 7 
Stages of Production
two components of, 53
value of, 55–57
expenses, third-party, 83
expertise, demonstrating, 56
experts, consulting, 243
external hard drive, 156
Facebook, 40, 131–133, 174
failure, fear of, 210
fans
lesser, 67
true, see true fans
FAQs, 143, 149–152
fears, 15, 16, 71, 210, 236, 245, see also 
obstacle(s) to success
FedEx, 186
Ferriss, Tim, 18
file management, 157
Final Website Content and Show Notes 
(Stage 5), 143–154
documents for review in, 145,  
147–152
highlights of, 143, 144
Libsyn, iTunes, Stitcher, and Google 
Play setup in, 153–154
Project Sheet template for, 145–147
Fischer, Vera, 213–216
Flutie, Doug, 242
Focus Is Your Friend, 45, 243–246
Forgent Networks, 213
Foster, Cody, 64–65
fraud, fear of being exposed as a, 16–17
freemiums, 57
functions, vital, 25–26
GarageBand, 156
Google AdWords, 174, 244
Google Play
guest account on, 153–154
registering podcast with, 169
setup in, 39, 153–154
growing revenue, 43–52
Campfire Pitch for, 45–46
opportunities for, 44
Social Media Warm-Up for, 46–51
through relationships with fans, 
61–62
as top challenge for businesses, 8

[ 252 ]
index
growth of podcasting, 8–11
GSD&M, 213
Guest Advocacy System, 38, 89–90, 
93–108
Question Flow in, 93–94
ScheduleOnce in, 94, 97–101,  
103–108
Sound Brilliant Guide in, 102–103
Guest Experience and Website 
Groundwork (Stage 2), 89–109
Guest Advocacy System in, 89–90, 
93–108
highlights of, 91
Project Sheet template for, 90, 92–93
Question Flow in, 93–94
ScheduleOnce in, 94–101, 103–108
Sound Brilliant Guide in, 102–103
website groundwork in, 109
guest invitations, 38, 136–140
distributing, 38
objectives of, 127–128
preparing, 136–137
professionalism of, 227–228
template for, 128, 138–140
guest-leads, converted into proposals, 
26
guest-proposals, converted into sales,  
26
guests
converted into leads, 26
names of, 122–124
registering, 89, 104–105
reminder email to, 169–170
social engagement with, 40
Sound Brilliant Guide for, 102–103
touches with, 97–101
Hardy, Darren, 23, 24
author’s interview with, 138
and defining Dream 50, 70, 71
Foster interviewed by, 64–65
and Predictive ROI LIVE event, 
70–72
on Romancing Your Dream 50, 74
Hatfield, Kelly, 59, 232–236
Hill, Napoleon
on decisions, 35, 36
Wintle quoted by, 179–180
Hollander, Linda, on attracting 
sponsorships, 181–190
Homer, 2
Hootsuite, 131
hosting, 39, 175–180
host name, in show artwork, 115
Howes, Lewis, 58
How to Be a Power Connector (Judy 
Robinett), 211
IBM, 182
The Ideal Restaurant, Canton, Ohio, 12
Imes, Suzanne, 16
impostor syndrome, 16–20, 235, 246
Infusionsoft, 100, 143, 145
Integrate & Ignite, 228–232
integrity, 56
interdependence, 43
internal kickoff meeting, 37–38
interns
Predictive ROI’s program for,  
191–200
reasons for not recruiting, 192
recruiting, 191–200
intimacy, 67
intro scripts, 38–39
basics of creating, 116–117
examples of, 118
quality of, 116
invitations, see guest invitations

[ 253 ]
index
Is Your Business Worth Saving? (Stacy 
Tuschl), 223–228
iTunes
categories and subcategories for, 
124–126
description of episode for, 152
guest account on, 153–154
New and Noteworthy section of, 167
Onward Nation ranking in, 1
podcast’s logo in, 115
rankings on, 40–41
reaching top ranking of, 40, 167–174
registering podcast with, 169
setup in, 39, 153–154
What’s Hot section of, 167
Jensen, Erik, 194, 199
Jones, Lori, 228–232
Kang, Pei, 4
Keller, Wendy, 5–6, 54
Kelly, Kevin, on true fans, 61, 62, 65–66
kickoff meeting, 37–38, 83, 85
kinetic typography, 58
Krupski, Alex, 197, 199
launch day, 40
Launch Strategy: How to Reach the 
Top of iTunes (Stage 7), 167–174
rate and review request email in, 
170–174
registering podcast in, 169
reminder email to guests in, 169–170
leads, guests converted into, 26
learning, 237–238
lesser fans, 67
Libsyn, 169
categories for, 125
guest account on, 153
setup of, 153–154
LinkedIn, 40, 131, 133
listening
active, 234
as critical skill, 177–178, 211–212, 
219, 226, 241–242, 245
Livesay, John, 176, 209–212
book written by, 60
on hosting skills, 177–178
logo, 115
loudness, recording, 158, 159
Mammano, David, 237–240
Maronitis, Peter, 12
McKain, Scott
as Onward Nation guest, 1, 4
on reaching the next rung, 20
McLellan, Drew, 5, 176, 216–223
on building a platform, 55–56
on cultivating and serving guests, 178
on hosting, 177
mentors, 20, 24, 241
metrics, vital, see vital metrics
microphone, 156
Microsoft, 186
midroll, 120
monetization strategy, 2, 6, see also 
growing revenue
Multitrack session, 159–160
My Life & 1,000 Houses: Failing 
Forward to Financial Freedom 
(Mitch Stephen), 240–243
My Life & 1,000 Houses: 200+ Ways to 
Find Bargain Properties (Mitch 
Stephen), 240–243
name of podcast
deciding on, 85–86
in show artwork, 115

[ 254 ]
index
nation
size of, 64–65
weekly emails to, 58–59
see also building your true fans nation
97 Degrees West, 213
noise reduction, 157–159
obstacle(s) to success, 13–21
impostor syndrome as, 16–20
time trap as, 15–16
Odyssey (Homer), 2
Onward Nation, 1
asking for feedback on, 67
creating revenue from, 4–6
“door-opening email” to guests on, 
47–51
episodes of, 175
guest invitation of, 136–138
guest touches from, 97–101
intro and outro scripts of, 118
launch of, 4
origin of, 3–4
Question Flows used at, 94–96
revenue from, 62
ScheduleOnce account of, 105–106
success of, 61
time required to launch, 41
Onward Nation Network, 6
organic search traffic, increasing, 58
Osteen, Joel, 18
outro scripts, 38–39
basics of creating, 116–117
examples of, 118
quality of, 116
Pamela, 135
passive revenue streams, 44
pausing, 119
perfectionism, 212
personal brand, 229, 232
pivoting, in interviews, 230
platform
for building a nation of true fans, 
63–64, 66, 224–225
definition of, 54
expanding, see expanding your 
platform
used by true fans, 67
podcasting
amount of time involved in, 15–16, 
215, 220–221, 227, 232,  
235–236, 239, 242, 246
current growth mode for, 8–11
as media channel, 3
with Onward Nation, 1, 3–6
primary challenges with, 14
as Trojan horse of selling, 2–3
value of, 14
podcast-related revenue
from selling services to guests,  
44
total, 26
podcast website, see website
Poe, Edgar Allan, 204
Predictive ROI, 1, 6, 24
client avatar of, 73–74, 86
and creation/launch of business 
podcasts, 49
“door-opening email” of, 47–51
internship program at, 191–200
Mammano’s work with, 239
McLellan assisted by, 220–222
Onward Nation revenue for, 62
see also Onward Nation
Predictive ROI LIVE, 70–72
premium-priced services, 44
pre-outro, 120
preparing for interviews, 122–124

[ 255 ]
index
Preview Links email, 101
priorities, see vital priority(-ies)
production, see 7 Stages of Production
Profitable Podcast System, 35–41
complexity of, 36
steps in, 37–41
Project Sheet template
for Audio Intros, Outros, and Design 
(Stage 3), 113
for Final Website Content and Show 
Notes (Stage 5), 145–147
for Guest Experience and Website 
Groundwork (Stage 2), 90, 
92–93
for Social Media, Recording 
Software, and First Round of 
Guest Interviews (Stage 4), 
128, 130–131
for Strategic Planning and 
Production Kickoff (Stage 1), 
80–82
proposals
guest-leads converted into, 26
sponsor, 184, 187–189
prospects, identifying, see client avatar
Pulizzi, Joe, on content marketing,  
57
purpose, 14
Question Flow
creating, 93, 94
downloading template for, 90
predetermined vs. spontaneous, 85
preparing, 38
used at Onward Nation, 94–96
questioning skills, 238
rate and review request email, 170–174
Real Estate Investor Summit, 240–243
recording podcasts, 124, 157
recording software setup, 134–135
recruiting interns, 191–200
registering
of guests, 89, 104–105
of podcasts, 169
rejection, fear of, 210
relationship building, 55–57, see also 
building your true fans nation
reminder emails, 100–101, 107,  
169–170
reservation system, 105
revenue
growing, see growing revenue
total business, 26
total podcast-related, 26
reviews
email requesting, 170–174
iTunes, 168–169
Robbins, Tony, 201–206
Robinett, Judy, 176, 209, 211
Rocky (movie), 204–206
ROI Scorecard Meeting, 41
Romancing Your Dream 50, 74–75
sales
guest-proposals converted into, 26
strategies for, see growing revenue
ScheduleOnce, 94, 97–101, 103–108, 
145
scheduling, third-party software for,  
93
Schuth, Louie, 193, 196–197
screaming cool value exchange, 57,  
174
search traffic, increasing, 58
self-doubt, 227
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People 
(Stephen R. Covey), 43

[ 256 ]
index
7 Stages of Production, 77–78
Audio Intros, Outros, and Design 
(Stage 3) in, 111–126
Equipment, Software, and Editing 
Your Interviews (Stage 6) in, 
155–165
Final Website Content and Show 
Notes (Stage 5) in, 143–154
Guest Experience and Website 
Groundwork (Stage 2) in, 
89–109
Launch Strategy: How to Reach 
the Top of iTunes (Stage 7) in, 
167–174
Social Media, Recording Software, 
and First Round of Guest 
Interviews (Stage 4) in,  
127–141
Strategic Planning and Production 
Kickoff (Stage 1) in, 77–87
Shark Tank, 230–231
She’s Building Her Empire, 223–228
Show Airing Schedule, 39–40
show artwork, 39, 114–116
Show Notes
boosting word count to, 58
creating template for, 39
customizing, 122–123
template for, 143, 145, 147–149
sidebar graphics, 116
Skype, 124, 151
Ecamm Call Recorder with, 157
for Macs, 135
for PCs, 134–135
Skype window, 123–124
small businesses, 8
Smart Podcast Player, 109
Smith, Chris, 46
social engagement, with guests, 40
social footprint, of reviewers, 168–169
social media
setup of, 40, 128, 131–134
strategy for, 46–47, see also Social 
Media Warm-Up
video sharing on, 58
Social Media, Recording Software, and 
First Round of Guest Interviews 
(Stage 4), 127–141
guest invitations in, 127–128,  
136–140
highlights of, 129
Project Sheet template for, 128, 
130–131
recording software setup in,  
134–135
social media setup in, 128, 131–134
Social Media Warm-Up, 46–51
social proof, 138, 140, 196–197
solocasts, 67, 85, 120–121
Sound Brilliant Guide, 102–103
sound effects, 119
Spear, Guy, 211
sponsor proposal, 184, 187–189
sponsorships
attracting, 181–190
to boost revenue and credibility, 44
Sponsor Wish List, 187
Stallone, Sylvester, 201–206
Staples, 186
Stephen, Mitch, 240–243
steps in, 37–41
Stitcher
guest account on, 153–154
registering podcast with, 169
setup in, 39, 153–154
Strategic Planning and Production 
Kickoff (Stage 1), 77–87
highlights of, 79

[ 257 ]
index
Project Sheet template for, 80–82
recipe for, 83–86
strategy, 226
sub-intro, 119–120
success
definitions of, 209
overcoming obstacles to, 13–21
“vitals” of, see vital metrics
The Successful Pitch (podcast), 60, 176, 
209–212
The Successful Pitch: Conversations About 
Going from Invisible to Investable 
(John Livesay), 60, 176, 211
SUCCESS Magazine, 64
System Execution, 213–216
tagline
banner for, 116
in show artwork, 115
template(s)
for About Host page, 143
downloading, 90
for emails, 90, 93
for FAQs, 143, 149–152
for guest invitations, 128, 138–140
for Question Flow, 90
for Show Notes, 39, 143, 145,  
147–149
see also Project Sheet template
testimonials, 196–197
Thank You email, 101
third-party expenses, 83
third-party scheduling software, 93
Three Faces of Fear, 210
time trap, 15–16
Toerek, Sharon, 218
top of mind awareness (TOMA),  
229
total business revenue, 26
total podcast-related revenue, 26
trademark, 86
Trojan horse, 2–3
true fans, 65–67
attracting audience who will become, 
53–54
building nation of, 61–68
definition of, 66
number of, 65–66
weekly emails to, 58–59
trust, developing, 56
Tuschl, Stacy, 223–228
Twitter, 40, 131–132
Ultimate Guide to Platform Building 
(Wendy Keller), 54
unique website visitors
change in number of, 26
converted into email opt-ins, 26
unknown, fear of, 210
value
adding, 55, 56
nation of true fans build on,  
63–64, 66
value proposition, 72
Vaynerchuk, Gary, 7, 85
video, turning audio into, 58
visual podcast elements, 114–116,  
see also Audio Intros, Outros,  
and Design (Stage 3)
vital functions, 25–26
vital metrics, 23–33
continuous review of, 41
defining your, 86
definition of, 26
evaluating your, 27–32
vital functions and, 25–26
vital priorities and, 25

[ 258 ]
index
vital priority(-ies), 25, 43
building your true fans nation as, 
61–68
defining, 86
expanding your platform as, 53–60
growing revenue as, 43–52
interdependence of, 43
volume, recording, 158, 159
Walmart, 182
Washington, George, 18
website, 39
FAQs page for, 143, 149–152
groundwork for, 77–78, 109
increasing organic search traffic to, 
58
offering freemiums on, 57
sidebar graphics for, 116
time required for launching, 77–78
Webster, Tom, 9
Wintle, Walter D., 179–180
Women’s Small Business Expo,  
182
Wooden, John, on inner circle,  
20, 21
WordPress, 109
writing a book, 60
Yaeger, Don, 4, 20
as accountability partner, 24
on greatness, 207
“You’re Live on . . . !” email, 101
“Your Interview is LIVE” email,  
169–170
YouTube channel, putting podcast 
interviews on, 58
Zickert, Jessica, 193

[ 259 ]
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Stephen Woessner is founder and CEO of the digital marketing 
agency Predictive ROI, and host of Onward Nation, the top-rated daily 
podcast for business owners.

[ 260 ]
FREE SAMPLE FROM 
GET SCRAPPY
T
hink only big brands with big budgets can do big things? Think again! 
More than budget or staff size, what matters most is attitude. Nick  
Westergaard, a digital marketing expert, who has helped countless busi-
nesses of all sizes develop their big-brand presence, knows that with a scrappy 
mindset even the leanest marketing team can generate powerhouse results. 
Check out a sample of the advice in his best-selling book Get Scrappy next.

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 261 ]
INTRODUCTION
scrappy, adjective.  Describing someone or something that appears 
dwarfed by a challenge, but more than compensates for seeming 
inadequacies through will, persistence, and heart. 
(Urban Dictionary) 
“Do I really need another marketing book?”
This was probably going through your head when you saw this 
book. Our shelves are bursting at the seams with marketing books 
for one simple reason: This is an exciting time to be in marketing. The 
Internet, social media, and content marketing have forever changed 
the way we build brands and market our organizations. These shifts 
have reset the playing field to the advantage of businesses big and 
small. 
And yet, it’s also a frustrating time to be in marketing, as we 
struggle to keep up and overcome obstacles. While many understand 
the potential unleashed by these digital shifts, few are truly prepared 
for it. The Internet has changed how we plan, staff, manage, and 
measure our marketing. There’s a lot of work that needs to be done 
and, for many businesses, resources are minimal. We understand the 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 262 ]
why behind these marketing shifts. What many marketers struggle 
with is the how. How will all of this get done in a meaningful manner 
with the resources we have? This book is for the marketers who want 
to get stuff done. 
As a brand strategist, keynote speaker, and college educator, I 
help thousands of marketers every year. From small businesses to the 
Fortune 500 to the President’s Jobs Council. From seasoned market-
ing pros to marketing students. From the plains of the Midwest to 
cities in Europe. And they all struggle with the same challenges—
the same ones you are facing. 
To paraphrase Charles Dickens, it is the best of times, it is the 
worst of times. Dickens wasn’t talking about marketing today, but 
he could have been. For marketers, this is the best of times. Tech-
nology has enabled new forms of media such as Facebook and Twit-
ter, which allow us to reach more people, more economically and 
easily than ever before. We can build direct, personal relationships 
with our customers. We can help, inform, entertain, interact, and 
instruct. And as a result, we can create enormous value on our own 
powerful platforms and channels. 
Now we come to the worst of times. While we face many chal-
lenges, there are three main obstacles that stand in our way.
1. Shiny New Things. We’re distracted by all of the shiny 
new things online: new channels, features, platforms, and 
networks are constantly coming at us. Ooh! Shiny! What’s 
your brand doing on Snapchat? How about that new Instagram 
feature? Or that awesome new platform that integrates all of 
your social media activity and makes you breakfast while it does 
all of this? Okay, so the last one isn’t here (yet!) but you get 
the idea. 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 263 ]
2. The Myth of Big. Budgets are tighter than ever. Only big 
brands with big budgets, big teams, and big technology can 
do big things with digital marketing today, or so it feels 
sometimes. Dwarfed by this imagined competition, many 
end up collapsing into self-pity as they sigh, “That’s cool but 
we couldn’t do that here.”
3. Checklist Marketing. This is when we focus on checking 
things off lists instead of on what makes the most sense. For 
fear of ending up in the boss’s crosshairs because he saw a 
story about Facebook advertising on CNBC, many market-
ers take a checklist approach. Facebook? Check. Twitter? 
Check. LinkedIn group? Yep. Instagram? We got that, too. 
Is any of this working?! Awkward silence.
Marketers have more opportunities than ever before. How do 
we capitalize on this unprecedented time in marketing history while 
maintaining our budgets and our sanity?
GET SCRAPPY
As you approach your marketing, don’t get frustrated. Get scrappy 
instead. At this point, you may be asking, “What is scrappy?” Let’s 
start with what scrappy isn’t. Scrappy isn’t marketing small. Scrappy 
isn’t marketing on the cheap. And, most importantly, scrappy isn’t 
dumbing down your marketing.
Merriam-Webster Collegiate defines scrappy as having an aggres-
sive or determined spirit.1 My favorite definition comes from the 
Urban Dictionary, which defines scrappy as describing “someone 
or something that appears dwarfed by a challenge, but more than 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 264 ]
compensates for seeming inadequacies through will, persistence, and 
heart.”2
Ultimately, the size of your organization doesn’t matter. Busi-
ness-to-business vs. business-to-consumer, nonprofit vs. for-profit 
doesn’t either. The local dry cleaner who does its own marketing can 
benefit from getting scrappy just as much as a marketer in a larger 
organization. As Samantha Hersil, who leads digital marketing at 
Pacific Cycle for brands like Schwinn, Kid Trax, and Roadmaster, 
told me, “We all wish that we had a few people and a few dollars 
more.”3
Regardless of how different our organizations and brands may 
be, we all face the same hurdles that can be overcome with will, per-
sistence, and heart—tapping into that feistiness and edge of getting 
scrappy. Scrappy is doing more with less. Scrappy is a spirit deter-
mined to simplify marketing in today’s complex digital world. 
Scrappy is thinking like an underdog (even if you aren’t) with a 
winning and determined mindset. Let’s explore that mindset a little 
further.
THE SCRAPPY MINDSET
If scrappiness is a state of mind that can be useful to anyone at any 
organization large or small, what does it entail? And, more impor-
tantly, how can you harness the power of scrappy to help you do more 
with less? To better understand how you can get scrappy with your 
marketing, let’s explore the three core attributes that make up the 
Scrappy Mindset.
Brains Before Budget— Whether you are a marketing director 
at a Fortune 500 company, a nonprofit development director, or a 
one-person marketing department at a small business, we’re all sus-

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 265 ]
ceptible to the monetary implications of the Myth of Big. When you 
start to think about personnel, tools, and technology, digital market-
ing can get real expensive real fast. 
Remember, getting scrappy is more than just being cheap. 
Scrappy also isn’t about dumbing down your marketing and saving 
your brain cells. In fact, getting scrappy is about using more of your 
brain to help you do more with less. That’s why a key tenet of the 
Scrappy Mindset is putting your brains before your budget. To do 
more with less, you need to first define what it is that you’re doing. 
All of this thinking doesn’t stop once your marketing strategy 
is approved either. You need to continue to look for smarter ways 
around the challenges you face. When you get scrappy, you start 
to see the value that you can harness from your internal team, your 
community of customers, and other unexpected sources. 
Market Like a Mousetrap— As the famous saying often credited 
to Ralph Waldo Emerson goes, “Build a better mousetrap, and the 
world will beat a path to your door.” And yet, despite the fact that 
inventors each year for nearly a century have gotten patents for sup-
posedly improved versions, these paths remain unbeaten as nothing 
has proved more useful than the simple spring-loaded bar mouse-
trap invented by William C. Hooker of Abingdon, Illinois.4 That’s 
because the mousetrap is both effective and efficient.
My family lives in a rambling old house. It’s the kind of house 
that has character. It’s also the kind of house that mice love when it 
cools off in the fall. While working in my home office, I occasionally 
hear little squeaks and scratches inside my walls. However, there’s no 
cause for alarm as I’ve set several Victor mousetraps throughout the 
house. If there’s a mouse, it won’t be around for long. The mousetrap is 
effective. And you can’t beat the price. At most stores, a couple dollars 
buys you a pack of two traps or more. The mousetrap is efficient.

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 266 ]
Like the mousetrap, to get scrappy with your marketing, you 
have to be both effective and efficient. To be effective, your objective 
has to be clearly defined first (the trap’s objective is pretty obvious) 
so that you know when the job is done (snap!). Efficiency provides 
the best construct for a more scrappy relationship with money. Being 
efficient is more than just being cheap. You’ve still met your desired 
objective. You’ve just done so with minimal expense. 
See Ideas Everywhere— Jeremy Gutsche, innovation expert, 
best-selling author, and CEO of Trend Hunter, says that we’re cur-
rently in a period of history’s highest rate of change. “It’s not just 
the new things. It’s the pace of change.”5 That’s why marketers often 
turn to case studies to help make sense of this ever-changing world. 
While case studies can be useful, sometimes we focus so intently 
on how different our own business is that we miss out on valuable 
insights from unexpected sources. 
Stay open to ideas from outside your industry. Nope. That’s a B2C 
idea. We’re B2B. That won’t work here. Or perhaps, That’s too business-y. 
We’re a nonprofit and things are sooooooo different for us. Many times 
you can have an even greater impact because it’s an approach that’s 
not often taken in your industry. Cloud-computing giant Salesforce 
developed an app that allowed fans to create custom Valentine’s Day 
e-cards to share via social media. Wait! Isn’t Valentine’s Day a con-
sumer-focused holiday? Isn’t Salesforce a B2B company? Maybe, but they 
had some fun and stood out in a big way by daring to think beyond 
their own sector stereotypes.
Technology is moving too fast for you to be confined by the 
proven ideas in your industry. To stay ahead, you have to learn to 
collect insights and ideas from beyond your specific niche and indus-
try. In the heyday of the direct mail era, marketers kept physical files 
of mailers they liked for future ideas they could “swipe.” The scrappy 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 267 ]
marketer knows to keep a digital swipe file (trade the file folder for 
Google Docs or Evernote) for useful ideas from a variety of sources. 
Disclosure: Not every case study shared in this book is from a 
business just like yours. But I promise you there’s something you can 
learn from each and every example. If you need some encourage-
ment, think of Saturday Night Live’s Stuart Smalley: “You’re good 
enough, you’re smart enough, and doggone it, you can steal this mar-
keting idea and make it work for you.” Okay, so I adapted that last 
part a bit but I was just making something from another industry 
work for me. 
To get scrappy you need to remember to (1) put your brains 
before your budget, (2) market like a mousetrap, and (3) see ideas 
everywhere. Then and only then can you start doing more with less. 
More isn’t always better. Sometimes it’s just more. By embracing 
this mindset, you can get scrappy with your marketing as others are 
already doing—at organizations big and small.
SUPER BOWL TO SEWER MAN:  
SCRAPPY MARKETERS ARE EVERYWHERE
You don’t have to look far to find marketers getting scrappy. 
Each year brands shell out millions to be a part of the Super Bowl. 
The going rate for a 30-second ad slot during the game at the time 
of writing is $4.5 million.6 In recent years, social media has provided 
viewers and marketers alike with a new experience on their second 
screen, following and engaging in social media conversations around 
hashtags such as #SuperBowlAds and #brandbowl. This online activ-
ity has led brands to maximize their investment and exposure by 
releasing their ads in the week leading up to the big game. 
Newcastle Brown Ale took advantage of this online opportunity 
to get scrappy during Super Bowl XLVIII. Because it’s owned by 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 268 ]
Heineken, you might not think of Newcastle as a scrappy under-
dog. When compared with the rest of the beer category in the U.S., 
however, the U.K. workingman’s ale is dwarfed by giants such as 
Anheuser-Busch and MillerCoors. With Budweiser as the official 
beer of the Super Bowl, Anheuser-Busch reserved 3.5 minutes of air 
time in 2014, easily costing $30 million.7 
And yet, Newcastle scored big points for a fraction of the cost. 
How? By releasing a YouTube video among the other leaked Super 
Bowl ads featuring Pitch Perfect star Anna Kendrick gossiping about 
Newcastle’s “megahuge Super Bowl ad that didn’t get made.” The 
non-ad was set to star Kendrick, who confesses to being “hot but not 
‘beer commercial babe’ hot” in a hilarious two-minute send-up of 
celebrity culture and the inflated stakes around Super Bowl ads. The 
video closes with the hashtag #IfWeMadeIt, which set up Newcas-
tle’s digital strategy during the game itself. 
While the Kendrick video never aired, it gained 4 million views 
on YouTube in a week and was considered a “Super Bowl ad” by 
many people. During the game, Newcastle tweeted to each brand 
that advertised, complimenting their ad while linking to YouTube 
parodies for each ad sketched out in a simple, hand-drawn story-
board format with a narrator pitching the ad #IfWeMadeIt (you 
tube.com/newcastle).
Scrappy marketing can work for businesses of all shapes and 
sizes. My wife and I have five kids. Amidst our controlled craziness, 
we need all of our toilets up and running at all times to prevent any 
number of domestic disasters. Recently, we had a two-toilet emer-
gency and called Hawkeye Sewer and Drain to come bail us out. 
After the job, as I was paying the plumber and walking him out of 
our house, he stopped and asked me, “Do you have a copy of our 
latest newsletter?” I did not. (Why would I?) Then he handed me a 
copy of Sewer Science, an informative newsletter printed on bright 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 269 ]
gold paper featuring engaging articles such as “Is Your Toilet Paper 
the Problem? How Can You Know?” 
Falling into the trap of Checklist Marketing, it would have been 
easy for the Sewer Man (owner Jeff Waite’s self-applied nickname) 
to invest tons of money to develop a cool mobile app or direct cus-
tomers to the latest, greatest social media channel. While the articles 
in his newsletter all live online as well, he took a chance on produc-
ing highly valuable content (seriously—you should read the articles) 
delivered in print at an incredibly relevant moment. Think about it. 
Once your problem is fixed and the plumber is out the door, your 
interest in plumbing wanes considerably. 
Marketing snobs could dismiss this as an old-school tactic. 
However, the strategy behind Sewer Science isn’t just spot on. It’s 
scrappy. Like Newcastle, the Sewer Man put his brains before his 
budget and created marketing that was both effective and efficient 
like the mousetrap. 
Marketers of all shapes and sizes can do more with less by get-
ting scrappy. What are you waiting for?
YOUR GUIDE TO SMARTER DIGITAL MARKETING
Remember all of those marketing books I mentioned earlier? Too 
many examine the why behind these shifts without focusing on the 
how. 
Confession: My name is Nick and I’m a book addict. My office 
is packed full of bookcases and book stacks. However, there’s one 
characteristic that unites the books that sit closest to my desk: All are 
ragged, dog-eared, and chock-full of notes. In picking them up you 
may find a broken spine where the book flops open to a certain page 
or a cover that’s on the verge of falling off.
That’s because these books serve as consistent reference points in 

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 270 ]
my day-to-day life as a marketer. The best business books not only 
teach you a philosophy for thinking about your work, they also arm 
you with tools and systems to go forth and do that work. My goal 
with Get Scrappy is to create a valuable resource for you. I hope you 
break the spine, dog-ear the pages, and write in the margins. Like 
you would with a valuable handbook or trusty guide. 
The challenges you face as a marketer are both strategic and tac-
tical. Both big picture and boots on the ground. You need guiding 
philosophies as well as practical how-tos. That’s why I’ve organized 
this book into three parts. Scrappy marketers look before they leap. 
Part One focuses on the smart steps that you can’t skip if you want to 
properly ground your marketing. Having a solid strategy is the only 
way to see past all of the Shiny New Things in our complex digital 
world. Part Two is about doing the work—specifically, how you can 
do more with less and overcome the Myth of Big.
Finally, in Part Three, it’s time to measure, manage, and, most 
importantly, simplify—making your efforts leaner, meaner, and 
more effective and efficient for the long haul. Then and only then can 
you avoid Checklist Marketing and target your precious resources on 
what matters most. Throughout this process, you’ll need to remem-
ber the value in seeing ideas everywhere, identifying the ideas you 
can potentially adapt from outside your industry.
As this book aims to be practical and tactical, each chapter will 
conclude with “Next Steps” prompts to help you start applying these 
concepts in your marketing. Remember, I want you to make notes 
in the book. A useful handbook should look a little banged up and 
scribbled in. At the end, you’ll also find an appendix featuring a 
handy reference guide or “scrappy summary,” a list for further read-
ing, and discussion questions for helping you share these ideas with 
your coworkers, classroom, or reading group. 
Get Scrappy will help you:

FREE SAMPLE FROM GET SCRAPPY
[ 271 ]
- Demystify digital marketing today in a way that makes 
sense for your business. 
- Ground your marketing with strategy that lays a foundation 
for action.
- Build a strong brand with something to say.
- Employ social media and content as a part of your brand’s 
marketing mix.
- Integrate digital and non-digital marketing touch points in 
a meaningful way.
The result is a reliable, repeatable system for reinventing your 
marketing as marketing reinvents itself. 
Now, are you ready to get scrappy? Let’s get started.

[ 272 ]
OTHER BEST-SELLERS FROM AMACOM
Sell with a Story: How to Capture Attention, Build Trust, and Close the Sale
Sales stories draw people in and actively engage them. Storytelling expert Paul 
Smith helps salespeople add this potent tool to their toolkit, and get dramat-
ically better results. Based on interviews with sales and procurement profes-
sionals at more than 50 top companies including Microsoft, Costco, Xerox, 
Abercrombie & Fitch, and Hewlett Packard, Sell with a Story explains how 
stories work, when to use a story to move the sales process along, which ones 
to always have handy, and how to turn real-life experiences into stories that 
resonate. 
Do It! Marketing: 77 Instant-Action Ideas to Boost Sales, Maximize Profits, 
and Crush Your Competition
A quick, encouraging kick in the pants to reignite your marketing mojo, Do 
It! Marketing combines the big picture “why” with easy-to-follow advice for 
helping your business conquer the world step-by-step and day-by-day. With 
nothing left out and nothing assumed, this down-to-earth marketing guide 
gives you all the strategies, tactics, templates, and tools you need to increase 
awareness and sales. 

[ 273 ]
OTHER BEST-SELLERS FROM AMACOM
People Styles at Work . . . and Beyond 
The book reveals the strengths and weaknesses of four different people styles, 
providing practical techniques that work both on the job and off. Now includ-
ing all new material on personal relationships, parenting, and more, this is the 
ultimate guide anyone can use to enhance even the most difficult relationships. 
Just Listen: Discover the Secret to Getting Through to Absolutely Anyone 
Barricades between people become barriers to success, progress, and happiness; 
so getting through is not just a fine art, but a crucial skill. Just Listen gives you 
the techniques and confidence to approach the unreachable people in your 
life, and turn frustrating situations into productive outcomes and rewarding 
relationships.
Talking to Crazy: How to Deal with the Irrational and Impossible People in 
Your Life
Difficult people can make life hard, but a select few can make it hell. The boss 
with nonsensical demands. The spouse who explodes at nothing. The overly  
emotional coworker, hostile neighbor, or friend who frequently bursts into 
tears. Top-ranked psychiatrist and communication expert Mark Goulston un-
locks the mysteries of the irrational mind, and explains how faulty thinking 
patterns develop. His keen insights are matched by a set of counterintuitive 
strategies proven to defuse crazy behavior, along with scripts, examples, and 
exercises that teach you how to use them.

[ 274 ]
AMACOM  Books 
Our Mission
We help you lead a more satisfying and successful life 
through books that drive professional and personal growth.
Our Books
We specialize in business books, but we also publish  
titles in health, fitness, parenting, and popular  
psychology, because you don’t leave life behind  
when you go to the office.
Our Authors
We publish the people you trust, from business legends 
Brian Tracy and Phillip Kotler, to life experts  
Mark Goulston and Michelle Segar.

Great skills drive great performance. When true talent
transformation takes place, the possibilities for better
business outcomes are almost unlimited.
American Management Association is widely recognized as a world leader in
professional development. We support the goals of individuals, organizations, and
government agencies with a complete range of talent transformation solutions.
Our flexible training fits your learning preferences, your busy schedule—and your
ongoing career and business needs.
Learn more at www.amanet.org or call 1-800-262-9699
Don’t just train—
transform
n  Learn with AMA anytime, anywhere.
n  Be part of a transformative and unique learning experience.
n  AMA helps you solve the problems you’re facing now.
n  Maintain your competitive edge.

Bulk discounts available. For details visit:
www.amacombooks.org/go/specialsales
Or contact special sales:
Phone: 800-250-5308
E-mail: specialsls@amanet.org
View all the AMACOM titles at: www.amacombooks.org
American Management Association: www.amanet.org
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject 
matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, 
accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required, the services 
of a competent professional person should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Woessner, Stephen, 1972-  author.
Title: Profitable podcasting : grow your business, expand your platform, and 
build a nation of true fans / Stephen Woessner.
Description: New York : Amacom, [2017] | Includes bibliographical references 
and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2017010664 (print) | LCCN 2017013242 (ebook) | ISBN 
9780814438299 (E-book) | ISBN 9780814438282 (pbk.)
Subjects: LCSH: Internet marketing. | Podcasting.
Classification: LCC HF5415.1265 (ebook) | LCC HF5415.1265 .W64 2017 (print) |  
DDC 658.8/72—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017010664
© 2018 Stephen Woessner
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
This publication may not be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in whole or in part, in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior 
written permission of AMACOM, a division of American Management Association, 1601 Broadway, 
New York, NY 10019.
The scanning, uploading, or distribution of this book via the Internet or any other means without the 
express permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized 
electronic editions of this work and do not participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials, 
electronically or otherwise. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.
About AMA
American Management Association (www.amanet.org) is a world leader in talent development, advancing 
the skills of individuals to drive business success. Our mission is to support the goals of individuals and 
organizations through a complete range of products and services, including classroom and virtual semi-
nars, webcasts, webinars, podcasts, conferences, corporate and government solutions, business books, and 
research. AMA’s approach to improving performance combines experiential learning—learning through 
doing—with opportunities for ongoing professional growth at every step of one’s career journey.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

