
PROFILING AND CRIMINAL
JUSTICE IN AMERICA
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY 
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Consumer Culture, Douglas J. Goodman and Mirelle Cohen
Courts and Trials, Christopher E. Smith
Dating and Sexuality, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Environmental Activism, Jacqueline Vaughn Switzer
Families in America, Jeffrey Scott Turner
Forest Conservation Policy, V. Alaric Sample and Antony S. Cheng
Gay and Lesbian Issues, Chuck Stewart
Media and American Courts, S. L. Alexander
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Police Misconduct in America, Dean J. Champion
Racial and Ethnic Diversity in America, Adalberto Aguirre, Jr.
Racial Justice in America, David B. Mustard
Media and Politics in America, Guido H. Stempel III
Religion and Politics, Glenn H. Utter and John W. Storey
The Religious Right, Second Edition, Glenn Utter and John W.
Storey
Reproductive Issues in America, Janna C. Merrick and Robert H.
Blank
U.S. Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Voting in America, Robert E. DiClerico
Women and Equality in the Workplace, Janet Z. Giele and Leslie F.
Stebbins
Women in Prison, Cyndi Banks
Work and Family in America, Leslie Stebbins

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly writ-
ten, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting point
for research by high school and college students, scholars, and
general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies, anno-
tated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better under-
standing of the social, political, environmental, and economic
issues facing the world today.


PROFILING AND
CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
IN AMERICA
A Reference Handbook
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California 
Denver, Colorado 
Oxford, England

To Kathy, Jack, Alex, and Carl. Your patience 
with me has been above and beyond the call. 
I love each of you very much.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publishers.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Bumgarner, Jeffrey B.
Profiling and criminal justice in America : a reference handbook / 
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner.
p.
cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes index.
ISBN 1-85109-469-5 (hardcover : alk. paper); 1-85109-474-1 (eBook)
1.  Criminal justice, Administration of—United States.
2. Racial 
profiling in law enforcement—United States.
I. Title.
II. Series. 
HV9950.B86 2004
363.2’3’08900973—dc22
2004014005
08 07 06 05 04
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. Visit
abc-clio.com for details.
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is printed on acid-free paper     .
Manufactured in the United States of America
∞

CONTENTS
Preface, xi
1
Introduction, 1
Definitions, 3
Importance of Studying Criminal Justice Profiling, 5
The Criminal Justice System, 8
Profiling and Political Philosophy, 10
Pluralism: The American Ideal, 11
Elitism: The American Reality? 12
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling, 15
Profiling by the Police, 16
The Origins of Police Institutions, 16
Slave Patrols, 21
Emerging Theories of Crime and Profiling, 22
Common Police Profiles, 26
The Hijacker, 26
The Serial Killer, 27
Drug Courier, 27
Proactive and Reactive Profiling, 28
Prosecutorial and Judicial Profiling, 32
References, 33
2
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling, 35
Stereotyping and Profiling, 35
Police Discretion, 38
Charging Decisions, 41
In Court, 43
At Sentencing, 49
Constitution and Civil Rights, 52
Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling, 61
vii

Arguments against Profiling, 61
Arguments for Profiling, 67
Remedies, 69
Profiling after 9/11/01, 74
References, 76
3
Global Perspectives on Profiling, 79
Four Legal Traditions around the Globe, 79
Civil Law Tradition, 80
Common Law Tradition, 81
Socialist Law Tradition, 82
Islamic Law Tradition, 82
Legal Processes, 83
Profiling around the World, 85
Australia, 86
Germany, 88
France, 91
China, 94
Japan, 96
India, 98
Summing Up, 100
References, 101
4
Chronology, 103
5
Biographical Sketches, 123
Freda Adler (1933– ), 123
Harry A. Blackmun (1908–1999), 124
Julian Bond (1940– ), 125
Henry Brown (1836–1913), 125
Warren E. Burger (1907–1995), 126
William J. Clinton (1946– ), 126
John Douglas (1947– ), 128
W. E. B. DuBois (1868–1963), 128
Franz Gall (1758–1828), 128
Ruth Bader Ginsburg (1933– ), 129
Herman Goldstein (1981– ), 129
John M. Harlan (1833–1911), 130
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679), 130
J. Edgar Hoover (1895–1972), 131
Jesse Jackson (1941– ), 132
Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929–1968), 133
viii
Contents

Rodney King (1965– ), 134
John Lewis (1940– ), 134
Cesare Lombroso (1835–1909), 135
Thurgood Marshall (1908–1993), 135
Kweisi Mfume (1948– ), 136
Rosa Parks (1913– ), 137
Lewis Powell (1907–1998), 137
William H. Rehnquist (1924– ), 138
Janet Reno (1938– ), 138
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778), 139
Margaret Sanger (1879–1966), 140
Antonin Scalia (1936– ), 140
Al Sharpton (1954– ), 141
Roger Taney (1777–1864), 142
August Vollmer (1876–1955), 142
Earl Warren (1891–1974), 143
Ida B. Wells (1862–1931), 144
Byron White (1917–2002), 144
Christine Todd Whitman (1947– ), 145
James Q. Wilson (1931– ), 146
O. W. Wilson (1900–1972), 147
6
Selected Cases and State Statutes, 149
Cases, 149
Korematsu v. United States (1944), 150
Hoyt v. Florida (1961), 154
Delaware v. Prouse (1979), 158
Bowers v. Hardwick (1986), 162
Batson v. Kentucky (1986), 166
United States v. Sokolow (1989), 171
Whren et al. v. United States (1996), 176
State Statutes, 182
California, 183
Colorado, 185
Connecticut, 187
Florida, 189
Illinois, 190
Kansas, 193
Kentucky, 194
Maryland, 195
Massachusetts, 199
Minnesota, 201
Contents
ix

Missouri, 203
Nebraska, 204
Nevada, 206
North Carolina, 206
Oklahoma, 209
Rhode Island, 210
Tennessee, 214
Texas, 215
Washington, 219
West Virginia, 220
7
Organizations and Agencies, 223
Private Organizations, 224
Federal Government Agencies, 236
State Government Agencies, 237
8
Print and Nonprint Resources, 241
Academic Studies, 241
Books, Government Publications, and Videos, 265
Books, 265
Government Publications, 270
Videos, 274
Glossary, 281
Index, 287
About the Author, 299
x
Contents

PREFACE
P
rofiling and Criminal Justice in America: A Reference Handbook
serves as an introduction to the issue of profiling within the
criminal justice system in the United States. The term profil-
ing means different things to different people. When the term is
mentioned, many people who are consumers of popular cinema
and television crime drama productions think immediately of the
process of drawing up psychological composite sketches of
unknown offenders who have invariably left “calling cards” at
crime scenes. Although this type of profiling does exist as an
investigative tool and is addressed in some portions of this book,
this is not the bulk of what this publication is about. Rather, this
book is primarily concerned with the use of race and other dubi-
ous identifiers by criminal justice officials in making decisions
about enforcement, prosecution, guilt, and punishment.
In the wake of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, it
is not sufficient simply to say that profiling along racial or ethnic
lines is always immoral or ill advised. Such a position may be a
legitimate one to hold; in these dangerous times, however, posi-
tions must be informed ones. The traveling public, for example,
has little patience for the random screening of elderly white
women at airports while Middle Eastern men board unmolested.
The public, by and large, would prefer to be more safe than fair.
Likewise, it is not a foregone conclusion even after 9–11 that
profiling along racial, ethnic, or religious lines is appropriate.
There is no question that considerable opportunity for error and
abuse exists when criminal justice officials rely on such criteria,
and history seems to bear this out. What’s more, the public, when
queried, does not think for the most part that a person’s race or
religion should doom that individual to a lifetime of chronic sus-
picion and inconvenience.
xi

Profiling is a tough issue in this day and age and requires a
comprehensive understanding of all sides to it. Although this
book may not convey all information that can be conveyed, it is
my hope that readers will find Profiling and Criminal Justice in
America: A Reference Handbook to be a useful and balanced intro-
duction to the topic and a springboard for further research about
profiling within the context of our criminal justice system.
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner
Minnesota State University
Mankato, Minnesota
xii
Preface

1
Introduction
O
n July 27, 1996, in the early morning hours and amid well-
attended all-night festivities in Atlanta’s Centennial Olympic
Park, a security guard named Richard Jewell came across a
green, military-style backpack placed under a bench. This bench
was located next to a row of additional benches; it was also next
to the NBC Sound Tower that had been erected to manage the
sound from a stage nearby where one band after another per-
formed for the crowds in attendance. Even though it was 1:20
A.M., the park was crowded with bystanders in town to enjoy the
Olympic events and associated celebrations.
To Jewell’s horror, the backpack contained an apparent
bomb. Immediately, Jewell radioed law enforcement officers of
his situation and started clearing the area of people. Another
security officer arrived on scene, and Jewell informed him of the
bomb. Jewell said “Let’s get out of here.” A few seconds later, the
bomb exploded. The explosion killed one woman instantly,
caused a fatal attack in another individual, and seriously injured
more than 100 others. Immediately after the bomb, Jewell, who
aspired to a career in law enforcement, began administering aid
to the wounded. By all accounts, Jewell had acted heroically
before and after the explosion . . . by all accounts except that of
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
Almost immediately after the FBI investigation began, fed-
eral authorities began to focus their suspicion on Richard Jewell.
According to their profile of the likely offender, Jewell measured
up. FBI profilers suspected that the bomber was white, male, in
the thirty-something age group, politically conservative, a rela-
tive loner, and a southerner. Additional information received by
1

the FBI further solidified their suspicions. For example, former
coworkers of Jewell described him as wanting to be in the mid-
dle of the action if anything happened at the Olympics. He was
characterized as an “adrenaline junkie.” His passion for a career
in law enforcement was read by FBI investigators as Jewell’s
possessing a “hero complex”—in other words, they thought
Jewell relished the idea of coming in and saving the day during
some crisis. The FBI believed this about Jewell despite the fact
that Jewell himself never claimed to be a hero or to be doing any-
thing other than his job—even in the immediate hours after the
incident when everyone else believed that he was, indeed, a
hero.
On July 30, 1996, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, which is
Atlanta’s major daily newspaper, ran a front-page story identify-
ing Jewell as a suspect of the FBI in the bombing. The paper cited
several unidentified law enforcement sources. This was a huge
national and international story. From that point on, every major
media organization referred to Richard Jewell as the Olympic
Park bombing suspect.
For over eighty days, Richard Jewell was officially a suspect
of the FBI in the Olympic Park bombing. Although no physical
evidence was ever found tying him to the bombing, the FBI clung
to Jewell and his remarkable resemblance to the suspected profile
of the bomber. The facts (as opposed to the profile), however,
simply could not sustain long-term suspicion against Jewell.
After search warrants were executed on his car and at the
residence of Jewell and his mother, and after countless inter-
views, the FBI could not tie Jewell in any way to the bombing or
even produce evidence of a motive. In late October 1996, the U.S.
Department of Justice sent Jewell a letter stating that he was no
longer a suspect in the bombing.
Indeed, in November 2000, Eric Robert Rudolph was
indicted on twenty-one counts related to the Olympic Park
bombing by a federal grand jury. He was also indicted for a
bombing at a Birmingham, Alabama, abortion clinic in which an
off-duty police officer was killed. In some ways, the FBI profile
held up with Rudolph. He was white, male, thirty-something,
ultraconservative politically, a southerner. But given the misdi-
rected attention by the FBI toward Jewell and the apparent
unwillingness early on to look elsewhere given Jewell’s fit with
the profile, can it be said that the profile worked?
2
Introduction

Definitions
There is no disagreement in the United States today that criminal
justice profiling is a controversial and sensitive issue. The pres-
ence of controversy implies that there is more than one side to the
issue. Indeed there is. In this handbook, we will examine the
issue of criminal justice profiling from what I hope is an objec-
tive, nonjudgmental perspective. The goal is to simply provide
you, the reader, with information about the issue and expose you
to all sides of it.
As criminal justice profiling is controversial, it should not be
surprising that there is more than one definition that governs the
topic. What is criminal justice profiling? In its plainest sense,
criminal justice profiling occurs when criminal justice officials
strategically consider characteristics such as race, gender, reli-
gion, or sexual orientation as they make discretionary decisions
in the course of their duties. In considering such characteristics,
criminal justice officials may select some action or actions over
others, in part because of the profile of the suspect, convicted
offender, victim, witness, or other relevant party under consider-
ation. Although many writers on the subject use the expression
criminal profiling, this handbook will regularly refer to criminal
justice profiling because it is not necessarily suspects alone who
are profiled by the criminal justice system.
It is easier to imagine legitimate uses of profiles by law
enforcement than it is to imagine legitimate prosecutorial or judi-
cial uses. This does not mean, however, that profiling does not
take place at some level or another in the prosecutorial and judi-
cial realms. This handbook will present in a later chapter some
scholarly evidence that decisions are made by prosecutors and
judges at least in part on the basis of race, gender, and other
offender characteristics. For example, a prosecutor may attempt
to strike an individual from consideration for jury duty during
jury selection (voir dire) because of the gender of that potential
juror. Prosecutors may believe, for example, that women will be
less likely to invoke the death penalty, and so the more men on
the jury, the better (from the prosecutor’s standpoint).
Although this book concerns itself with profiling throughout
the criminal justice system, it is incontrovertible that the most
pressing profiling debates today revolve around the use of pro-
files by law enforcement. This fact was true prior to the suicide
Definitions
3

hijackings on September 11, 2001; it is even more true afterward.
Although this book by design will avoid spending too much time
on profiling in the war against terrorism, the impact that 9–11 has
had on breathing new life into the pro-profiling movement can-
not be overstated.
Just when it seemed politicians were in agreement that race
or ethnicity had been receiving too much weight by law enforce-
ment in decision making and that it must stop, the terrorist
attacks took place. Now policymakers are asking why airport
security personnel are randomly selecting passengers for
searches, including elderly ladies from North Dakota, when
clearly the most likely threat is going to come from a male, young
adult of Middle Eastern descent.
Profiled characteristics can certainly include race, ethnicity,
gender, sexual orientation, and religious affiliation. These are not
the only characteristics considered in profiling, however. Things
such as travel patterns, socioeconomic status, geographic loca-
tion, age, clothing, and many other factors can weigh into a pro-
file that is used by criminal justice professionals. What is so con-
troversial, however, about race, sex, and religion’s being utilized
in profiling is the fact that these characteristics all are explicitly
protected statuses, or classes, in our laws. Further, these are not
behaviors; these are characteristics that simply “are.”
Although a neutral definition of profiling may be simply the
consideration of certain characteristics in criminal justice deci-
sion making, less neutral definitions also exist. For example,
some may define criminal justice profiling as the targeting of
racial, sexual, and religious minorities for criminal justice action
on the basis of their class or group affiliation. Such a definition is
by and large a negative portrayal of profiling. Indeed, profiling
that results in criminal justice action solely on the basis of these
characteristics is generally illegal, as we shall see.
Others (especially within the criminal justice system) may
choose, however, to define profiling as the consideration of
racial, sexual, or religious characteristics, when relevant, along
with other characteristics in a law enforcement officer’s decision
to stop, question, arrest, or search someone, in a prosecutor’s
decision to prosecute someone, or in a judge’s decision of how to
adjudicate someone. This definition, although a little unwieldy,
allows criminal justice professionals some flexibility and free-
dom to account for any number of obvious observations of or
association with criminal tendencies.
4
Introduction

Daniel Carlson, author of the book When Cultures Clash
(2002), distinguished between rational and irrational profiling.
He noted that rational profiling is a legitimate investigative tool
in the fight against crime, and police officers, relying on a com-
monsense analysis of the observed environment and the activi-
ties of suspicious people in context, use the tool frequently.
Irrational profiling, by contrast, is when a police officer
decides to stop and question someone when the sole rationale for
the stop is the person’s race or some other protected classification
(Carlson 2002).
Although there are numerous instances of irrational profil-
ing in the criminal justice system past and present, most profiling
advocates argue that legitimate and proper criminal justice pro-
filing actually guards against random harassment and discrimi-
nation by law enforcement. This is because profiling offers crim-
inal justice officials the opportunity to pool together collective
criminal justice experience into comprehensive and accurate
information, as opposed to selectively remembered war stories of
individual officials (Harris 2002).
Importance of Studying 
Criminal Justice Profiling
The importance behind the issue of criminal justice profiling is as
plain as the commonsense arguments for and against the use of
profiling. First and foremost, it is important because fighting
crime and ensuring the safety of all people in a community is
among the chief purposes of government. Any tool that can be
enlisted in that fight has got to be thoroughly considered prior to
any decision to disregard such tool.
Likewise, another purpose of our government—perhaps a
greater purpose than fighting crime—is to ensure the equality of
all people before the law. The image of Lady Justice blindfolded
while holding her scale is rooted in a very important American
(and generally Western) concept: that all people, regardless of
class, race, sex, religion, disability, and so on, are of fundamen-
tally equal worth and should therefore be treated as equals. Class
should not have its privileges before the bar of justice.
American history teaches that this concept of equal justice,
although lauded from our beginnings, has been in fact a work in
Importance of Studying Criminal Justice Profiling
5

progress. But progress has been made. More than ever before, it
has become the goal of the criminal justice system, and govern-
ment generally, to treat men and women, blacks and whites, Jews
and Christians, heterosexuals and homosexuals, as equals.
The extent to which criminal justice profiling negatively
impacts the steady movement in the United States toward equal-
ity of all before the law necessitates that the issue be carefully
thought out and studied—certainly before any final verdicts
about its legitimacy as a criminal justice tool are made at the pub-
lic policy level.
There are arguably no two greater aims of government than
to protect its citizens from other citizens who would do people
harm and to protect its citizens from government itself, by abid-
ing by constitutional and statutory restrictions and through self-
restraint. In the case of criminal justice profiling, these two aims
appear somewhat at odds with each other. As with any issue hav-
ing two or more compelling sides to it, only the possession of an
informed understanding of the issue by policymakers and the
public will result in the proper balance being struck.
The issue of criminal justice profiling and its potential dis-
criminatory effects was hotly debated in a number of statehouses
in the 2001 and 2002 legislative sessions. In the state of Virginia,
the legislature passed a measure to require and expand cultural
diversity training for law enforcement officers in part because of
perceived racial profiling. West Virginia’s legislature passed a
measure outlawing any stop or search of a person solely on the
basis of his or her race or ethnicity. Such a stop was already
unconstitutional, but legal redundancy rarely gets in the way of
good politics. The measure also established procedures for inves-
tigating claims of biased policing and for disciplining officers
found to engage in it.
In South Carolina, the state senate passed a bill that would
require police officers to collect data on traffic stops to determine
if law enforcement is engaging in racial profiling. Similar require-
ments already exist in several other states. The state of Utah
passed legislation requiring driver’s licenses and state identifica-
tion cards to record the holder’s race so that the race of individu-
als being checked in the system by law enforcement can be
tracked. Additionally, officers are required to record why a person
is being checked every time the officer runs someone in the sys-
tem. The information of race is then matched up with the reasons
people are being stopped and which officers are stopping them.
6
Introduction

The aggregate information is passed on to the departments and to
the state legislature. Utah law enforcement agencies are also
required under the law to adopt policies against bias-based polic-
ing (International Association of Chiefs of Police 2003).
In 1994, the National Commission on Crime Control and
Prevention was established by the Violent Crime Control and
Law Enforcement Act. This commission, like national crime com-
missions in the past, was tasked with the responsibility to make
broad and realistic recommendations to improve the U.S. crimi-
nal justice system. Among the mandates given to it by Congress,
the commission was to:
1.
develop a comprehensive proposal for preventing and
controlling crime and violence in the United States
2.
bring attention to the successful models and programs
in crime prevention and crime control
3.
reach out beyond the traditional criminal justice com-
munity for ideas for controlling and preventing crime
4.
recommend improvements in the coordination of local,
state, federal, and international crime control and pre-
vention efforts, including efforts relating to crime near
international borders
5.
make a comprehensive study of the economic and
social factors leading to or contributing to crime and
violence, including the causes of illicit drug use and
other substance abuse, and to develop specific propos-
als for legislative and administrative actions to reduce
crime and violence and the factors that contribute to it
6.
recommend means of utilizing criminal justice
resources as effectively as possible, including targeting
finite correctional facility space to the most serious and
violent offenders, and considering increased use of
intermediate sanctions for offenders who can be dealt
with adequately by such means
7.
examine distinctive crime problems and the impact of
crime on members of minority groups, Native Ameri-
cans living on reservations, and other groups defined
by race, ethnicity, religion, age, disability, or other char-
acteristics and to recommend specific responses to the
distinctive crime problems of such groups
8.
examine the problem of sexual assaults, domestic vio-
lence, and other criminal and unlawful acts that partic-
Importance of Studying Criminal Justice Profiling
7

ularly affect women and to recommend federal, state,
and local strategies for more effectively preventing and
punishing such crimes and acts
9. examine the treatment of victims in federal, state, and
local criminal justice systems and to develop recom-
mendations to enhance and protect the rights of victims
10. examine the ability of federal, state, and local criminal
justice systems to administer criminal law and criminal
sanctions impartially without discrimination on the
basis of race, ethnicity, religion, gender, or other legally
proscribed grounds and to make recommendations for
correcting any deficiencies in the impartial administra-
tion of justice on these grounds
11. examine the nature, scope, causes, and complexities of
violence in schools and to recommend a comprehensive
response to that problem
Interestingly, two of the mandates concern the issue of race,
ethnicity, religion, and other protected classifications. Mandate
number seven implores the criminal justice system to concern
itself with the specific and unique problems associated with par-
ticular classes of people; the tenth mandate, however, essentially
demands that the criminal justice system ignore the variety of
classifications in pursuit of justice, lest it be unequal in its appli-
cation. In other words, the former mandate proposes conscious-
ness regarding groups and classes whereas the latter proposes
neutrality.
This seeming, and certainly unintentional, contradiction
exemplifies in a broad way some of the dilemmas felt in the more
narrowly framed issue of criminal justice profiling. In the follow-
ing sections, criminal justice profiling will be examined for what
it is and is not and for the contradictory aims and achievements
it yields.
The Criminal Justice System
In understanding criminal justice profiling, it is important to
know something about the criminal justice system in the United
States. In particular, what are its goals? Criminal justice scholars
are not in agreement on the degree to which American criminal
justice operates as a system to begin with. Generally, when we
8
Introduction

speak of the criminal justice system, we think of the police, the
prisons, and the courts as the triad comprising the system.
It could be argued, however, that American criminal justice
is distinctly a “nonsystem,” as the police, prisons, and courts
have different, and sometimes competing, goals. In a true system,
the component parts of the system are all designed to work
toward the bigger objective. Instead, the component criminal jus-
tice parts are working frequently at odds with each other, and in
any case rarely act in concert with each other.
Add to the differing goals of these three criminal justice
components the fact that the United States has one federal and
fifty state criminal justice systems existing at the same time, and
you will have the epitome of decentralization that marks our fed-
eralist approach to government. Calling it a “system” that can be
universally characterized as “racist” or “nonracist” or “sexist” or
“just” may be giving it too much credit.
This point notwithstanding, most criminal justice profes-
sionals and scholars believe there are some overall objectives of
all who work in the U.S. justice system. These broad objectives
can be said to be the goals of the American criminal justice “sys-
tem.” And it is within the context of these goals that profiling
takes place. The overarching goal of the U.S. criminal justice sys-
tem is to “do justice” (Cole and Smith 2001, 14). There are two
values associated with doing justice. Although these values are
somewhat in competition, they are not mutually exclusive. The
first is that of crime control. This value requires our free society
to make every effort to allow law-abiding citizens to live in free-
dom and safety by repressing crime that would otherwise be per-
petrated against them. This means there is an emphasis placed on
efficiency, speed, and finality in the prevention, apprehension,
and punishment of criminals.
The other value characterizing U.S. criminal justice is that of
due process. This value requires us to make every effort to ensure
that our criminal justice decisions and actions are based on fair
and reliable information. There is an emphasis on the adversarial
process, the rights of defendants, and formal decision-making
procedures over ad hoc, impulsive, or emotion-driven decisions.
Those who stress crime control tend to support the expan-
sion of police numbers and police powers; they tend to want to
limit the ability of judges to be lenient on defendants; and they
tend to oppose probation and parole, preferring instead to build
more prisons and jails. Those who stress due process, on the
The Criminal Justice System
9

other hand, make every effort to ensure that individual rights are
protected; they tend to prefer treatment and rehabilitation efforts
over punishment for punishment’s sake; and they insist that the
system err on the side of offenders rather than risk unjustly
depriving innocent people of their rights or their liberty.
The relative value one places on crime control and due
process will likely shape one’s view on the worthwhileness of
criminal justice profiling. Those who value crime control over
due process will find profiling to be an invaluable crime-fighting
tool that is not used enough or to great enough lengths to pre-
serve law-abiding citizens’ safety and security from criminal ele-
ments. Those who value due process above crime control will
find profiling to be an oppressive and illegitimate tool of gov-
ernment to single out some of its citizens for action. Even if it
works, the cost to individual dignity and rights is too high to
warrant its use.
Profiling and Political Philosophy
The issue of criminal profiling has broader implications than
those just for the law enforcement community, or the criminal
justice system for that matter. Profiling raises questions that are
the heart of the political philosophies of the United States.
Indeed, exactly what America’s philosophies and core values are
continues to be debated to this day. At the root of the debate are
the models of “consensus” and “conflict.”
The debate of consensus versus conflict amounts to two
competing models of explanation as to where our laws (and the
enforcement mechanisms that follow) come from. The consensus
model holds that criminal law, as an expression of the social con-
sciousness of the whole society, reflects widely shared values and
beliefs (Cole and Smith 2001). In other words, the laws of Amer-
ican society reflect a consensus that has been arrived at by soci-
ety’s members.
The main principles commonly associated with the consen-
sus model are that (1) the law reflects the need for order; (2) the
law results from a consensus on the values that are widely shared
in society; (3) the law is an impartial system that protects the
public interest; and (4) the law provides a neutral means for
resolving disputes.
10
Introduction

Crimes that tend to be emphasized by those adhering to this
model are known as mala in se offenses. These offenses are
thought to be wrong by their very nature, with or without a
criminal code telling us so. Offenses such as murder, assault,
rape, and so on are considered mala in se crimes. The fact that
there are criminal codes against these offenses reflects the fact
that society’s members widely agree that committing these acts
is wrong.
The conflict model rejects the notion that most of the crimi-
nal laws are written as a result of widespread consensus.
Instead, subscribers of this model hold that the criminal laws
and enforcement mechanisms have been crafted by powerful
political groups. The model assumes that people act in their own
self-interests; therefore, people who have power are the ones
whose preferred wishes will be codified into law (Cole and
Smith 2001).
The conflict model emphasizes crimes known as mala pro-
hibita offenses to prove its point. Mala prohibita crimes are prohib-
ited by law but are not necessarily evil or wrong in and of them-
selves. These offenses include gambling, vagrancy, prostitution,
and drug use. Many critics of the notion of consensus in our crim-
inal laws point out that the statutes articulating mala prohibita
offenses tend to be largely enforced against the lower classes in
society—especially against racial and sexual minorities.
Pluralism: The American Ideal
Often associated with the criminal justice notion of consensus is
the broader political philosophy of pluralism. Pluralism postu-
lates that self-rule by all the people of a society can be achieved
through competition among multiple organized groups and that
individual members of society can genuinely participate in soci-
etal and political decisions through group memberships and
elections (Dye 2001). Things get done, including the crafting of
the criminal justice system, by debating, bargaining, and com-
promising among various interest groups in competition.
Public policy that emerges from a pluralistic system is gen-
erally thought to be rationally derived. Through open and free
debate, all policy options are aired and considered according to
their relative costs and benefits. In the end, policy is crafted
Pluralism: The American Ideal
11

according to the maximum social gain, which is consistent with
the consensus model.
That the government has the right to do this is based on the
long-standing adherence of the United States to social contract
theory. The notion of social contract in America can be traced
back to seventeenth-century political philosopher John Locke,
among others. Social contract is the idea that government origi-
nates as an implied contract among individuals who agree to
obey the law in exchange for the protection of their rights.
Locke argued that government is based on consensus. It
exists because the people have allowed it to . . . and for good rea-
son. As Thomas Hobbes said in his classic work Leviathan, life
without any government would be “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish,
and short” (Hobbes 1651, 65). Indeed, we the people have con-
sented to the existence of our government. In doing so, we have
agreed to give up some of our liberties and responsibilities, such
as to avenge ourselves (and to a lesser degree protect ourselves),
and have delegated them to the government instead. As the Pre-
amble of the U.S. Constitution says, we have agreed to delegate
to the government our national defense, the preservation of our
welfare, the establishment of justice and tranquility, and the
securing of our liberties. If the government lives up to its portion
of the contract and provides these things, then the people will
continue to let the government exist and rule. Locke suggested,
however, that when government—any government—fails to
deliver in these—its essential responsibilities—then the govern-
ment can and should be dissolved by the people and replaced
with a new one.
Clearly, John Locke’s social contract served as the justifica-
tion for the American Revolution. American colonists had
decided that the British Crown no longer deserved power over
them as it no longer (if it had ever) met its contractual obliga-
tions. Hence, Locke’s language appears practically verbatim in
the American Declaration of Independence.
Elitism: The American Reality?
The political philosophy of elitism is generally aligned with the
conflict model of criminal justice. Elitism posits that public pol-
icy of all types boils down to the preferences and values of the
12
Introduction

governing elite. Those who argue that the United States is an
elitist society note that most policymakers are drawn from the
upper socioeconomic strata of society. What’s more, so are those
who have access to the policymakers. It is estimated that half of
the nation’s total assets are concentrated in the 100 largest cor-
porations and fifty largest banks in the United States (Dye 2001).
Leaders of these businesses have regular access to politicians
and high-ranking bureaucrats. C. Wright Mills coined the term
power elite to describe those leaders in government, the military,
and private corporations who comprise the decision makers in
U.S. society. He noted that they tend to be white, male, wealthy,
educated, and Protestant and together form the pinnacle of a
pyramid of power, with the masses positioned below (Mills
1956).
Elitism manifests itself in the criminal justice system with
two types of discriminatory laws. Historically, many laws in this
country were designed to treat people differently based upon
their minority racial, ethnic, gender, sexual orientation, or reli-
gious status. A well-known example would be the Jim Crow laws
of the South, which well into the twentieth century enforced
racial segregation.
In recent years, however, the Supreme Court has been scru-
tinizing laws that were directed against particular classes of peo-
ple. Most laws specifically directed against a particular class of
people—favorably or unfavorably—have been found to be viola-
tions of the Equal Protection clause of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment and therefore unconstitutional. But many people point out
that elitism also manifests itself in laws that are classification
neutral but are enforced in a way that causes an adverse impact
on a class or group of people (Schott 2001).
In these instances, the law applies to everyone equally, but
the impact tends to be greater among a particular group because
of that group’s tendencies or because of selective enforcement.
For example, possession or sale of crack cocaine carries a harsher
penalty in many jurisdictions than does powder cocaine. African
American cocaine users tend to prefer crack cocaine, whereas
white users favor powder.
Supporters of such laws note that crack cocaine is more dan-
gerous and more addictive. Critics point out, however, that
blacks and other ethnic minorities tend to use crack cocaine
because it is cheaper, whereas middle- and upper-class whites
Elitism: The American Reality?
13

can afford the more expensive powder cocaine. Although a white
person using crack cocaine may be subject to the same penalties
as minorities who use it, the net effect is that harsher penalties
tend to be doled out to black cocaine users more than white
cocaine users because of the preference and affordability of crack
cocaine over powder among the black population.
Another example is the existence of antisodomy laws that
remain on the books in most states. Although heterosexuals and
homosexuals alike live under such laws, homosexuals are much
more likely to engage in sodomy and therefore be prosecuted for
it because sodomy is the preferred sexual activity among homo-
sexuals. Therefore antisodomy laws, which in appearance are
neutral when it comes to sexual orientation, generally impact one
particular group more than others. The Supreme Court struck
down these laws in 2003. Many see such laws as prima facie evi-
dence of an elitist society and an elitist criminal justice system.
As is the case in so many social contexts, the polar extremes
may not reflect the reality that is our criminal justice system.
Instead, we may think of the degree of fairness or unfairness in
criminal justice as a continuum. Samuel Walker, Cassia Spohn,
and Miriam DeLone conceptualized discrimination in the Amer-
ican criminal justice system as existing along a continuum rang-
ing from “systematic discrimination” to “pure justice” (Walker,
Spohn, and DeLone 2002).
The view that the criminal justice system is discriminatory at
all stages, at all times, and in all places throughout the United
States is one that holds to “systematic discrimination.” It is the
view that the criminal justice system, as presently constituted, is
hopelessly flawed with bias against all types of people.
Next along the continuum is the notion that the criminal jus-
tice system is characterized by “institutional discrimination.”
This position asserts that disparities in outcomes along racial,
ethnic, gender, or other lines are due to the application of other-
wise neutral factors, such as criminal record or family status, but
these factors nevertheless adversely impact some groups more
than others. The previously mentioned crack cocaine and anti-
sodomy laws are also examples.
“Contextual discrimination” is next on Walker, Spohn, and
DeLone’s continuum. People believing that this level of discrimi-
nation exists in the system hold that discrimination is not “system”
wide. Rather, discrimination surfaces in particular contexts and cir-
14
Introduction

cumstances, such as regions of the country or in regards to specific
kinds of crime. Discrimination does exist, but it is not so pervasive
that context is irrelevant. If you want to treat discrimination, it
stands to reason that you treat the contexts that give rise to it.
Finally, at the end of the continuum opposite to systematic
discrimination is the notion of “pure justice.” Those who believe
“pure justice” exists, and there are not many who do, believe that
there is no discrimination of any type affecting any group or
groups at all—ever. This position on the continuum represents
the ideal of American criminal justice. Again, few argue that it
represents the reality. But, as the ideal, it is always the horizon
toward which we should move.
It is debatable what role criminal justice profiling plays in
fixing the criminal justice system somewhere on the above con-
tinuum. Some see profiling as evidence of systematic discrimina-
tion and as a tool of maintaining systematic discrimination. Oth-
ers see profiling more as a manifestation of institutional or
contextual discrimination. Still others argue that profiling simply
is a symptom of where crime is and to not go where the crime is,
through profiling or other means, is to unfairly leave vulnerable
potential victims who live where the crime is—usually in lower-
income, minority neighborhoods. By that logic, profiling is evi-
dence of a desire on the part of the criminal justice system to pro-
tect all people, including the poor and minorities, and therefore
reflects no discrimination. Whatever significance one places on
criminal justice profiling in gauging the true level of fairness and
equality in the United States, it clearly has become a cause
célèbre—whether anecdotal or substantive—in the debate over
“doing justice.”
Applications of Criminal 
Justice Profiling
Profiling within the criminal justice system is most often associ-
ated with law enforcement. Most of the scholarly (and almost all
of the popular) literature that focuses on criminal justice profiling
emphasizes the law enforcement piece of the justice system.
Criminal justice profiling can and does take place at various
stages of the criminal justice process including, but not limited to,
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling
15

police work. To the extent that profiling is defined broadly as the
practice of justice officials directly or indirectly taking into con-
sideration various characteristics of suspects or known offenders
as they make decisions in their official capacity, profiling can
occur in the law enforcement, prosecutorial, and judicial phases
in the justice system.
Profiling by the Police
To place profiling by the police in context, we must at least con-
sider what the goals of modern police agencies are. The police
have three primary functions in American society: order mainte-
nance, service, and law enforcement. Order maintenance refers to
the prevention of behavior that disturbs the public peace. Service
involves the provision by police of assistance to the public in
matters unrelated to crime. Services the police may provide
include medical assistance, helping citizens locked out of their
vehicles, public relations activities, and so on. It is estimated that
80 percent of police calls do not involve crime (Roberg, Crank,
and Kuykendall 2000). Finally, law enforcement refers to control-
ling crime by intervening in situations in which the law has been
or is being broken and there exists a need to identify and appre-
hend those guilty of breaking it. It is this latter function of law
enforcement that we have come to equate with the “profession”
of policing. That has not always been the case. Policing as an
occupation has come a long way.
The Origins of Police Institutions
From the late thirteenth century through the eighteenth century,
England and its colonies utilized the parish-constable watch sys-
tem of law enforcement (Samaha 1994). Under this system, each
parish or town would appoint at least two unpaid constables,
usually selected by lot. Constables in turn selected night watch-
men to assist them in their duty. When a constable or night
watchman, who later came to be called a “bailiff,” would come
across a crime in progress, the practice was to call out for help to
any and everyone who could hear him. In fact, English law made
it a crime for able-bodied citizens to ignore the “hue and cry” and
required citizens to keep weapons in their homes for the purpose
of rendering such assistance. These same citizens were also
expected to join a posse, if necessary, to capture offenders. Posses
16
Introduction

were led by a leader of the shire—or county—in question. This
leader was known as the shire reeve, from which the modern
term sheriff is derived (Schmalleger 1993).
In the 1700s, particularly after the advent of gin, which was
amazingly cheap for an intoxicating beverage, English urban
areas became frequent sites of riots. Huge numbers of people liv-
ing in London’s industrial ghettos began binges of drinking and
rioting to drown out their troubles. The night watchmen proved
to be woefully incapable of dealing with the riots and, in fact,
became targets of mob violence to the point of frequently being
beaten for sport (Schmalleger 1993).
The alternative to the watchmen when things were out of
control was to turn to the military. Under the English Riot Act,
troops could be called out “in aid of the civil power” (Deakin
1988). In 1818, soldiers were called out to quell a riot in Manches-
ter and in the process killed 11 and wounded over 500 in the
crowd. After this incident and others with similar consequences,
the notion of forming a police force to handle disorders became
increasingly appealing to the British government. After all, the
objection to creating a police force because it would constitute
putting troops in the streets was negated by the fact that real
troops were frequently put in the streets for lack of a police force.
Probably the single most significant event in police history
was the passage of the Metropolitan Police Act of 1829. That
piece of legislation, submitted to Parliament by Sir Robert Peel,
created the first modern police force. Within a year of the act’s
passage, the Metropolitan Police force, commonly called the Met,
employed over 1,000 officers. Officers were equipped with a uni-
form, a short baton, and a rattle, the latter being used to raise an
alarm when necessary. Each constable, nicknamed a “bobby” in
Peel’s honor, was issued a number that he had to wear on his col-
lar, making the bobbies immediately identifiable to the public
(Peak and Glesnor 1996).
Although establishing a police force was controversial, as it
resembled to some a standing army in the streets of London, the
alternative of continuing to use the military was more problem-
atic. The Met was created to keep the civil order without resort-
ing to broadly administered violence wherever possible. The Met
had a four-part mandate:
1. to prevent crime without using repressive force and to
avoid calling out the military to control disturbances
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling
17

2. to maintain public order by nonviolent means, using
force only to obtain compliance as a last resort
3. to reduce conflict between the police and the public
4. to show efficiency through the absence of crime and dis-
order rather than through visible police actions
In the United States, modern police departments arose
owing to circumstances remarkably similar to those that had
existed in England. From the 1830s to the 1870s, there was an un-
precedented amount of civil disorder occurring throughout the
industrial United States. Very few cities escaped serious rioting
and mob violence. The civil upheaval was often rooted in ethnic
fighting due to the massive influx of immigrants during this time
period. There was also violence rooted in economic issues, result-
ing in banks and businesses being ransacked by angry customers
or employees (Walker 1977).
As had been the case in England, there was no continuous
police presence in the urban centers of the United States in the
early nineteenth century. The night watch was largely the only
official mechanism in place, short of troops, to confront the fre-
quent mob violence—and only then at night.
In one major city after another, the response was the same.
Police departments began to be formed throughout the middle of
the nineteenth century in America’s urban centers to keep the
peace. Policing in the United States paralleled policing in
England. Some of the similarities between American and British
police in the nineteenth century included (Uchida 2001)
• common legal tradition
• civilian workforce (not soldiers) with a military-style
command structure
• crime prevention as the main mission
• random patrol of fixed beats as the main strategy
against crime
• restrained police powers
• paid, uniformed police officers
Although police forces in the United States were modeled after
London’s metropolitan force, there were some significant differ-
ences between the English and American models.
Chief among the differences was the political orientation of
18
Introduction

the police. The Met was a creation of the national government in
England, whereas in the United States police departments were
installed by city governments. This made U.S. police officers
much more a part of the political machinery than their London
counterparts. Police officers were usually recruited by political
leaders of a given ward or precinct and served at the pleasure of
the political leadership. For example, in Cincinnati, after an elec-
tion in 1880 changed the party in power, 219 of the 295 members
of the police force were dismissed. Six years later, after another
political power shift, 238 of the 289 patrolmen and eight of six-
teen lieutenants were removed (Walker 1977).
Police in the United States in the nineteenth century were
characterized by cronyism and endemic corruption and con-
ducted themselves by a set of informal processes that had little to
do with the official mandate of the police, namely to protect and
to serve. But police were not up to no-good and nothing else.
Police departments in that time period, commonly dubbed the
political era of policing, spent much of their time engaged in ser-
vices. Departments, as extensions of politics, were routinely
tasked with providing ambulance services, running soup
kitchens, running shelters, and other benevolent activities. Amer-
ican policing around the turn of the century was more oriented
toward service than any other police function.
With the twentieth century came the Progressive Era. From
1900 to 1914, there were widespread reform efforts directed
toward the criminal justice system. The reforms were consistent
with efforts being made in government generally—namely, the
depoliticization of the civil service and the birth of public admin-
istration as a distinct profession based on technical competencies
and practices. The reforms directed toward police agencies in-
cluded centralization of power by concentrating most authority
in an autonomous chief; rational administrative procedures; up-
grading personnel by means of selection, training, and discipline;
and restricting the police role to enforcing the criminal law
(Walker 1977; Samaha 1994).
Initially, the reform efforts toward the police were met with
hostility from the police rank-and-file. They viewed reformers
who sought to sever the police connection with political bosses as
making their jobs more difficult, more dangerous, and less pop-
ular with the public. As one police scandal was publicly paraded
after another, however, many officers began to see the police cor-
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling
19

ruption and incompetence as conduits toward making all police-
men laughingstocks; consequently, internal pressure began to
swell for reform (Sparrow, Moore, and Kennedy 1990).
Gradually, over the years that followed the first decade of
the twentieth century leading into the modern era, police depart-
ments around the country began to change. To be sure, corrup-
tion and incompetence plagued many agencies and in some cases
exist systematically even today. But in totality, a genuine para-
digm shift relating to policing began to take place in the collec-
tive and individual minds of officers, their managers, and the
public. The quality and character of police officers began to mat-
ter as never before. For example, officers in departments under-
going reform were required to declare financial interests and
remain debt free as a condition of employment, in order to mini-
mize the temptation of corruption. Indeed, in an effort to ensure
that bribery and protection rackets had seen their last day, many
departments went so far as to forbid unnecessary or casual con-
versation with the public (Sparrow, Moore, and Kennedy 1990).
This obsolete rule has survived police culture in many cases
to this day in the form of officer aloofness. In other words, the
courteous but nonfriendly, businesslike demeanor we often
observe in police officers as we try unsuccessfully to get out of a
ticket does not necessarily originate in officer bias or rudeness.
Rather, it is an unforeseen consequence of professionalization
and countercorruption efforts.
Another reform in the police field was the use of motorized
vehicles. This created an ability to cover more area of an assigned
beat within a shift. This ability was further enhanced by the
widespread use of radios in patrol cars by 1950. Reformers saw
the radio-squad car as huge plus. Not only did the cars help keep
officers separated from the public, thus minimizing the potential
for corruption, but they gave officers the ability of preventive
patrol and rapid response.
The “reform” or “professional” model of policing as it
emerged during the first two-thirds of the twentieth century
remains mostly intact today even as a new model—community
policing—is championed in name. Modern police deeply resent
political interference. They find their legitimacy and methods in
the ideas of law enforcement and crime control, not community
sentiment. And further, the ideas of professionalism have been
reinforced through the advent of specialized police procedures
and advanced forensic techniques.
20
Introduction

Some developments in the professional era included the
advent of the police code of ethics, merit selection and promo-
tion, training standards, the use of management science, a new
emphasis on impartiality in enforcing the law, advances in trans-
portation, and scientific crime fighting. It is this last development
that really serves as the parent of modern criminal profiling.
During the professional era, the primary mission of police
departments became law enforcement, as opposed to service or
even order maintenance. The supremacy in importance of fight-
ing and solving crime was solidified in police culture. Addition-
ally, isolation from the public was inevitable during this time
period. The advent of the patrol car meant that officers were cov-
ering more ground while interacting less with the public.
It is this professional, crime-fighting model of policing that
has by and large survived to this very day. Although police de-
partments increasingly adopt community policing policies, which
seek to form partnerships with the communities to solve rather
than salve community problems, modern law enforcement still
primarily serves as a reactionary, crime-fighting force.
In the professional model of policing, the overriding mission
of law enforcement is to suppress criminal activity. Profiling, to
the extent that it enables law enforcement to successfully identify
potential criminal activity and perpetrators of such activity, is
entirely consistent with the professional model. Perhaps this is
why profiling has flourished in recent years and has been legit-
imized in law enforcement as a quasi-science through training
and practice. The bottom line in the minds of many profession-
ally oriented police officers is that profiling tends to work.
It also makes sense that with the growth of community
policing, the comfort level of society with profiling is diminish-
ing—particularly among citizens in the subcommunities most
affected. Say those citizens: how can we partner with the police
when they view us as potential violators based on objective cri-
teria over which we have no control, such as our race?
Slave Patrols
The English origins of American policing serve as the primary
source for understanding U.S. police history. The model for
urban law enforcement given to us from the Met, or even the tra-
ditional notion of the office of county sheriff, derived from the
British “shire reeve,” who was responsible for tax collection and
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling
21

process service in the English countryside, does not, however,
explain the police practices of the nineteenth-century American
South.
Indeed, policing in the southern United States, particularly
as policing related to black Americans, has a sad history of its
own. Many historians recognize today that policing in the Amer-
ican South during the eighteenth century and first half of the
nineteenth century was inextricably tied to slavery.
Owing to a fear of violent slave uprisings, along with fear-
ing the lesser offenses of refusing to work, escape, killing live-
stock, and destroying equipment, formal slave patrols began to
form in the Southern colonies (Samaha 2002).
South Carolina established the first slave patrol in 1704. Vir-
ginia followed in 1727 and North Carolina in 1753 (Hadden
2001). Those formal slave patrols established legislatively by the
colonies constitute some of the earliest formal police operations
in America. Patrollers were usually white men between the ages
of sixteen and sixty. These men were often chosen from the ros-
ters of the militia. They had three main duties: (1) searching slave
quarters, (2) dispersing slave gatherings, and (3) safeguarding
communities by patrolling the roads (Hadden 2001).
The slave patrols continued to exist throughout the South
until the Civil War. In the wake of the Civil War and the emanci-
pation of slaves, the slave patrols gave way to vigilante groups
that continued to troll for blacks with an eye toward submission
through intimidation at the least and downright terror for ter-
ror’s sake at the worst. The Ku Klux Klan (KKK) was organized
as one of these vigilante groups. Given the common heritage of
organizations such as the KKK with elements of modern polic-
ing, it is little wonder that many African Americans have an
antipathy for aggressive, contact-intensive police patrol tactics.
Emerging Theories of Crime and Profiling
Just as law enforcement, as an occupation and practice, has
developed over time, so have the theories of crime often relied
upon by the criminal justice system. There have been many the-
ories advanced as to the cause of crime and criminality. Obvi-
ously, the same explanations people use to explain crime can be
used to predict it as well. And people, once they believe them-
selves capable of predicting crime, will necessarily engage in pro-
filing to do so. The degree to which race, ethnicity, gender, sexual
22
Introduction

orientation, or religion are pieces of those explanations relates to
the degree that people will tend to be profiled along these lines.
As George Cole and Christopher Smith have noted, philoso-
phies of crime in America and elsewhere in the West prior to the
eighteenth century were inseparable from the prevailing theolo-
gies of the day. Under this worldview, mankind is fallen and
inherently sinful. Crime is a natural manifestation of mankind’s
sinful nature. Formal indictments for criminal offenses in colo-
nial times would include language such as “[John Doe] not hav-
ing the fear of God before his eyes but being seduced by the insti-
gation of the Devil, did commit [some offense]” (Cole and Smith
2001, 68).
The eighteenth century, however, ushered in rational
approaches to explaining criminality in people. In particular,
Cesare Beccaria (1738–1794) published Essays on Crimes and Pun-
ishment in 1764, which contained the tenets of what is now
known as classical criminology. Beccaria claimed that the expla-
nation for crime is not generally rooted in theology; rather, it is
rooted in rational thinking. Becarria argued that when criminals
commit crime, they do so out of their free will, having made a
rational choice weighing the costs of possibly getting caught
against the benefits of succeeding.
Beccaria’s basic principles were
1. crime is caused by the individual rational exercise of
free will
2. pain and pleasure are the two central determinants of
human behavior
3. crime disparages the quality of the relationship that
exists between individuals and society
4. punishment is a necessary evil and is sometimes
required to deter criminal choices and serve as an exam-
ple to others
5. crime prevention is possible through swift and certain
punishment, which offsets any gains to be had through
criminal behavior.
Although many in history have looked at Beccaria’s principles as
an excuse for harsh punishment, Beccaria himself was actually a
staunch opponent of excess punishment.
The profiling implications of classical criminology are that
crime may be predicted by identifying those most likely to find
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling
23

the benefits of committing a crime greater than the costs. If other
people’s rational choices regarding crime can be anticipated,
then the criminal justice system may use that during enforce-
ment to avert crime or during adjudication and sentencing to
avert recidivism.
In the nineteenth century and first part of the twentieth cen-
tury, another theory of crime became very popular. During that
time, it was common to believe that crime was at least in part due
to biology. In other words, adherents to this theory argued that
some people are predisposed to committing crimes. That theory
of crime—the theory that some people are born criminal—is the
criminogenic theory of crime.
Criminogenics’ most famous champion was Cesare Lom-
broso (1836–1909). Lombroso and others argued that people who
were born criminal had some telltale biological and physiological
features. For example, they claimed that criminals tended to have
primitive physical features such as strong canine teeth, huge
jaws, and high cheekbones. Indeed, the cartoon cliché of crimi-
nals having “slack jaws and beady eyes” came from this school
of thought.
Lombroso’s theory of crime was tied to naturalism and
Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution. If some people exhibited
features that were common to a more primitive version of man,
that is, a version appearing earlier in the evolutionary chain, then
it was logical to assume that the behavior of those people would
tend to be more primitive.
Although few serious scholars today advance Lombroso’s
criminogenic theories, many do believe that genetics, physiology,
and heredity may play a part in determining criminal behavior.
Studies continue to be done by biologists and research psycholo-
gists in attempts to identify genetic and physiological features
that are associated with people who commit various types of
crime—particularly violent crime.
The implications that the biological theories of crime have
for profiling are plain. If criminals are likely to have certain phys-
ical features, then the criminal justice system, many would argue,
should give proactive attention to people possessing those fea-
tures before all others. Or, if criminals will likely have certain
genetic features, then perhaps the criminal justice system should
give proactive attention to those whose deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) fits a certain profile.
24
Introduction

For example, some researchers have published findings in
mainstream scientific journals that sexual orientation has an
association with pedophilia. In particular, it is claimed that
homosexual men (generally assumed to constitute less than 3
percent of the total population) are responsible for a third of all
child molestations. This disproportionate representation of
homosexuals among sex offenders against children, if true,
would have significant profiling implications. For example, peo-
ple meeting the profile—namely, homosexual and male—might
not be permitted to work unsupervised with children. Nor might
they be permitted to adopt. Or, when male children went miss-
ing, homosexual males would be the first people law enforce-
ment would look at for suspects.
Today, the most prevailing types of theories to explain crime
are sociological ones. Sociological explanations of crime—and
there are many—emphasize the role that society and social con-
ditions (for example, poverty, prestige, family structure or lack
thereof, role of institutions such as church, lack of education, and
so on) have on individual offenders. Theorists along these lines
claim that we are products of our environment. Consequently,
treating undesirable social conditions is the best way to address
criminality in our society.
Profiles that rely on sociological theories of crime would
suggest that the criminal justice system could expect crime from
those quarters of our society that are run-down, impoverished,
lacking traditional family households, lacking socioeconomic
opportunities, and so on. A profile of “typical” violent offenders
in a particular city might be juveniles who have no father figures
at home, who live in poverty with drug use all around them, and
who receive no moral instruction from those over them.
Although many of the above profile’s elements are associ-
ated with crime in America’s urban areas, the practical applica-
tion would require people to be treated differently on the basis of
these conditions. This is a point already alleged by many—
specifically, that the poor and minorities in this country are
treated differently than others by the criminal justice system. As
all are supposed equal before the bar of justice, inequitable treat-
ment on the grounds of social status is offensive to most. Such
profiling might be used, however, to identify needed points of
intervention before the bar of justice is ever needed.
Applications of Criminal Justice Profiling
25

Common Police Profiles
Criminal justice profiling by law enforcement has been exten-
sively represented and glamorized in books and film. Many
Americans with no connection to criminal justice professions
could tell you about common types of criminal adversaries that
are targeted by profiling. David Harris, in his book Profiles in
Injustice (2002), described three of the most common police pro-
files categories that have been used with regularity: (1) the
hijacker, (2) the serial killer, and (3) the drug courier. None of the
profiles is in essence about race, gender, religion, or sexual orien-
tation, but some of these classifications carry weight within the
profiles.
The Hijacker
Although much attention of law enforcement has been given to
hijacking after the September 11 attacks, concern over the forcible
commandeering of airliners has been with us for many years. In
the late 1960s, U.S. airliners were successfully hijacked by the
dozens. In 1968, eighteen American airliners were hijacked; in
1969, more than thirty airliners were hijacked (Harris 2002).
In an effort to put a stop to this epidemic problem of air
piracy, U.S. authorities developed a profile of potential hijackers.
It was hoped that hijackers would be spotted by alerted law
enforcement officials before the hijackers ever got onto the air-
planes.
The hijacker profile was behavior driven and relied on
observations made by airline personnel, starting at the ticket
counter. Those individuals who acted suspiciously or in some
way met the profile would be screened in greater detail. The
screening would involve having them pass through metal detec-
tors and answer questions about their identity and destination.
Hijacker profiling had limited success, and by 1973, the Fed-
eral Aviation Administration scrapped the program and simply
began to require all passengers to pass through metal detection
devices. Many believe it is time, in lieu of searches of randomly
selected passengers, to bring hijacker profiling back and concen-
trate our limited security resources at airports on those most
likely to pose a threat.
26
Introduction

The Serial Killer
The ability of law enforcement officials to profile serial killers
and rapists is among the most glorified of law enforcement activ-
ities. Serial offender profiling is a relatively new police tactic that
simply built upon the standard deductive reasoning process of
traditional police investigations. Serial killer profiling really took
root at the FBI Academy’s Behavioral Science Unit. FBI special
agent John Douglas and other FBI profilers became legendary in
law enforcement circles for their ability to predict detailed char-
acteristics about serial offenders based on patterns within the
offenders’ modus operandi (that is, the methods, times, locations,
and victims drawn from in committing the offense).
As suggested earlier, profilers have generated much interest
in the popular culture, thanks to fictional novel and motion pic-
ture portrayals of law enforcement profilers, as in Thomas Har-
ris’s Red Dragon, Silence of the Lambs, and Hannibal and in true
crime reenactment television shows.
The premise of serial profiling is that much can be learned
about violent serial offenders by talking to previously identified
serial offenders. Through interviewing identified serial killers
and sex offenders, patterns and themes have in fact emerged con-
cerning the upbringing, general background, and modus
operandi of these offenders. The information is then used to pre-
dict (although not prove) the types of people that offenders may
or may not be. Today, the FBI and many large state and local
police agencies employ profilers whose knowledge and expertise
about violent serial offenders can be drawn upon whenever sus-
picions arise that a serial or bizarre offender has committed
crimes in their respective jurisdictions.
Drug Courier
The development of drug courier profiles by our nation’s drug
enforcement agencies and police divisions in the 1980s war on
drugs marked the beginning of widespread police profiling at the
patrol officer level. After all, serial killings and hijackings are rel-
atively uncommon criminal offenses, but drug trafficking is all
around us. It was thought that if profiling as a police tool could
be oriented toward drug traffickers, a significant dent in the drug
trade through interdiction might be achieved (Harris 2002).
Common Police Profiles
27

Drug courier profiles initially were utilized primarily in air-
ports by drug agents. Law enforcement officials would use pro-
files, that is, characteristics commonly associated with drug
couriers, in screening arriving and departing passengers. Those
passengers who fit the courier profile would then be temporarily
detained and questioned. The passengers would not be under
arrest. Rather, the detention merely amounted to an investigatory
stop.
The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the use of drug courier pro-
filing at our nation’s ports of entry in the case U.S. v. Sokolow
(1989). In that case, the defendant paid for his ticket with cash; he
traveled under a name different than that which was listed with
his telephone number; he made a round trip to Miami; he stayed
in Miami only two days, although the travel time alone took
twenty-four hours; he appeared nervous; and he did not check
any luggage. The Supreme Court recognized the right of the
police to be drawn to the obviously suspicious circumstances of
Sokolow’s traveling.
In time, the drug courier profile no longer was confined to the
nation’s international airports. Law enforcement, having per-
ceived a level of effectiveness in profiling drug couriers at the ports
of entry, developed profiles of couriers and traffickers on the road-
ways. Law enforcement began to ask, “What are the similarities
among those motorists who transport drugs on the highways?”
Volusia County (FL) Sheriff Bob Vogel, who was instrumental in
mainstreaming the practice of profiling on the highways in the
1980s, used the term cumulative similarities rather than profiles.
These similarities will be discussed later, but suffice to say here
that the perceived success of the practice of courier profiling on the
highways led to law enforcement’s widespread use of it, which in
turn led to its widespread criticism and incumbent controversy.
Proactive and Reactive Profiling
Profiling by law enforcement officials can be thought of as either
proactive or reactive, depending on the context. Proactive profil-
ing occurs when officers on patrol utilize profiling as a tool to
detect and prevent crime in the field. Reactive profiling is a tool
used by criminal investigators to apprehend those who have
already committed crimes. In other words, proactive profiling
28
Introduction

attempts to interdict and foil crime; reactive profiling seeks to
solve crime.
Darin Fredrickson and Raymond Siljander defined proactive
criminal justice profiling as the process whereby police officers
“make judgements about another, relative to possible criminal
activity, based on a number of overt and subtle factors which
may or may not include things such as the person’s race, manner
of dress and grooming, behavioral characteristics, when and
where the observation is made, the circumstances under which
the observation is made, and relative to information the officer
may already possess” (Fredrickson and Siljander 2002, 15).
When discussion is entered into about proactive criminal
justice profiling done by patrol officers in the field, the discussion
usually becomes one about racial profiling, as opposed to con-
cern about other characteristics being singled out. This is because
many of the voices of criticism concerning the tool of profiling
come from community leaders in urban areas where the majority
of inhabitants are racial minorities—African Americans, Hispan-
ics, Asian Americans, and so on. In those urban areas, profiling is
just one debate of many over various police strategies and prac-
tices that have been employed.
One especially controversial debate concerns that of the
“broken windows” approach to patrol work. This approach, first
proposed by James Q. Wilson and George E. Kelling, is based on
the theory that if a neighborhood is allowed to run down, that sit-
uation breeds bigger problems. In fact, many crime prevention
programs buy into the same assumptions. Vandalism, graffiti,
broken windows in buildings, abandoned cars, and ill-kept prop-
erties are all thought to contribute to the image that people don’t
care in a particular neighborhood and that therefore crime can
flourish. By contrast, neighborhoods that take care of the little
things, such as running out the prostitutes and petty drug deal-
ers, condemning drug houses and other substandard buildings,
will broadcast a message that crime is not welcome here; take it
somewhere else.
Broken windows, and its aggressive patrol tactics of ques-
tioning anyone raising suspicion and arresting people for minor
offenses, was first practiced by the New York Transit Police and
then later by the New York Police Department, both under the
leadership of Bill Bratton. The use of broken windows policing is
credited with dramatically reducing crime in the subway system
Proactive and Reactive Profiling
29

in the early 1990s and then dramatically reducing crime in the
City of New York in the mid- and late 1990s (Cleary 2000).
Critics of broken windows’ zero tolerance approach to the
minor offenses point out, however, that the strategy puts the offi-
cers in the position of an occupying military force. Police have lit-
tle opportunity to form partnerships with the community and
build trust among the residents when they are preoccupied with
stopping every suspected minor offender with the hopes of turn-
ing the case into something bigger. These critics tend to view pro-
filing, however successful it may or may not be in detecting
crime, as ultimately counterproductive because it alienates the
police from the community; it sets the police against the commu-
nity by suggesting that people who fit a stereotype are probably
up to no-good.
As mentioned earlier, uniformed officers who engage in pro-
filing are frequently attempting to snare the drug offender. Pro-
filing for drug offenders—particularly drug couriers—involves
consideration of the race of the motorist, the gender, age, route of
travel, and the vehicle being driven.
In the 1980s, law enforcement began to identify certain inter-
state highways from points of origin such as Miami that served
as main arteries for transporting drugs up the East Coast and into
the interior of the country. What’s more, police officers noted that
offenders were frequently minorities, were young males, and uti-
lized rental cars. Rental vehicles were ideal in that they were
mechanically reliable (Fredrickson and Siljander 2002). With the
advent of computer terminals in squad cars, rental cars offered
added protection against detection by the police in that a license
plate check by officers while driving would show the registered
owner to be the rental company, rather than the driver—who
might or might not have a warrant or be suspended or revoked.
Indicators that a vehicle might be carrying drugs are many.
In profiling, it is the totality of the facts that generates sufficient
suspicion to warrant further inquiry by the officer. These indica-
tors, with regard to the vehicle, include (Fredrickson and Siljan-
der 2002)
• rear end riding low (because of the weight of the drugs)
• spare tire or luggage in the back seat to make room for
drugs in the trunk
• tinted windows, or windows down during unusually
hot or cold weather
30
Introduction

• modifications or alterations to the vehicle
• very little if any luggage for out-of-state travelers
• “good guy” decals such as religious symbols, pro-police
stickers, or antidrug stickers
• lifestyle statements, such as drug paraphernalia, decals
of drugs, and decals of known drug-using rock bands
• multiple deodorants in the vehicle to mask the smell of
drugs
• dirty vehicle with clean plates
• unusual driving . . . especially perfect driving or driving
too slowly
Obviously, an individual may signal any number of these indica-
tors and not actually be carrying drugs in his or her vehicle. But
profiling plays the odds, and police note that the odds frequently
pay off.
Profiling by patrol officers has frequently targeted other
criminal activities as well. Profiling has been used very success-
fully to combat auto theft. Once again, race, age, and gender of
the offender are pieces of a larger profile that also includes make
of vehicle, number and type of occupants (a family, for example,
would not fit the profile), direction of travel, and time of day.
The more glamorous and less controversial type of criminal
justice profiling relates to reactive profiling—generally a tool of
investigators rather than patrol officers. This type of profiling
attempts to take facts and clues garnished from one or more
crime scenes and develop a composite sketch of the likely type of
person who committed the crime(s).
Specifically, criminal investigators who are profilers, such as
those who work in the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit, perform
their services in the pursuit of three goals (Holmes 1989):
1. to provide the criminal justice system with a social and
psychological assessment of the offender
2. to provide the criminal justice system with a psychologi-
cal evaluation of belongings found in the possession of
the offender
3. to provide interviewing suggestions and strategies
The first goal relates to identifying the offender. The assess-
ment will include basic information that is hypothesized about
the offender in a particular case. The information will include a
Proactive and Reactive Profiling
31

guess as to the offender’s age, sex, race, religion, employment,
marital status, education, and any other relevant factors that can
be reasonably inferred.
The second and third goals of the criminal investigator/pro-
filer are geared toward shoring up the case against a suspect once
identified. Souvenirs and mementos taken from the victims and
from other sources that are found in a suspect’s possession can
provide greater psychological insight as to what motivated the
offender to offend in the way he or she did. Profilers will also
help the primary investigators with strategies for questioning
suspects. Based on the profile developed, it might be thought
that certain points of conversation might be hot buttons worth
pushing. Or it might be supposed that the suspect would love to
tell his or her story, and therefore a more congenial approach
would be fruitful.
Investigative profiling is generally reserved for the most
serious types of offenses, such as rape and murder. Those who
are experts in profiling are few and therefore their efforts tend to
be channeled in that direction. As suggested earlier, criminal pro-
filing is simply an extension of deductive reasoning utilized by
police for ages. Some critics say that profiling murderers and
rapists is a practice that requires no special expertise and exists as
a science only in the minds of those who do it. One psychologist
suggested that most profiles submitted for consideration in an
investigation are either too vague and ambiguous to be useful or
they are simple statements of common sense that did not require
an expert from Quantico, Virginia, to make (Holmes 1989).
Prosecutorial and Judicial Profiling
Profiling is generally thought of as a law enforcement issue.
There is growing attention, however, to profiling in prosecutorial
and judicial venues of the criminal justice system as well.
Although law enforcement has an argument that profiling is a
tool that helps identify criminal suspects, there is significantly
less rationale for considering race, gender, or other characteristics
when it comes to prosecution decisions or rulings from the
bench.
And yet, evidence does suggest that racial, gender, and other
differences among people seem to matter as, in the aggregate,
they are treated differently. In the next chapter, an examination of
32
Introduction

the discretion criminal justice officials have includes segments on
prosecutorial and judicial discretion. Also, in a later chapter, sum-
maries of several studies concerning real and alleged unequal
treatment of various groups under the law by prosecutors and
judges will be presented. You will have the opportunity to draw
your own conclusions as to the legitimacy of charges of bias in the
criminal justice system, whether it exists intentionally or not.
References
Carlson, D. P. 2002. When Cultures Clash. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pren-
tice Hall.
Cleary, J. 2000. Racial Profiling Studies in Law Enforcement: Issues and
Methodology. St. Paul: State of Minnesota, House of Representatives
Research Department.
Cole, G. F., and C. E. Smith. 2001. The American System of Criminal Justice.
9th ed. Stamford, CT: Wadsworth.
Deakin, T. J. 1988. Police Professionalism: Renaissance of American Law
Enforcement. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Dye, T. R. 2001. Politics in America. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Fredrickson, D. D., and R. P. Siljander. 2002. Racial Profiling. Springfield,
IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Hadden, S. 2001. Slave Patrols: Law and Violence in Virginia and the Caroli-
nas. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Harris, D. A. 2002. Profiles in Injustice. New York: The New Press.
Hobbes, T. 1651. Leviathan. Reprint, London: J. M. Dent and Sons, 1965.
Holmes, R. M. 1989. Profiling Violent Crimes. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
International Association of Chiefs of Police. 2003. Legislative Updates
section. http://www.theiacp.org/leg_policy.
Mills, C. W. 1956. The Power Elite. New York: Oxford University Press.
National Commission on Crime Control and Prevention. 1994. Final
Report. Washington, DC.
Peak, K. J., and R. W. Glesnor. 1996. Community Policing and Problem Solv-
ing: Strategies and Practices. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Roberg, R., J. Crank, and J. Kuykendall. 2000. Police and Society. Los
Angeles: Roxbury.
Samaha, J. 1994. Criminal Justice. 3rd ed. St. Paul, MN: West.
———. 2002. Criminal Justice. 4th ed. St. Paul, MN: West.
References
33

Schmalleger, F. 1993. Criminal Justice Today. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Regents/Prentice Hall.
Shott, R. G. 2001. “The Role of Race in Law Enforcement,” FBI Law
Enforcement Bulletin, November, pp. 24–32.
Sparrow, M. K., M. H. Moore, and D. M. Kennedy. 1990. Beyond 911: A
New Era for Policing. New York: HarperCollins.
Uchida, C. 2001. “The Development of the American Police: A Histor-
ica1Overview,” pp. 18–35. In Critical Issues in Policing, 4th ed., ed. R. G.
Dunham and G. P. Alpert. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland.
Walker, S. 1977. A Critical History of Police Reform. Lexington, MA: Lex-
ington Books.
Walker, S., C. Spohn, and M. DeLone. 2003. The Color of Justice: Race, Eth-
nicity, and Crime in America. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
34
Introduction

2
Issues in Criminal 
Justice Profiling
Stereotyping and Profiling
Profiling is related to stereotyping but is not the same thing. Pro-
filing is an act. In criminal justice, profiling involves the taking of
some action by criminal justice officials based on observable con-
ditions, behaviors, and activities. Stereotyping, on the other
hand, is not action oriented; it is perception oriented (Lee,
Albright, and Malloy 2001). Stereotyping is the ascription of
characteristics to social groups or segments of society (Banaji and
Bhaskar 2000).
That having been said, stereotypes help shape the meaning
of the observations for the person doing the observing. Given the
relationship of stereotyping to the formation of meaning and
context for one engaged in criminal justice profiling, it is impor-
tant to understand more thoroughly the concept of stereotyping.
Stereotyping is essentially a shortcut to perceiving people.
Stereotypes can be rooted in truth or falsehood, or somewhere in
between. But whatever their veracity, stereotypes allow people,
including criminal justice officials, to start from somewhere other
than zero when sizing up other people. Obviously in a criminal
justice system such as ours, where all people are to be treated
equally and are presumed to be law-abiding, stereotyping raises
ethical quandaries apart from its utility.
Stereotypes can be thought of along two dimensions: accu-
racy and valance (Lee, Jussim, and McCauley 1995). Accuracy
relates to the question of just how much the set of inferences in
35

the mind of the perceiver matches the objectively measured (that
is, actual) qualities of the group in question. A stereotype can be
thought of as existing along a continuum ranging from com-
pletely accurate to completely inaccurate.
Although accuracy can be objectively measured, valance is
more subjective. The dimension of valance relates to the degree
that a stereotype is positive or negative. Sometimes the charac-
terization of something as positive or negative depends on the
perspective of the observer. One observer says: “Wow, that glass
is half full!” A second says: “Darn, that glass is half empty.” The
first observer clearly is happy with as much in the glass as there
is; the second is clearly disappointed. Both observers are accu-
rate—the glass contains one half of its maximum capacity.
In the case of stereotypes, when we put the dimensions of
accuracy and valance together (such as in the model in Figure
2.1), we can see four realms within which stereotypical percep-
tions are cast. Given that stereotypes shape context and meaning
for an observer (to include criminal justice officials), understand-
ing these realms becomes important.
As one can see in Figure 2.1, a stereotype can be accurate and
positive, accurate and negative, inaccurate and positive, and
inaccurate and negative. To the extent that stereotypes are drawn
upon (and all humans draw upon them), the ideal is that a stereo-
type is accurate and positive. By contrast, clearly the worst kinds
of stereotypes are those that are inaccurate and negative. Such
stereotypes can be slanderous and vicious.
In the middle are those stereotypes that are inaccurate but
positive and accurate but negative. For example, the stereotype
that Asian Americans are really smart is positive. Who doesn’t
36
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling
Accurate
Negative
Positive
Inaccurate
Figure 2.1
Intersection of Accuracy and Valance (Lee et al.)

want to be thought of as “smart”? The degree to which it is accu-
rate—particularly for all Asian Americans—is debatable and
subject to further evaluation. Maybe after looking at college
entrance scores for Asian American high school students across
the country and comparing them to other high school students,
we might come to conclude that the stereotype is more accurate
than not but fail to legitimately claim that it is completely accu-
rate. Or we might not. But it is measurable; the accuracy is veri-
fiable.
With regard to the issue of criminal justice profiling, and
knowing that profiles are influenced, if not driven, by stereo-
types, we can consider the combinations of accuracy and valance
characterizing those stereotypes to help assess the legitimacy of a
given profile.
Profiles rooted in a negative and inaccurate stereotype are
unfair, unethical, immoral, and counterproductive (particularly
due to the inaccuracy element). A stereotype that all urban
African Americans are into drugs and crime is not only extremely
negative and unfair to law-abiding African Americans, but it is
wildly inaccurate, thereby resulting in false investigations and
accusations of innocent people at the expense of more reasoned
efforts against the genuinely guilty.
On the other hand, a stereotype that all Hispanic teenage
males in particular Los Angeles neighborhoods who wear certain
colored bandanas and have their pants hang low, exposing their
boxer shorts, are gang members is one that is rooted in some
truth. Although it would not be completely accurate (that is, true
for all such persons), it may be largely accurate despite the nega-
tive connotation of being linked to gang membership. Law-abid-
ing Hispanic teens wearing such clothing in the aforementioned
way may find the negative stereotype offensive, but it largely
works for law enforcement—thereby giving them a shortcut in
making initial judgments of such people. When police officers in
Los Angeles pay special attention to such people while ignoring
others, all because of the relatively accurate stereotype, they have
engaged in profiling.
In short, stereotypes that are positive and accurate are not
controversial. Stereotypes that are positive and inaccurate are not
useful. Stereotypes that are negative and inaccurate are harmful
and not useful. Stereotypes that are negative and accurate are
controversial. It is this realm that criminal justice officials, and
particularly law enforcement officers, claim to occupy when they
Stereotyping and Profiling
37

profile. They argue that it is unfortunate that this group or that
group is subject to a negative stereotype, but the “shoe fits.”
Community leaders, on the other hand, argue that the crim-
inal justice system is too often in the realm of the negatively inac-
curate. They argue that the culture of criminal justice in the
United States perpetuates myths about groups of people—
blacks, Hispanics, young males, gays—that are simply not true.
Consequently, acting on those stereotypes predictably results in
the harassment of the innocent and overreaction to the guilty.
Police Discretion
To the extent that criminal profiling by the police is a permitted
and accepted practice in law enforcement, it is a manifestation of
police discretion. Any discussion about reforming the use of pro-
filing as a tool necessarily implies the need to curtail police dis-
cretion. Long before profiling was a current and controversial
issue, politicians, academics, and practitioners were debating the
appropriate limits of police discretion. So what is it?
Discretion exists when a public officer’s effective limits on
his or her power leave the officer free to make a choice among
possible courses of action or inaction. It is worth noting that the
emphasis is on the effective limits of the officer’s power, not sim-
ply what is legal or what is authorized; the range of decisions
available to an officer may include options that are illegal or of
questionable illegality (Evans 1978). In light of this definition,
police officer discretion might simply be paraphrased as an offi-
cer’s having a choice in how to respond to a situation.
Discretion is what governs an officer’s decision to pull over
a traffic law violator or not, or to give him a ticket, or her a warn-
ing. It governs the detective’s decision to work a particular case
aggressively, or minimally, or whether to open the case to begin
with. Discretion is everywhere in law enforcement; many police
reformers and critics would like to rein it in.
Dean Champion and George Rush, in their book Policing in
the Community (1997), presented a number of reasons that sup-
port the need for police officer discretion. The reasons include
• some laws are too vague to expect that they be enforced
with regularity
38
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

• police have limited resources and therefore must pick
their battles.
• enforcing all laws as written without discretion would
cause community alienation
• discretion enables officers to individualize the law (for
example, electing to take a juvenile vandal home to his
parents when it is believed that this juvenile will be
responsive to sanctions imposed by the parents)
• many violations are minor.
Advocates of giving police a wide berth in decision making point
to these arguments and others. There are problems with police
discretion as well. Samuel Walker noted that uncontrolled dis-
cretion can result in (Walker 1999)
• denial of due process for suspects
• denial of equal protection under the law
• poor police-community relations, particularly when
most of the discretionary decisions to enforce the law
are concentrated in particular communities or neighbor-
hoods
• poor personnel management
• poor planning and policy development
Additionally, discretionary enforcement of the law can reduce
the deterrent effect of the law and, because of discretion’s hidden
nature, can make officer decisions difficult to review (Brooks
2001).
There are four basic variables that influence police discre-
tionary decision making. These are organizational variables,
neighborhood variables, situational variables, and individual
variables (Roberg, Crank, and Kuykendall 2000).
Organizational variables include things such as the bureau-
cratic nature of police departments and the criminal justice sys-
tem. A growing number of police departments require that for
every traffic stop, a form be completed to document the race and
gender of the driver, as well as the reasons for the stop and out-
come. Additionally, an officer would still be required to complete
the initial contact report (ICR) and the citation or warning, if one
is issued. For a number of officers, pulling over motorists for
other than the most serious of violations is too much hassle. Con-
Police Discretion
39

sequently, the organizational variables—in this case paper-
work—are an influence on officers’ decisions to not pull people
over (a decision within the realm of their discretion).
Neighborhood variables refer to the characteristics of a
neighborhood that make policing it a unique experience. Things
such as the racial and ethnic homogeneity or diversity of a com-
munity could be a factor in the decisions an officer makes. Like-
wise, the economy and business makeup of a community will
have an impact as well. If the neighborhood being policed is a
suburban residential community with little more than light
industry and heavy commuter traffic, then traffic enforcement
might be the normal operation for officers not responding to
calls. A working-class neighborhood with numerous small shops
and even some manufacturing facilities, however, may require
that officers spend more time engaging in preventative patrol
around those businesses to guard against break-ins or holdups;
that would leave less time for traffic enforcement.
Situational variables refer to specific factors relating to an
incident to which the officer is responding and/or which the offi-
cer is resolving. Factors that are situational include how the offi-
cer came into the situation (was the officer dispatched or did he
or she just happen along), the demeanor and attitude of the par-
ties involved, the gender of the parties involved, the relationship
between the complainant and the suspect, the type of offense, the
location, and the presence of others.
For example, if an officer happens upon a dispute between
neighbors, he or she might choose to handle it less formally than
if the officer had been dispatched. Or if an officer responds to a
misdemeanor assault, the officer may be more inclined to make
an arrest in lieu of a citation if the parties have an “intimate” rela-
tionship (ironically, officers were more likely to have exactly the
opposite reaction only a few years ago—prior to heightened
attention given to domestic violence). Still another example of
situational variables includes the demeanor of the suspect. If a
motorist carries on with outrage about being stopped for speed-
ing, he will almost certainly receive a citation. If a motorist is
polite and apologetic, and the offense wasn’t too serious, many
officers would be inclined to give a warning instead. A bad atti-
tude is not illegal; yet those people with bad attitudes frequently
receive harsher treatment from agents within the criminal justice
system. Whether that’s fair or not, it is obvious evidence of dis-
cretion.
40
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

The final variable is officer individuality. In other words, this
variable is specific to the officer and includes the officer’s educa-
tion, experience, age, race, gender, and career ambitions. Officers
with less experience will make different discretionary decisions
than those with more experience. Officers who treat their job as
just a job, or who are cynical, will make different decisions than
those who view law enforcement as their life’s calling and
approach their occupation with passion. Officers who are mem-
bers of an ethnic or racial minority may be more sympathetic
with others from that group and more understanding of their
culture and their plight. Perhaps female officers may be more
diplomatic than many male officers. All these factors can and do
impact the decisions police officers make in the field on a daily,
and hourly, basis.
Charging Decisions
Prosecutors throughout the United States have considerable dis-
cretion in determining who is going to be charged and with
what. Clearly, things such as race or ethnicity should not enter
into the decision making about what charges, if any, should be
brought against one subject or another. Yet there have been stud-
ies that suggest that prosecutors tend to be lenient in their deci-
sions toward female offenders and more likely to prosecute racial
minorities over whites (Schmalleger 1999) or to upgrade charges
against minorities while downgrading them for whites (Robin-
son 2002).
But prosecutors must consider some screening factors to
help them determine which cases are worthy and which are less
of a priority. The U.S. Department of Justice offers guidelines to
federal prosecutors to gauge whether a particular case should be
pursued or not. The guidelines ask prosecutors to consider (Cole
and Smith 2001)
• federal law enforcement priorities of the day
• the nature and seriousness of the offense
• the deterrent effect of prosecution
• the person’s culpability in connection with the offense
• the person’s criminal history
• the person’s willingness to cooperate in the investiga-
tion
Charging Decisions
41

• the probable sentence or consequences if the prosecu-
tion is successful
Nowhere among the consideration criteria is there listed race,
gender, sexual orientation, or other factors not related to the
criminal activity itself.
In criminal justice literature, three decision-making models
have emerged to help explain how prosecutors accept or decline
individual cases: legal sufficiency model, system efficiency
model, and trial sufficiency model (Jacoby 1979). The three mod-
els vary according to how strong the case must be prior to accep-
tance for prosecution.
The legal sufficiency model requires only the minimum level
of legal elements necessary to prove a case against a suspect.
Prosecutors operating under this model will tend to accept virtu-
ally all cases given to them by the police, knowing that the major-
ity of them will be plea-bargained away before ever reaching
trial. That outcome is fine with them because many of these cases
are questionable as to whether proof beyond a reasonable doubt
(the standard for a conviction) could be demonstrated in court.
Attorneys operating under this model are comfortable with the
fact that many of these cases will eventually be dismissed.
The system efficiency model is a little more stringent in stan-
dards. The weak cases are screened out upon receipt from law
enforcement. Then, of those that remain, the majority are dis-
posed of outside of court. Fewer cases are expected by the pros-
ecutor to be dismissed altogether, however, because the truly
lousy cases are not pursued from the start. Although these cases
are stronger, there is still an emphasis on plea bargains and diver-
sions, given the volume of cases and the time it takes for a pros-
ecutor to try a case.
The trial sufficiency model is the most stringent in screening
cases. Prosecutors operating according to the trial sufficiency
model will only accept cases that clearly have enough evidence
to win at trial. In other words, the outcome of getting a convic-
tion upon trying the case, whether before a judge or a jury, is not
in doubt in the prosecutor’s mind. With such cases, plea-bar-
gaining is not common. If plea-bargaining does take place, the
terms will be especially favorable to the prosecutor.
Given the volume of cases generated in the urban areas,
prosecutors are frequently overwhelmed with case decisions.
Urban prosecutor offices often follow one of the first two models
42
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

and emphasize plea-bargaining as a means to dispose of cases.
Plea bargains mean convictions. Given that urban areas have
large minority populations, it is not surprising to see large num-
bers of minority convictions.
But is it fair?
In 1886, the Supreme Court addressed the question about
the legality of racial motivation in bringing charges against sus-
pects. The Court said clearly in Yick Wo v. Hopkins that it was
impermissible for racial discrimination to be a motive in charg-
ing decisions. Since then, however, the Supreme Court has up-
held in case after case the right of prosecutors to decide who and
how to charge, short of breaking the law (McCoy 1998).
In making the decision to prosecute or not, prosecutors may
consider factors outside the strict merits of the case, such as com-
munity sentiment. Consider the case against the police officers
who had beaten Rodney King in 1992. They had been tried for
and acquitted of criminal assault against King. Customarily, the
U.S. Justice Department does not retry cases that were lost at the
state level unless there was a substandard prosecutorial effort
made at the state level. That was certainly not the case regarding
the effort of the Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office.
Even so, the community’s sentiment cried out for another prose-
cution, and the U.S. Justice Department obliged.
In Court
The entrances and hallways to courtrooms across the United
States are frequently adorned with icons of equal justice for all,
such as pictures or statues of Lady Justice, blindfolded and hold-
ing her scales. Indeed, the emphasis on formal procedures to
ensure due process and equal protection would make one think
that profiling, that is, classification consciousness, would have no
place there; regardless of how one comes to be there, all are equal
upon stepping into the courthouse. Even in the courthouse, how-
ever, there has historically been a place for profiling by class
(race, gender, and so on). The courthouse activity most touched
today by the practice of profiling is the jury selection process.
Jury selection is one area in the trial process where attorneys
have some latitude in their ability to discriminate. Through voir
dire, which refers to the questioning of prospective jurors by the
prosecution and defense attorneys to screen out individuals the
In Court
43

attorneys believe are biased or incapable of delivering a fair ver-
dict, attorneys can have jurors stricken from the jury pool (Cole
and Smith 2001).
During the voir dire process, prosecutors and defense attor-
neys are granted the ability to make a limited number of peremp-
tory challenges and an unlimited number of challenges for cause.
Peremptory challenges traditionally meant that an attorney
could disqualify a potential juror for any reason or for no reason
at all. The attorney needed only to feel uncomfortable with that
juror, and he or she would be excused jury duty in that case.
There are limits to the number of peremptory challenges attor-
neys can exercise. The precise number depends on the jurisdic-
tion, but customarily, the defense has more preemptory chal-
lenges than does the prosecutor.
Challenges for cause are when either the prosecutor or the
defense attorney can convince the judge, based on objective evi-
dence, that a prospective juror is likely incapable of rendering a
fair verdict and therefore must be removed. A potential juror
whose husband was killed in a robbery might be fine as juror in
a tobacco lawsuit but is too likely to be biased against the defen-
dant in a robbery or murder case. In such a case, the judge would
strike the juror from service, and neither side would lose one of
its peremptory challenges.
Historically and through legal imposition, juries consisted of
white men. Over time, the laws changed to allow women and
minorities to serve on juries. What was permissible under the
law, however, was not always seen as desirable by attorneys try-
ing the cases. Indeed, through peremptory challenges and
through challenges for cause based on flimsy rationales of jury
bias offered to sympathetic judges, women and minorities con-
tinued to be discriminated against when it came to jury duty.
The U.S. Supreme Court has a track record of eyeing dis-
criminatory jury pools and peremptory challenges with suspi-
cion when a particular race or group of people is excluded from
jury duty. As far back as the 1879 case of Strauder v. West Virginia,
the Court said that a defendant who is a racial minority is
deprived of equal protection under the Fourteenth Amendment
when members of his or her race are purposefully excluded
from the jury. The law in place that was struck down by the
Court was West Virginia’s 1873 law concerning who could serve
on juries. It read: “All white male persons who are twenty-one
years of age and who are citizens of this State shall be liable to
44
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

serve as jurors, except as herein provided.” The persons ex-
cepted were state officials.
As David Cole noted in his book No Equal Justice (1999), the
Court in Strauder recognized that race matters. Strauder was
denied equal protection through the exclusion of black jurors
because there was an assumption that black and white jurors,
especially in the post–Civil War era, would evaluate a black
defendant differently.
Ironically, the practice of excluding jurors on the basis of race
would be challenged 100 years later relying precisely on the oppo-
site conclusion—namely, that there should be no presumption
that one race is inherently biased against the other and is inca-
pable of rendering a fair verdict. If that were true, say some, then
the Supreme Court erred in Strauder in its reasoning by assuming
that an all-white jury could not fairly evaluate Strauder.
Despite the Strauder case, discrimination against minorities
who would serve on juries continued for decades with the
Supreme Court’s blessing via its upholding of convictions. In
Smith v. Mississippi (1896), the Court upheld a conviction of a
black man convicted by an all-white jury, despite the fact that
there were 1,300 black voters and only 300 white voters in the
county and that no blacks had ever been selected to serve as
jurors in that county since their emancipation (Cole 1999).
In the case of Neal v. Delaware (1881), however, the U.S.
Supreme Court was compelled to find in favor of a black defen-
dant because the lower courts (in particular, the Delaware
Supreme Court) actually put to paper their unfettered bias
against blacks. Even though the State of Delaware had a popula-
tion of less than 150,000, whereas its black residents totaled over
26,000, and had never had a black citizen serve as a juror in the
history of the state, the Delaware Supreme Court upheld the bias
against black jurors and therefore the conviction against Neal by
an all-white jury, stating in part: “That none but white men were
selected is in nowise remarkable in view of the fact that—too
notorious to be ignored—that the great body of black men resid-
ing in the State are utterly unqualified by want of intelligence,
experience, or moral integrity to sit on juries. Exceptions there
are, unquestionably, but they are rare. . . .” (103 US 370)
Even in 1881, the U.S. Supreme Court could not let that one
go. In the Court’s words, such a rationale excluding blacks from
jury duty amounted to a “violent presumption” about the fitness
of blacks to engage in jury service. Despite Strauder and Neal,
In Court
45

however, the Supreme Court, with rare exception, let stand
numerous convictions rooted in all-white juries for decades to
come (Cole 1999). It was not until the latter part of the twentieth
century that the Supreme Court began to consistently afford
relief to defendants convicted by juries derived from suspect
pools or by suspect challenges.
In Batson v. Kentucky (1986), the Supreme Court overturned
a conviction because prosecutors had used the peremptory chal-
lenge to exclude black jurors, and the trial judge did not require
a rational explanation for the exclusions.
In 1991, the U.S. Supreme Court heard the case of Powers v.
Ohio. In that case, the Supreme Court declared that it was uncon-
stitutional to issue preemptory challenges in a criminal case if the
challenge was based on race. The court declared that
the very fact that [members of a particular race] are sin-
gled out and expressly denied . . . all right to participate
in the administration of the law, as jurors, because of
their color, though they are citizens, and may be in other
respects fully qualified, is practically a brand upon
them, affixed by the law, an assertion of their inferiority,
and a stimulant to that race prejudice which is an
impediment to securing individuals of that race equal
justice which the law aims to secure to all others (499 US
400).
Later in the same term, the U.S. Supreme Court declared that
racially motivated peremptory challenges were likewise uncon-
stitutional in civil cases. The Court said in Edmonson v. Leesville
Concrete Company, Inc. (1991), that “it is clear that neither prose-
cutor nor civil attorneys in the future will be able to exclude
minority potential jurors consistently unless they are able to
articulate clearly credible race-neutral rationales for their
actions” (500 US 614).
Then, in the case of J.E.B. v. Alabama (1994), the U.S. Supreme
Court extended the logic against racially motivated peremptory
challenges to those challenges motivated by gender. Gender dis-
crimination was very common in peremptory challenges, as
women were often seen by prosecutors as less likely to grant the
death penalty in capital cases and, ironically, as harsher critics of
female victims of sexual violence who are perceived to have con-
tributed to their victimization by their lifestyle choices.
The Supreme Court wrote in J.E.B.:
46
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

The Equal Protection Clause prohibits discrimination in
jury selection on the basis of gender, or on the assump-
tion that an individual will be biased in a particular case
solely because that person happens to be a woman or a
man. Respondent’s gender-based peremptory chal-
lenges cannot survive the heightened equal protection
scrutiny that this Court affords distinctions based on
gender. Respondent’s rationale—that its decision to
strike virtually all males in this case may reasonably
have been based on the perception, supported by his-
tory, that men otherwise totally qualified to serve as
jurors might be more sympathetic and receptive to the
arguments of a man charged in a paternity action, while
women equally qualified might be more sympathetic
and receptive to the arguments of the child’s mother—is
virtually unsupported and is based on the very stereo-
types the law condemns. The conclusion that litigants
may not strike potential jurors solely on the basis of gen-
der does not imply the elimination of all peremptory
challenges. So long as gender does not serve as a proxy
for bias, unacceptable jurors may still be removed,
including those who are members of a group or class
that is normally subject to . . .”rational basis” review and
those who exhibit characteristics that are disproportion-
ately associated with one gender. (000 US U10411)
The dissenting justices in the J.E.B. v. Alabama case, observ-
ing that a growing number of preclusions were cropping up to
the historically absolute right of peremptory challenges, noted
that “the core of the Court’s reasoning [to ban preemptory chal-
lenges when based on discrimination against a protected class] is
that peremptory challenges on the basis of any group character-
istic subject to heightened scrutiny are inconsistent with the
guarantee of the Equal Protection Clause. . . . Since all groups are
subject to the peremptory challenge . . . it is hard to see how any
group is denied equal protection.”
Despite the decisions in Batson v. Kentucky, Powers v. Alabama,
Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete, and J.E.B. v. Alabama, discrimination
against potential jurors, and by extension, defendants, did not
end. As the Court said in Edmonson, the attorneys would have to
articulate clearly credible race-neutral (and later, gender-neutral)
rationales for their actions. But what is “credible”?
In Court
47

The lower limits of the term were put to the test in the 1995
case of Purkett v. Elem. In this case, prosecutors removed jurors of
one particular race. The trial judge, according to the Batson rul-
ing, asked the prosecutor to provide nonracially motivated rea-
sons for removal of the prospective jurors.
The prosecutor responded:
I struck [juror] number twenty-two because of his long
hair. He had long curly hair. He had the longest hair of
anybody on the panel by far. He appeared to not be a
good juror for that fact, the fact that he had long hair
hanging down shoulder length, curly, unkempt hair.
Also, he had a mustache and a goatee type beard. And
juror number twenty-four also has a mustache and goa-
tee type beard. Those are the only two people on the
jury . . . with facial hair. . . . And I don’t like the way
they looked, with the way the hair is cut, both of them.
And the mustaches and the beards look suspicious to
me. (000 US U10277)
The U.S. Supreme Court, in a vote of seven to two, upheld
the striking of those prospective jurors, despite the objectively
silly reasons offered by the prosecutor, because the trial judge
asked for, received, and accepted the nonracially motivated
explanation for the exclusions. The Supreme Court left in place
the use of peremptory challenges. Had it ruled otherwise, it effec-
tively would have left only those challenges that were based on
reasonable concerns about juror fitness, which is the definition of
challenges for cause.
One interesting fact about the legal and illegal profiling that
takes place by both prosecuting and defense attorneys during
voir dire is that the prevalence of it has not drawn that much
attention. Scholars who spend time exploring the fairness of the
criminal justice system are certainly aware of the jury selection
issue, but it has not captured the public’s attention, nor that of
their elected representatives, as the issue of police profiling has.
Perhaps one explanation is that police profiling involves
encounters between the system (in the form of the police) and cit-
izens, guilty and innocent. By contrast, at least in the public’s eye,
profiling in court only affects the guilty. “Why else would they be
in court if they weren’t guilty, after all?” The subtlety of this pro-
filing, coupled with its belated position along the criminal justice
48
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

chain of events, means it will likely remain an issue of interest to
academic types and activists, but few others.
At Sentencing
Still another point in the criminal justice process where profiling
of a sort can occur is at the sentencing phase. Many scholars have
examined sentencing for different types of bias. The overwhelm-
ing majority of reports and studies suggest that criminal sen-
tences handed down in the United States are replete with evi-
dence of bias. Scholars point to disparity of sentences between
those received by blacks and whites, Hispanics and whites, men
and women, minority juveniles and white juveniles, male juve-
niles and female juveniles, and so on.
The assertion of many of these studies, or at least the impli-
cation of them, is that the sentencing process is unfair in light of
the statistics that emerge. If the sentencing patterns are disparate,
that is, if they do indeed reflect a bias, then is it a result of some
sort of judicial profiling, or do other explanations prevail? If it is
profiling at the heart of many of these disparities, then it must be
judges and juries who are doing so. How can this be when pro-
cedures are supposed to be in place to ensure fairness and neu-
trality? Is it really possible that judges may consider things such
as race or sex of the convicted when passing on a sentence?
Some inferences might be drawn from the studies high-
lighted later in this handbook. But first, to put those studies in
context, one must understand how sentencing in the United
States works. Keep in mind that differences do exist from state to
state. Even so, there are some basic commonalities among most
sentencing procedures in criminal courts across the country.
Upon conviction, punishment is doled out to the offender.
There are many goals of punishment. One goal is retribution, that
is, punishment for punishment’s sake because it is deserved.
Another goal of punishment is deterrence; it is hoped that being
punished will deter that individual offender from offending again
(specific deterrence) and will be a lesson to the rest of us not to
engage in that same criminal behavior (general deterrence). A
third goal of punishment, especially involving incarceration, is
that of incapacitation. In other words, through punishment, the
public will be protected from the offender for at least the duration
At Sentencing
49

of the punishment. A final goal of punishment is rehabilitation.
This last goal is not about being punitive to the offender, but
rather restorative. Rehabilitation seeks to treat the underlying
causes of criminal behavior in the offender and then restore that
person to society as a constructive and law-abiding member.
Depending on the circumstances of the case, a judge may
seek to achieve any one or more of these goals in handing down
a sentence. And it is the judge who is responsible for sentencing.
In states where juries make recommendations as to sentence, the
judge has the ultimate responsibility of deciding whether to fol-
low the jury’s recommendations or to do something different. In
fact, in the very recent U.S. Supreme Court case of Ring v. Arizona
(2002), the Court ruled the death sentences imposed by juries in
Arizona and several other states were unconstitutional, as that
duty should belong to the judge.
This does not mean that judges have absolute, unrestrained
discretion in their sentences. Sentencing for crimes is usually
broadly (but sometimes specifically) proscribed in the penal
codes of each state. There are three types of sentences in the
United States: indeterminate, determinate, and mandatory (Cole
and Smith 2001).
Indeterminate sentences are sentences for an indefinite
period of time that specifies a minimum and maximum period to
be spent incarcerated. This type of sentencing is generally associ-
ated with rehabilitation because it allows for an offender to be
paroled and released at such time within the minimum and max-
imum sentencing range that the offender is sufficiently treated
and reformed to return to society. Over two-thirds of the states
permit judges to set indeterminate sentences for at least some
offenses.
Determinate sentences are those that set a specific period of
time to be served. Fourteen states require determinate sentences
in lieu of indeterminate ones. Even though the judge must pre-
scribe a specific sentence with determinate sentencing, the judge
often still has discretion. Determinate sentencing relies on sen-
tencing guidelines passed by the legislature that list presumptive
sentences for offenses (that is, the sentences the judge should
give to the offender absent some reason not to). An upward or
downward departure from that presumptive sentence is permit-
ted by the judge as circumstances warrant. The judge need only
be prepared to explain the departure from the guidelines.
50
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

Finally, all states use mandatory sentencing for at least some
offenses. A mandatory sentence is one that is required by law to
be imposed upon conviction of a particular offense. For example,
in many states, a first degree murder conviction requires that the
offender be sentenced to life without parole. In cases involving
mandatory sentences, judges have no discretion at the sentencing
phase.
Other than in mandatory sentencing circumstances, the sen-
tences received by offenders who commit the same crime may
vary even within the same jurisdiction. How is that so? It is
because judges are often permitted to consider aggravating and
mitigating factors (Schmalleger 1999). Aggravating factors work
against the offender and include such things as
• the defendant induced others to participate in the com-
mission of the offense
• the offense was particularly heinous or cruel
• the defendant was armed with or used a deadly weapon
while committing the crime
• the offense was committed to obstruct justice or avoid
arrest or escape
• the offense was committed for hire
• the offense was committed against a law enforcement
officer performing his or her duties
• the offense was motivated by hatred of a protected
group.
In considering aggravating factors, judges may lengthen a sen-
tence or even invoke the death penalty in some states because of
them.
Judges may also consider mitigating factors in their sen-
tences. Mitigating factors work in the defendant’s favor and
include
• defendant has no prior criminal record
• defendant has already made restitution
• defendant is a person of good character and of good
reputation
• defendant aided in the apprehension or prosecution of
others
• defendant acted under strong provocation
At Sentencing
51

• the offense was committed under duress, coercion,
threat, or compulsion at a level that reduces but not
completely absolves the defendant’s culpability
• the defendant was suffering a mental or physical condi-
tion that reduces but not completely absolves the defen-
dant’s culpability.
The net effect of aggravating and mitigating factors is that
convicted offenders are treated differently by judges who must
assign—sometimes subjectively—weight and value to these fac-
tors in determining a sentence. Race, gender, sexual orientation,
and religious affiliation are neither legitimate aggravating nor
mitigating factors in any state’s sentencing guidelines. Therefore,
one would not expect to see profiling by the judiciary along these
lines. Profiling critics note, however, that some legitimate factors
may be disproportionately associated with race, gender, and so
on and therefore result in de facto profiling. For example, having
small children who rely on you may be a mitigating factor; that
factor will favor female offenders more often than male offend-
ers. Or committing a crime motivated by hate is an aggravating
factor in many jurisdictions and might be more associated with
certain racial groups or religious beliefs over others.
In looking at sentencing patterns, some caution must be
injected into assumptions based on numbers alone. The numbers
may be indicative of judicial profiling, or they may be indicative
of other things that happen to also correspond to groups of one
kind or another. Profiling in law enforcement and even in jury
selection has its defenders. But few would argue that taking into
consideration race, gender, sexual orientation, or religion has any
place in the activity of an unbiased and neutral judge. As profil-
ing by the judiciary is the least defensible, we should be very
aware of possible alternative explanations.
Constitution and Civil Rights
It is important to remember that criminal justice profiling does
not occur in a legal vacuum. There are parameters within which
profiling may legitimately occur; profiling outside of those para-
meters can trigger a variety of ethical, moral, statutory, and con-
stitutional violations.
52
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

We can be grateful that the United States is a country that
does impose limits on how government relates to its citizens,
even while pursuing justice. Chief among our protections is the
Constitution of the United States. This document contains the Bill
of Rights, which is the first ten amendments to the Constitution
and was ratified in 1791. The Bill of Rights was added to the orig-
inal constitutional document to ensure that individuals’ liberties
were protected in their dealings with the government. Several of
the first ten amendments have specific relevance to the criminal
justice system and are worth mentioning below:
First Amendment:
Congress shall make no law respecting the establish-
ment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof;
or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or
the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Fourth Amendment:
The right of the people to be secure in their persons,
houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable
searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no War-
rants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by
Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the
place to be searched, and the persons or things to be
seized.
Fifth Amendment:
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or
otherwise infamous crime, unless on a presentment or
indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the
land or naval forces, or in the Militia, when in actual ser-
vice in time of War or public danger; nor shall any per-
son be subject for the same offense to be twice put in
jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in any
criminal case to be a witness against himself; nor be
deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law; nor shall private property be taken for
public use, without just compensation.
Sixth Amendment:
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial
jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall
Constitution and Civil Rights
53

have been committed, which district shall have been
previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the
nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted
with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory
process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have
the Assistance of Counsel for his defense.
Eighth Amendment:
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive
fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments
inflicted.
As worthwhile as these protections are, they did not widely pro-
tect citizens from state and local government historically. In fact
until the last half of the twentieth century, the Bill of Rights
served primarily to protect citizens from federal abuses alone. It
is true that state constitutions had similar bills of rights contained
in them, but their interpretations were subject to the whims of
local judicial politics.
On the heels of the Civil War, the Fourteenth Amendment
was ratified in 1868. Section One of this amendment sought
specifically to protect individuals from state and local govern-
mental abuses of power. The Fourteenth Amendment (Section 1)
reads as follows:
All persons born or naturalized in the United States and
subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the
United States and of the State wherein they reside. No
State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge
the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United
States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, lib-
erty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny
any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of
the laws.
Primarily in the last four decades, through a series of U.S.
Supreme Court cases, the Bill of Rights in the Constitution has
also come to be applied directly to state and local governments
by way of a process called “incorporation.” Essentially, the
Supreme Court has determined that the protections of the First,
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments apply to state and
local governments because of the due process and equal protec-
tion provisions of the Fourteenth Amendment. In other words,
54
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

the Fourth Amendment has been “incorporated” into the Four-
teenth, and so has the Fifth Amendment, the Sixth, and so on.
In addition to protections of the Constitution by way of
evolving interpretations by the courts, the Congress of the United
States and state legislatures throughout the land have passed civil
rights legislation affording additional protections to “protected
classes.” In the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the U.S. Congress out-
lawed discrimination in housing, employment, and other areas on
the basis of race, ethnicity, religion, and gender. Discrimination
legislation relating to age and disabilities was passed later. Many
state legislatures have also passed civil rights laws that prohibit
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
Many would argue that criminal justice profiling violates
these various constitutional safeguards. People who are subject
to a traffic stop because they fit a profile that includes race as a
prominent factor might claim that their Fourth Amendment right
to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures as well as
their Fourteenth Amendment right to be treated fairly under the
law was violated by officers. Or, an offender receiving the death
penalty might claim his or her Sixth Amendment and Fourteenth
Amendment rights were violated when a prosecutor successfully
excluded all but the most hawkish of females from the jury.
To be sure, when the criminal justice system breaches poten-
tial constitutional liberties, the bar is high for the government to
justify its actions. At a minimum, whenever the criminal laws
and the actions the government takes to enforce them touch on
constitutionally protected interests, the government must show
that the laws and actions are rationally related to furthering a
legitimate government interest.
Criminal laws that directly infringe upon fundamental
rights found in the Bill of Rights are subject to more stringent
evaluation, however. Such laws receive “strict judicial scrutiny,”
which means that the law is presumed by the court to be uncon-
stitutional absent the government’s ability to show a “compelling
government interest” (Scheb and Scheb 1999). Likewise, enforce-
ment actions that directly challenge our civil liberties in a way
that is not explicitly endorsed by the Constitution are likely to be
viewed as unconstitutional as well.
The debatable question about criminal profiling is: does pro-
filing rise to a level of patent unconstitutionality absent the high
standard of a “compelling government interest,” or is it adequate
Constitution and Civil Rights
55

for government to show that profiling as practiced is rationally
related to the legitimate government interest of fighting particu-
lar crimes, for example, drug trafficking, hijacking, and so on?
Elsewhere within these pages some attention has been paid
to relevant court cases concerning profiling in court—particu-
larly during the voir dire process. As suggested earlier, however,
there is currently no more controversial manifestation of profil-
ing than that which is done by police patrol officers against sus-
pected drug traffickers, gang members, and others thought to be
possibly up to no-good.
Many people are confused as to what is exactly required for
a police officer to pull a motorist over. Some people believe offi-
cers can stop people on gut feelings or hunches alone. Sadly,
some officers believe that as well. But the standard is higher.
Specifically, police officers may pull over motorists if they have
reasonable suspicion that a legal violation—traffic or criminal—
has taken place. Reasonable suspicion is an accumulation of
observations, along with an officer’s informed experience, that
leads one to reasonably believe a motorist has committed a vio-
lation (Klotter 2002). With reasonable suspicion, an officer may
stop and temporarily detain a person to investigate further those
suspicions.
Investigative stops are rooted in the landmark case of Terry
v. Ohio (1968). In that case, the U.S. Supreme Court explained the
limits of detention for investigative purposes. In that case, a
plainclothes Cleveland, Ohio, police officer was walking his beat
in downtown Cleveland when he saw three individuals acting
suspiciously. In particular, he saw the three men peering into a
store window, walking down the street a short distance, and then
coming back to peer through the window again. The officer sus-
pected that the suspects might be casing the store in preparation
for holding it up.
The officer approached the subjects, identified himself as a
police officer, and asked their names. The responses by the sus-
pects were muted, and the officer decided to pat one of the sus-
pects down. In doing so, he felt a pistol in the pocket of the sus-
pect’s overcoat. The other two suspects were also patted down
for weapons and an additional revolver was found.
The Supreme Court upheld the detention and search for
weapons by the officer. It said that police officers may approach
and detain people for the purposes of investigating possible
criminal activity when the officers can reasonably conclude, in
56
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

light of their experience, “that criminal activity may be afoot.”
And in Delaware v. Prouse (1979), the threshold of reasonable sus-
picion has also been extended to the stopping and searching of
suspects in motor vehicles.
The outcome of that investigative stop is to either develop
the probable cause (if it does not already exist at the time of the
stop) necessary to take action—such as write a ticket or make an
arrest—or to set the person free.
An example of this would be if an officer hears of a report
that a bank robbery just took place involving two men who left
the scene in a blue Camaro. Not far from the scene, the officer
sees a blue Camaro with two occupants and pulls it over. The
officer at this point does not have probable cause to make an
arrest. The officer cannot say in court that those particular occu-
pants in the Camaro the officer is trying to catch up to in order to
initiate a stop are the bank robbers. But it is certainly reasonable
to investigate the possibility.
After the officer stops the vehicle, realizes the two occupants
are husband and wife with a previously unseen child in the back-
seat, and verifies that these people do not fit the description of
the robbers and therefore lets them go, the stop in retrospect was
no less reasonable—even though probable cause for an arrest did
not develop. That’s the purpose of an investigative stop.
With exception of truly random checkpoints in certain cases,
traffic stops that are based upon anything less than reasonable
suspicion are unconstitutional. Obviously, if an officer observes
the subject vehicle committing a violation, then reasonable sus-
picion and even probable cause exist that a violation occurred
and a stop is clearly warranted.
Once a vehicle is stopped, there is also some confusion—
inside policing and out—of just when an officer may search a
vehicle. The Fourth Amendment generally requires that the
police have a search warrant if they want to search someone’s
belongings and possibly seize them for evidence. The U.S.
Supreme Court, however, has crafted several exceptions to the
search warrant requirement that police officers may use in
searching a motorist’s vehicle.
1. Consent—Consensual encounters are those interactions
between the police and the citizens that are voluntary
and require no legal basis for the interaction to occur.
Citizens may break off the encounter with the officer at
Constitution and Civil Rights
57

any time and may choose to forego interaction with the
officer altogether. The courts have consistently held that
searches of vehicles when the motorist in control of the
vehicle gave consent to do so are valid searches, even if
the motorist was not expressly told of his or her right to
refuse to consent. Rather, the courts have looked at the
degree to which a reasonable person would know that
they were free to refuse the search. An officer asking
permission to search a vehicle suggests to a reasonable
person that the answer could be “no.”
2. Terry Search—Police officers may search the passenger
compartment of a vehicle for weapons if the officer has
reasonable suspicion to believe weapons may be pre-
sent. This is only a search for weapons. Opening a film
canister or reading documents strewn about the car
floor would not be permitted in a Terry search.
3. Plain View—Police officers who observe evidence or
contraband in plain view may seize that evidence. In
order for the search to be valid, officers must have the
legal justification to be where they were when the evi-
dence was observed, and it must be apparent that the
object observed constitutes evidence of a crime. If an
officer on a traffic stop sees drug paraphernalia sitting
in the cup holder of the vehicle, that evidence can be
seized. If it can be shown that the traffic stop was with-
out merit, however, then the officer had no right to be
where he or she was when the observation was made,
and the evidence would become inadmissible.
4. Carroll Search—The most sweeping warrantless search
authority given to police officers is that granted to them
by the Supreme Court in Carroll v. United States (1925)
and reiterated in Chambers v. Maroney (1970). The
Supreme Court essentially ruled that because vehicles
are mobile, obtaining actual search warrants in a timely
manner from a judge back at the courthouse is not
always realistic or possible. Therefore, officers may
search a vehicle for evidence without a warrant, bumper
to bumper, if they have sufficient probable cause as to
warrant a search warrant should they have sought one.
There is still a preference for a warrant if there is time
and means to get one, but it is not required when deal-
ing with motor vehicles.
58
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

It is important to note that refusal to give permission for a
search does not constitute probable cause that there is evidence
of a crime in the vehicle despite certainly arousing the suspicions
of the police officers. Many officers will utilize drug dogs to stiff
around the vehicle, however. If the dog detects a “hit,” then most
officers will conclude they have probable cause that drugs are in
the vehicle and conduct a Carroll search. Further, most courts
will uphold that belief by the officers. Still others will develop
probable cause after finding evidence during a more limited
search—for example, a Terry search for weapons.
Another very important Supreme Court case that relates
directly to the authority officers have in the field to engage in
profiling is Whren v. United States (1996). This case addressed the
frequent complaint of black motorists that police officers use
incredibly minor offenses as the basis for their stops, knowing
full well that they are looking for more serious offenses. Critics
further argue that black motorists are being stopped far more
often for these minor offenses then white motorists and that
therefore illegal race-based profiling is taking place. In other
words, minor violations are being used as a pretext for stopping
African Americans and other minorities.
For example, it has been alleged that a disproportionate
number of minorities are pulled over on the New Jersey Turnpike
by troopers for speeding, even though virtually everyone
exceeds 55 miles per hour. And, in Maryland, a study showed
that blacks constituted 73 percent of the motorists who are
stopped and searched along I-95, even though they make up only
14 percent of the motorists (Roberg, Crank, and Kuykendall
2000).
In the Whren case, the Court addressed head-on whether
pretextual traffic stops—that is, those with an objective basis for
the stop but actually rooted in ulterior motives of the officer—are
constitutional.
In the Whren case, police officers who were patrolling in a
“high drug area” of Washington, D.C., observed a vehicle
stopped at a stop sign for an unusually long period of time, then
suddenly turning without signaling. The vehicle was stopped
purportedly by the officers to warn the driver about traffic viola-
tions. Upon approaching the vehicle, however, the officers
observed in plain view plastic bags of crack cocaine.
The suspects in the case, James Brown and Michael Whren,
were convicted of federal drug crimes. They challenged their
Constitution and Civil Rights
59

convictions because the officers did not have reasonable suspi-
cion or probable cause that they were trafficking in drugs, and
the traffic violation was just a pretext to stop them. After all, the
officers had been in civilian clothes and an unmarked squad car;
traffic enforcement was obviously not the officers’ number one
priority, said the defendants.
Whren and Brown relied in part on the Court’s decision in
Delaware v. Prouse (1979). In that case, a police officer stopped a
motorist without observing a traffic or equipment violation.
Rather, the officer contended he simply wanted to check the dri-
ver for a valid license and proper vehicle registration. The stop
resulted in the officer’s arresting Prouse for driving after revoca-
tion and, incident to that arrest, finding marijuana on his person.
The Supreme Court in Prouse said “the permissibility of a partic-
ular law enforcement practice is judged by balancing its intrusion
on the individual’s Fourth Amendment interests against its pro-
motion of legitimate governmental interests”(440 US 648). In the
Prouse case, the government’s legitimate interests were deemed
to be outweighed by Prouse’s Fourth Amendment interests, and
therefore the conviction was overturned.
Whren and Brown were hoping for a similar decision on the
part of the Supreme Court regarding their case. After all, a pre-
textual stop based on a petty, generally unenforced traffic law is
little more than the hunch the officer had in Prouse. Furthermore,
the Court in Florida v. Wells (1990) had indicated that an inven-
tory search prior to a vehicle’s being towed must not be used as
a pretext for a search for incriminating evidence. The decision in
that case suggested, at least to Whren and Brown, that the court
looked disapprovingly at “police attempts to use valid bases of
action against citizens as pretexts for pursuing other investiga-
tory agendas” (517 US 806).
The Supreme Court in Whren, however, cited other cases
where the motives of the officer did not adversely affect the
objective basis for action. In the end, the Court ruled in Whren
that as long as an objective basis for a traffic stop exists, includ-
ing minor equipment and moving violations, then there is no
unreasonable seizure in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The
convictions were upheld. The Court did reiterate that stops may
not be based on race or some other similarly illegal factor. But if
they are, the relief is found in the Fourteenth Amendment, not
the Fourth Amendment.
Justice Scalia, writing for the majority, said:
60
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

We think these cases [cited in the Whren opinion] fore-
close any argument that the constitutional reasonable-
ness of traffic stops depends on the actual motivations
of the individual officers involved. We of course agree
with petitioners that the Constitution prohibits selective
enforcement of the law based on considerations such as
race. But the constitutional basis for objecting to inten-
tionally discriminatory application of laws is the Equal
Protection Clause, not the Fourth Amendment. Subjec-
tive intentions play no role in ordinary, probable-cause
Fourth Amendment analysis” (517 US 806).
Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling
Arguments against Profiling
There are many arguments that can be made against criminal jus-
tice profiling. One argument against profiling is really a counter-
argument to those who argue for profiling. Many proponents of
profiling suggest that some groups more than others—certainly
men more than women and often minorities more than whites—
commit a disproportionate share of crime. In support of this,
many statistics are presented that show, for example, that blacks
are arrested per capita far more often than whites.
Jim Cleary and others have noted, however, that this reason-
ing is circular. They claim it is precisely because blacks are tar-
geted disproportionately by law enforcement that they are
arrested disproportionately by law enforcement. In other words,
racial profiling helps create its own justification (Cleary 2000).
Harvard professor Randall Kennedy, on the other hand, con-
ceded that blacks and other minorities are committing greater
numbers of crime and also conceded that most profiling is done
by criminal justice officials who are well intentioned and are not
racists. But he remains firmly against criminal justice profiling on
principle when it is based even partly on race or some other pro-
tected classification (Kennedy 2000).
Kennedy argued that profiling results in a downward spiral
of relations between criminal justice officials and members of the
community. Well-meaning and courteous police officers will
eventually pull over individuals who themselves had always
Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling
61

been supportive of law enforcement but have grown tired of
being stopped. When they lash out against the officers out of
resentment of their plight, the officer will likely defend himself or
herself, but the spiral begins. Eventually, after a number of simi-
lar encounters, the regard held by officers and citizens for each
other will inevitably be low.
Kennedy’s ultimate criticism of profiling is not rooted in the
practical effects on police-community relations; it is rooted in
principle. Regardless of the odds of a black man committing a
crime compared to a white woman or some other breakdown,
Kennedy posited that people should be judged solely by their
individual conduct. Factors such as race or gender should not
even partly be used to form opinions or suspicions about other
people. The use of profiling, however successful it may be,
undercuts this principle and therefore should be discarded, said
Kennedy. Success is not an argument. Think how safe and crime
free we would be if we dismissed the Fourth Amendment
requirement against unreasonable searches and seizures. But we
don’t, because principle trumps even safety and success.
Still another argument against profiling is the potential harm
it causes individual law-abiding citizens who fall subject to it.
This harm includes mental anguish and emotional distress from
the degradation of a confrontational and accusatory encounter
with the police. Consider the following testimony given in March
2000 by an African American to the U.S. Senate’s Judiciary Com-
mittee, which was investigating the occurrence of racial profiling
by law enforcement.
My name is Master Sergeant Rossano Gerald. I am glad
to have an opportunity to talk with you today about my
experience in Oklahoma.
The issue of racial profiling is a serious problem in
this country today and I am glad to see that the Senate
is beginning to take a look at it. I am coming forward to
tell my story to try to prevent this from happening
again. I don’t want anything like this to happen to my
son again.
In August of 1998, I was driving in Oklahoma on my
way to a family reunion. At that time I was a Sergeant
First class in the Army stationed in Fort Richie. My 12-
year-old son Gregory was with me. As soon as we
crossed the border from Arkansas, I noticed patrol cars
62
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

in the area and began driving even more carefully than
usual. Within minutes, an officer pulled me over for
“following another car too closely.” He did not give me
a citation.
Soon after, we stopped to buy gas and use the
restroom. After our break we continued driving. Hav-
ing been stopped once already, I was driving particu-
larly carefully. I was in the right hand lane when I saw
two patrol cars approach on the ramp. I signaled, then
pulled over to let them in. I said to my son, “Watch this,
I bet they’ll stop me again.” Sure enough, I was pulled
over again.
An officer walked to the rear of my car and told me to
get in the patrol car. I later learned that his name was
Trooper Perry. Once he had me in the car and started
questioning me, I told him that my son was still in my
car. He left and got Gregory and frisked him before
putting him in the back of the patrol car.
He told me that I had changed lanes without signal-
ing. I told him that I had signaled, and asked how he
would have been able to see from his vantage point on
the ramp.
Trooper Perry started writing me a warning ticket
and asking me questions. He asked me why I was ner-
vous. I told him that I was not nervous, but upset
because I had just been stopped by another trooper. He
then asked me more questions about my destination,
my point of origin and my military assignment.
Trooper Perry informed me that he had just made a
drug bust and asked to search my car, and I said no. I
asked him to call my Commanding Officer, Captain
Rhodes, because it is standard operating procedure for
the army. He refused. He would not let me call Captain
Rhodes on my cell phone. I asked him again later to call
my Commanding Officer and again he refused. Trooper
Perry gave me the warning ticket but told me that I was
not free to go.
Trooper Perry continued asking me questions. He
badgered me about why I would not let him search my
car if I had nothing to hide. I was polite but would not
let him search my car. He asked me if I was carrying any
weapons or contraband and I informed him that I was
Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling
63

not. Trooper Perry then stated that it was legal for him
to search my car without my consent.
Trooper Perry called for the K-9 unit from the second
patrol car. I said I wanted to watch the search and we
got out of the car. The dog walked around the outside of
the vehicle. The dog did not “alert.” He did not bark,
scratch, whimper or sit down, although the trooper kept
patting certain areas of the car and would not let the
dog walk away. Even though the dog did not alert, the
second trooper patted the right wheel well and claimed
that the dog had alerted. He said he would conduct a
full scale search now. I have been trained in using dogs
and thought that the search was highly improper and
unusually suggestive.
Trooper Perry ordered Gregory and me to get back
into the car. At this point, I became really worried that
the Troopers were going to plant illegal contraband in
my car. Trooper Perry then got the drill and took over
the search. He began drilling under the carpet at the feet
of the passenger side. Trooper Perry came back to the
car and stated that he had found “something.” The two
troopers spoke privately. I was then accused of having a
secret compartment in my car that had drug residue in
it. This compartment was actually a footrest that was a
feature of the car.
I was then handcuffed by Trooper Perry who man-
handled me, thrust me into his car and then strapped
me in. He turned off the on-board camera and took out
the tape. The second trooper continued the search of my
car. At one point, Trooper Perry and the other officer
lifted the hoods of their patrol cars, an action that had
no obvious purpose. I was worried that they were try-
ing to obstruct my view so that they could plant contra-
band in my car.
During the search we overheard Trooper Perry on the
radio with another trooper. He told the other trooper
that he was turning up nothing. The other trooper told
him to keep searching and asked if he needed back up.
By this point a third unit had appeared.
This trooper moved Gregory into his car and asked
him questions without me being present. The second
trooper brought the drug dog to the car that Gregory
64
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

was in and asked him some of the same questions. The
dog kept barking at Gregory, who was afraid it would
bite him.
The troopers put our luggage on the ground and had
the dogs sniff it. They found airline tickets, one of which
was to Chicago. When the trooper asked me about it, I
answered that Gregory had flown out of Chicago.
Because he had again asked me about drugs, I informed
him that my car had passed inspection and received
military clearance and that because of my military
assignment, I was subject to random urinalysis tests and
would never do drugs. Trooper Perry was angry that I
would not give him details about my classified assign-
ment. I suggested that he contact my Commanding
Officer.
At 3:45 P.M. the Troopers let me go with nothing more
than a warning ticket. I was told that I was being let go
because I was “behaving myself now.” I complained
that my car and baggage were a mess and Trooper Perry
said, “We ain’t good at repacking.” Trooper Perry had
removed parts of the headliner, floorboards, carpet and
other areas. There was over one thousand dollars of
damage.
As soon as we were released, I called Captain Rhodes.
He advised me to go to Fort Sill where the Director of
Public Safety searched my vehicle in case drugs were
planted in my car. An Army-certified narcotic working
dog did not find any drugs or contraband.
This experience was very traumatic for Gregory.
Throughout the interrogation, he was frightened and
crying. Even before he was removed from my presence
he was nervous, crying and hyperventilating. I had to
watch while my son suffered tremendous physical dis-
comfort from the heat. Trooper Perry had turned off the
air conditioning when he put us in his car, despite the
ninety degree heat.
Before we were finally released, one of the troopers
asked who would come get Gregory if they arrested me.
This remark made Gregory more nervous and upset. He
was crying and wondering what would happen to him
and I tried to calm him down. He was scared for the rest
of the trip. My son has since become afraid of dogs. He
Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling
65

continues to ask his mother why his father was treated
this way.
I was very humiliated by this experience. I was
embarrassed and ashamed that people driving by
would think I had committed a serious crime. It was
particularly horrible to be treated like a criminal in front
of my impressionable young son.
I never thought I would find myself in the position of
suing police officers. I am an authority figure myself. I
don’t want my son thinking that this kind of behavior
by anyone in uniform is acceptable. I hope that by com-
ing forward to tell my story it might prevent other peo-
ple of color from being treated this way. (United States
Senate Judiciary Committee Hearing, Subcommittee on
the Constitution, March 30, 2000)
Sergeant Gerald was only one of several who testified or
submitted statements for the record concerning their brushes
with profiling. The witnesses included not just African Ameri-
cans, but Hispanics, and included people from all walks of life,
including a prominent attorney pulled over on the way home
from a family member’s funeral. In all cases, the testimony
reflected deep resentment at having their privacy invaded and
being suspected of wrongdoing without any basis. It is clear that
these occurrences create lifelong memories of unpleasant and,
from their perspectives, unfair encounters with the criminal jus-
tice system.
A final argument raised with frequency today in opposition
to criminal justice profiling, particularly by the police, is that it is
inconsistent with the new law enforcement paradigm of commu-
nity policing. Many definitions of community policing exist, but
they all tend to have the common theme of partnership between
the police and the community. Community policing can be
defined as a philosophy of law enforcement, based on the con-
cept that police officers and citizens working together in creative
ways can help solve contemporary community problems related
to crime, the fear of crime, social and physical disorder, and
neighborhood decay (Trajanowicz and Bucqueroux 1990). This
definition has serious ramifications for police-community rela-
tionships and leaves little room for preemptive, adversarial pro-
filing of community members.
66
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

The Police Executive Research Forum is a think tank organi-
zation dedicated to improving police practices. It notes that com-
munity-oriented policing requires departments to change their
thinking by asking questions relating to five dimensions of police
work (Police Executive Research Forum 1996):
1. Deployment—how can more officers be moved closer to
the citizens?
2. Community revitalization—how can officers help pre-
vent neighborhoods from deteriorating and instead cre-
ate conditions that result in less fear of crime?
3. Problem solving—how should officers identify and ana-
lyze problems and then develop solutions and assess
their success?
4. Customer—how can officers be more responsive to citi-
zen needs and open up lines of communication?
5. Legitimacy—how can officers gain credibility with the
public in the notion that the police are fair and equitable
in the provision of service?
The answers to most of the above questions leave little room
for aggressive police tactics and criminal justice profiling in par-
ticular. Critics point out that profiling is a tool of the professional
policing era. In the community policing era, officers need not and
should not go it alone—them against the community. Rather, offi-
cers should seek to build relationships in the community that
will yield dividends in the future.
Arguments for Profiling
There is frankly no contest to the assertion that some groups of
people commit disproportionate shares of crime. African Ameri-
cans, for example, constitute 13 percent of the nation’s popula-
tion and yet represent 43 percent of persons arrested for serious
violent crimes and 32 percent of persons arrested for serious prop-
erty crimes nationwide (U.S. Department of Justice 2003a). In Vir-
ginia, although only 20 percent of the state’s population, African
Americans represented 51 percent of those committing Part I
felonies (most serious offenses) and 40 percent of Part II felonies
(remaining felonious crime). Although some critics, such as Jim
Cleary, have argued that profiling is self-perpetuating, the fact
Pros and Cons of Criminal Profiling
67

that there is a disproportionate number of minorities arrested for
the most serious offenses mitigates that criticism. The serious
felonies are investigated until suspects, whatever their race, mate-
rialize. Investigating a homicide or armed robbery is not driven
by a bias against one race or another. The crime occurred.
What’s more, the statistics are bound by context and do not
only affect African Americans. All races are subject to light shed
by statistical realities. Most individuals trafficking illegal aliens
on the southern border are likely to be of Hispanic origin
(Kennedy 2000). Statistically, a stop of a van driven by a Hispanic
male will more likely yield smuggled drugs or aliens than would
a stop of a van driven by an apparent soccer mom in the same
border vicinity.
Besides race, observations about gender jump out in associ-
ation with criminal activity. Of the nearly six million violent
crimes committed in the United States in 1999, 80 percent were
committed by men, 19 percent by women, and 1 percent
remained unknown (U.S. Department of Justice 2003b). An offi-
cer responding to a violent crime, while not ruling out anything,
can at least know that odds are the perpetrator is a man. Is that
bias or merely a recognition of a statistical reality?
In addition to the statistical argument, supporters of profil-
ing point out that it is common sense. Johnny Hughes of the
National Troopers Coalition, a retired major in the Maryland
State Police, testified to the U.S. Senate in 2000 that criminal pro-
filing is a good, effective, and commonsensical law enforcement
tool. Police trainees are taught to observe the individual charac-
teristics or indicators for drug-courier activity and other crimes
in progress. These observations are based on reason, said Major
Hughes, not race (or any other class per se). He argued that com-
mon sense dictates that preventing and investigating crime in
minority areas are necessarily going to involve the interaction of
police with predominantly minorities (National Commission on
Crime Control and Prevention 1994).
A white male in an urban black neighborhood late at night
with license plates that register to the suburbs is quite possibly in
the area to purchase drugs. The race of the suspect, in this case
Caucasian, cannot help but be noticed. To completely ignore that
aspect of an overall profile or observation is to unrealistically
hamper law enforcement from thinking.
Finally, some defenders of criminal justice profiling note that
public safety and the community are benefactors. It is argued
68
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

that to avoid using good and proven police techniques in the
detection and prevention of crime is to do so to the detriment of
the community. Doing so unnecessarily leaves the public vulner-
able to criminals who might have otherwise been apprehended.
The very public harmed when profiling is disallowed are usually
minorities and the poor, as it is their neighborhoods that are often
overrun with the criminal element. To leave law-abiding minori-
ties—which are the majority in such neighborhoods—to stew in
a crime-ridden environment could itself be considered racist or
classist. Minorities have the right to be safe too.
For example, studies show that blacks are far more likely
than whites to be victims of serious crime. In 1993, black males
between the ages of twelve and twenty-four were murdered at a
rate of 115 per 100,000; the murder rate for white males in the
same age group was 12 per 100,000. Blacks were four times more
likely than whites to be victims of gun violence (DeLisi and
Regoli 1999). We know that 80 percent of black victims of violent
crime are victimized by blacks (U.S. Department of Justice
2003b). Given that violent crime tends to be intraracial, one can
argue that it is minority communities who are served by effective
criminal justice profiling.
Remedies
There are two primary remedies that citizens can pursue when
they feel they have been illegally profiled or in some other way
discriminated against by the criminal justice system. One route is
to involve the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), Civil Rights
Division. The other route is to pursue civil litigation.
The DOJ Civil Rights Division maintains a section devoted
to special litigation, which includes the responsibility of suing
local and state law enforcement agencies. Under authorities
given to DOJ under the Civil Rights of Institutionalized Persons
Act (CRIPA), violations of the civil rights of those who are incar-
cerated can be investigated, civilly litigated, and even prosecuted
by the Department of Justice.
Additionally, under authority of the 1968 Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act, DOJ’s Civil Rights Division has the
authority to initiate civil litigation to remedy patterns of racial,
ethnic, gender, or religious discrimination by law enforcement
agencies that receive federal funds. The Violent Crime Control
Remedies
69

and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 further empowers DOJ to con-
duct similar investigations and seek similar remedies from agen-
cies administering juvenile justice that demonstrate patterned
illegal conduct.
A common tactic for the DOJ in recent years has been to
enter into consent decrees with targeted criminal justice agencies.
In exchange for the dropping of the federal lawsuit against them,
agencies and departments under investigation for discriminatory
conduct consent to an agreement whereby a multitude of things
will be done by that department, depending on the areas identi-
fied by DOJ as needing improvement. Typically, the departments
agree to things such as (U.S. Department of Justice 2003b):
• revising policies concerning citizen encounters
• instituting a reformed training program
• changing supervisory practices and protocols
• implementing systems to receive and investigate citizen
complaints
• greater emphasis on minority recruiting/promotions
In 1997, the police departments of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
and Steubenville, Ohio, entered into consent decrees with the
Department of Justice to avoid federally spearheaded lawsuits
alleging pervasive racial discrimination in the departments.
In 1999, a consent decree was entered into between DOJ and
the New Jersey State Police owing to complaints of racial profil-
ing. The year 2000 saw a similar agreement between DOJ and the
Montgomery County, Maryland, Police Department. In 2001,
agreements were entered into with the police departments of Los
Angeles, Washington, D.C., and Highland Park, Illinois. All of
these consent decrees were rooted in complaints of racial dis-
crimination and profiling. Other types of violations by law
enforcement officers and departments, such as sexual harass-
ment and coercive sexual conduct, are also being investigated.
In 2002, the DOJ and the Cincinnati, Ohio, police department
entered into a consent decree with each other. Cincinnati had been
plagued by horrible relations between the police and the black
community there. This relationship deteriorated into riots follow-
ing a shooting by an officer of a wanted, but unarmed, African
American. The officer was prosecuted in the death of the suspect
but was acquitted. With the growing national attention on Cincin-
70
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

nati, the DOJ took a closer look. According to a DOJ press release,
among the terms agreed to by both parties were the following
things that the city and the police department (CPD) would do:
• enhance policy requirements and limitations on the
use of force by officers, including the use of
firearms, beanbag shot guns and 40 millimeter foam
rounds, chemical irritant and canines;
• improve supervisory oversight of use of force inci-
dents; supervisors will document and investigate
each incident giving rise to a use of force for com-
pliance with CPD policy and to evaluate the tactics
used by the officer;
• implement policy revisions and training which will
emphasize that de-escalation techniques, such as
disengagement, area containment, surveillance,
waiting out a subject, summoning reinforcements
or calling in specialized units may be an appropri-
ate response to a situation;
• enhance and expand its risk management system
that will provide CPD managers with information
necessary to better supervise officers and groups of
officers;
• analyze trends in uses of force, searches, seizures,
and other law enforcement activities that create a
risk of officer misconduct;
• create a cadre of officers who are specially trained
to intervene in situations involving people with
mental illness;
• improve the procedures for investigating allega-
tions of misconduct and uses of force by CPD offi-
cers and to complete the investigations in a more
thorough, fair, and timely manner;
• publicly report important data regarding CPD use
of force incidents and civilian complaints; and
• implement a variety of changes in the procedures
used for receiving, investigating, and resolving mis-
conduct complaints. CPD will make complaint
forms and informational materials more widely
available at a variety of public locations. (U.S.
Department of Justice 2003a)
Remedies
71

Currently, the DOJ Civil Rights Division is participating in a
program entitled the Police Misconduct Initiative. The DOJ is on
the record as favoring the tool of consent decrees and expects to
enter into many more agreements with state and local criminal
justice agencies in the future.
The other common remedy available to citizens when they
believe their civil rights have been violated by law enforcement
or some other criminal justice entity is to pursue civil litigation
themselves.
Although there has long been the right to sue certain crimi-
nal justice officials, including police officers, for violating one’s
civil rights, the practice has become increasingly common in
recent years. In the 1960s, there was an average of 6,000 such civil
cases each year against law enforcement. By 1976, the number
was 13,400. And recent figures have shown more than 30,000
cases each year against the police (Kappeler 2001).
The ability to sue the police and other state-level criminal
justice officials is rooted in the Civil Rights Act of 1871, which
was codified in Title 42 of the United States Code, Section 1983.
To win a “1983” action, the plaintiff (that is, the one bringing the
suit) must show that (Kappeler 2001):
• the officer was acting under the color of law
• the violation was a constitutional or federally protected
right
• the violation was sufficiently serious enough to reach a
“constitutional” level.
The requirement that an officer acted under the color of law
simply refers to the idea that the officer used or in some way
implicated his or her status as a criminal justice official during
the incident that violated the plaintiff’s rights. Usually, showing
that the officer acted under the color of law is not difficult for
profiling cases. The facts that the officer was in uniform, in a
squad car, filed official documents on the case, displayed or was
obviously armed with a weapon, and was working with the
department’s authorization are all evidence that the officer acted
under the color of law.
The most common violations raised in 1983 actions are
alleged violations of the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and
Fourteenth Amendments, along with the Civil Rights Act of 1964
and subsequent amendments.
72
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

Although a technical violation of one’s civil rights may have
occurred, the courts have been reluctant to uphold civil rights
lawsuits if the offense is not sufficiently serious. Although
exactly how serious the violation has to be is an issue that has
been back and forth in various district and appellate courts, most
would agree, for example, that an officer telling a jabbering sus-
pect in the backseat of the squad car to “shut up” does not con-
stitute a serious violation of the First Amendment free speech
right.
Generally, 42 USC 1983 allows private citizens to sue indi-
vidual officers who violate civil rights. If it can be shown, how-
ever, that the department acted with “deliberate indifference” in
regulating the conduct of its employees, then the department
could be liable as well. To link an employee’s misconduct to the
department at large, a plaintiff would need to show things such
as (Kappeler 2001)
• the frequency of violations
• extent to which the violations were routine for other
employees
• extent to which the practice was accepted by supervi-
sors
• number of employees involved in violation in question
• retention of, failure to discipline, and failure to investi-
gate employee
• failure to prevent future violations
• failure to train employees adequately, properly, or at all
Although there have been a growing number of lawsuits
against officers for unlawful profiling and other alleged civil
rights violations, the cases usually do not succeed for the plain-
tiffs. Only about 8 percent of civil cases brought against officers
and departments are won (Kappeler 2001). Officers do have
defenses they can rely on. If they can demonstrate they acted in
good faith (that is, they could not have known at the time that
their conduct was illegal), then they will prevail. Likewise, if it
can be demonstrated that their conduct was “objectively reason-
able” at that time—in other words, a reasonable officer in the
same situation with the same amount of information would have
acted similarly—the officer will win the case.
Some think the laws should be loosened up further to make
it easier to win and sustain convictions against criminal justice
Remedies
73

officials thought to be engaging in discriminatory conduct. Oth-
ers, however, point to the fact that criminal justice employees are
usually just doing the best they can. To extend greater liability to
them—people who are earning working-class wages at best and
often enjoy no widespread public appreciation—will only make
recruitment of decent officers tougher, and that is a problem that
itself can cyclically contribute to the very problem of misconduct
that so many criminal justice professionals, politicians, and citi-
zens are trying to alleviate.
Profiling after 9/11/01
It is impossible to ignore the effects that the catastrophe that was
September 11, 2001, brought to the issue of profiling in criminal
justice. Prior to 9/11, it was difficult to find public officials who
would defend profiling under any circumstances. As William
McDonald noted, profiling had developed a “broad and almost
unchallengeable public antipathy” (McDonald 2003, 232). Gover-
nors, presidential candidates, and FBI director Robert Mueller,
when a candidate for his job, all decried profiling—particularly
racial or ethnic profiling—as obscene in relation to the Constitu-
tion and generally unfair and immoral.
But on September 11, 2001, nineteen males of Middle Eastern
descent, most of whom were from Saudi Arabia, killed approxi-
mately 3,000 people in the United States. Had law enforcement
and intelligence officials ignored the obvious commonality in
race among the assailants, they would have been properly
accused of gross incompetence or negligence. There are certain
people currently at war with the United States, and their last
names are never Jorgesen or Smith. But the opposite is true as
well. Not all men named Mohommad are at war with the United
States. Many so named are Americans and love America. So what
is law enforcement to do?
In examining current federal policy, one sees a tiered
approach to the use of profiles, be they based on race, ethnicity,
religion, or gender. In June 2003, the U.S. Justice Department
issued new policy guidelines to all of federal law enforcement
that banned the use of racial and ethnic profiling. Doing so was
consistent with President Bush’s proclamation in February 2001
that racial profiling was “wrong and we will end it in America”
(U.S. Department of Justice Guidance Regarding Use of Race by
74
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

Federal Law Enforcement Agencies, 2003, 1). At that time, Presi-
dent Bush directed the Justice Department to look at the use of
race and ethnicity by criminal justice agencies and to craft poli-
cies to curtail their use.
The policy does indeed ban the use of racial profiling, absent
specific suspect information that would implicate race, in tradi-
tional law enforcement activities. Such activities include general
patrol functions for uniformed police services, drug investiga-
tions, and other general crimes. The policy is more permissive,
however, where national security and border integrity are con-
cerned.
Regarding traditional law enforcement activities, the policy
reads:
In making routine or spontaneous decisions, such as
ordinary traffic stops, Federal law enforcement officers
may not use race or ethnicity to any degree, except that
officers may rely on race and ethnicity in specific sus-
pect description. This prohibition applies even where
the use of race or ethnicity might otherwise be lawful.
In conducting activities in connection with a specific
investigation, Federal law enforcement officers may
consider race and ethnicity only to the extent that there
is trustworthy information, relevant to the locality or
time frame, that links persons of a particular race or eth-
nicity to an identified criminal incident, scheme, or
organization. This standard applies even where the use
of race or ethnicity might otherwise be lawful. (U.S.
Department of Justice 2003b, 2–4)
The standard articulated above for traditional law enforce-
ment activities is more stringent than the Constitution requires.
Indeed, the Supreme Court has made it clear that the Constitu-
tion does not concern itself with the motives of officers where an
objective offense is observed; nor does the Constitution prohibit
profiling for particular offenses, such as drug trafficking, where
race of the suspect is one of many factors in the profile. But now,
using race as a factor or acting on an observation of an actual
offense when the officer is personally more inclined to do so
when committed by members of a particular race is prohibited
practice for federal law enforcement.
The policy might have stopped there but for 9–11. The pol-
icy goes on to state that the above standards
Profiling after 9/11/01
75

do not affect current Federal policy with respect to law
enforcement activities and other efforts to defend and
safeguard against threats to national security or the
integrity of the Nation’s borders. . . . In investigating or
preventing threats to national security or other cata-
strophic events (including the performance of duties
related to air transportation security), or in enforcing
laws protecting the integrity of the Nation’s borders,
Federal law enforcement officers may not consider race
or ethnicity except to the extent permitted by the Con-
stitution and the laws of the United States. (U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice 2003b, 8)
It is worth noting that even where the potential harm is cat-
astrophic, the policy pays homage to the Constitution. Even so,
race and ethnicity (and by extension, religion and gender) may
indeed be used as factors in developing profiles of those who
might do the United States significant harm.
In short, federal policy bans profiling—usually. This policy
is a stark example of the dilemma inherent to profiling generally.
If we concede that profiling does prevent some crime (and many
say it does not), we must also acknowledge that it does so at a
cost—particularly for those innocents who are subject to it. In the
weeks following 9–11, many Middle Eastern men were asked to
disembark from commercial airliners because passengers and
pilots refused to fly with them aboard. These individuals were
demeaned, inconvenienced, and embarrassed. If it turns out that
just one of the dozens this happened to actually intended to do a
flight harm—perhaps by blowing it up with a shoe bomb—
would we say it was all worth it? And if it is worth it in airline
security, is it not likewise worth it to get a murderous, drug-deal-
ing gang member off the streets of Chicago?
One thing is absolute after 9–11: far fewer people are
absolutely against criminal profiling than were before.
References
Banaji, M., and R. Bhaskar. 2000. “Implicit Stereotypes and Memory: The
Bounded Rationality of Social Beliefs.” In Memory, Brain and Belief, ed.
D. L. Schacter and E. Scarry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 139–175.
76
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

Brooks, L. W. 2001. “Police Discretionary Behavior: A Study of Style.” In
Critical Issues in Policing, 4th ed., ed. Roger G. Dunham and Geoffrey P.
Alpert. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland, 117–131.
Champion, D. J., and G. E. Rush. 1997. Policing in the Community. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cleary, J. 2000. Racial Profiling Studies in Law Enforcement: Issues and
Methodology. St. Paul, MN: State of Minnesota, House of Representatives
Research Department.
Cole, D. 1999. No Equal Justice. New York: New Press.
Cole, G. F., and C. E. Smith. 2001. The American System of Criminal Justice.
9th ed. Stamford, CT: Wadsworth.
DeLisi, M., and B. Regoli. 1999. “Race, Conventional Crime, and Crimi-
nal Justice: The Declining Importance of Skin Color.” Journal of Criminal
Justice 27 (November):549–557.
Evans, M., ed. 1978. Discretion and Control. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Jacoby, J. 1979. “The Charging Policies of Prosecutors.” In The Prosecutor,
ed. W. F. McDonald. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 75–97.
Kappeler, V. 2001. Critical Issues in Police Civil Liability, 3rd ed. Prospect
Heights, IL: Waveland.
Kennedy, R. 2000. “Suspect Policy.” In Criminal Justice, ed. Joseph Victor.
Guliford, CT: Dushkin/McGraw-Hill, 102–106.
Klotter, J. C. 2002. Legal Guide For Police. 6th ed. Cincinnati, OH: Ander-
son.
Lee, Y. T., L. Albright, and T. Malloy. 2001. “Social Perception and Stereo-
typing: An Interpersonal and Intercultural Approach.” International Jour-
nal of Group Tension 30, no. 2., 183–209.
Lee, Y. T., L. Jussim, and C. McCauley. 1995. Stereotype Accuracy: Toward
Appreciating Group Differences. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
McCoy, C. 1998. “Prosecution.” In The Handbook of Crime and Punishment,
ed. M. Tonry. New York: Oxford University Press, 457–473.
McDonald, W.F. 2003. “The Emerging Paradigm for Policing Multiethnic
Societies: Glimpses from the American Experience.” Police and Society,
No. 7:232–249.
National Commission on Crime Control and Prevention. 1994. Final
Report. Washington, DC.
Police Executive Research Forum. 1996. Themes and Variations in Commu-
nity Policing. Washington, DC.
References
77

Roberg, R., J. Crank, and J. Kuykendall. 2000. Police and Society. Los
Angeles: Roxbury.
Robinson, M. B. 2002. Justice Blind? Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Scheb, J. M., and J. M. Scheb II. 1999. Criminal Law and Procedure. 3rd ed.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Schmalleger, F. 1999. Criminal Justice. 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Trajanowicz, R., and B. Bucqueroux. 1990. Community Policing: A Con-
temporary Perspective. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson.
U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics section. http://
www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs, accessed in 2003.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2003a., Civil Rights Division section. http://
www.usdoj.gov/crt, accessed in 2003.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2003b. Guidance Regarding the Use of Race by
Federal Law Enforcement Agencies. Washington, DC.
Walker, S. 1999. The Police in America. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
78
Issues in Criminal Justice Profiling

3
Global Perspectives on Profiling
T
he balancing act concerning profiling—weighing its useful-
ness in criminal justice against its unfairness toward individ-
uals—is not one unique to the United States. Nor is it even
unique to Western democracies. Profiling in one fashion or
another can be observed in criminal justice systems all around
the world.
That having been said, the issue of profiling has not been
confronted in other countries exactly the same way it has been in
the United States. It couldn’t be. The U.S. Constitution is unique,
and America’s constitutional and legal development over the
decades is even more so. As U.S. courts and legislatures came to
develop theories, philosophies, and practices relating to profiling
and relating to the larger issue of equal justice for all under the
law, they did so within the context of American institutions, cul-
tural development, demographic conditions, and the like.
Likewise, as other countries have grappled with fairness
issues balanced against effective law enforcement practices, they
have done so without the benefit of the U.S. Constitution.
Instead, they did so under their own constitution or under no
constitution at all. Consequently, and not surprisingly, countries
around the world treat the issue of profiling with varying
degrees of acceptance or aversion, as the case may be.
Four Legal Traditions around the Globe
To better understand how the issue of profiling manifests itself
around the world apart from the United States, one must have an
79

understanding of the main legal traditions that give birth to the
world’s criminal justice systems. Comparative criminal justice
scholars, such as Philip Reichel, commonly identify four main
legal traditions: civil, common, socialist, and Islamic (Reichel
2002).
Civil Law Tradition
The tradition most identified with Western nations is the civil tra-
dition. This tradition can be traced back to the Roman Empire. It
is the tradition that emphasizes the need for laws and regulations
to be written down in a systematic manner by some political
authority (Mukherjee and Reichel 1999). Typically, the political
authority is a legislative body. In such systems, the legislature is
generally considered the source of all law. The importance of
writing down the law is found in the need for all citizens to know
what the law is, to know what their rights are, and to know what
is expected of them.
There have been variations of the civil tradition over time.
The Romans as far back as 450 B.C. codified a collection of laws
into what was known as the Twelve Tables. These laws contained
specific rights for all Roman citizens (Reichel 2002).
More recently, in the early nineteenth century, France codi-
fied its laws into a single set of laws known as the Napoleonic
Code. This code was composed of many previously existing
French laws as well as some new ones. Despite part of the code’s
consisting of older French laws, the validity of all aspects of the
code was based in the fact that it had been enacted once again in
this single code. What had been before was not relevant. What
“is” was all that mattered.
The Code Napoléon was extremely influential in the develop-
ment of legal systems throughout Europe and Latin America.
The code, and its successors in other countries influenced by it,
made it possible for average citizens to know where they stood
under the law. It also provided for a separation between those
who made law and those who would apply and interpret it. The
role of courts under the civil tradition, particularly as influenced
by the Napoleonic Code, is inherently restrained. Judicial
activism, that is, making laws from the bench, has no place in the
true civil law tradition.
80
Global Perspectives on Profiling

Common Law Tradition
The common law tradition differs from the civil law tradition in
that the customs of the people are the sources of law, not what
some legislature has written down. Although the customs are
eventually put into written form, this fact does not detract from
the source of the law: the people’s customary behavior and atti-
tudes of what is right and wrong.
For this reason, the common law tradition is associated with
jury-based judgments. It is not judges who decide if one behaved
appropriately or reasonably given a set of circumstances. Instead,
juries of peers are placed in the position to judge the actions of
others.
Further, under common law, judges were expected to follow
the people’s leading by relying on precedent. This notion of rely-
ing on the interpretation and application of common law in the
past is called stare decisis. For judges to give great deference to
precedence is a hallmark of the common law tradition.
Because the written codes, to the extent the laws are written
down, are mere reflections of the higher common law, there is
great room for judges to interpret and apply the law according to
their read of precedence and according to their understanding of
common law, that is, the customs and sensibilities of the people
with regard to what is reasonable.
The written law is not the final authority under the common
law tradition. Rather, the law only receives ultimate legitimacy
after judicial review (Mukherjee and Reichel 1999). And even
then, the law’s legitimacy must receive periodic approval. This is
why the First Amendment of the Constitution, for example,
seems to permit a government-owned nativity scene on display
at Christmas one year and then prohibits it the next, despite the
unchanged wording of the amendment. The understanding of
the wording, particularly within the context of an increasingly
secular culture, has been changed by the courts.
America’s legal system and that of its parent nation England
hail from the common law tradition. It is no wonder, then, that so
much change socially in the United States has taken place as a
result of court decisions. Likewise, the practices of the U.S. crim-
inal justice system have been profoundly impacted by the judi-
cial review process.
Four Legal Traditions around the Globe
81

Socialist Law Tradition
The socialist law tradition is the newest of the major legal tradi-
tions recognized by scholars. The roots of this tradition can be
traced to the legal system of the Soviet Union; virtually all social-
ist societies in existence today borrowed significant elements
from the Soviet legal model (Reichel 2002).
At the heart of socialism is the philosophical position that
the law is merely a tool to be utilized by man. Socialists believe
that within nonsocialist countries, the law is used by those in
power—particularly the wealthy—to keep power and hold the
working class down. Socialists say by contrast that socialist sys-
tems use the law for the benefit of the common man. To this end,
the law is not seen as a higher value that checks the behavior of
all people, including rulers. Instead, it is a tool to accomplish a
particular end. The law’s validity is not verified by the courts; the
law is by definition valid because the people, through the legis-
lature (or through a dictator for that matter), have put the law in
place in support of some policy; the law is subordinate to policy
(Mukherjee and Reichel 1999).
Islamic Law Tradition
There are approximately a billion Muslims in the world. Millions
of Muslims live in countries where Islam is not the predominant
religion, such as the United States. Millions more live in countries
where Islam is predominant, but the government is secular. A
good example of this is Turkey. And still millions more live in
countries that rely on the tenets of Islam in all facets of life,
including public law. In such countries—Iran is a good exam-
ple—the legal system’s authority is rooted in divine authority—
namely, Allah’s.
The word in Arabic for Islamic Law is Shari’a. Shari’a is not
in place to only govern religious facets of life. For nations who
follow Islamic law, Shari’a is what governs all facets of life. There
is no compartmentalization allowed. A believer either follows
Shari’a entirely, or not. Likewise, a nation is either truly Islamic
by following Shari’a, or it is not. For many Muslims, a nation that
is secular in its public law system and fails to adhere to Shari’a is
an ungodly and damned nation at best.
As Philip Reichel noted (1999), Shari’a law is primarily artic-
ulated in the Quran and the Sunna. The Quran is the holy book
82
Global Perspectives on Profiling

of Islam. It is the Muslim’s Bible. According to Islamic tradition,
the Quran was handed down to the prophet Muhammad by the
angel Gabriel. The Sunna is a supplement to the Quran and is
considered a written record of the statements and deeds of the
prophet Muhammad.
Although the Quran and the Sunna do contain rules govern-
ing people’s relations and interactions with one another, they do
not collectively make up a comprehensive criminal code. Conse-
quently, they are augmented by the reasoning and rulings of reli-
gious scholars and leaders. These augmentations fill in the
details that are sometimes lacking from the broader proclama-
tions of the Quran and the Sunna.
Legal Processes
When considering the criminal justice systems around the world,
in addition to the legal traditions that exist, one must also con-
sider the legal processes that generally exist. In examining legal
processes, one does not speak so much of the authority of the law,
which goes to the legal tradition prevalent in a country. Rather,
one speaks of the relationship of the participants in the justice
system to the system and to each other, that is, the accused, the
victims, the state, and so on.
Scholars regularly identify three basic types of processes
contained in the world’s legal systems. These are the inquisitor-
ial process, the adversarial process, and the informal process.
These categories are identified for conceptualization purposes. In
fact, justice systems around the world commonly contain mix-
tures of each, much like the fact that legal traditions are blended
in many countries. But the categories of legal process serve to
develop an appreciation for the fact that similar offenders, for
example, may be handled differently from one nation to
another—sometimes even when legal traditions are shared.
The inquisitorial process is often associated with the crime
control model of criminal justice, which appeared earlier in this
book. The crime control model emphasizes the need to process
offenders efficiently through the system. The more quickly bad
people are off the streets, the more quickly crime is thereby con-
trolled, and we are presumably safer for it.
The inquisitorial process—as the word suggests—is focused
on the offender. What did the offender do? Where and when did
Legal Processes
83

he or she do it? The goal of the process is to get to the truth by
inquiry. In its purest form, such a process is not totally concerned
with fairness because sometimes leveling the playing field
defeats finding truth and securing justice.
The adversarial process, on the other hand, is concerned
about fairness. This process is generally associated with the due
process model of criminal justice. The due process model, also
addressed earlier in the book, emphasizes the need of protecting
the accused, lest people be wrongly convicted. In this model, it is
better that society allow a guilty person to go free rather than risk
a miscarriage of justice by punishing an innocent.
For adherents of the due process model, freedom is para-
mount, and the reasons for taking freedom away must be over-
whelmingly compelling. The reasons must be so compelling, in
fact, that those reasons are apparent even when an unmitigated
advocate of the accused presents evidence to the contrary.
This is the sum and substance of the adversarial process.
Adversarial processes are intentionally built into many of the
world’s justice systems, including that of the United States, pre-
cisely to give every bit of benefit of the doubt to the accused but
not yet convicted. Through the adversarial process, the state must
work hard to convince judges and juries that the criminal justice
system has treated an accused person fairly and that despite that
fair treatment—that benefit of the doubt—it still remains clear
that a crime was committed and the accused committed it.
Should the state fail to make a case in the face of an adver-
sary vigorously defending the accused, then the accused must be
set free without regard for whether the accused actually did it.
The question “Did he do it?” sums up the inquisitorial process.
The question “Can procedural hurdles be overcome to prove it?”
sums up the adversarial process.
A third category of processes can be labeled the informal
process. Reichel (1999) noted that the Shari’a provides for the use
of informal processes to deal with criminal offenders. The Islamic
legal tradition in fact encourages informal approaches for deal-
ing with individual misconduct. In many cases, if a property
crime occurs, and even with some types of violent crime, offend-
ers are given the opportunity to reconcile with their victims
through compensation. If compensation is satisfactory to the vic-
tim, then their desire to pursue retribution under the Shari’a may
be deterred. In such cases, police records may not even be cre-
ated, and criminal charges may never actually be formalized.
84
Global Perspectives on Profiling

This is not unlike some of the restorative justice efforts being
attempted in various U.S. jurisdictions. The difference is that
even restorative justice programs in the United States involve
formal processes with formal consequences.
Profiling around the World
Just as in the United States, criminal justice profiling in other
countries is, by definition, group conscious. Therefore, it makes
sense that profiling is a more pressing issue in countries where,
as in the United States, different groups reside.
In the United States, racial minorities are frequently the sub-
jects of criminal justice profiling. This book has already consid-
ered some of the reasons for this, ranging from the notion that
criminal justice officials are racist to the proposition that minori-
ties tend to commit more crimes and therefore more readily draw
the attention of the justice system.
These very same issues are debated hotly in other countries
where racial and ethnic minorities are present. To survey profil-
ing around the globe, countries will be examined in the follow-
ing sections. What is especially interesting is the fact that so
many issues that are integral to a discussion of American crimi-
nal justice profiling are likewise implicated when examining jus-
tice systems abroad. One gets the sense that politics is politics,
people are people, and criminal justice practices are criminal jus-
tice practices, wherever one finds oneself in the world.
In 1995, the United Nations released the results of a study
concerning the incarceration rates of ethnic minorities around the
world and the crimes for which they were incarcerated. In the
Netherlands, for example, minorities made up 9 percent of the
total population and yet accounted for 40 percent of the prison
population. What’s more, half of these were incarcerated for
property and drug offenses that, for most others, typically result
in diversionary sanctions short of imprisonment. The pattern
seen in the Netherlands plays out in virtually every other coun-
try profiled by the study.
The United Nations findings suggest that the problems and
issues facing the criminal justice system in the United States con-
cerning treatment of minorities is not America’s problem alone.
These issues are recurrent around the globe. In the remainder of
this chapter, we briefly examine six countries for similarities and
Profiling around the World
85

differences where treatment of ethnic and religious minorities by
the criminal justice system is concerned. As we will see, there are
far more similarities than differences. Many of the criminal jus-
tice themes and controversies are the same as are present in the
United States.
Australia
In discussing criminal justice in Australia, one cannot ignore the
fact that the nation itself started off as a penal colony. Its very
existence, historically, is anchored in criminal justice. Originally,
England utilized the colony of Australia as a place to which to
banish criminals. As far back as 1598, the British Parliament
authorized the transportation of criminals to far-off places so as
to rid the British Isles of their presence (Reichel 1999).
The American colonies were among those that regularly
received British convicts. With the Revolutionary War and the
ousting of Britain from America, the British needed a new place
to which to transport its convicts and found such a place in Aus-
tralia. From the late eighteenth century to the middle of the nine-
teenth century, 160,000 prisoners arrived in Australia. Beyond
mere banishment, most prisoners also had an obligation to work
off their sentences. By 1868, the practice of prisoner transporta-
tion to Australia was over (Hughes 1987).
Despite its rather unique beginnings, Australia is a country
with many similarities to the United States. It is a nation whose
origins are found in Great Britain. It is a nation whose frontier
has been historically to the West. The country is known for its
rugged individualism. And, like the United States, it was inhab-
ited by indigenous people before Europeans ever arrived.
Despite being a relatively small country in population, the
diversity of Australia is remarkable. Australia has a population
of nearly twenty million people. Approximately four million of
these people were born abroad in more than 200 other countries.
Ninety-two religious denominations are represented in the coun-
try along with 170 languages. Two and a half million Australians
speak something other than English in the privacy and routine of
their homes (Leong 2001).
Much of this diversity comes from immigration. The nation
has been a popular destination for immigrants from all over the
world, including English-speaking Great Britain, Canada, and
the United States. A little more than a third of a million of Aus-
86
Global Perspectives on Profiling

tralians are indigenous to the nation-continent, however. Their
ancestry predates all others; these are the Aborigines. Aborigines
total approximately 1.7 percent of the total Australian population
but 19 percent of the Australian prison population (Broadhurst
1996).
Today, Australia is a federalist nation; consequently, there
are semi-independent criminal justice systems in all six Aus-
tralian states and two territories. And of course, there is a
national justice system as well. A common criticism of Australian
criminal justice is that there is a huge discrepancy in justice prac-
tices and services from one state or territory to another.
Some of this is unavoidable and explained by demographics.
The state of Western Australia and the Northern Territory, for
example, are both incredibly sparse. It is impossible, say justice
officials, to provide the same level of professionalism and service
in the Outback as in Sydney or Melbourne. The critics respond,
however, that many of Australia’s problems where criminal jus-
tice is concerned—especially unfair profiling—actually take
place in the more populated states and urban centers where one
would otherwise expect more professional service.
In Australia, the relationship between the criminal justice
system and minorities invariably is reduced to consideration of
the relationship between the police and Aborigines.
Proponents of the notion that Aborigines are treated unfairly
point to the incarceration rates as proof positive. As Camp and
Camp (1997) noted, African Americans constitute 13 percent of
the U.S. population and 47 percent of the prison population. As
disparate as this figure is, Aborigines are much worse off by the
numbers. With only 1.7 percent of Australia’s total population,
and donating enough of its members to make up 19 percent of
the Australian prison population, Aborigines can rightly be con-
sidered the most incarcerated people in the world (Reichel 1999).
In Australia, policing is largely the responsibility of the
states. The authority that law enforcement has is generally the
same throughout the country, however. For example, the oppor-
tunities police have to make an arrest typically fall under the fol-
lowing circumstances (James 1994, 31):
• when an offender is caught in the act of committing an
offense
• when an offender is caught after having committed an
offense
Profiling around the World
87

• when a person is found on the premises that were
searched under a search warrant and the person is
linked to the evidence seized
• when there is a belief that a warrant exists for the per-
son’s arrest
• when a person who loiters at night is suspected with
reasonable cause of committing an offense
It is the last provision that gives police ample opportunity to
focus on particular groups known to the police for criminal con-
duct. When an officer finds a young, male Aborigine or other
minority loitering about outside a convenience store or a tavern,
it often doesn’t take very much to develop reasonable cause that
the loiterer has been up to some kind of no-good.
Germany
The country of Germany has over eighty million inhabitants. The
governmental system in Germany is federal. In modern Ger-
many, there are sixteen states with their own semiautonomous
governments—similar to the federal system in the United States.
Although there does exist a powerful German constitution that
gives considerable authority to parliament, the implementation
of Germany’s laws and the function of law enforcement are con-
ducted for the most part at the state level (Albrecht and Teske
2000). This means that decisions about the enforcement and
prosecution of various crimes are made by locally accountable
officials rather than nationally accountable ones, thus allowing
for different standards from one part of the country to another.
The decentralization of criminal justice in Germany is but
one mitigating factor in how people are treated by the justice sys-
tem. Events of post–Cold War history have also had an impact.
Two such events are the unification of Germany and the embrace
by Germans of the European Union.
Throughout the Cold War, Germany actually existed as two
countries—the Federal Republic of Germany (commonly known
as West Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (com-
monly known as East Germany). But with the collapse of the
Soviet Union and the demise of compulsory communism in East-
ern Europe, Germany was reunited on October 3, 1990, under
one government and one constitution.
88
Global Perspectives on Profiling

Immediately, the criminal justice resources of a unified Ger-
many were strained. East Germany was incredibly poor com-
pared to the west. Workers in the east were largely unemployed.
Many of the skilled workers were educated or trained at sub-
standard levels and were not easily absorbed into the west’s
modern and free-market economy.
East Germany donated poverty and broken infrastructure to
the new, unified Germany, whereas West Germany donated free-
dom and due process. No longer were German citizens, even in
the east, to be rounded up on mere suspicion of criminal viola-
tions. No longer would fear of the famed East German secret
police, known as the Stasi, keep economically depressed peoples
in check. In a unified Germany, socioeconomic disadvantage for
Germans and nonethnic Germans alike could be outwardly
expressed without fear of brutal reprisals. This created a serious
challenge for the German criminal justice system.
Germany’s membership in the European Union (EU) also
poses challenges for Germany’s criminal justice efforts. In 1992,
the Maastricht Treaty forged a formalized unified Europe. As a
part of the treaty, coordination among member nations was
required in areas of border controls, immigration, and criminal
justice. Despite being a federalist society with considerable state-
level authority, Germany as a nation became bound by certain
rules and conventions as a part of a united Europe, including
practices governing the fair and equitable dispensing of justice
(Schulte 2001).
The free-flowing travel of people and goods into Germany
as a result of its membership in the EU has given birth to new
forms of criminal activity. Organized crime involving many dif-
ferent ethnic groups has skyrocketed. Extortion rackets have
emerged. Instances of trafficking in stolen goods, drugs, and
even human beings have become common types of criminal
cases for law enforcement. Prostitution, money laundering, and
illegal immigration are all up (Schulte 2001).
In Germany, more than eight million people—or approxi-
mately 10 percent of the population—are foreign born. Many of
these immigrants come from developing, non-Western areas of
the world. This is a change from only 1 percent foreign born in
the 1950s (Albrecht 1997). For example, two million ethnic Turks
live in Germany today. Among them are a couple hundred thou-
sand ethnic Kurds. Long-standing disputes between Turks and
Profiling around the World
89

Kurds that have nothing to do with Germany have been
imported into the country, along with the violence that has his-
torically characterized those disputes.
In Germany today, there are approximately 7,000 activists of
the Kurdish Workers Party, a Marxist terror organization that tar-
gets Turks anywhere in the world. German criminal justice offi-
cials have been thrust into this conflict by virtue of Germany’s
changing demographics. When responding to these new threats,
German authorities have not always been well received by the
ethnic minorities they try to police.
As Albrecht noted, there have been some trends in the crim-
inal justice system that would suggest Germany has a problem
with how it deals with minorities. Statistics relating to the Ger-
man prison population showed that ethnic Germans were being
imprisoned at lesser rates than they had been in the past. Ethnic
minorities—and particularly foreign-born nationals—were being
put in prison at far greater rates, however, than in the past. In
fact, foreigners in the 1990s accounted for more than three times
the number of arrests in Germany that one would expect given
their representation in the population (Albrecht 1997).
As in the United States, the 1980s and 1990s saw an increase
in the use of incarceration for violent offenders. This seemed to
correspond to an increase in violent crime. Again, changing
demographics and absorption of increasing numbers of poorer
people tend to be associated with increases in crime rates gener-
ally in any country. Germany was no exception.
This has resulted in a belief—sometimes but not always
spoken—among many Germans and certainly among German
criminal justice officials that the growing crime problem is due to
“outsiders” (Albrecht and Teske 2000).
Many criminologists and policymakers in Germany do
attribute certain kinds of crime directly to the nation’s growing
foreign-born population. Those offenses are not the serious and
violent ones that Germans tend to be most anxious about, how-
ever. Rather, studies have shown that the influx of migrant work-
ers, asylum seekers, and other immigrants is most associated with
petty offenses, such as shoplifting. Between 1989 and 1990, for
example, reports of shoplifting in Berlin went from 36,000 cases to
60,000 cases; conventional wisdom in Germany attributed this to
the opening of borders (Albrecht and Teske 2000). In any case, it
gives ammunition to those in the criminal justice system who pre-
fer to “keep an eye” on foreigners because of the odds.
90
Global Perspectives on Profiling

France
Like Germany, France is a charter member of the European
Union. Also like Germany, France has faced dramatic increases in
immigration in the past several years from economically
depressed areas in Eastern Europe and the Middle East. In fact,
France played a major role, along with England and Russia, in
colonizing and influencing the Middle East—particularly after
World War I. North African countries such as Algiers and
Morocco were dominated by the French for decades; the histori-
cal connection between North African Arabs and France has
made the country a particularly hospitable place to migrate to—
at least procedurally.
Despite the common roles as leaders in the EU and despite
many of the same demographic phenomena taking place, France
and Germany are decidedly different in many key areas when it
comes to criminal justice. Chief among the differences is the cen-
trality of police services in France, compared to the more decen-
tralized federal system in Germany.
In fact, France offers perhaps the best example of centralized
policing in Western Europe. As such, many critics have noted
that the interests of the state, that is, France, too often trump the
interests of the individual (Loveday 1999). Some have gone so far
as to say that France’s system of policing produces as close to a
totalitarian form of government as any Western country can
(Loveday 1999).
Although there is no federalist system of checks and bal-
ances on law enforcement in France, there are checks and bal-
ances nonetheless through the existence of two somewhat com-
peting and generally noncooperating national police forces. The
first is aptly known as the National Police and is housed in the
Interior Ministry. It is more often associated with traditional
policing activities such as uniformed patrol and emergency
response—particularly in urban areas.
The more prestigious Gendarmerie is also a national law
enforcement agency with both uniformed and plainclothes offi-
cers. Its function is to perform police duties in rural France and
in communities of 10,000 or less. Given the relatively low num-
ber of urban areas in France, 95 percent of French territory and
approximately 50 percent of the French population fall under the
Gendarmerie’s responsibility (Reichel 2002). In addition to gen-
eral law enforcement duties, the Gendarmerie is also responsible
Profiling around the World
91

for dignitary protection—a duty it wrestled away from the
National Police in 1987. This transfer of responsibility is one of
many high-profile developments that have typified these two
agencies, both of which seem to take great pride in upstaging the
other and even, when possible, arresting scandalized officers
from the other (Loveday 1999).
It is also worth mentioning that relatively recent French leg-
islation has made it possible for local municipalities to create
their own police forces. The authority of the national forces is not
diminished, but nevertheless many small governments have
sought to have a greater connection to the law enforcement and
crime prevention activities in their communities. This has been
accomplished in many cases through the creation of municipal
police departments. And, in the end, such autonomous munici-
pal departments are ultimately linked in their training, appear-
ance, and practices to the National Police force. Citizens have a
hard time distinguishing the two. Consequently, most communi-
ties have not bothered to burden themselves with their own
locally controlled department (Reichel 2002).
Although other countries explore the ages-old Robert Peel
model of bringing the police closer to the public and in partner-
ship with the public as community policing doctrine advocates,
the French model of policing does not lend itself to such reforms
and innovations (Brogden 1999). By definition, the role of the
French police forces emphasizes public order above all else,
including personal freedom. Therefore, the police in France tend
to have a fairly free hand to pursue justice and order as they see
fit, sometime even at the expense of whole groups of people.
Charting the experiences of minorities in France with the
police and the larger criminal justice system is difficult, despite the
centrality of the system. This is because France does not recognize
the existence of minority groups per se. The nation keeps no offi-
cial tabulations on minorities who are citizens of France. Rather,
the government simply notes who is a citizen and who is not. Offi-
cially, France does not recognize that French citizens who are first-
or second- or even fifth-generation immigrants or descendants of
immigrants may not be fully assimilated into French society and
therefore may be treated differently (Jackson 1997).
Studies have shown that the largest groups of foreign work-
ers living in France who are not actual citizens come from the
countries of Algeria, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, Tunisia, Turkey,
and Italy. A survey of urban mayors in France showed that chil-
92
Global Perspectives on Profiling

dren from these groups—particularly from the North African
countries—have trouble succeeding in school, frequently have
run-ins with the law, and generally exhibit a great deal of hostility
toward their adopted host nation and its people (Jackson 1997).
Immigrants from North African countries such as Algeria,
Morocco, and Tunisia make up the largest share of noncitizen,
migrant groups in France. Their estimated share of the total
French population is 3 to 5 percent. In some municipalities, how-
ever, they make up as much as 47 percent of the total population.
They are overwhelmingly Muslim (in an overwhelmingly
Catholic country). They frequently have dark complexions and
therefore are visibly recognizable. They are often employed as
low-skilled migrant workers, if employed at all. They tend to be
poor. All these factors create ripe conditions for discrimination
and, for better or worse depending on one’s perspective, profil-
ing by criminal justice officials concerned first and foremost with
public order.
In France, the national crime rate in 1990 was about 62
crimes per 1,000 people. In regions of France with large repre-
sentations of immigrant groups (such as along the Mediter-
ranean Sea), the crime rate was 124 per 1,000 people (Jackson
1997). Similar trends are observed in sections of urban areas
dominated by immigrants. It appears that higher crime rates do
correlate with France’s immigrant population.
An examination of the French criminal justice system’s
response to immigrants living in France suggests that consider-
able discrimination takes place. For example, one study showed
that if individuals eventually imprisoned for their offenses were
French nationals, they were held in pretrial detention at a rate of
75 percent. Immigrants meeting the same criteria were held in
pretrial detention at a rate of 90 percent. Most of these detentions
were actually effected by the decision of magistrates as opposed
to law enforcement officers (Robert 1995).
The use of detention without the determination of guilt for
immigrants is seen as a necessary evil despite concerns about
individual rights because such practices are seen by French soci-
ety as indispensable for maintaining public order. Also suspi-
cious to critics of the French justice system is the fact that so
many foreigners, once convicted, are sentenced to prison at
greater rates than others. Even as far back as 1990, foreigners con-
stituted 30 percent of the total prison population. The percentage
is higher today (Jackson 1997).
Profiling around the World
93

With regard to law enforcement, there is little doubt that the
social and economic marginalization of foreigners—particularly
Arab Muslims—has fostered hostility between Arab groups and
the police. Police stand expectant of rioting and lawlessness.
Arab immigrants find solace and reinforcement in themselves as
a group set opposed to law enforcement. According to French
social scientist Michel Wievorka (1992), the French police admit-
tedly develop some racist language and behaviors toward spe-
cific groups while adhering to the general principle of equal
application of the law for all. The “us versus them” mentality has
come to drive the actions of police and migrants alike. When that
happens, abuses in profiling are generated.
China
China is a country of 1.3 billion people. The nation’s landmass
covers 3.7 million square miles, encompassing all types of ter-
rain. Much of China is rural and underdeveloped. Only about 20
percent of China’s population lives in urban areas.
There are fifty-six ethnic groups in China, but one group
stands out as the overwhelming majority: the Han Chinese. They
constitute about 94 percent of China’s population. Most of the
remaining 6 percent live outside of the developed urban areas,
instead living in the rural west and northwest regions (Gaylord
2000).
As most people know, China is a communist country with a
powerful central government. There is no tradition of individual
liberties in China. The state, representing the people collectively,
is supreme. Certainly, a significant duty of the criminal justice
system in China, as in any totalitarian regime, is to quell dissent.
Groups and individuals who are thought to be subversive,
including ethnic and religious minorities seeking greater free-
doms for themselves, become frequent targets of government
intervention.
This is not to say that general, nonpolitical crime gets a pass
in China. In fact, owing to the increasing liberalization of the
economy (as opposed to politics), financial corruption has
become routine at all levels of bureaucracy and business. As
legitimate economic opportunities increase in China, so do ille-
gitimate ones; it is considered axiomatic that crime grows with
the economy (Gaylord 2000). The public is keenly aware of the
corruption and expects the government to deal with it.
94
Global Perspectives on Profiling

General crime in China has been on the rise since the mid-
1980s. For example, in just four years, from 1984 to 1988, crime
rates went from 40 per 100,000 people to 77 per 100,000 (Bakken
1993). The increase in crime has been attributed to a variety of
factors, chief among them the growing population of young peo-
ple. In the 1950s and 1960s, crime committed by offenders aged
fourteen to twenty-five consistently accounted for 20 to 35 per-
cent of total crime. In the 1980s and 1990s, 60 to 75 percent of total
crime was committed by offenders in that age group (Gaylord
2000). Despite the rising crime figures in China, perspective is
still in order. The fact is that studies show Western nations have
crime rates as much as 140 times that of China.
Today in China, the criminal justice system’s greatest prior-
ity is organized crime and low- to mid-level corruption. Al-
though corruption is also widely known to exist at high levels of
government and in the Communist Party, for obvious reasons lit-
tle enforcement has been directed there. Most justice officials
want to continue to be justice officials.
For rudimentary criminal matters, China’s criminal justice
system is actually rather informal. According to Reichel (2002),
China frequently relies on the informal mechanism of People’s
Mediation Committees (PMCs) to deal with disputes. There are
about one million PMCs throughout China, organized at the
workplace, in neighborhoods, and at schools. Each PMC is com-
posed of ten to twenty citizens. The PMCs adjudicate wide vari-
eties of alleged offenses through questions and discussion. Offi-
cially, PMCs operate under the authority of local government,
but their policies and standards are set at the national level. For
more serious offenses in China, the justice system uses four lev-
els of “People’s” courts. Given that the system is more inquisito-
rial, as one would expect in a totalitarian government, trials tend
to be simply continuations of the investigation (Reichel 2002).
The police in China are known as the People’s Public Secu-
rity Forces. There are approximately 1.4 million civil police per-
sonnel in China. They are augmented by 600,000 members of the
Armed Police Forces, who are organized under military com-
mand but have a civil police function (Shaowen 2001).
The stated mission of the police forces in China is to prevent,
frustrate, and investigate criminal activity; maintain social secu-
rity and order; curb behavior thought damaging to social security;
control traffic; control the borders; protect dignitaries and impor-
tant facilities; manage demonstrations; manage computer secu-
Profiling around the World
95

rity; and monitor and control social organizations (Shaowen
2001). Clearly, the police in China have not prioritized the need
for solid community relations and partnerships along the lines of
the Peel model. Social control is paramount, not individual rights.
With the introduction of economic and trade reforms in the
last couple of decades, China has seen an increase in offenses
such as drug trafficking, alien smuggling, fraud, organized
crime, and technology crime. Given the system in place, the
police have had a free hand to tackle these problems as they see
fit—which often includes targeting ethnic and philosophical
minorities, as well as foreigners, all of whom are perceived as
commonly implicated in these types of crimes.
Outrage at criminal justice profiling in China is a nonstarter
within the country. Most Chinese lament the safety, security, and
order that existed prior to the implementation of economic
reforms. Cracking down on minorities who are believed to be
responsible for disorder is not an unpopular activity of govern-
ment. Dismay over China’s lack of civil rights and selective pros-
ecution of minorities—especially religious and political ones—is
generally held on to primarily by China’s critics in the West.
The economic ties that the United States and other Western
countries have forged with China make it difficult, however, for
those nations to impose any consequences. In December of 2001,
the United States granted China permanent Most Favored
Nation (MFN) trading status in spite of a widely acknowledged
downturn of civil liberties in that country. The most serious con-
sequence China seems to face for its practices is typically a harsh
speech or two by American legislators on the Senate and House
floors.
Japan
Japan is a nation of 124 million people. It is a nation of several
islands, but its population is primarily located on four of them.
For a democratic and free country, it has one of the lowest crime
rates in the industrialized world (Leishman 1999).
Japanese law enforcement is both centralized and decentral-
ized. It is centralized in the sense that there exists a National
Police Agency (NPA), the duties of which are to oversee law
enforcement functions throughout the country. It is decentral-
ized, however, in the sense that most actual law enforcement
activities take place among the nation’s seven regional police
96
Global Perspectives on Profiling

bureaus and the metropolitan police departments such as in the
capital city of Tokyo.
Police officers and other criminal justice officials in Japan are
held in high regard by the public. The police are considered to be
the experts in law enforcement, and so the public defers to them
greatly without a lot of second-guessing. In return for this defer-
ence, the police in Japan likewise hold the public in high esteem.
The notion of “service to the public” is embedded in Japan’s
police culture.
Interestingly, Japan’s police agencies have long maintained a
collaborative atmosphere among the police personnel and with
the public. Empowering individual officers to work with one
another and with management to solve problems is a tenet of
American community policing, which arrived in the United
States about ten to fifteen years ago. Japan, on the other hand, has
been doing this for decades. One criticism, however, of this style
of policing in Japan is that the deliberative nature of addressing
problems fosters a slowness to act in responding to major crimes
and incidents (Leishman 1999).
Japanese policing is extremely community oriented. Police
officers in urban and rural areas alike are expected to blend into
the community and simply be of service. Officers frequently find
themselves being consulted on family and personal matters, as
well as taking the customary complaints and responding to acci-
dents (Leishman 1999).
Like most countries in the developed world, Japan’s crime
rates have been inching up. They are still considered low by
Western standards, however, with a victimization rate 10 percent
lower than that in Europe (Mayhew 1994).
To the extent that Japan’s crime rates have gone up and are
gaining public attention there, the crimes of particular concern
are those committed by organized crime syndicates and gangs,
foreigners, and terrorists. As these criminal elements are fre-
quently the target of investigators as opposed to uniformed
patrol officers, it is worth delineating the privileges that detec-
tives have in Japan.
Although policing in general is very community centered,
observers of the criminal justice system there note that detectives
conduct their work in a very enabling legal and cultural environ-
ment (Leishman 1999). Where criminal investigations are con-
cerned, the importance of individual liberty and civil rights is
subordinated to the public need for safety and social order.
Profiling around the World
97

In Japan today, the most serious transnational crime problems
are weapons and drug smuggling. These offenses are commonly
associated with illegal immigration and foreigners—particularly
Koreans, Filipinos, and Chinese. This leads to the temptation to
treat legal and illegal visitors differently from the citizenry. Inter-
estingly, to do so would be a violation of Japan’s Police Code of
Ethics. Among the provisions of that code, officers promise to
respect human rights and perform their duties with courtesy and
impartiality (Ueno 1994). In fairness, though, Japanese law
enforcement has been fairly successful in its pursuit of profes-
sional, impartial policing. But the temptation for differential treat-
ment is clearly there and requires official concerted effort to resist.
Law enforcers in Japan, as in the United States, are given
considerable discretion. They are not expected to enforce the law
mechanically. In the United States, critics have noted that discre-
tion is frequently associated with partiality. Consequently, many
justice pontificators in America argue for diminishing police dis-
cretion.
In Japan, however, most observers agree that police use their
discretion to the benefit of the public. Police are taught that some
people, including offenders, are weak and should be subjected to
empathy and understanding. Heavy-handedness is frowned
upon by the public and therefore frowned upon by police lead-
ership. Law enforcement in Japan is truly conscious of its public
image. Law enforcement in Japan doesn’t work to counter or
deflect criticisms from the public, including its sizable minority
communities. Instead, it works very hard to have no critics.
India
With over one billion people, India has historically been consid-
ered the second most populated country on earth. Current esti-
mates are that now India has overtaken China as the most popu-
lated country. The nation is extremely diverse. Its citizens speak
eighteen languages with hundreds of dialects. Hindu is the pre-
dominant religion, but all major faiths are represented among the
populace.
India is credited with being the world’s largest democracy. A
former British colony, it won its independence in 1947 and
became a republic in 1950. Although independent, India’s crimi-
nal justice system—and particularly its constabulary—is still
reflective of British influence.
98
Global Perspectives on Profiling

India is made up of twenty-five states and seven territories.
Much of the nation’s criminal justice activities are engaged at the
state level. Even so, India’s national government also provides
police services dedicated to border security, industrial security,
and significant criminal investigations. About three-quarters of
India’s two million law enforcement officers work for state police
forces. Approximately 600,000 work for the federal government.
India is a nation that has been particularly plagued by ter-
rorist gangs seeking to make political and religious strides
through violence. For example, in the state of Punjab, Sikhs, who
are a religious minority in India, have been fighting for an inde-
pendent state since India’s inception. Through the backing of
Sikhs in wealthy western countries such as the United Kingdom,
the United States, and Canada, violent Sikh organizations have
been able to sustain ongoing attacks against government inter-
ests. Likewise, Islamic extremists have sought to undermine and
overthrow Indian rule in Kashmir and Jammu. Attacks against
Indian governmental infrastructure as well as against civilians
have made terrorism a pressing concern for Indian criminal jus-
tice and public safety officials.
The illicit drug trade is also of considerable concern to
India’s law enforcement. With over three-quarters of India’s pop-
ulation living in rural areas, and given the size of India (3.2 mil-
lion square kilometers), the ability of drug traffickers to grow
opium, heroin, ganja, and cannabis is largely unchallenged.
Law enforcement in India, as in some parts of the United
States and unlike most parts of Japan, is maligned by the public
for being corrupt, heavy-handed, unfair, and inefficient. Public
opinion surveys in India show that the public frequently lacks
confidence in its police forces to discharge their duties properly.
This has resulted in a decided lack of cooperation with the police
by the public and a siege mentality among officers. In fact, police
are deemed so unreliable and untrustworthy that admissions of
guilt made by offenders to police officers have generally not been
admissible as evidence (Diaz 1994).
India has a long cultural tradition of subordinating the
rights of individuals in favor of the social order of things. Much
of this has to do with the Hindu-rooted caste system. Historically,
Indian society has existed within five castes. The caste one
belongs to determines one’s station in life. The highest caste con-
sists of priests; the lowest caste is made up of various “untouch-
ables.” Most Indians are somewhere in between. Castes are not
Profiling around the World
99

classes, because in a class-oriented society, one can move up or
down. With a caste system, people are born to their caste and
remain there all their lives.
In the last few decades, India has shifted away from the caste
system to a class form of social order (Vincentnathan 2000). A
diminished view of the value of those trapped in the lower eche-
lons of society remains pervasive, however, in Indian culture.
India does pride itself as a nation ruled by law. It has a
strong constitution and a court system that was set up to embody
justice and fairness—particularly for those accused of crimes.
Despite its large population and its democratically enshrined
freedoms, India has a relatively low crime rate, thereby relegating
the criminal justice system to step in as a last resort where family,
religion, and other informal social controls fail to stem criminal
activity. In the mid-1990s, India had a property crime rate of 47
per 100,000. This compares quite favorably to the rate per 100,000
in the United States (4,814), Germany (4,824), Canada (4,883),
France (4,137), and Japan (1,019).
Given the relatively low crime rate in India overall, coupled
with a lack of partnership with the public, India’s criminal justice
system is very susceptible to focusing on those more serious mat-
ters such as civil unrest and terrorism in the regions of the coun-
try heavily populated by minorities. Civil rights watch groups
warn that Muslims in the Kashmir and elsewhere along the bor-
der of hated Pakistan, Sikhs in the Punjab, and Christians in the
rural interior may all be subject to hostile treatment by justice
officials who would preempt potential problems through aggres-
sive enforcement against them or a lack of enforcement against
those in the majority who would transgress against the minority.
Summing Up
For those living in the United States, it is probably easier to for-
get the rest of the world than it is for people living anywhere else.
In America, everything needed is at hand. Additionally, there is
no long tradition of global awareness and certainly no wide-
spread tradition of global travel or language and cultural profi-
ciency. Consequently, it is tempting to fail to realize that many of
the issues that confront and confound criminal justice officials
and civil rights advocates in the United States are alive and well
all over the earth.
100
Global Perspectives on Profiling

The United Nations has recognized the potential dangers of
biased treatment, mistreatment, and maltreatment directed
toward minority groups by the world’s criminal justice systems
wherever they may be. The fact that the United Nations annually
studies criminal justice efforts on a worldwide scale demon-
strates the interest in notions of equality and justice held by most
of the international community.
In 1990, the United Nations expressed the weight it gives to
these notions by declaring, among other things, that mistreat-
ment by the police of the policed, including minorities, should be
a criminal offense—particularly when force is used. For many
countries, such an idea is absurd. For most countries, it’s a reality.
And for the United States, there is solace in knowing that it
is not alone in tackling such heated criminal justice issues and is
not necessarily behind in the effort; and there is disillusionment
in knowing that inequitable treatment of people is so ingrained
in human nature that there are precious few places on the planet
one can go to avoid it.
References
Albrecht, H. J. 1997. “Minorities, Crime, and Criminal Justice in the Fed-
eral Republic of Germany.” In Minorities, Migrants, and Crime, ed. Ineke
Haen Marshall. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 86–105.
Albrecht, H. J., and R. Teske. 2000. “Germany.” In Crime and Crime Con-
trol: A Global View, ed. G. Barak. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 29–48.
Bakken, B. 1993. “Crime, Juvenile Delinquency and Deterrence Policy in
China.” Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs 30:29–58.
Broadhurst, R. 1996. “Aboriginal Imprisonment in Australia.” Over-
crowded Times 7(3): 5–8.
Brogden, M. 1999. “Community Policing as Cherry Pie.” In Policing
across the World, ed. R. I. Mawby. New York: Garland Publishing,
167–186.
Camp, C. G., and G. M. Camp. 1997. The Corrections Yearbook. South
Salem, NY: Criminal Justice Institute.
Diaz, S. M. 1994. “Police in India.” In Police Practices: An International
Review, ed. D. Das. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 181–229.
Gaylord, M. 2000. “China.” In Crime and Crime Control: A Global View, ed.
G. Barak. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 13–28.
Hughes, R. 1987. The Fatal Shore. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
References
101

Jackson, P. I. 1997. “Minorities, Crime, and Criminal Justice in France.”
In Minorities, Migrants, and Crime, ed. Ineke Haen Marshall. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, 130–147.
James, S. 1994. “Police in Australia.” In Police Practices: An International
Review, ed. D. Das. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 1–122.
Leishman, F. 1999. “Policing in Japan: East Asian Archetype?” In Policing
across the World, ed. R. I. Mawby. New York: Garland Publishing, 109–125.
Leong, M. 2001. “Australia.” In International Police Cooperation: A World
Perspective, ed. Daniel Koenig and Dilip Das. Oxford, UK: Lexington
Books, 113–120.
Loveday, B. 1999. “Government and Accountability of the Police.” In
Policing across the World, ed. R. I. Mawby. New York: Garland Publishing,
132–150.
Mawby, R. I., ed. 1999. Policing across the World. New York: Garland Pub-
lishing.
Mayhew, P. 1994. Findings from the International Crime Survey: Home Office
Research and Statistics Paper No. 8. London: Home Office.
Mukherjee, S., and P. Reichel. 1999. “Bringing to Justice.” In Global Report
on Crime and Justice, ed. G. Newman. New York: Oxford University
Press, pp. 65–88.
Newman, G., ed. 1999. Global Report on Crime and Justice. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Reichel, P. 1999. Comparative Criminal Justice Systems: A Topical Approach,
2d ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
———. 2002. Comparative Criminal Justice Systems: A Topical Approach, 3d
ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Robert, P. 1995. “A Lawmaker’s Headache: Pretrial Detention.” Penal
Issues: Research on Crime and Justice in France, Volume 6, March: 3–5.
Schulte, R. 2001. “A German Perspective on Future European Security
Needs.” In International Police Cooperation: A World Perspective, ed. D.
Koenig and D. Das. Oxford, UK: Lexington Books, 141–157.
Shaowen, Y. 2001. “International Police Cooperation in China.” In Inter-
national Police Cooperation: A World Perspective, ed. D. Koenig and D. Das.
Oxford, UK: Lexington Books, 129–140.
Ueno, H. 1994. “Police in Japan.” In Police Practices: An International
Review, ed. D. Das. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 231–283.
Vincentnathan, S. G. 2000. “India.” In Crime and Crime Control: A Global
View, ed. G. Barak. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 65–82.
Wievorka, M. 1992. La France Raciste. Paris: Seuil.
102
Global Perspectives on Profiling

4
Chronology
T
he purpose of this chapter is to provide a time line of signifi-
cant events that relate directly or indirectly (but significantly)
to the issue of criminal profiling. Many elements of the time
line also appear elsewhere in this book. Even so, events are pre-
sented here with brief explanations in order to present an over-
all, albeit abbreviated, picture of the relevant history behind pro-
filing.
1704
South Carolina legislatively establishes the first slave
patrol in the American colonies. The slave patrols serve
in a law enforcement capacity with the primary duties of
searching slave quarters for contraband, dispersing slave
gatherings, and generally safeguarding communities
from marauding slaves by patrolling the roads.
1727
Virginia legislatively establishes a slave patrol similar to
South Carolina’s.
1753
North Carolina legislatively establishes a slave patrol
similar to South Carolina’s.
1764
Cesare Beccaria publishes Essays on Crimes and Justice,
which articulates the themes of what is now known as
classical criminology. The thrust of this criminological
theory is that people commit crimes after making rational
choices; consequently, swift and certain punishment must
result from criminal deeds in order to deter people,
through rationalization, from choosing criminal behavior.
103

1800
Franz Joseph Gall develops “phrenology,” as published
in his work Anatomy and Physiology of the Nervous System,
and of the Brain in Particular. Phrenologists believe that
mental functions, including deviant thoughts and behav-
ior, come from localized parts of the brain. Consequently,
phrenologists of the day believe an examination of one’s
skull can predict inferiority among races of people and
propensities to commit crime.
1829
Phrenology becomes a widespread theory in the United
States to help explain deviance; the acceptance of the the-
ory is due to the work of Gaspar Spurzheim, a former
student of Franz Joseph Gall’s.
The Metropolitan Police Act passes in the British Parlia-
ment, creating the Metropolitan Police of London. The
force, known as the “Met,” is headed by Sir Robert Peel
and is the first modern civil police organization. It is
mandated to emphasize crime prevention, community
relations, maintaining order without violence to the
extent possible—many of the themes of modern-day
community policing.
1850s– Political era of policing. Law enforcement in the United
States during this time is largely a tool of the political
machines in power in any given city. Police officers are
hired and promoted based on who they know politically
and what they have done for the political bosses,
whether it be financial donations, getting out the vote
efforts, or similar activities. Much of the effort of law
enforcement during this period is devoted to service-
related duties, such as soup kitchens, driving ambu-
lances, and so on, as these activities are politically pop-
ular.
1857
Dred Scott v. Sandford. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that
blacks whose ancestors were brought to America as
slaves were not included in the Constitution when it
mentioned the “people of the United States” or “citi-
zens.” Because they were a “subordinate and inferior
class of beings, who had been subjugated by the domi-
104
Chronology
1910s

nant race . . . they had no rights or privileges” under the
Constitution, even in slave-free territories and states.
1866
Ku Klux Klan (KKK) is formed as a fraternal organiza-
tion in Pulaski, Tennessee. Its members are former offi-
cers of the Confederate Army. In short order, the group
gains popularity and membership grows. The scope of
its purpose also grows beyond the bounds of fraternity.
The KKK becomes a group of marauders who intimidate,
assault, terrorize, and murder newly freed blacks.
1868
The Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the
United States is ratified, thus giving all people born or
naturalized in the United States the rights of citizenship.
States are prohibited from depriving any person of life,
liberty, or property without due process of law.
1871
The Ku Klux Act passes in the U.S. Congress and is
signed into law. The law calls for civil and criminal sanc-
tions against any persons who would infringe upon
another’s civil rights and gives the government the
authority to use force to intervene against those who
would deny others their civil rights.
1875
The Civil Rights Act of 1875 passes in the U.S. Congress
and is signed into law. This law makes it a criminal and
civil offense to deny other people, regardless of race or
previous condition of servitude, full and equal enjoyment
of public accommodations, advantages, facilities, the-
aters, public conveyances on land and water, and other
places of amusement. The law also prohibits discrimina-
tion in jury selection for state and federal courts on the
basis of race and color. The law is to be enforced by U.S.
marshals and violations prosecuted in federal courts.
1876
Cesare Lombroso publishes Criminal Man and presents
the theory of atavism. This theory argues that criminals
are born to be criminals because of primitive and savage
biological traits. This Darwinian theory was widely
accepted in the United States in the late nineteenth cen-
tury and the first half of the twentieth century and was
Chronology
105

used by some in criminal justice to justify oppressing cer-
tain peoples, such as African Americans, to prevent their
inevitable criminal deeds.
1879
Strauder v. West Virginia. The U.S. Supreme Court rules
that a criminal defendant who is a racial minority is
denied his equal protection rights under the law when
members of his race are purposefully excluded from the
jury. The West Virginia law that says only white males
can serve as jurors is declared unconstitutional because
of the racial litmus test of being white. Not addressed is
the issue of whether limiting jurors to males is permissi-
ble. The court’s silence on the issue allows that practice
to continue.
1886
Yick Wo v. Hopkins. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that
prosecutors may not consider the race of a criminal sus-
pect when deciding whether to charge someone. Prose-
cutors maintain discretion in charging decisions and are
permitted even some degree of caprice in their decisions,
as long as race in no way enters into the decision-making
process.
1860s– Laws emerge throughout the South in the United States
to keep blacks and whites separated. State legislatures
throughout the former Confederacy pass laws requiring
dining facilities, recreational facilities, public transporta-
tion seating, bathrooms, drinking fountains, and a host
of other accommodations to be separated for use accord-
ing to race. Blacks are not permitted to use “whites only”
accommodations, nor are whites permitted to use “col-
ored” accommodations, although there is rarely a desire
for the latter, since accommodations for blacks are
always substandard. These laws requiring separate
accommodations are known as “Jim Crow” laws.
1896
Plessy v. Ferguson. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that Jim
Crow laws are constitutionally permissible as long as the
separate accommodations for blacks are equal to those
for whites. Further, the Court rules that the Fourteenth
Amendment’s Equal Protection Clause does not require
106
Chronology
1876,
cont.
1950s

social equality among the races; it only requires political
equality.
1905
August Vollmer becomes town marshal, and then police
chief, for the city of Berkeley, California. He is widely
regarded as the father of professional policing in the
United States. Vollmer is among the first law enforce-
ment administrators to require formal academic police
training for rank and file officers. He is also known for
putting his officers in patrol cars, and later, putting
radios in those patrol cars, to enhance police presence
and response times.
1910s– Progressive era of policing. Law enforcement in the
United States during this period largely moves away
from overt political influence in favor of reforms that are
taking place in government generally. In particular,
police organizations begin to move autonomous author-
ity into the position of police chief, personnel are selected
and promoted on the basis of merit, professional training
is required of officers, and the emphasis for police
becomes law enforcement rather than service.
1920
The Nineteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution is
ratified, granting women the constitutional right to vote
in federal, state, and local elections.
1940
Cantwell v. Connecticut. The U.S. Supreme Court rules
that the criminal prosecution and conviction of three
Jehovah’s Witnesses for sharing the faith without a solic-
itation license and for breaching the peace is unconstitu-
tional. The court rules that criminal laws, when applied
to constrain legitimate religious practice, violate the First
Amendment’s No Establishment Clause.
1942
In the wake of war declared against Japan by the United
States, President Franklin Roosevelt issues an executive
order authorizing the creation of military zones that per-
sons of Japanese descent may not enter. These military
zones cumulatively include the entire West Coast of the
United States to a depth inland of about forty miles. Dur-
Chronology
107
1960s

ing the war, approximately 112,000 persons of Japanese
descent are involuntarily relocated from the West Coast
to war relocation camps run by the U.S. military.
1944
Korematsu v. United States. The U.S. Supreme Court rules
that the prosecution of a U.S. citizen of Japanese descent
for entering a prohibited military zone—in this case,
Korematsu’s home—was constitutional. Korematsu’s
rights under the Fourteenth Amendment were not vio-
lated by his prosecution. The court also rules, however,
that once Japanese Americans’ loyalty to the United
States can be ascertained, they may no longer be held
involuntarily in the military relocation camps.
1947
A report is published by President Harry Truman’s Com-
mittee on Civil Rights. The report declares that every cit-
izen, regardless of race, is entitled to four basic rights: to
be safe and secure in their person, to freely exercise the
privileges of citizenship and civic duty, to be free in con-
science and expression, and to have equal opportunity.
The committee goes on record to acknowledge that the
first right—to be safe and secure in one’s person—is
severely threatened, particularly for minorities, by the
practices of arbitrary arrest and police brutality.
1954
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka. The U.S. Supreme
Court rules that “separate but equal” is inherently
unequal and therefore unconstitutional. This ruling
reverses the precedent set in Plessy v. Ferguson, which
upheld racial segregation law in the South. In this case,
the Court determines that even when facilities, opportu-
nities, curriculum, and other amenities are in fact equal
in quality, which is rare, there is still inequality because
of the social harm minorities succumb to that is caused
by segregation.
1957
Civil Rights Act of 1957. This, the first civil rights act to
be passed by Congress since 1875, creates the U.S. Com-
mission on Civil Rights. The purpose of the commission
is to investigate voting rights violations and denial of
equal protection under the law. The act also clarifies the
qualifications to be a federal juror, reinforcing the fact
108
Chronology
1942,
cont.

that race, ethnicity, and religion should have no part in
disqualifying one for jury duty. Finally, certain criminal
penalties are prescribed for violating the act.
1961
Hoyt v. Florida. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that a
Florida law that systematically excludes women from
becoming jurors does not invalidate the murder convic-
tion by an all-male jury of a female accused of killing her
husband. The Court is asked by Hoyt to apply the stan-
dard of “strict scrutiny” to Florida’s law—customary
when a “suspected class” is involved—but it refuses.
Instead, the Court applies only the “ordinary equal pro-
tection scrutiny” standard. Hoyt’s conviction is upheld.
Mapp v. Ohio. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that evi-
dence obtained by police without a search warrant,
when such a warrant is required, must be excluded from
use at trial. Thus, the exclusionary rule now applies to all
levels of law enforcement, not just to federal law enforce-
ment as it had since the 1920s. Exemplifying the dra-
matic impact of this case on police practice, in the year
prior to Mapp, New York City police officers do not
bother to obtain even one search warrant. In the year fol-
lowing Mapp, the same department obtains over 800
warrants.
1963
Martin Luther King Jr. delivers his famous “I have a
dream” speech from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington, D.C., to over 200,000 people in attendance.
In his speech, he references the police brutality suffered
by blacks in the South as well as in the urban North.
1964
The Twenty-Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution
is ratified. This amendment outlaws any poll tax or other
tax imposed on prospective voters for the right to vote.
Leading up to this amendment, poll taxes had been an
effective means in southern states for excluding blacks,
who were generally poorer than whites, from voting.
Freedom summer. Civil rights activists from college
campuses in the North, along with black activists living
in the South, seek to educate eligible black Mississippi
Chronology
109

voters on how to vote and get them registered to vote. A
massive voter registration campaign is waged. Early in
the campaign, three civil rights workers—Michael Schw-
erner, Andrew Goodman, and James Chaney—are
arrested by local law enforcement in Neshoba County,
Mississippi. They are released after posting bond and
disappear. The Federal Bureau of Investigation later
finds their fire-scorched vehicle and their murdered
bodies in a rural swamp. The murders are the work of
the local Ku Klux Klan. The sheriff and a deputy are
among those charged with violating the civil rights of
Schwerner, Goodman, and Chaney. The sheriff is even-
tually acquitted; the deputy and other local Klan mem-
bers are convicted.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 passes in the U.S. Congress
and is signed into law by President Lyndon Johnson. The
purpose of the act is to eliminate racial segregation and
other forms of discrimination. The act addresses dis-
crimination in voting, employment, education, and seg-
regation in public facilities. The act authorizes the U.S.
attorney general to take legal action on behalf of individ-
uals who are discriminated against. The act also pro-
hibits federal funds from going to any organization that
discriminates. Finally, the act creates the Equal Employ-
ment Opportunity Commission to ensure that the right
to fair employment is not infringed upon because of
one’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin. Hiring
and firing decisions based on these criteria are outlawed.
Exceptions exist for religious and Indian organizations.
1965
Griswold v. Connecticut. The U.S. Supreme Court rules
that a right to privacy exists in the U.S. Constitution
despite not being expressly mentioned therein. The
Court reasons that a right to privacy can be found in the
“penumbra” of the Fourteenth Amendment’s rights of
due process and equal protection. In this case particu-
larly, the court finds that a state law making it a crime to
prescribe or use contraceptives is unconstitutional. The
Court says married couples have a right to privacy with
respect to their sexual and reproductive choices.
110
Chronology
1964,
cont.

1968
Terry v. Ohio. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that it is per-
missible for police officers to temporarily stop and detain
persons, without a warrant, when an officer has reason-
able suspicion that a particular person is engaged in, or
about to be engaged in, committing a crime. This inves-
tigatory detention must be brief unless probable cause is
developed through the encounter so that an arrest can be
made. The Court also rules that a pat down of the sus-
pect for weapons is permissible without warrant if rea-
sonable suspicion exists that the suspect is armed.
The Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968
is passed in the U.S. Congress and signed into law. This
legislation, among many other things, authorizes the
U.S. attorney general to pursue civil litigation against
those persons or organizations, including state and local
governments, who discriminate against others on the
basis of race, color, national origin, gender, or religion.
The act also establishes the Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, which over time provides more than $7
billion to police agencies and institutions of higher edu-
cation to research and develop better, more professional
police practices.
Late 
U.S. airlines and law enforcement team up to develop a
profile of potential air hijackers, or “skyjackers.” The
need for developing such a profile is great during this
time as a rash of hijackings take place. In 1968, 18 U.S.
airliners are hijacked. In 1969, more than 30 U.S. airliners
are hijacked. The federal government also creates its Air
Marshal program to put armed law enforcement officers
on board selected flights to deal with hijackings should
they arise.
1972
Yoder v. Wisconsin. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that a
state law requiring school attendance for children
through the twelfth grade is unconstitutional in that it
unlawfully requires Amish children to attend. The Court
rejects a lower court decision that requires a practice of a
religious group to be central and inseparable in that
group’s theology before First Amendment protections
Chronology
111
1960s

would kick in. A lower court has said that for the Amish,
having children not attend school after the eighth grade
is essentially a community lifestyle issue, not an inher-
ently religious one. The Supreme Court, however, simply
says a practice must be “rooted in religious belief,” as is
the Amish’s communal and simple lifestyle, to be pro-
tected by the First Amendment.
Eisenstadt v. Baird. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the
constitutional right to privacy afforded to a married cou-
ple in Griswold v. Connecticut extends to unmarried het-
erosexual couples as well.
1975
Freda Adler publishes Sisters in Crime, which is the major
early work in feminist criminology. This publication sets
out to explain the differences in crime rates between men
and women. Adler explains the differences as largely
being due to the lack of opportunity for women in soci-
ety. Just as women are denied equal access to legitimate
endeavors, likewise the same lack of access throughout
society inhibits their ability or desire to pursue illegiti-
mate endeavors.
Taylor v. Louisiana. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the
jury selection laws in Louisiana, which require women to
register an interest in being considered for jury duty
whereas men are simply drawn from the county rolls, is
unconstitutional as it has the effect of systematically
excluding women. This decision effectively reverses
Hoyt v. Florida.
Late 
The community policing model of law enforcement
emerges to compete with, if not replace, the professional
model of policing. With community policing, an empha-
sis is placed on building relationships between police
officers and members of the community being policed.
Partnership is a key concept, as opposed to the more
standoffish and neutral approach to the public inherent
to the profession model. An additional emphasis is
placed on problem-solving by officers and community
members; abandoned is the strictly reaction orientation
of the professional model.
112
Chronology
1972,
cont.
1970s

1979
Delaware v. Prouse. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the
decision to stop a black motorist without observing a
traffic or equipment violation is unconstitutional under
the Fourth Amendment’s protection against unreason-
able searches and seizures. In this case, the Court
declares once and for all that stopping people for reasons
ranging from an officer’s outright racial bias to an offi-
cer’s legitimately felt hunch is unacceptable absent an
objectively observable violation.
1982
James Q. Wilson and George Kelling, both criminolo-
gists, publish Broken Windows, which theorizes that visi-
ble urban decay fosters criminal activity. Consequently, if
one wants to deter and reduce crime in one’s neighbor-
hood, one needs a neighborhood that appears to care.
Broken windows need to be fixed; abandoned vehicles
need to be towed; garbage needs to be picked up. And
police need to aggressively pursue nuisance offenders,
such as prostitutes, truants, vagrants, panhandlers, and
petty drug dealers.
1985
Crack cocaine explodes on the scene as the illegal drug of
choice in New York City. It is a smokable form of 
cocaine that is cheap and very addictive. In the coming
months and years, crack use and addiction spread
throughout the United States—particularly in the urban
inner cities.
1986
The Anti-Drug Abuse Act is passed by the U.S. Congress
and signed into law by President Ronald Reagan. This
legislation signals the beginning of the War on Drugs.
Drug dealers and drug cartels become federal law
enforcement’s public enemies number 1. The act devotes
nearly $2 billion to fight the drug epidemic. It allocates
nearly $100 million to build new prisons, $200 million for
drug education, and $241 million for drug treatment pro-
grams. The act creates mandatory minimum federal
prison sentences for drug offenses. Crack cocaine, used
more by minorities and the poor, draws stiffer penalties
than powder cocaine, used more commonly by the white
middle and upper class. The federal prison population
grows exponentially in the coming years as a result of
Chronology
113

low-level drug offenders being sentenced to mandatory
federal prison terms.
Bowers v. Hardwick. The U.S. Supreme Court upholds the
conviction of two homosexuals who were charged with
sodomy. The Court refuses to extend the Fourteenth
Amendment’s implied right of privacy from Griswold v.
Connecticut to consenting adults engaged in sodomy.
Batson v. Kentucky. The U.S. Supreme Court overturns the
conviction of a black defendant because the prosecutor
had used his right of peremptory challenges to exclude
blacks from the jury. In this case, the prosecutor fails to
articulate that there is some other reason besides the race
of the prospective jurors that causes him to exclude all
blacks. The Court states that although peremptory chal-
lenges can be based on almost any reason, race cannot be
a factor in peremptory challenges.
1989
Volusia County, Florida, sheriff Bob Vogel establishes the
Selective Enforcement Team to interdict drug trafficking
on Interstate 95, which runs north/south through the
county and connects Miami, Florida, to the Mid-Atlantic
and Northeast. In three years, the team seizes $8 million
in forfeitable cash from drug offenders and untold scores
of drugs heading for market. Vogel and his Selective
Enforcement Team are controversial, as almost immedi-
ately after the team is created, there appears to be racial
bias against blacks and Hispanics in the decision by offi-
cers of whom to stop.
U.S. v. Sokolow. The U.S. Supreme Court rules law
enforcement’s development and use of drug courier pro-
files is permissible in developing reasonable suspicion to
warrant an investigatory detention. The Court states that
profiles consisting of many factors, and not based solely
or primarily on race, are constitutional.
1991
Powers v. Ohio. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that a
racially discriminatory use of peremptory challenges to
exclude blacks from a jury is unconstitutional even when
the accused on trial is white. Racially motivated peremp-
114
Chronology
1986,
cont.

tory challenges are unconstitutional regardless of the
similarity or difference in race between those prospective
jurors excluded and the person on trial. Powers’s murder
conviction is reversed, and he is granted a new trial.
Motorist Rodney King flees from the California Highway
Patrol and the Los Angeles Police Department in a motor
vehicle at speeds of over 110 miles per hour. His vehicle
is cut off by squads and the chase ends. During the
attempt to subdue King, Los Angeles police officers
Lawrence Powell, Theodore Briseno, and Timothy Wind
and Sgt. Stacey Koon are videotaped delivering more
than fifty baton blows before handcuffing King.
1992
The four Los Angeles police officers in the Rodney King
beating are tried in California district court for use of
excessive force and assault against King. Sgt. Stacey
Koon and Officers Timothy Wind and Theodore Briseno
are acquitted on all charges. Officer Lawrence Powell is
acquitted on all but one charge, about which the jury
could not reach a decision. The acquittals lead to a race
riot in South Central Los Angeles. The riots result in the
deaths of 52 people, 7,000 arrests, and more than $1 bil-
lion in damaged property.
1993
Los Angeles police officers Lawrence Powell, Timothy
Wind, and Theodore Briseno and Sgt. Stacey Koon are
tried in federal court for violating Rodney King’s civil
rights. Sgt. Koon and Officer Powell are convicted and
sentenced to thirty months in federal prison. Officers
Wind and Briseno are acquitted.
1994
Rodney King sues the City of Los Angeles and officers
Powell, Wind, and Briseno and Sgt. Koon in civil court
for violating his civil rights. The city of Los Angeles stip-
ulates liability and is ordered to pay King $3.8 million.
The civil jury finds none of the four officers liable and
awards King zero dollars in damages from each officer.
J.E.B. v. Alabama. The U.S. Supreme Court extends the
logic the Court articulated in Batson v. Kentucky to the
issue of gender. The Court rules that, just as race cannot
Chronology
115

be used as a basis for peremptory challenges to prospec-
tive jurors, neither can gender.
The Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act
passes the U.S. Congress and is signed by President Bill
Clinton. The act is a sweeping omnibus crime bill with a
wide range of provisions including enhancing the fed-
eral death penalty, enhancing the protection of women
against domestic violence, fine-tuning antiterrorism
laws, establishing the Police Corps training program,
allocating grants for community policing initiatives, and
strengthening the U.S. Department of Justice in address-
ing the issue of police misconduct. In particular, the Spe-
cial Litigation Section of the Justice Department is
empowered under Title 42 to pursue civil relief when
police officers individually or collectively as a depart-
ment engage in a pattern and practice of misconduct and
civil rights violations.
1995
Five Philadelphia police officers are convicted of fabri-
cating evidence against African Americans in that city.
The convictions call into question approximately 1,500
prosecutions involving those officers.
1996
Romer v. Evans. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that
Amendment 2 to Colorado’s constitution, which pro-
hibits governmental bodies from adopting special laws
protecting homosexuals from discrimination, violates
the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amend-
ment of the U.S. Constitution. The Court finds that sin-
gling out a group, in this case homosexuals, and banning
them from seeking additional protections while all other
groups may still lobby for additional protections is
unconstitutional.
Whren v. U.S. The U.S. Supreme Court rules that the
motives of police officers for stopping a motorist are
irrelevant if an actual violation of the law, no matter how
minor, is observed. In other words, police may use traffic
and equipment violations as bases for a stop, even
though the police may have little interest in traffic
enforcement and may be fishing for more serious offend-
116
Chronology
1994,
cont.

ers. The Court refuses to adopt a standard for officers
that would require no pretext before a stop could be
made.
New Jersey Superior Court judge Robert E. Francis
throws out nineteen drug-possession cases, concluding
that state troopers patrolling the New Jersey Turnpike
had improperly singled out and stopped black motorists.
1997
Under the authority granted to it in the Violent Crime
Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, the U.S. Jus-
tice Department, Special Litigation Section, enters into
consent decrees with the following police agencies in
order to monitor reforms to which the police agencies
agree: Steubenville, Ohio, Police Department; Pitts-
burgh, Pennsylvania, Police Department. In agreeing to
the conditions of the consent decree, the police depart-
ments avoid further litigation against the federal gov-
ernment.
1998
Four African American males driving a rented van on the
New Jersey Turnpike are pulled over by state troopers.
During the traffic stop, the troopers open fire on the van,
wounding three, two critically. No drugs or contraband
are found, and no charges are filed against the four occu-
pants of the van. The state awards the four occupants
nearly $13 million in a civil settlement. The troopers
involved in the incident are convicted of making an
unlawful stop. The troopers go on record, saying that
racial profiling is the policy of the New Jersey State
Police.
1999
The New Jersey state legislature passes a resolution ask-
ing for the U.S. attorney general to investigate allega-
tions of racial bias and profiling by the New Jersey State
Police. The resolution notes that the New Jersey attorney
general’s office is not in a position to be impartial, thus
requiring federal review.
The U.S. Department of Justice settles a lawsuit against
the New Jersey State Police, resulting in a consent decree
whereby a federal monitor oversees the effort by the
Chronology
117

state police to implement ninety-seven agreed-upon
reforms, including providing additional training to
troopers on civil rights, installing computer tracking sys-
tems for tracking traffic stop data, and installing video
cameras in every squad car.
The Traffic Stops Statistics Study Act is introduced in the
Senate and the House. The bill requires the U.S. attorney
general to conduct a nationwide study of traffic stops by
law enforcement officers. The study would seek to iden-
tify the violations for which motorists were stopped,
motorist identifier information (race, gender, ethnicity,
and approximate age), number of occupants in vehicles
stopped, whether searches were conducted by the offi-
cers, duration of the stops, and disposition of the cases.
Federal funds would be appropriated to help state and
local governments pay for the study. The bill does not
pass.
2000
New Jersey governor Christine Todd Whitman causes
some controversy when she is photographed frisking a
black man while out on patrol with a state trooper. The
black man has been stopped for suspicious activity but is
not ultimately arrested as no law has been violated.
U.S. Department of Justice, Special Litigation Section,
enters into a consent decree with the Montgomery
County, Maryland, Police Department in order to moni-
tor reforms to which the agency agrees. In agreeing to the
conditions of the consent decree, the police department
avoids further litigation against the federal government.
The U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee holds hearings to
investigate the issue of racial profiling and its pervasive-
ness in American society. Senator John Ashcroft, who
later becomes the U.S. attorney general, chairs the hear-
ings. Victims of racial profiling are called to testify, as are
police officers and other law enforcement officials with
varying views on the issue.
2001
President George W. Bush, in his first address to a joint
session of Congress, decries the practice of racial profil-
118
Chronology
1999,
cont.

ing by law enforcement officers. He further pledges to
help end the practice of racial profiling in the United
States.
A Cincinnati police officer shoots and kills Timothy
Thomas, an unarmed nineteen-year-old black man. The
city erupts into rioting. Later, Officer Steve Roach is
charged with the death of Thomas but is acquitted. The
incident sparks a U.S. Justice Department investigation.
U.S. Department of Justice, Special Litigation Section,
enters into consent decrees with the following police
agencies in order to monitor reforms to which the agen-
cies agree: Highland Park, Illinois, Police Department;
Washington, D.C., Metropolitan Police Department; Los
Angeles Police Department. In agreeing to the conditions
of the consent decree, the police departments avoid fur-
ther litigation against the federal government.
Four U.S. airliners are hijacked. Two airliners are flown
into the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New
York City, one airliner is flown into the Pentagon, and
one airliner crashes in rural Pennsylvania when passen-
gers attempt to retake the jet. It is believed that the last jet
was heading for the White House or the U.S. Capitol
building. Nineteen men of Arab descent accomplish the
four hijackings. In the wake of this disaster, Americans
begin to question the wisdom of disbanding racial pro-
filing. In the days, weeks, and months following the
tragedy, Arab visitors, immigrants, and Arab Americans
are scrutinized by law enforcement and intelligence offi-
cials, as well as by regular (and now wary) Americans.
The U.S. Patriot Act passes both houses of Congress and
is signed into law by President George W. Bush. The law,
among other things, makes it easier for federal law
enforcement officers to conduct covert surveillance oper-
ations against suspected terrorists. Civil liberties groups
decry the law and predict that the government will use it
to infringe upon the rights of Arab Americans and Mus-
lims. Supporters of the law respond that Americans will
not tolerate another 9–11 and that the law is not race- or
Chronology
119

religion-specific. Further, supporters note that it would
be unreasonable to ignore the fact that those who
attacked the United States on 9–11 were all indeed Arab
and were all Muslims.
2002
U.S. Department of Justice, Special Litigation Section,
enters into consent decrees with the following police
agencies in order to monitor reforms to which the agen-
cies agree: Detroit Police Department; Buffalo, New
York, Police Department; Columbus, Ohio, Police
Department; Cincinnati, Ohio, Police Department. In
agreeing to the conditions of the consent decree, the
police departments avoid further litigation against the
federal government.
2003
Lawrence v. Texas. U.S. Supreme Court rules that consent-
ing adults have a constitutional right to sexual privacy.
This applies to heterosexual and homosexual conduct.
The ruling overturns the long-standing decision in Bow-
ers v. Hardwick. In doing so, the antisodomy laws of thir-
teen states are invalidated.
The Department of Justice issues a policy for all of fed-
eral law enforcement that bans criminal justice profiling
that is based solely or primarily on race or ethnicity—
even where such profiling would otherwise be permitted
by the Constitution and by laws. Although the Supreme
Court in Whren said that motives of officers do not mat-
ter, this directive requires federal law enforcement offi-
cers to act according to pure and racially neutral motives.
Using race or ethnicity by federal officers absent specific
and trustworthy information that a suspect of a particu-
lar race or ethnicity is involved in a crime, or operating
while holding to generalized racial or ethnic stereotypes,
is forbidden.
The University of Minnesota School of Law releases a
landmark study. The study involves the tracking of traf-
fic stop information from sixty-five urban, suburban,
and rural Minnesota law enforcement agencies. The
study shows that white motorists are stopped less fre-
quently than black, Hispanic, or Native American
120
Chronology
2001,
cont.

motorists. White motorists who are stopped, however,
more frequently possess drugs or other contraband than
do minorities. These findings hold true for urban, subur-
ban, and rural contexts. Although debate rages around
the methodological soundness of the study, it goes a long
way toward dispelling the notion that minority
motorists are stopped more because they more often
than whites are in possession of contraband.
Chronology
121


5
Biographical Sketches
I
n this chapter, personalities are introduced who directly or indi-
rectly have played a significant role in relation to the issue of
profiling. Few, if any, individuals of notoriety have focused their
lives on the issue of profiling. Many people, however, have con-
cerned themselves with the issue of profiling within the context of
their broader life’s work. Many of the individuals listed below
have served in the larger cause of civil rights for groups tradi-
tionally discriminated against, and confronting the issue of profil-
ing is simply a manifestation of the larger cause to which they are
dedicated. Others listed below have served in law enforcement or
in the judiciary—particularly the U.S. Supreme Court. These indi-
viduals, in their professional capacities, have been connected to
the issue of profiling and have wielded influence in one way or
another with regard to this issue. Still others listed were theorists
or philosophers whose ideas, passed on through history, had and
have an impact on the debate over profiling.
The list of individuals below should not be construed as
complete or absolute. Countless others have weighed in on the
issue of profiling, and many have worked all their adult lives as
proponents of equal treatment under the law while achieving
justice. A cursory examination of the individuals listed here pro-
vides the reader with at least a start in compiling biographies of
people who have influenced the debate over profiling.
Freda Adler (1933– )
Freda Adler is one of America’s most well-known criminolo-
gists, past or present. Acclaim for her work and theories first
123

emerged in 1975 when she published “Sisters in Crime,” which
set out to explain female criminal behavior from a feminist per-
spective. This has come to be known as the liberation theory of
criminology. Adler’s work consistently rejected the notion that
women commit crime or not because of biological or psycho-
logical determinants. Instead, Adler suggested that women
commit crime in proportion to their decreasing oppression in
society. Adler said that as women are increasingly liberated
from society’s traditional notions of womanhood, and thereby
are free to pursue legitimate economic, social, and political
advancement, so are they increasingly empowered and are in a
position to pursue illegitimate gains in these same areas.
According to Adler, women are no longer confined to the most
menial of offenses; rather, they are capable of being world class
in their criminality just as men can be. Adler continues today to
be an influential member of academia as a proponent of feminist
criminology.
Harry A. Blackmun (1908–1999)
Harry Blackmun was born in southern Illinois in 1908. His fam-
ily moved to Minnesota, where he grew up. In fact, a childhood
friend in grade school was the future chief justice Warren
Burger. Blackmun attended Harvard University and received his
B.A. in 1929. He went on to attend Harvard Law School, receiv-
ing his law degree in 1932. Blackmun returned to Minnesota
upon graduation and set up a law practice that ran from 1933 to
1959. He left his private practice to accept an appointment from
President Dwight Eisenhower to the U.S. Eighth Circuit Court of
Appeals. Blackmun served in that capacity until President
Richard Nixon appointed him to the U.S. Supreme Court in
1970, where he served for twenty-four years. He retired in 1994.
Blackmun is most noted for his controversial authorship of the
Court’s opinion in Roe v. Wade in 1973. That decision took the
privacy rights established in the case of Griswold v. Connecticut
and extended them to establish a constitutional right to an abor-
tion. In Blackmun’s final year on the Court, he authored the
majority opinion in J.E.B. v. Alabama. In that case, the Court
ruled that gender, just as race, cannot be the basis for a prosecu-
tor’s decision to strike a potential juror through peremptory
challenges.
124
Biographical Sketches

Julian Bond (1940– )
Julian Bond was born in Nashville, Tennessee, in 1940. He has
lived a life dedicated toward advancing the cause of civil rights
for oppressed and depressed economic and racial classes of peo-
ple. As a college student at Morehouse College in Atlanta, Geor-
gia, in the late 1950s, Bond worked as a student activist in the
effort to bring about integration in Atlanta’s cinemas, restau-
rants, and other public places. In 1965, Bond was elected to the
Georgia House of Representatives. The Georgia House refused to
seat him, however, because of his opposition to the Vietnam War.
He was elected two more times before he finally was permitted
to serve after the legislature was ordered by the Supreme Court
to seat him. Bond served in the Georgia House, and then Senate,
from 1965 until 1987. He sponsored dozens of bills relating to
civil rights that eventually were passed into law in Georgia.
While serving in the state legislature of Georgia, Bond also
served the cause of civil rights as an official of the Southern
Poverty Law Center. In fact, he was appointed the center’s first
president upon its founding in 1971. For several years, Bond also
served on the National Board of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), which is the oldest
and largest civil rights organization in the United States. In 1998,
Bond became the NAACP National Board chairman.
Henry Brown (1836–1913)
Henry Brown was born in Massachusetts in 1836. He attended
Yale University, graduating in 1856. Brown then pursued a legal
education at Harvard and Yale law schools. He received his law
degree in 1859. After law school, Brown moved to Michigan and
served as a deputy U.S. marshal and as an assistant U.S. attorney
in the Eastern District of Michigan. In 1868, Brown began his
judicial career as a local judge in Detroit. In 1875, Brown was
appointed as a federal district judge in the Eastern District of
Michigan. He had served as a district judge for fourteen years
when President Benjamin Harrison nominated him to the
Supreme Court in 1890. Brown served as a Supreme Court justice
for sixteen years and then retired. During those sixteen years,
Brown authored more than 450 majority opinions for the Court.
One of those, however, stands out more than the others: Plessy v.
Biographical Sketches
125

Ferguson (1896), in which the Supreme Court upheld state-sanc-
tioned race consciousness. In particular, the concept of “separate
but equal” was found to be constitutional. This enabled southern
and some northern states to lawfully continue the practice of seg-
regation for decades until the landmark decision in Brown v.
Board of Education in 1956.
Warren E. Burger (1907–1995)
Warren Burger was born in 1907 in St. Paul, Minnesota. He grew
up in Minnesota and attended the University of Minnesota as an
undergraduate student from 1925 to 1927. Burger went on to
attend the St. Paul College of Law (now known as the William
Mitchell College of Law) in St. Paul. Upon being admitted to the
Minnesota bar, Burger engaged in private practice for over
twenty years. He also taught law on the side. In 1953, the Eisen-
hower administration hired Burger to serve as the assistant attor-
ney general for the Civil Division in the U.S. Department of Jus-
tice. In 1956, Burger was nominated and appointed to the U.S.
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. In 1969, Burger
was appointed by President Richard Nixon to the U.S. Supreme
Court to replace outgoing Chief Justice Earl Warren. Burger was
a strict constructionist in his judicial philosophy, and many con-
servatives had hopes that he would roll back some the judicial
activism seen in the previous decade. Although Burger was gen-
erally considered a conservative on the Court, he did not live up
to the expectations of countering the more liberal tide on the
bench. Many significant civil rights cases were heard during the
Burger Court, which spanned the period from 1969 to 1986. Dur-
ing his tenure, Burger authored an opinion upholding the prac-
tice of forced busing as a part of desegregation. He also authored
the opinion holding valid the subpoena that required Richard
Nixon to give up his private tapes concerning Watergate. This led
to Nixon’s resignation in 1974.
William J. Clinton (1946– )
William (Bill) Clinton was born William Jefferson Blythe III in
Hope, Arkansas. His father died in a car accident three months
before he was born. His mother married Roger Clinton when Bill
was four years old, and Bill took his stepfather’s last name. Clin-
126
Biographical Sketches

ton earned a bachelor’s degree from Georgetown University with
a major in international relations in 1968. He also attended
Oxford University in England as a Rhodes Scholar and received
a law degree from Yale University in 1973. Clinton served as gov-
ernor of Arkansas from 1978 to 1980 and from 1982 to 1988. In
1992, Clinton was elected president of the United States and was
reelected in 1996.
The Clinton presidency, which ran from January 1993 until
January 2001, is known for many things. One of the legacies of
the Clinton years in the White House is the advancement of com-
munity policing in the United States. President Clinton estab-
lished the Community Oriented Policing Service (COPS) office in
the U.S. Department of Justice. Through this office, the federal
government subsidized the hiring of tens of thousands of police
officers around the country. To qualify for the subsidy, local
departments would have to commit officers to community polic-
ing efforts. Additionally, the Clinton administration began the
funding of dozens of regional community policing institutes
around the country, the purpose of which was to support com-
munity policing efforts through training and technical advising.
Still another legacy is the Clinton administration’s stepped-up
effort to confront illegal police actions through Department of
Justice investigation and intervention.
President Clinton set out to end the practice of racial profil-
ing. He directed the Departments of Justice, Treasury, and Agri-
culture to collect data on race, ethnicity, and gender of individu-
als subject to stops by federal law enforcement. He also supported
legislation encouraging states to collect the same data. During the
Clinton years, several consent decrees were entered into between
the U.S. Department of Justice and local police departments
accused of racial profiling and other biased policing actions. Pres-
ident Clinton’s positive relations with African Americans in the
area of law enforcement and other areas caused many to dub him
America’s first black president. President Clinton also developed
positive relations with the gay and lesbian community. He insti-
tuted a “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy in the military that resulted
in the cessation of screening gays from military service. He also
made dozens of appointments in his administration of openly gay
or lesbian public officials. Finally, President Clinton sought to
include sexual orientation among the categories covered by hate
crime and employment discrimination legislation.
Biographical Sketches
127

John Douglas (1947– )
John Douglas is a name that has long been associated with crim-
inal profiling—particularly behaviorally rooted profiling. As an
FBI special agent and head of the FBI’s Investigative Support
Unit (also known as the Behavioral Science Unit), he pioneered
the development of behavioral profiles as investigative tools and
has used such profiles in investigating infamous crimes such as
the Tylenol poisonings in Chicago, the Green River Killer in
Washington State, a serial killer of children in Atlanta, and a ser-
ial killer of prostitutes in Alaska. He has also studied and profiled
famous criminals such as Charles Manson, Richard Speck, John
Wayne Gacy, David Berkowitz, and others. Although many out-
side of criminal justice circles have never heard of Douglas, most
have heard of fictional characters for whom he or his criminal
subjects have served as inspiration. Of particular fame are
Thomas Harris’s books and subsequent movies (including Red
Dragon and Silence of the Lambs) featuring the character Scott
Glenn, who was a nemesis of Hannibal Lecter.
W. E. B. DuBois (1868–1963)
William Edward Burghardt DuBois was an African American
who defied all stereotypes for the role of blacks in the late nine-
teenth and early-middle twentieth centuries. He received a bach-
elor’s degree from Fisk University and a Ph.D. from Harvard. He
served as a professor of classical languages at the University of
Pennsylvania and as a professor of economics and history at
Atlanta University. He was a founding member of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
He wrote several books concerning the struggle of African Amer-
icans for equality both before and after slavery. DuBois was also
among the first civil rights leaders to address the issue of gender
discrimination—particularly as applied against black women.
The reputation of DuBois is that he genuinely desired equality
for all people, regardless of race, religion, or gender.
Franz Gall (1758–1828)
Franz Joseph Gall was born in Baden, Germany, in 1758. He stud-
ied medicine in Austria and became a well-known medical sci-
entist. He is most remembered for his development of “phrenol-
128
Biographical Sketches

ogy,” the attempted method of determining personality types
and traits in individuals by examining the shape and size of their
skulls. He believed that personality traits were localized in dif-
ferent modules of the brain and therefore more pronounced areas
of one’s brain would predict the talents one likely possessed.
Likewise, skull depressions would reveal a person’s negative
behavioral tendencies, including potential criminality. Many rul-
ing-class people in England during the nineteenth century
embraced Gall’s theories because they could be used to support
the notion that colonial subjects and others in lower social classes
were biologically inferior. His theories significantly influenced
the early “science” of predicting criminality.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg (1933– )
Ruth Bader Ginsburg was born in New York in 1933. She received
her bachelor’s degree from Harvard University and her law
degree from Columbia University School of Law. She attended
law school in the 1950s when women were not particularly wel-
come in the profession and a great deal of hostility toward female
law students could be felt. In 1963, Ginsburg joined the faculty of
Rutgers University School of Law. She eventually returned to
Columbia University to join the law faculty there. As a law pro-
fessor, Ginsburg became very active in feminist issues and used
her standing in the legal profession to advance feminist causes.
In 1971, she shepherded the Women’s Rights Project of the Amer-
ican Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and served as the general
counsel for the ACLU from 1973 to 1980, all while serving as a
tenured professor of law at Columbia. In that capacity, she had
the opportunity to argue cases on behalf of women seeking the
same suspect class/strict scrutiny that racial minorities had won
in the courts. In 1980, Ginsburg was appointed as a federal appel-
late judge for the District of Columbia federal circuit. In 1993,
President Clinton nominated her to the U.S. Supreme Court. She
was confirmed and took her seat that year. She was President
Clinton’s first Supreme Court nominee.
Herman Goldstein (1931– )
Herman Goldstein is the pioneer of the community policing move-
ment. As far back as the 1970s, this University of Wisconsin pro-
fessor began focusing his writing and research efforts toward
Biographical Sketches
129

developing a model of policing that emphasizes partnership
between the police and the community and incorporates principles
of empowerment and democracy within the policing structure. His
model of police work permits officers to actually solve problems
rather than simply react to them. Community policing has become
a popular model for law enforcement in urban centers, especially
where there exist high concentrations of ethnic or racial minorities.
In many urban areas, police have historically been dimly viewed
by the public for their heavy-handedness and perceived racism.
Community policing seeks to change that perception by involving
the community in the law enforcement and crime control process
through partnership with the police. Although not perfect, the
model has gone a long way to bridging the gulf between minority
groups and the law enforcers serving them.
John M. Harlan (1833–1911)
John Harlan was born the son of a lawyer in Boyle County, Ken-
tucky. He graduated from Centre College in 1850 and studied
law at Transylvania University. In 1853, Harlan was admitted to
the bar in Kentucky and began practicing law. Although a south-
erner and a slaveholder, Harlan remained loyal to the Union dur-
ing the Civil War. In fact, Harlan joined the Union army and
served as an officer. In 1863, he resigned his army commission to
serve as the attorney general for Kentucky. In 1877, President
Rutherford B. Hayes nominated Harlan to the U.S. Supreme
Court, where he served for thirty-three years. He was known as
the “Great Dissenter” for his many often solitary dissents against
the majority on the Court. One of his most worthy dissents was
in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson, where Harlan demonstrated he
was ahead of his time. In that case, Harlan wrote that it was not
proper under the Constitution for a government organization to
know the race of people under its charge. In other words, Harlan
believed government should not be race-neutral, but race-blind.
Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679)
Thomas Hobbes was born in Wiltshire, England, in 1588. He
lived a long and productive life, dying in 1679. Over his ninety
years on earth, he developed into one of the most influential
political philosophers of all time. Hobbes believed and wrote that
mankind, if left to its own devices in a state of nature, would exist
130
Biographical Sketches

in a very brutal, violent, and selfish way. Hobbes wrote that gov-
ernment is very important in that without it, social order would
erode into savagery. He said that there exists a social contract in
which individuals subordinate to the government a limited
amount of their inherent freedom in exchange for government’s
protection and maintenance of order. Given that the natural state
of mankind, according to Hobbes, was extremely brutal, his
vision of government was fairly authoritative. Government was
not to be given unlimited and everlasting authority, however.
Should government fail in its obligation of protecting the people
under its charge or in securing their individual liberties, then the
contract would be broken and a different government could
appropriately and morally be crafted to replace the old one.
Hobbes’s works were very influential upon colonists during the
run-up to the American Revolution. Although Hobbes was cer-
tainly for individual freedom, he was also for a strong enough
and effective enough government to overcome humankind’s nat-
ural tendencies toward violence and mayhem. Therefore, with
regard to criminal justice and profiling, one might conclude that
Hobbes would encourage government to use whatever tools are
reasonably necessary to ensure the public’s safety from crime.
J. Edgar Hoover (1895–1972)
John Edgar Hoover was born in Washington, D.C., in 1895. In
1917, he graduated with a law degree from George Washington
University. Soon after, Hoover joined the U.S. Justice Department
as a special agent. In 1917, the United States entered World War
I. Concern over espionage was very high. Hoover quickly
became recognized as an accomplished and skilled federal agent
and was promoted to head the Enemy Aliens Registration Sec-
tion. In 1919, he was promoted to the head of the General Intelli-
gence Division within the Department of Justice. In 1921, Hoover
joined the Bureau of Investigation as the deputy director. In 1924,
at the age of twenty-nine, he became director of the bureau,
which had over 400 special agents. In 1935, the Bureau of Inves-
tigation was renamed the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
and was given expanded powers as the federal government’s
premiere law enforcement and domestic intelligence agency.
By all accounts, Hoover ran a “tight ship” at the FBI. It was
his FBI. He made great strides to professionalize the bureau. He
instituted background checks for all special agents, implemented
Biographical Sketches
131

rigorous training and physical fitness requirements, and created
a national laboratory for the analysis of forensic evidence. Under
Hoover, the FBI became a part of American popular culture in its
fight with gangsters of the 1930s. The Bureau’s most famous foe
was John Dillinger, who was killed in a gun battle with FBI
agents in Chicago. Hoover’s FBI emerged as the lead agency to
enforce civil rights laws in the 1960s and 1970s and had some
success in prosecuting violent segregationists in the South when
state and local law enforcement were unwilling to take action.
Hoover was shrouded in controversy during his forty-eight-year
career with the Bureau. Many have speculated that Hoover kept
secret files on potential political opponents. Those files presum-
ably contained information that could be used to blackmail
opponents into compliance with Hoover’s wishes. In some cases,
Hoover is alleged to have leveraged the sexual orientation and
sexual practices of some opponents. Hoover remained the direc-
tor of the FBI until his death in 1972.
Jesse Jackson (1941– )
Jesse Louis Jackson Sr. was born in Greenville, South Carolina, in
1941. He grew up in South Carolina and earned a bachelor’s
degree from North Carolina A & T University in 1964. Jackson
began studies at the Chicago Theological Seminary in Illinois, but
dropped out owing to his heavy involvement in the civil rights
movement. He eventually returned to seminary to receive his
Master of Divinity degree in 2000. Jackson became a civil rights
activist in 1960 when he led sit-ins to desegregate local public
facilities in South Carolina and elsewhere. In 1965, he began
working full-time for the Southern Christian Leadership Confer-
ence and for Martin Luther King Jr. In 1971, Jackson founded
Operation PUSH (which stands for “People United to Serve
Humanity”) in Chicago. The goal of PUSH was to empower peo-
ple of color to overcome economic disadvantage. In 1984, Jackson
founded the National Rainbow Coalition in Washington, D.C. The
Rainbow Coalition was created to advocate social justice and
change public policy to that end. In 1996, Jackson’s two organiza-
tions merged into the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition. Jackson is one of
the more controversial figures in the civil rights movement. He
has been an outspoken critic of law enforcement and the criminal
justice system, conservative politicians, conservative religious
groups and denominations, and others. He ran for president of
132
Biographical Sketches

the United States in 1984 and 1988 as an unabashed liberal. He has
also inserted himself many times into international crises; in
doing so, he has negotiated the release of hostages and prisoners
of war from hostile foreign countries. He has also been an ardent
supporter of labor unions worldwide. His political activities have
won him support from some and criticism from others.
Martin Luther King, Jr. (1929–1968)
Perhaps the most famous and well-regarded American civil
rights leader in the nation’s history is Martin Luther King, Jr.,
who was born in 1929 in Atlanta, Georgia. King grew up in
Atlanta and eventually attended and graduated from Morehouse
College with a bachelor’s degree in sociology. He went on to earn
a divinity degree from Crozer Theological Seminary in Pennsyl-
vania in 1951 and a Ph.D. in theology from Boston University in
1955. King, like so many African American civil rights champions
of his day, began his adult life in the ministry. He was ordained
as a Baptist minister and served as a pastor in Alabama before
returning to Georgia as the director of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference in 1959. King was very passionate for the
cause of civil rights. He was responsible for organizing the Mont-
gomery bus boycott in 1955 and 1956 to protest segregation on
the bus. He was jailed dozens of times for his involvement in
nonviolent civil disobedience. He was greatly influenced by
Gandhi’s own example of nonviolence to influence change.
King aggressively sought the help of the federal government
in enforcing the right of blacks to register and vote. His efforts,
and others, created the impetus for a variety of sweeping civil
rights laws. In 1963, King organized and led the March on Wash-
ington, where he gave his famous “I have a dream” speech. That
speech remains an anthem of the ideal for race relations in the
United States. In 1964, King was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
for his efforts to bring justice and equality to the American South
and urban North. In 1968, Martin Luther King Jr. visited the city
of Memphis for the purpose of leading a protest march in sup-
port of striking garbage workers. While standing on the balcony
of his hotel room on April 4, 1968, King was shot dead by James
Earl Ray. Ray pleaded guilty to the assassination and was sen-
tenced to ninety-nine years in prison, where he died. Since 1994,
the third Monday in January each year is a national holiday ded-
icated in King’s honor.
Biographical Sketches
133

Rodney King (1965– )
Rodney King was born in Sacramento, California, in 1965. He has
become one the most visible symbols of police violence against
African Americans in today’s society. On March 3, 1991, Rodney
King was involved in a high-speed pursuit. King had a signifi-
cant criminal history. He had been convicted of beating his wife.
He was on parole for robbery of a convenience store and assault,
and he was intoxicated. Consequently, he fled in his vehicle
when a California Highway Patrol officer attempted to stop him
on a Los Angeles freeway. During the pursuit, the Los Angeles
Police Department became involved to assist the highway patrol.
When King finally pulled over and exited his vehicle, four Los
Angeles police officers used their batons to subdue him. The
baton blows were caught on tape by a bystander and made it to
the television news. The officers involved in the beating were
eventually charged by the Los Angeles district attorney for
assault and police misconduct. On April 29, 1992, a jury found
the officers not guilty of criminal wrongdoing. The black and
Hispanic communities in Los Angeles were outraged at the ver-
dict, and a riot broke out in the south central part of the city.
Many storefronts and homes were set on fire and burned to the
ground. Damage totaled $16 billion. More important, fifty-two
people were killed in the riots by rioters and 3,000 people were
injured. Rodney King, already famous from the videotaped beat-
ing, solidified his status as an icon when he asked on national
television his famous question “Can’t we all just get along?” The
same four police officers were re-tried for civil rights violations
in federal court. Two of the four were found not guilty; the
remaining two—Lawrence Powell and Stacey Koon—were
found guilty and sentenced to federal prison. In 1994, the city of
Los Angeles agreed to pay King $3.8 million in damages. King
has continued to have run-ins with the law. Just since 1999, he
has been arrested for domestic assault, drug use, and driving
while under the influence of drugs.
John Lewis (1940– )
John Lewis was born in rural Alabama in 1940. He attended seg-
regated schools during his elementary and secondary education.
He went on to earn a bachelor’s degree in religion from Fisk Uni-
versity and a divinity degree from the American Baptist Theo-
134
Biographical Sketches

logical Seminary in Nashville. John Lewis began his long civil
rights advocacy career as a freedom rider in the South in the early
1960s. He frequently participated in civil disobedience in order to
protest the segregation policies throughout the South. He was
recognized at an early age as a leader in the civil rights move-
ment. In fact, at age twenty-three, he helped organize and spoke
at the March on Washington in 1963. Lewis was intimately
involved in the “Freedom Summer” of 1964 in Mississippi. He
led hundreds of marchers across the Edmund Pettus Bridge in
Selma, Alabama. That particular march was notoriously con-
fronted by state troopers—an event that came to be known as
“Bloody Sunday.” Lewis was no stranger to police contacts. He
was arrested over forty times for his acts of nonviolent civil dis-
obedience. Lewis served as an activist for twenty more years
until he was elected to the U.S. Congress in 1986 by the citizens
of Atlanta, Georgia. He has been a leader among the congres-
sional Democrats and has worked very hard to achieve fairness
and equity for minorities in the United States, especially within
the context of the criminal justice system.
Cesare Lombroso (1835–1909)
Cesare Lombroso was a nineteenth-century Italian criminologist
who believed that there existed a relationship between the phys-
ical characteristics and features of people and criminal behavior.
It is from Lombroso that we have taken the stereotypical notions
of “beady eyes” or a “slack jaw” serving as an indicator of crim-
inality. Lombroso was influenced in the development of his the-
ories by Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution and Franz Gall’s
theories of phrenology. Lombroso’s theories were popular in
Europe and parts of South America into the twentieth century.
Criminological theories that focused on social and environmen-
tal causes of crime eventually replaced biological and genetic
determinants, however, as the mainstream hypotheses concern-
ing crime’s origins.
Thurgood Marshall (1908–1993)
Thurgood Marshall was born in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1908. He
attended Lincoln University as an undergraduate, receiving a
B.A. in 1930. He then studied law at Howard University, a pre-
dominantly black university in Washington, D.C. He received a
Biographical Sketches
135

law degree in 1933. After practicing law in Maryland for a couple
of years, Marshall became the legal director for the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
He served in that capacity from 1940 to 1961. During that time,
Marshall litigated many significant civil rights cases. The most
famous civil rights case he successfully litigated was Brown v.
Board of Education in 1954. In that case, Marshall argued persua-
sively before the U.S. Supreme Court that racial segregation in
public schools was unconstitutional. The Supreme Court agreed
and ended the idea of “separate but equal” previously estab-
lished in the case of Plessy v. Ferguson. In 1961, Marshall was
appointed by President John F. Kennedy to serve as a judge on
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. In 1965, Mar-
shall became the solicitor general of the United States under Pres-
ident Johnson. The solicitor general is the chief trial lawyer for
the U.S. government and has the responsibility of representing
the United States before the Supreme Court. In 1967, Johnson
nominated Marshall to become the first black justice of the
Supreme Court. By the time he took office, he had successfully
argued nearly thirty cases before the court on which he now sat.
As a Supreme Court justice, Marshall was considered a staunch
liberal. He opposed the death penalty because he believed it to be
inherently “cruel and unusual” and applied in a discriminatory
fashion, both of which would be violations of the Constitution.
Kweisi Mfume (1948– )
Kweisi Mfume was born Frizzell Gray in 1948 in Baltimore, Mary-
land. He grew up in that city and became active in politics and the
civil rights movement. He attended and graduated from Morgan
State University, serving as the editor of the college paper and as
the president of the Black Student Union on campus. He eventu-
ally earned a master’s degree in international studies at Johns
Hopkins University. In 1979, Mfume was elected to the Baltimore
City Council. He served as a council member until 1986, when he
was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. As a congress-
man, he worked very hard on civil rights legislation. This
included legislation relating to affirmative action, protection of
Americans with disabilities, reforming financial institutions,
reforming the equal employment opportunity laws, and tighten-
ing up gun control. Mfume served as chair of the Congressional
Black Caucus and as such gained national attention as a spokes-
136
Biographical Sketches

person for issues affecting African Americans. In 1996, Mfume left
the Congress to become president of the National Association for
the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). In that capacity,
he has continued to champion affirmative action and other civil
rights issues, including the elimination of brutality and discrimi-
nation inflicted by the criminal justice system on minorities.
Rosa Parks (1913– )
Rosa Parks is an icon in the American civil rights movement. An
African American woman born and raised in Alabama, she dared
as a forty-two-year-old adult to challenge the absurdity that was
segregation in her home state. On December 1, 1955, while riding
home from work on a city bus in Montgomery, Alabama, she was
ordered by the driver to give up her seat to a white man. She was
further told to move from the front of the bus to the back of the
bus, where blacks were permitted to sit. She refused to comply,
which resulted in her arrest. This high-profile incident resulted in
a boycott of the Montgomery city buses. Blacks all across town,
led by Martin Luther King Jr., simply refused to give patronage to
a transportation system that treated them as second-class citizens.
Instead, they walked or helped each other with rides. The boycott
lasted over a year. Eventually, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that
segregation in public transportation was unconstitutional. The
civil rights activism that started with her refusal to move to the
back of the bus gave rise to the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the
Voting Rights Act of 1965. After this incident, Parks began to work
full-time on the cause of civil rights. Eventually, due to threats and
harassment, Parks and her family left Alabama and moved to
Detroit, Michigan, where she has remained.
Lewis Powell (1907–1998)
Lewis Powell was born in Virginia in 1907. He also grew up
there. In 1929, Powell graduated with a bachelor’s degree from
Washington and Lee. He remained there to study law, receiving
his degree in 1931. Powell went on to receive a master’s degree
in law from Harvard University in 1932. Powell practiced law in
Virginia from 1933 to 1971, with the exception of four years ser-
vice as an officer with the U.S. Army Air Corps from 1942 to 1946.
In 1972, Powell was appointed from private practice to the U.S.
Supreme Court by President Richard Nixon. During his fifteen
Biographical Sketches
137

years on the Court, Powell was considered a moderate and fre-
quently served as a swing vote. Notably, Powell authored the
Court’s opinion in the case of Batson v. Kentucky. This 1986 case
resulted in the prohibition of prosecutors’ use of the peremptory
challenge to eliminate potential jurors from sitting on a case
because of their race. Powell retired in 1987.
William H. Rehnquist (1924– )
William H. Rehnquist was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, in
1924. Before he could enter college, World War II broke out.
Rehnquist enlisted in the U.S. Army Air Corps and served in
North Africa. After the war, Rehnquist attended Stanford Uni-
versity, using funds from the GI Bill. He received a bachelor’s
and a master’s degree in political science. He then went to obtain
a second master’s degree, this time in government, from Harvard
University. In 1950, he returned to Stanford University to attend
law school and graduated number one in his class. After law
school, Rehnquist practiced law in Arizona and became active in
the Republican Party. In 1971, President Richard Nixon
appointed him to the U.S. Supreme Court. Rehnquist served on
the Court as an outspoken, if often solitary, conservative. His dis-
senting opinions on several cases demonstrated a restrictive view
concerning the breadth of the Fourteenth Amendment vis-à-vis
nonracial matters. In 1986, President Reagan nominated him to
replace the retiring Warren Burger as the chief justice of the U.S.
Supreme Court. The Senate confirmed the nomination, and
Rehnquist has served as chief justice ever since. Rehnquist has
authored or contributed to many significant court opinions.
Notably, Rehnquist authored the Court’s opinion in Sokolow,
which upheld the use of objectively constructed profiles to iden-
tify possible drug couriers at airports.
Janet Reno (1938– )
Janet Reno became America’s first female U. S. attorney general
when she was appointed to that post by President Clinton in
1993. She served in that capacity until 2000. Reno was born in
Miami in 1938. She grew up in the Miami area and graduated
from high school there. In 1956, she enrolled at Cornell Univer-
sity in New York State. In 1960, she was accepted into Harvard
Law School. She was one of sixteen women in a class of 500 stu-
138
Biographical Sketches

dents. In 1963, she received her law degree and returned to
Florida. Prior to becoming the U.S. attorney general, Reno served
as a Dade County assistant state’s attorney, as a staff member for
the Florida legislature, and as the Dade County state’s attorney.
She helped establish the Miami Drug Court, which served as an
alternative to the traditional criminal justice adjudication and
punishment process for nonviolent drug offenders. As the U.S.
attorney general, Janet Reno set a course for the Justice Depart-
ment to aggressively enforce civil rights laws, thereby ensuring
equal opportunity for all. In particular, her Justice Department
entered into several consent decrees with local police agencies,
which required those agencies to adhere to predetermined prac-
tices and policies in order to avoid federal litigation.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712–1778)
Jean-Jacques Rousseau was born in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1712.
He lived there until the age of sixteen, when he moved to Paris.
He remained in France until his death in 1778. Rousseau is con-
sidered perhaps the most influential philosopher to emerge from
the Enlightenment. In Rousseau’s earlier works, he wrote that
people were basically good and noble but became corrupted and
were made unhappy by the influence of a corrupt society upon
them. He believed that the social customs of his time, particularly
among the aristocracy, were artificial and should be rejected.
Rousseau emphasized the notion that people are born free and
should be afforded equality within society. Among his later
works was his most important publication: The Social Contract. In
this work, Rousseau reiterated much of what Thomas Hobbes
said about the need for government—namely, that it exists to
secure personal freedom and keep what would otherwise be a
violent, disorderly society in check. Rousseau, however, empha-
sized the notions of equality, at the expense of majority will, and
challenged the right to hold private property. Rousseau’s work is
considered to have laid the groundwork for the emergence of
socialism and communism—particularly given his defense of
“Everyman” against society elites who own all the property and
hold all the power. Although one cannot be certain, his writings
suggest that he would hold disdain for the practice of profiling
when done so on the basis of race, religion, or other classifica-
tions. Rousseau would likely find profiling to be a tool of the rul-
ing class for keeping elitist social order in place.
Biographical Sketches
139

Margaret Sanger (1879–1966)
Margaret Sanger is considered a chief pioneer of feminism in the
United States. She was born as Margaret Higgins in 1879 to an
Irish American, devoutly Catholic family in Coming, New York.
Her mother died at the age of fifty after bearing eleven children.
Higgins believed that her mother’s chronic condition of preg-
nancy contributed to her relatively early death. This belief helped
shape Higgins’s views of the pitfalls of “traditional” living for
women and contributed to the development of her feminist phi-
losophy. Margaret Higgins attended Claverack College in 1896
and then entered a nursing training program at White Plains
Hospital in 1900. In 1902, she married William Sanger, with
whom she had three children. Margaret Sanger became an early
advocate for women’s health issues and the use of birth control.
In 1912, she began to publish newspaper columns related to sex
education. She actively promoted the ideas of anarchist Emma
Goldman and saw birth control as a way to secure freedom from
the economic shackles that a family creates. In 1914, Sanger
divorced her husband and carried on a sexually liberated life
consisting of several affairs. Sanger’s driving issue throughout
her adult life centered on the right of women to use birth control.
In fact, Sanger was the founder of the Planned Parenthood Fed-
eration of America. In 1966, her lifelong battle culminated in the
U.S. Supreme Court’s decision of Griswold v. Connecticut, in
which a right to privacy and the use of birth control was deemed
to be contained in the Constitution. This court decision decrimi-
nalized laws in several states that had restricted the use of birth
control methods. Sanger was not an uncontroversial figure even
by modern standards. She was directly allied with anarchists and
socialists of her day. She was a believer in eugenics, which
involves the attempt to produce biologically superior humans by
socially controlling reproduction—an idea also popularized in
Nazi Germany. Even so, Sanger was undeniably a stalwart of
early efforts at women’s liberation and decriminalization of mat-
ters pertaining to women’s health.
Antonin Scalia (1936– )
Antonin Scalia was born in Trenton, New Jersey, in 1936. Scalia is
considered, even by his critics, to be one of the sharpest justices
academically in Supreme Court history. His father was a college
140
Biographical Sketches

professor, and the love for all things intellectual was passed on to
him. Scalia received his bachelor’s degree in history from
Georgetown University. After graduating from Georgetown
summa cum laude as valedictorian, he went on to Harvard Law
School. There, he served as the Law Review editor and graduated
magna cum laude in 1960. After practicing law from 1961 to 1967,
Scalia joined the faculty of the University of Virginia’s Law
School. He served there until 1974 and then again as a law pro-
fessor at the University of Chicago from 1977 to 1982. He served
as assistant attorney general during the Ford administration
from 1974 to 1977. In 1982, he was appointed by President Rea-
gan to the Federal Court of Appeals for Washington, D.C. There,
Scalia established a record of judicial restraint and strict con-
structionism (that is, belief that government’s authorities are only
those expressly granted to it in the U.S. Constitution). In 1986,
Reagan nominated Scalia to the Supreme Court at the same time
William Rehnquist was nominated to become chief justice. Scalia
was confirmed unanimously. Scalia is widely known by admirers
and critics as the Supreme Court’s most conservative justice. His
written opinions have demonstrated a belief in states’ rights to
regulate things such as abortion or consensual sexual relations.
He has also challenged the permissibility of programs such as
affirmative action that are race conscious. Scalia wrote the opin-
ion of the court in Whren v. U.S.
Al Sharpton (1954– )
Alfred Sharpton was born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1954. Sharp-
ton is widely known as a minister, civil rights activist, and presi-
dential candidate. His career has centered around civil rights
issues and has included regular confrontations with the criminal
justice system when he has perceived abuses or injustices against
minorities to have occurred. Sharpton entered politics in 1978
when he ran for a New York state senate seat. He was not elected
and so continued his political activism. In 1986, Sharpton gained
prominence nationally by organizing demonstrations after an
African American man was killed by several whites in the
Howard Beach neighborhood of New York City. A couple of
years later, Sharpton became an adviser for Tawana Brawley,
who claimed to have been sexually assaulted by a group of white
people. Sharpton lost considerable credibility in the public eye by
defending Brawley, as her claims later turned out to be a hoax.
Biographical Sketches
141

Sharpton also gained national attention when he led protests in
1989 following the shooting death of a black youth named Yosuf
Hawkins by whites in Bensonhurst, another New York City
neighborhood. More recently, Sharpton has organized demon-
strations after the sexual assault of Haitian immigrant Abner
Louima by police officers in 1997 and the police shooting of
Amadou Diallo, an unarmed Ghanaian immigrant in 1999. In
addition to Sharpton’s failed campaign in 1978, he unsuccess-
fully ran for New York City mayor in 1997 and for the U.S. Sen-
ate in 1992 and 1994. Sharpton also ran as a candidate for presi-
dent of the United States in 2003–2004.
Roger Taney (1777–1864)
Roger Taney was born in Calvert County, Maryland, in 1777. He
graduated from Dickinson College in 1795. After studying law on
his own, he was admitted to the Maryland bar in 1799. That year,
he was also elected to the Maryland House of Delegates, where
he served one term. In 1821, he entered into private practice but
remained active in politics and political campaigns. In 1831,
Taney was appointed as U.S. attorney general by President
Andrew Jackson. Five years later, Taney was nominated to be
chief justice of the Supreme Court to replace John Marshall.
Taney significantly contributed to the Court’s early development.
He has primarily come to be known, however, for the notorious
decision of Dred Scott v. Sandford (1856). The Court’s opinion in
that case, which Taney delivered, officially declared that blacks
were not “people” for the purposes of the Constitution and were
indeed inferior beings. That decision damaged the credibility of
the Court in the minds of many people at that time. Taney served
on the Supreme Court until his death in 1864.
August Vollmer (1876–1955)
August Vollmer is often referred to as the father of modern polic-
ing. By all accounts, Vollmer was in many ways ahead of his
time. He served as the town marshal, and then police chief, for
Berkeley, California, from 1905 to 1932. During his tenure there,
he instituted many innovations. He collaborated with the Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley to develop a police training pro-
gram for his officers. He required all of his officers to be formally
trained in criminology and the social and physical sciences. He
142
Biographical Sketches

also developed a code of ethics for his department, which, among
other things, eliminated the acceptance of gratuities or favors.
Other innovations of his and his department included being first
to hire a female police officer; first to use automobiles and motor-
cycles for patrol; first to use crystal radios for dispatched com-
munications; first to rely on scientific investigative techniques
(for example, analysis of blood, fibers, and soil); and among the
first to require new recruits to pass psychological screenings and
intelligence tests. In 1936, Vollmer published a book entitled The
Police and Modern Society in which he explained his vision for the
emerging profession of law enforcement. Vollmer was an advo-
cate for advancing the goal of impartial police work. Many de-
partments today that still have difficulties navigating through
issues of community relations and relations with minority
groups would still find Vollmer to be innovative.
Earl Warren (1891–1974)
Earl Warren was born in Los Angeles in 1891. He grew up in Bak-
ersfield, California, and attended the University of California at
Berkeley. He received his bachelor’s degree from that institution
in 1912 and his Juris Doctor degree from there in 1914. He
worked in private practice in the San Francisco Bay area for three
years before entering the U.S. Army as a lieutenant in 1917. His
early career in civilian government included several terms as
Alameda County’s (Oakland, California) district attorney. Serv-
ing as a prosecutor proved to be a good career to come from
when entering politics. Warren, a moderate to liberal Republican,
was elected governor of California three successive times: . . .in
1942, 1946, and 1950. In 1948, Warren ran unsuccessfully as the
vice presidential candidate for Thomas Dewey, who narrowly
lost to Harry Truman. In 1953, President Dwight Eisenhower
appointed Warren as the chief justice for the U.S. Supreme Court.
President Eisenhower would later call the appointment of War-
ren, as well as his appointment of William Brennan, among the
biggest mistakes he ever made. Warren proved to be very liberal
and judicially activist on the Supreme Court. It was during his
tenure as chief justice that the Bill of Rights was incorporated into
the Fourteenth Amendment through one case after another,
thereby requiring state and local authorities to abide by the pro-
visions of the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments in
particular. The Warren Court also oversaw the end of legal seg-
Biographical Sketches
143

regation and a host of other civil rights advances. Despite being
a liberal, Warren wrote the opinion of the Court in Terry v. Ohio,
in which the conviction of armed, would-be robbers was upheld
after a police officer patted them down for weapons without a
warrant.
Ida B. Wells (1862–1931)
Ida B. Wells is also known as Ida B. Wells-Barnett and was born
into a Mississippi slave family in 1862. Wells learned to read as a
child owing to the emphasis her parents placed on hard work
and education. She went on to receive her college training at Fisk
University. In 1884, Wells was traveling on a train and was
forcibly removed from first class and placed into the “Jim Crow”
car (a blacks-only car), despite having paid for a first class ticket.
Wells sued the railroad company over this incident and won the
case. The Tennessee Supreme Court reversed, however, in favor
of the railroad. She then dedicated her life to confronting racial
injustice and bigotry. She did this primarily through writing and
giving speeches. One injustice Wells frequently decried was the
substandard facilities and supplies for black school children as
compared to white children in the same school districts. Wells
was also touched by violence against blacks. Three of her friends
in Memphis, Tennessee, were killed by whites, and she herself
was threatened with death for continuing to write about segre-
gation. She eventually moved to Chicago and wrote several
pieces on lynchings and mob rule in the South. In Chicago, Wells
worked aggressively for equality for blacks and equality for
women. Wells became a very influential civil rights leader in
Chicago and wielded that influence until her death in 1931.
Byron White (1917–2002)
Byron White was born in Colorado in 1917. He grew up there and
attended the University of Colorado. He played football, basket-
ball and baseball for the university, earning ten varsity letters. He
was also an outstanding student and won the Rhodes Scholar-
ship to Oxford University in England in 1939. From 1942 to 1946,
White served as a naval intelligence officer. Once World War II
ended and he was released from active duty, he attended Yale
Law School. Amazingly, while at Yale, he played professional
football for the Detroit Lions on the weekends. After graduating
144
Biographical Sketches

from law school, White clerked for U.S. Supreme Court justice
Fred Vinson and then returned to Colorado to practice law. He
was in private practice in Colorado for fourteen years before
being selected to serve as deputy attorney general in Robert
Kennedy’s Justice Department. Less than a year later, in 1962,
White was selected by President John F. Kennedy to take a seat
on the U.S. Supreme Court. White developed a reputation on the
court as a moderate. His views may have been more liberal than
moderate, but compared to the overall tenor of the truly liberal
Warren Court, it didn’t take much judicial restraint to be consid-
ered a moderate. White authored a couple of court opinions
directly impacting the issue of profiling. In 1975 he authored the
Court’s opinion in Taylor v. Louisiana, in which the systematic
exclusion of women from potential jury duty was ruled uncon-
stitutional. He also authored the opinion of the Court in Delaware
v. Prouse, in which a police officer’s stop of a motorist without an
objective basis for the stop was ruled unconstitutional.
Christine Todd Whitman (1947– )
Christine Todd Whitman is well known in political circles for a
variety of accomplishments. Most recently, she served as the
head of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under Presi-
dent George W. Bush. She first gained wide, national notoriety,
however, when she was elected governor of New Jersey in 1993,
defeating incumbent Jim Florio. Whitman was considered a
moderate to liberal Republican by national party standards. She
was not as conservative as the national Republican Party on
many social issues such as abortion. She believed sincerely in the
need to cut taxes, however, as the number-one priority in putting
an overall budget together. Whitman cut state income taxes by 30
percent in just two years, something for which she remains well
known in New Jersey to this day. Whitman did not shy away
from controversy in the criminal justice arena either. As governor,
Whitman aggressively sought to end racial profiling in her
state—particularly as practiced by the state police. The New Jer-
sey State Police had been regularly accused by civil rights groups
of targeting blacks for traffic stops. In 1999, that accusation
gained some footing when the New Jersey attorney general con-
cluded the same thing. Whitman, who had been a long-time sup-
porter of law enforcement, then became very loud and visible in
her opposition to racial profiling—even to the point of angering
Biographical Sketches
145

many police officers and troopers. Her crusade against profiling
hit a bump in the road in 2000 when a 1996 photo of Whitman
surfaced, showing her frisking a black male, spread-eagled
against the wall, with a state trooper by her side. She was smil-
ing in the picture, seemingly enjoying the encounter. Whitman
was in the situation in the first place because she was engaged in
a ride-along with that particular trooper. It turned out the subject,
who had been stopped for acting “suspiciously,” had no
weapons or contraband in his possession and was not eventually
arrested. Whitman received considerable criticism for her partic-
ipation in this apparent act of racial profiling. Despite this public
relations setback, Whitman’s reforms that she forced upon the
state police and the antiprofiling legislation she pushed through
the legislature have remained.
James Q. Wilson (1931– )
James Q. Wilson is one of the premier criminal justice and public
policy scholars of modern times. He attended the University of
Redlands in southern California, graduating with a bachelor’s
degree in 1952. He then went on to earn a master’s degree and
Ph.D. at the University of Chicago in 1957 and 1959, respectively.
Wilson has served on numerous commissions concerning crime
and criminal justice. He has also published several books on
crime, law enforcement, and other social issues. He is best known
for his “broken windows” theory of crime. That theory hypothe-
sizes that ignoring public and social order matters, such as pros-
titution, abandoned buildings, and small-time drug dealers,
sends the message that “crime and the criminal element are wel-
come here.” Instead, police should address those quality-of-life
and social order issues. In doing so, more serious crime will be
rooted out or will not emerge in those areas to begin with. The
application of the broken windows theory has been varied over
the years. Some departments have embraced the theory as a rea-
son for community policing, which is a model of law enforce-
ment geared toward solving problems—including social order
problems. Others have embraced broken windows as a justifica-
tion for aggressive policing strategies—that is, aggressively
arresting minor offenders in hopes of uncovering or preventing
more serious criminal conduct. The latter response has typically
been received poorly by communities of color in urban areas.
146
Biographical Sketches

O. W. Wilson (1900–1972)
O. W. Wilson was one of the most significant police reformers of
the twentieth century. A protégé of August Vollmer in Berkeley,
California (see Vollmer entry), Wilson went on to influence police
professionalism greatly in his own right. Wilson served as a
scholar of police studies and as a police administrator over his
long career. He served as the police chief for Fullerton, California;
Wichita, Kansas; and Chicago. He also served as the first dean of
the School of Criminology at the University of California, Berke-
ley. Wilson is well known for having implemented a professional
style of policing everywhere he served as chief. His leadership
style is reflected in the well-known text he published in 1950 enti-
tled Police Administration. In that book, Wilson argued for the true
bureaucratic model of organization for police departments,
including strict adherence to rules and regulations, a clear and
hierarchical chain of command, division of responsibilities, and
impartiality in providing service. His book also outlined princi-
ples for building relations with the public. Wilson also is noted
for having refined the practice of preventative patrol, that is,
fielding roving police officers in squad cars in an effort to deter
crime through presence or to intercept crime in the act. He
believed that aggressively policing a neighborhood or city could
in fact reduce crime. This model of policing continues to be com-
mon today but is generally considered to be at odds with com-
munity policing.
Biographical Sketches
147


6
Selected Cases and 
State Statutes
I
n this chapter, readers have an opportunity to examine a sam-
pling of proclamations from two distinct governmental venues
that have weighed in on the issue of profiling and other dis-
criminating behaviors—legitimate and otherwise—by the crimi-
nal justice system in the United States. These two venues are the
courts and state legislatures.
These two venues are included together in this chapter
because when proclamations emerge from either one, consider-
able influence is exerted in shaping criminal justice practices and
procedures. Furthermore, court rulings and state statutes often
and openly draw from each other in reaching conclusions (which
is kind of amazing since many think judges and politicians are
too arrogant to look beyond their own incumbent wisdom).
What follows are excerpts from some of the most significant
U.S. Supreme Court cases and reprints of existing state laws relat-
ing to criminal justice profiling and ancillary practices and issues.
Cases
In this section, seven selected U.S. Supreme Court cases related
in some way to the issue of profiling have been highlighted. Four
of the cases relate to profiling by race, one case relates to gender,
one case relates to sexual orientation, and finally one case relates
to the permissibility of criminal profiling generally.
Excerpts of the important and historic opinions for each case
are reprinted in the pages that follow. Despite the wealth of infor-
mation and the gist of the court’s logic in each excerpted opinion,
149

readers are encouraged to obtain and read these opinions in their
entirety. Supreme Court decisions represent mines full of informa-
tion. In its opinions, the Supreme Court explains its logic for its
decisions in light of judicial history. Prior cases that relate to each
decision are cited. The reliance on precedence, that is, previously
decided cases, is known as stare decisis. In reading the excerpts
that follow, you will see that the Supreme Court, in overturning or
upholding a particular law or practice, heavily relies on what it has
said in the past.
Each case below is preceded by a brief summary of the
issues in the case and the Court’s opinion. The opinions reprinted
below represent the majority opinion of the Court in each case.
Not included are the concurring or dissenting opinions. With the
name of any party contained in the case heading, or with the case
number, one may download majority and dissenting opinions of
the U.S. Supreme Court by accessing its website at http://www.
supremecourtus.gov or by going to http://www.findlaw.com.
Korematsu v. United States,
323 U.S. 214 (1944)
Korematsu was a U.S. citizen of Japanese descent during World War II.
On December 8, 1941, the United States declared war on Japan, Ger-
many, and Italy. In February 1942, President Franklin Roosevelt issued
an executive order authorizing the creation of military zones that persons
of Japanese descent could not enter. The motive behind the order was to
prevent sabotage by people loyal to the Empire of Japan. By March, the
entire West Coast of the United States to a depth of about forty miles
inland was designated as such a military zone. Eventually, about 112,000
persons of Japanese descent were involuntarily relocated from the West
Coast to war relocation camps run by the military. Korematsu was pros-
ecuted for remaining in a prohibited area when relocation was ordered.
This case is significant for profiling in that it involves the single
most egregious and massive act of racial profiling that ever occurred in
this country—the mass internment of Japanese Americans solely on the
basis of their race. In this case, the Supreme Court upheld the convic-
tion of Korematsu for remaining in a prohibited area—namely, his
home. Indeed, the mass evacuation of all Japanese Americans from the
West Coast was deemed constitutional. The Court did, however, declare
that the involuntary internment of Japanese Americans whose loyalty
to the United States was established was unconstitutional. It ordered
150
Selected Cases and State Statutes

that such people be immediately and unconditionally released, as they
posed no threat of sabotage.
JUSTICE BLACK delivered the opinion of the Court.
The petitioner, an American citizen of Japanese descent, was
convicted in a federal district court for remaining in San Leandro,
California, a “Military Area”, contrary to Civilian Exclusion
Order No. 34 of the Commanding General of the Western Com-
mand, U.S. Army, which directed that after May 9, 1942, all per-
sons of Japanese ancestry should be excluded from that area. No
question was raised as to petitioner’s loyalty to the United States.
The Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed, [1] and the importance of
the constitutional question involved caused us to grant certiorari.
It should be noted, to begin with, that all legal restrictions
which curtail the civil rights of a single racial group are immedi-
ately suspect. That is not to say that all such restrictions are uncon-
stitutional. It is to say that courts must subject them to the most
rigid scrutiny. Pressing public necessity may sometimes justify the
existence of such restrictions; racial antagonism never can.
In the instant case prosecution of the petitioner was begun
by information charging violation of an Act of Congress, of
March 21, 1942, 56 Stat. 173, 18 U.S.C.A. 97a, which provides that
. . . whoever shall enter, remain in, leave, or commit any
act in any military area or military zone prescribed, under
the authority of an Executive order of the President, by
the Secretary of War, or by any military commander des-
ignated by the Secretary of War, contrary to the restric-
tions applicable to any such area or zone or contrary to
the order of the Secretary of War or any such military
commander, shall, if it appears that he knew or should
have known of the existence and extent of the restrictions
or order and that his act was in violation thereof, be guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be liable to
a fine of not to exceed $5,000 or to imprisonment for not
more than one year, or both, for each offense. . . .
One of the series of orders and proclamations, a curfew order,
which like the exclusion order here was promulgated pursuant to
Executive Order 9066, subjected all persons of Japanese ancestry in
prescribed West Coast military areas to remain in their residences
from 8 P.M. to 6 A.M. As is the case with the exclusion order here,
that prior curfew order was designed as a “protection against espi-
Cases
151

onage and against sabotage.” In Kiyoshi Hirabayashi v. United
States, 320 U.S. 81, 63 S.Ct. 1375, we sustained a conviction ob-
tained for violation of the curfew order. The Hirabayashi convic-
tion and this one thus rest on the same 1942 Congressional Act and
the same basic executive and military orders, all of which orders
were aimed at the twin dangers of espionage and sabotage.
The 1942 Act was attacked in the Hirabayashi case as an
unconstitutional delegation of power; it was contended that the
curfew order and other orders on which it rested were beyond
the war powers of the Congress, the military authorities and of
the President, as Commander in Chief of the Army; and finally
that to apply the curfew order against none but citizens of Japa-
nese ancestry amounted to a constitutionally prohibited discrim-
ination solely on account of race. To these questions, we gave the
serious consideration which their importance justified. We
upheld the curfew order as an exercise of the power of the gov-
ernment to take steps necessary to prevent espionage and sabo-
tage in an area threatened by Japanese attack.
In the light of the principles we announced in the
Hirabayashi case, we are unable to conclude that it was beyond
the war power of Congress and the Executive to exclude those of
Japanese ancestry from the West Coast war area at the time they
did. True, exclusion from the area in which one’s home is located
is a far greater deprivation than constant confinement to the
home from 8 P.M. to 6 A.M. Nothing short of apprehension by the
proper military authorities of the gravest imminent danger to the
public safety can constitutionally justify either. But exclusion
from a threatened area, no less than curfew, has a definite and
close relationship to the prevention of espionage and sabotage.
The military authorities, charged with the primary responsibility
of defending our shores, concluded that curfew provided inade-
quate protection and ordered exclusion. They did so, as pointed
out in our Hirabayashi opinion, in accordance with Congres-
sional authority to the military to say who should, and who
should not, remain in the threatened areas. . . .
[In this case as with] curfew, exclusion of those of Japanese
origin was deemed necessary because of the presence of an
unascertained number of disloyal members of the group, most of
whom we have no doubt were loyal to this country. It was
because we could not reject the finding of the military authorities
that it was impossible to bring about an immediate segregation
of the disloyal from the loyal that we sustained the validity of the
152
Selected Cases and State Statutes

curfew order as applying to the whole group. In the instant case,
temporary exclusion of the entire group was rested by the mili-
tary on the same ground. The judgment that exclusion of the
whole group was for the same reason a military imperative
answers the contention that the exclusion was in the nature of
group punishment based on antagonism to those of Japanese ori-
gin. That there were members of the group who retained loyal-
ties to Japan has been confirmed by investigations made subse-
quent to the exclusion. Approximately five thousand American
citizens of Japanese ancestry refused to swear unqualified alle-
giance to the United States and to renounce allegiance to the
Japanese Emperor, and several thousand evacuees requested
repatriation to Japan.
We uphold the exclusion order as of the time it was made
and when the petitioner violated it. . . . In doing so, we are not
unmindful of the hardships imposed by it upon a large group of
American citizens. . . . But hardships are part of war, and war is
an aggregation of hardships. All citizens alike, both in and out of
uniform, feel the impact of war in greater or lesser measure. Cit-
izenship has its responsibilities as well as its privileges, and in
time of war the burden is always heavier. Compulsory exclusion
of large groups of citizens from their homes, except under cir-
cumstances of direst emergency and peril, is inconsistent with
our basic governmental institutions. But when under conditions
of modern warfare our shores are threatened by hostile forces,
the power to protect must be commensurate with the threatened
danger. . . .
It is said that we are dealing here with the case of imprison-
ment of a citizen in a concentration camp solely because of his
ancestry, without evidence or inquiry concerning his loyalty and
good disposition towards the United States. Our task would be
simple, our duty clear, were this a case involving the imprison-
ment of a loyal citizen in a concentration camp because of racial
prejudice. Regardless of the true nature of the assembly and relo-
cation centers—and we deem it unjustifiable to call them con-
centration camps with all the ugly connotations that term
implies—we are dealing specifically with nothing but an exclu-
sion order. To cast this case into outlines of racial prejudice, with-
out reference to the real military dangers which were presented,
merely confuses the issue. Korematsu was not excluded from the
Military Area because of hostility to him or his race. He was
excluded because we are at war with the Japanese Empire,
Cases
153

because the properly constituted military authorities feared an
invasion of our West Coast and felt constrained to take proper
security measures, because they decided that the military
urgency of the situation demanded that all citizens of Japanese
ancestry be segregated from the West Coast temporarily, and
finally, because Congress, reposing its confidence in this time of
war in our military leaders—as inevitably it must—determined
that they should have the power to do just this. There was evi-
dence of disloyalty on the part of some, the military authorities
considered that the need for action was great, and time was
short. We cannot—by availing ourselves of the calm perspective
of hindsight—now say that at that time these actions were unjus-
tified.
Affirmed.
Hoyt v. Florida, 368 U.S. 57 (1961)
Much of the profiling debate relates to race and ethnicity. In this case,
however, the debate revolves around gender. Although for over 100
years the Supreme Court had held that the systematic exclusion of a
particular race from a jury was unconstitutional, there had never been
the same logic extended to gender. In the present case, Gwendolyn Hoyt
was convicted by an all-male jury of killing her husband. Under Florida
law at the time, male citizens were automatically subject to jury duty,
whereas females had to register an interest in serving on juries. In other
words, women had to actively seek eligibility for jury duty. This
resulted in very few women actually being listed among eligible jurors.
In Hoyt’s view, this amounted to the systematic exclusion of women
from jury duty based on their gender.
This case was one of several in the 1950s and 1960s that sought to
overturn so-called “Jane Crow” laws, that is, laws that made women
essentially second-class citizens. In this case and others, the Supreme
Court refused to adopt the idea that gender was a suspect class similar
to race and therefore required a strict scrutiny test for any laws impli-
cating gender. Eventually, federal and state equal rights legislation
would accomplish what the Supreme Court would not do in this and
other cases.
MR. JUSTICE HARLAN delivered the opinion of the Court.
Appellant, a woman, has been convicted in Hillsborough
County, Florida, of second degree murder of her husband. On
this appeal under 28 U.S.C. 1257 (2) from the Florida Supreme
154
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Court’s affirmance of the judgment of conviction, 119 So.2d 691,
we noted probable jurisdiction, 364 U.S. 930, to consider appel-
lant’s claim that her trial before an all-male jury violated rights
assured by the Fourteenth Amendment. The claim is that such
jury was the product of a state jury statute which works an
unconstitutional exclusion of women from jury service.
The jury law primarily in question is Fla. Stat., 1959, 40.01
(1). This Act, which requires that grand and petit jurors be taken
from “male and female” citizens of the State possessed of certain
qualifications, contains the following proviso:
provided, however, that the name of no female person
shall be taken for jury service unless said person has
registered with the clerk of the circuit court her desire to
be placed on the jury list.
Showing that since the enactment of the statute only a minimal
number of women have so registered, appellant challenges the
constitutionality of the statute both on its face and as applied in
this case. For reasons now to follow we decide that both con-
tentions must be rejected.
At the core of appellant’s argument is the claim that the
nature of the crime of which she was convicted peculiarly
demanded the inclusion of persons of her own sex on the jury.
She was charged with killing her husband by assaulting him
with a baseball bat. An information was filed against her under
Fla. Stat., 1959, 782.04, which punishes as murder in the second
degree “any act imminently dangerous to another, and evincing
a depraved mind regardless of human life, although without any
premeditated design to effect the death of any particular indi-
vidual. . . .” As described by the Florida Supreme Court, the
affair occurred in the context of a marital upheaval involving,
among other things, the suspected infidelity of appellant’s hus-
band, and culminating in the husband’s final rejection of his
wife’s efforts at reconciliation. It is claimed, in substance, that
women jurors would have been more understanding or compas-
sionate than men in assessing the quality of appellant’s act. . . .
Of course, these premises misconceive the scope of the right
to an impartially selected jury assured by the Fourteenth Amend-
ment. That right does not entitle one accused of crime to a jury
tailored to the circumstances of the particular case, whether relat-
ing to the sex or other condition of the defendant, or to the nature
of the charges to be tried. It requires only that the jury be indis-
Cases
155

criminately drawn from among those eligible in the community
for jury service, untrammelled by any arbitrary and systematic
exclusions. . . .
Several observations should initially be made. We of course
recognize that the Fourteenth Amendment reaches not only arbi-
trary class exclusions from jury service based on race or color, but
also all other exclusions which “single out” any class of persons
“for different treatment not based on some reasonable classifica-
tion.” . . .
Manifestly, Florida’s 40.01 (1) does not purport to exclude
women from state jury service. Rather, the statute “gives to
women the privilege to serve but does not impose service as a
duty.” Fay v. New York, supra, at 277. It accords women an
absolute exemption from jury service unless they expressly
waive that privilege. This is not to say, however, that what in
form may be only an exemption of a particular class of persons
can in no circumstances be regarded as an exclusion of that class.
Where, as here, an exemption of a class in the community is
asserted to be in substance an exclusionary device, the relevant
inquiry is whether the exemption itself is based on some reason-
able classification and whether the manner in which it is exercis-
able rests on some rational foundation.
In the selection of jurors Florida has differentiated between
men and women in two respects. It has given women an absolute
exemption from jury duty based solely on their sex, no similar
exemption obtaining as to men. And it has provided for its effec-
tuation in a manner less onerous than that governing exemptions
exercisable by men: women are not to be put on the jury list
unless they have voluntarily registered for such service; men, on
the other hand, even if entitled to an exemption, are to be
included on the list unless they have filed a written claim of
exemption as provided by law.
In neither respect can we conclude that Florida’s statute is
not “based on some reasonable classification,” and that it is thus
infected with unconstitutionality. Despite the enlightened eman-
cipation of women from the restrictions and protections of
bygone years, and their entry into many parts of community life
formerly considered to be reserved to men, woman is still
regarded as the center of home and family life. We cannot say
that it is constitutionally impermissible for a State, acting in pur-
suit of the general welfare, to conclude that a woman should be
relieved from the civic duty of jury service unless she herself
156
Selected Cases and State Statutes

determines that such service is consistent with her own special
responsibilities. . . .
Appellant argues that whatever may have been the design of
this Florida enactment, the statute in practical operation results
in an exclusion of women from jury service, because women, like
men, can be expected to be available for jury service only under
compulsion. In this connection she points out that by 1957, when
this trial took place, only some 220 women out of approximately
46,000 registered female voters in Hillsborough County—consti-
tuting about 40 per cent of the total voting population of that
county [10]—had volunteered for jury duty since the limitation
of jury service to males, see Hall v. Florida, 136 Fla. 644. 662–665,
187 So. 392, 400–401, was removed by 40.01 (1) in 1949. Fla. Laws
1949. c. 25,126.
This argument, however, is surely beside the point. Given
the reasonableness of the classification involved in 40.01 (1), the
relative paucity of women jurors does not carry the constitutional
consequence appellant would have it bear. “Circumstances or
chance may well dictate that no persons in a certain class will
serve on a particular jury or during some particular period.” Her-
nandez v. Texas, supra, at 482.
We cannot hold this statute as written offensive to the Four-
teenth Amendment.
Appellant’s attack on the statute as applied in this case fares
no better.
In the year here relevant Fla. Stat., 1955, 40.10 in conjunction
with 40.02 required the jury commissioners, with the aid of the
local circuit court judges and clerk, to compile annually a jury list
of 10,000 inhabitants qualified to be jurors. In 1957 the existing
Hillsborough County list had become exhausted to the extent of
some 3,000 jurors. The new list was constructed by taking over
from the old list the remaining some 7,000 jurors, including 10
women, and adding some 3,000 new male jurors to build up the
list to the requisite 10,000. At the time some 220 women had reg-
istered for jury duty in this county, including those taken over
from the earlier list . . . .
This case in no way resembles those involving race or color
in which the circumstances shown were found by this Court to
compel a conclusion of purposeful discriminatory exclusions
from jury service . . . There is present here neither the unfortu-
nate atmosphere of ethnic or racial prejudices which underlay
the situations depicted in those cases, nor the long course of dis-
Cases
157

criminatory administrative practice which the statistical showing
in each of them evinced.
In the circumstances here depicted, it indeed “taxes our
credulity,” Hernandez v. Texas, supra, at 482, to attribute to these
administrative officials a deliberate design to exclude the very
class whose eligibility for jury service the state legislature, after
many years of contrary policy, had declared only a few years
before. It is sufficiently evident from the record that the presence
on the jury list of no more than ten or twelve women in the ear-
lier years, and the failure to add in 1957 more women to those
already on the list, are attributable not to any discriminatory
motive, but to a purpose to put on the list only those women who
might be expected to be qualified for service if actually called.
Nor is there the slightest suggestion that the list was the product
of any plan to place on it only women of a particular economic or
other community or organizational group.
Finally, the disproportion of women to men on the list inde-
pendently carries no constitutional significance. In the adminis-
tration of the jury laws proportional class representation is not a
constitutionally required factor. . . .
Finding no substantial evidence whatever in this record that
Florida has arbitrarily undertaken to exclude women from jury
service, a showing which it was incumbent on appellant to make,
we must sustain the judgment of the Supreme Court of Florida.
Affirmed.
Delaware v. Prouse, 440 U.S. 648 (1979)
Leading up to this case in 1979, it had been a common practice in police
work to conduct motor vehicle stops without any specific violation. In
such cases, the stop would still have to be brief absent the emergence of
evidence of a crime. But the stop itself was considered within the
purview of legitimate proactive police work. If an officer thought some-
thing looked funny with a particular vehicle or occupant, then on the
officer’s hunch, he or she could stop the vehicle and investigate. In the
present case, a police officer pulled over a vehicle because, in the officer’s
words, the officer wasn’t doing anything else, had no calls waiting, and
thought he would check the identification and registration.
This practice of pulling over vehicles solely at the discretion of the
officer, even when no observed violation existed, certainly had its crit-
ics. However noble it was for police officers to be proactive in their fight
against crime, the practice litigated in Delaware v. Prouse certainly
158
Selected Cases and State Statutes

lent itself to abuse—particularly against individuals who matched
whatever personal profiles officers held regarding likely offenders. For
many officers, such profiles included young adult males of color. Hence,
this case was particularly important for criminal profiling in that the
Supreme Court here first noted that random stops of vehicles simply to
“check things out” without articulable suspicion of criminal activity are
unconstitutional. Neither the whim of the officer, nor the mere status of
driving one’s vehicle on a public road, would qualify as a legitimate
basis for pulling a vehicle over.
The logic the Supreme Court followed in this case sets up the
Whren decision nearly two decades later, in which the Court empha-
sized the fact that an officer must have reasonable suspicion of a viola-
tion to pull over a vehicle and that reasonable suspicion is the only ele-
ment that matters with regard to the legality of a stop.
MR. JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.
The question is whether it is an unreasonable seizure under
the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments to stop an automobile,
being driven on a public highway, for the purpose of checking
the driving license of the operator and the registration of the car,
where there is neither probable cause to believe nor reasonable
suspicion that the car is being driven contrary to the laws gov-
erning the operation of motor vehicles or that either the car or
any of its occupants is subject to seizure or detention in connec-
tion with the violation of any other applicable law.
At 7:20 P.M. on November 30, 1976, a New Castle County,
Del., patrolman in a police cruiser stopped the automobile occu-
pied by respondent. [1] The patrolman smelled marihuana
smoke as he was walking toward the stopped vehicle, and he
seized marihuana in plain view on the car floor. Respondent was
subsequently indicted for illegal possession of a controlled sub-
stance. At a hearing on respondent’s motion to suppress the mar-
ihuana seized as a result of the stop, the patrolman testified that
prior to stopping the vehicle he had observed neither traffic or
equipment violations nor any suspicious activity, and that he
made the stop only in order to check the driver’s license and reg-
istration. The patrolman was not acting pursuant to any stan-
dards, guidelines, or procedures pertaining to document spot
checks, promulgated by either his department or the State Attor-
ney General. Characterizing the stop as “routine,” the patrolman
explained, “I saw the car in the area and wasn’t answering any
complaints, so I decided to pull them off.” The trial court granted
Cases
159

the motion to suppress, finding the stop and detention to have
been wholly capricious and therefore violative of the Fourth
Amendment.
The Delaware Supreme Court affirmed, noting first that
“[t]he issue of the legal validity of systematic, roadblock-type
stops of a number of vehicles for license and vehicle registration
check is not now before the Court.” . . . The court held that “a
random stop of a motorist in the absence of specific articulable
facts which justify the stop by indicating a reasonable suspicion
that a violation of the law has occurred is constitutionally imper-
missible and violative of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amend-
ments to the United States Constitution.” . . .
The Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments are implicated in
this case because stopping an automobile and detaining its occu-
pants constitute a “seizure” within the meaning of those Amend-
ments, even though the purpose of the stop is limited and the
resulting detention quite brief. . . . The essential purpose of the
proscriptions in the Fourth Amendment is to impose a standard
of “reasonableness” upon the exercise of discretion by govern-
ment officials, including law enforcement agents, in order “‘to
safeguard the privacy and security of individuals against arbi-
trary invasions. . . . ’” Thus, the permissibility of a particular law
enforcement practice is judged by balancing its intrusion on the
individual’s Fourth Amendment interests against its promotion
of legitimate governmental interests. Implemented in this man-
ner, the reasonableness standard usually requires, at a minimum,
that the facts upon which an intrusion is based be capable of
measurement against “an objective standard,” whether this be
probable cause or a less stringent test. In those situations in
which the balance of interests precludes insistence upon “some
quantum of individualized suspicion,” other safeguards are gen-
erally relied upon to assure that the individual’s reasonable
expectation of privacy is not “subject to the discretion of the offi-
cial in the field.” . . .
In this case, however, the State of Delaware urges that patrol
officers be subject to no constraints in deciding which automo-
biles shall be stopped for a license and registration check because
the State’s interest in discretionary spot checks as a means of
ensuring the safety of its roadways outweighs the resulting intru-
sion on the privacy and security of the persons detained. . . .
The question remains, however, whether in the service of
these important ends [particularly, safety on the state roadways]
160
Selected Cases and State Statutes

the discretionary spot check is a sufficiently productive mecha-
nism to justify the intrusion upon Fourth Amendment interests
which such stops entail. On the record before us, that question
must be answered in the negative. Given the alternative mecha-
nisms available, both those in use and those that might be
adopted, we are unconvinced that the incremental contribution
to highway safety of the random spot check justifies the practice
under the Fourth Amendment.
The marginal contribution to roadway safety possibly result-
ing from a system of spot checks cannot justify subjecting every
occupant of every vehicle on the roads to a seizure—limited in
magnitude compared to other intrusions but nonetheless consti-
tutionally cognizable—at the unbridled discretion of law
enforcement officials. To insist neither upon an appropriate fac-
tual basis for suspicion directed at a particular automobile nor
upon some other substantial and objective standard or rule to
govern the exercise of discretion “would invite intrusions upon
constitutionally guaranteed rights based on nothing more sub-
stantial than inarticulate hunches. . . .”
An individual operating or traveling in an automobile does
not lose all reasonable expectation of privacy simply because the
automobile and its use are subject to government regulation.
Automobile travel is a basic, pervasive, and often necessary
mode of transportation to and from one’s home, workplace, and
leisure activities. Many people spend more hours each day trav-
eling in cars than walking on the streets. Undoubtedly, many find
a greater sense of security and privacy in traveling in an auto-
mobile than they do in exposing themselves by pedestrian or
other modes of travel. Were the individual subject to unfettered
governmental intrusion every time he entered an automobile, the
security guaranteed by the Fourth Amendment would be seri-
ously circumscribed. As Terry v. Ohio, supra, recognized, people
are not shorn of all Fourth Amendment protection when they
step from their homes onto the public sidewalks. Nor are they
shorn of those interests when they step from the sidewalks into
their automobiles. . . .
Accordingly, we hold that except in those situations in which
there is at least articulable and reasonable suspicion that a
motorist is unlicensed or that an automobile is not registered, or
that either the vehicle or an occupant is otherwise subject to
seizure for violation of law, stopping an automobile and detain-
ing the driver in order to check his driver’s license and the regis-
Cases
161

tration of the automobile are unreasonable under the Fourth
Amendment. This holding does not preclude the State of
Delaware or other States from developing methods for spot
checks that involve less intrusion or that do not involve the
unconstrained exercise of discretion. [26] Questioning of all
oncoming traffic at roadblock-type stops is one possible alterna-
tive. We hold only that persons in automobiles on public road-
ways may not for that reason alone have their travel and privacy
interfered with at the unbridled discretion of police officers. The
judgment below is affirmed.
So ordered.
Bowers v. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986)
In this case, Hardwick, a male, was charged under the criminal code of
the State of Georgia for committing sodomy with another adult male.
The act was consensual and took place in Hardwick’s bedroom at his
home. Hardwick believed that the Georgia statute barring homosexual
conduct was unconstitutional and filed suit in federal court. The Fed-
eral District Court hearing the case upheld the constitutionality of the
statute. Hardwick appealed that decision and won a victory with the
Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals. The Appellate Court ruled that the
Georgia statute against sodomy was indeed unconstitutional as it vio-
lated the right of privacy developed and affirmed by the U.S. Supreme
Court in several previous cases . . . most notably Griswold v. Con-
necticut (1965). The Supreme Court, however, ruled with a five-to-four
margin that the U.S. Constitution does not grant a fundamental right
upon homosexuals to engage in homosexual acts. In short, the Court
affirmed a state’s right to criminalize homosexual conduct. This obvi-
ously posed some serious problems for those concerned about discrimi-
nation against gays by the criminal justice system. It is difficult for
advocates against profiling on the basis of sexual orientation to get a
foothold when the very acts associated with gay living remain crimi-
nalized with the Supreme Court’s blessing.
This case represented settled law for seventeen years until the
Supreme Court found in Lawrence v. Texas (2003) that a constitu-
tional right to sexual privacy exists for all consenting adults of any sex
and of any sexual orientation.
JUSTICE WHITE delivered the opinion of the Court.
In August 1982, respondent Hardwick (hereafter respon-
dent) was charged with violating the Georgia statute criminaliz-
162
Selected Cases and State Statutes

ing sodomy by committing that act with another adult male in
the bedroom of respondent’s home. After a preliminary hearing,
the District Attorney decided not to present the matter to the
grand jury unless further evidence developed.
Respondent then brought suit in the Federal District Court,
challenging the constitutionality of the statute insofar as it crim-
inalized consensual sodomy. He asserted that he was a practicing
homosexual, that the Georgia sodomy statute, as administered
by the defendants, placed him in imminent danger of arrest, and
that the statute for several reasons violates the Federal Constitu-
tion. The District Court granted the defendants’ motion to dis-
miss for failure to state a claim, relying on Doe v. Common-
wealth’s Attorney for the City of Richmond. . . .
This case does not require a judgment on whether laws
against sodomy between consenting adults in general, or
between homosexuals in particular, are wise or desirable. It raises
no question about the right or propriety of state legislative deci-
sions to repeal their laws that criminalize homosexual sodomy, or
of state-court decisions invalidating those laws on state constitu-
tional grounds. The issue presented is whether the Federal Con-
stitution confers a fundamental right upon homosexuals to
engage in sodomy and hence invalidates the laws of the many
States that still make such conduct illegal and have done so for a
very long time. The case also calls for some judgment about the
limits of the Court’s role in carrying out its constitutional man-
date.
We first register our disagreement with the Court of Appeals
and with respondent that the Court’s prior cases have construed
the Constitution to confer a right of privacy that extends to
homosexual sodomy and for all intents and purposes have
decided this case. The reach of this line of cases was sketched in
Carey v. Population Services International, 431 U.S. 678, 685
(1977). Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510 (1925), and Meyer
v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390 (1923), were described as dealing with
child rearing and education; Prince v. Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158
(1944), with family relationships; Skinner v. Oklahoma ex rel.
Williamson, 316 U.S. 535 (1942), with procreation; Loving v. Vir-
ginia, 388 U.S. 1 (1967), with marriage; Griswold v. Connecticut,
supra, and Eisenstadt v. Baird, supra, with contraception; and
Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973), with abortion. The latter three
cases were interpreted as construing the Due Process Clause of
the Fourteenth Amendment to confer a fundamental individual
Cases
163

right to decide whether or not to beget or bear a child. Carey v.
Population Services International. . . .
Accepting the decisions in these cases and the above
description of them, we think it evident that none of the rights
announced in those cases bears any resemblance to the claimed
constitutional right of homosexuals to engage in acts of sodomy
that is asserted in this case. No connection between family, mar-
riage, or procreation on the one hand and homosexual activity on
the other has been demonstrated, either by the Court of Appeals
or by respondent. Moreover, any claim that these cases neverthe-
less stand for the proposition that any kind of private sexual con-
duct between consenting adults is constitutionally insulated
from state proscription is unsupportable. Indeed, the Court’s
opinion in Carey twice asserted that the privacy right, which the
Griswold line of cases found to be one of the protections pro-
vided by the Due Process Clause, did not reach so far.
Precedent aside, however, respondent would have us
announce, as the Court of Appeals did, a fundamental right to
engage in homosexual sodomy. This we are quite unwilling to
do. It is true that despite the language of the Due Process Clauses
of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, which appears to focus
only on the processes by which life, liberty, or property is taken,
the cases are legion in which those Clauses have been interpreted
to have substantive content, subsuming rights that to a great
extent are immune from federal or state regulation or proscrip-
tion. Among such cases are those recognizing rights that have lit-
tle or no textual support in the constitutional language. Meyer,
Prince, and Pierce fall in this category, as do the privacy cases
from Griswold to Carey.
Striving to assure itself and the public that announcing
rights not readily identifiable in the Constitution’s text involves
much more than the imposition of the Justices’ own choice of val-
ues on the States and the Federal Government, the Court has
sought to identify the nature of the rights qualifying for height-
ened judicial protection. In Palko v. Connecticut (1937), it was
said that this category includes those fundamental liberties that
are “implicit in the concept of ordered liberty,” such that “neither
liberty nor justice would exist if [they] were sacrificed.”
It is obvious to us that neither of these formulations would
extend a fundamental right to homosexuals to engage in acts of
consensual sodomy. Proscriptions against that conduct have
ancient roots. Sodomy was a criminal offense at common law and
164
Selected Cases and State Statutes

was forbidden by the laws of the original 13 States when they rat-
ified the Bill of Rights. In 1868, when the Fourteenth Amendment
was ratified, all but 5 of the 37 States in the Union had criminal
sodomy laws. In fact, until 1961, all 50 States outlawed sodomy,
and today, 24 States and the District of Columbia continue to pro-
vide criminal penalties for sodomy performed in private and
between consenting adults. Against this background, to claim
that a right to engage in such conduct is “deeply rooted in this
Nation’s history and tradition” or “implicit in the concept of
ordered liberty” is, at best, facetious.
Nor are we inclined to take a more expansive view of our
authority to discover new fundamental rights imbedded in the
Due Process Clause. The Court is most vulnerable and comes
nearest to illegitimacy when it deals with judge-made constitu-
tional law having little or no cognizable roots in the language or
design of the Constitution.
Respondent, however, asserts that the result should be dif-
ferent where the homosexual conduct occurs in the privacy of the
home. He relies on Stanley v. Georgia, 394 U.S. 557 (1969), where
the Court held that the First Amendment prevents conviction for
possessing and reading obscene material in the privacy of one’s
home: “If the First Amendment means anything, it means that a
State has no business telling a man, sitting alone in his house,
what books he may read or what films he may watch.”
Stanley did protect conduct that would not have been pro-
tected outside the home, and it partially prevented the enforce-
ment of state obscenity laws; but the decision was firmly
grounded in the First Amendment. The right pressed upon us
here has no similar support in the text of the Constitution, and it
does not qualify for recognition under the prevailing principles
for construing the Fourteenth Amendment. Its limits are also dif-
ficult to discern. Plainly enough, otherwise illegal conduct is not
always immunized whenever it occurs in the home. Victimless
crimes, such as the possession and use of illegal drugs, do not
escape the law where they are committed at home.
Even if the conduct at issue here is not a fundamental right,
respondent asserts that there must be a rational basis for the law
and that there is none in this case other than the presumed belief
of a majority of the electorate in Georgia that homosexual
sodomy is immoral and unacceptable. This is said to be an inad-
equate rationale to support the law. The law, however, is con-
stantly based on notions of morality, and if all laws representing
Cases
165

essentially moral choices are to be invalidated under the Due
Process Clause, the courts will be very busy indeed. Even respon-
dent makes no such claim, but insists that majority sentiments
about the morality of homosexuality should be declared inade-
quate. We do not agree, and are unpersuaded that the sodomy
laws of some 25 States should be invalidated on this basis. [8]
Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeals is
Reversed.
Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986)
The Supreme Court’s decision in this case represents an extension of the
long-established position of the Court that systematic exclusion of peo-
ple of a particular race from jury duty is a violation of the Constitution.
Here, the Court applied this principle to peremptory challenges. Prose-
cutors and defense attorneys are both granted a limited number of
peremptory challenges (that is, the opportunity to strike a potential
juror from the jury pool for no particular reason whatsoever) for any
given trial. Traditionally, the right of criminal lawyers on both sides of
the case to exercise their peremptory challenges without any oversight
has always been upheld.
In Batson, however, the Supreme Court said that exclusion of peo-
ple from the jury, even through a peremptory challenge, was not consti-
tutional if the exclusion was because of race. The Supreme Court did not
require that attorneys have a good reason for excluding people. Indeed,
the reasons could be quite silly—as always—except that the reason had
to be race neutral. This opinion represents one of the Court’s more con-
temporary statements outlawing racial profiling during the trial
process.
JUSTICE POWELL delivered the opinion of the Court.
This case requires us to reexamine that portion of Swain v.
Alabama, 380 U.S. 202 (1965), concerning the evidentiary burden
placed on a criminal defendant who claims that he has been
denied equal protection through the State’s use of peremptory
challenges to exclude members of his race from the petit jury.
Petitioner, a black man, was indicted in Kentucky on charges
of second-degree burglary and receipt of stolen goods. On the
first day of trial in Jefferson Circuit Court, the judge conducted
voir dire examination of the venire, excused certain jurors for
cause, and permitted the parties to exercise peremptory chal-
lenges. The prosecutor used his peremptory challenges to strike
166
Selected Cases and State Statutes

all four black persons on the venire, and a jury composed only of
white persons was selected. Defense counsel moved to discharge
the jury before it was sworn on the ground that the prosecutor’s
removal of the black veniremen violated petitioner’s rights
under the Sixth and Fourteenth Amendments to a jury drawn
from a cross section of the community, and under the Fourteenth
Amendment to equal protection of the laws. Counsel requested a
hearing on his motion. Without expressly ruling on the request
for a hearing, the trial judge observed that the parties were enti-
tled to use their peremptory challenges to “strike anybody they
want to.” The judge then denied petitioner’s motion, reasoning
that the cross-section requirement applies only to selection of the
venire and not to selection of the petit jury itself.
The jury convicted petitioner on both counts.
In Swain v. Alabama, this Court recognized that a “State’s
purposeful or deliberate denial to Negroes on account of race of
participation as jurors in the administration of justice violates the
Equal Protection Clause.” This principle has been “consistently
and repeatedly” reaffirmed in numerous decisions of this Court
both preceding and following Swain. We reaffirm the principle
today.
More than a century ago, the Court decided that the State
denies a black defendant equal protection of the laws when it
puts him on trial before a jury from which members of his race
have been purposefully excluded. Strauder v. West Virginia. That
decision laid the foundation for the Court’s unceasing efforts to
eradicate racial discrimination in the procedures used to select
the venire from which individual jurors are drawn. In Strauder,
the Court explained that the central concern of the recently rati-
fied Fourteenth Amendment was to put an end to governmental
discrimination on account of race. Exclusion of black citizens
from service as jurors constitutes a primary example of the evil
the Fourteenth Amendment was designed to cure. . . .
Purposeful racial discrimination in selection of the venire
violates a defendant’s right to equal protection because it denies
him the protection that a trial by jury is intended to secure. “The
very idea of a jury is a body . . . composed of the peers or equals
of the person whose rights it is selected or summoned to deter-
mine; that is, of his neighbors, fellows, associates, persons having
the same legal status in society as that which he holds.” The petit
jury has occupied a central position in our system of justice by
safeguarding a person accused of crime against the arbitrary
Cases
167

exercise of power by prosecutor or judge. Those on the venire
must be “indifferently chosen” to secure the defendant’s right
under the Fourteenth Amendment to “protection of life and lib-
erty against race or color prejudice.”
Racial discrimination in selection of jurors harms not only
the accused whose life or liberty they are summoned to try. Com-
petence to serve as a juror ultimately depends on an assessment
of individual qualifications and ability impartially to consider
evidence presented at a trial. A person’s race simply “is unrelated
to his fitness as a juror.” (Frankfurter, J., dissenting). As long ago
as Strauder, therefore, the Court recognized that by denying a
person participation in jury service on account of his race, the
State unconstitutionally discriminated against the excluded juror.
The harm from discriminatory jury selection extends
beyond that inflicted on the defendant and the excluded juror to
touch the entire community. Selection procedures that purpose-
fully exclude black persons from juries undermine public confi-
dence in the fairness of our system of justice. Discrimination
within the judicial system is most pernicious because it is “a
stimulant to that race prejudice which is an impediment to secur-
ing to [black citizens] that equal justice which the law aims to
secure to all others.” . . .
In Strauder, the Court invalidated a state statute that pro-
vided that only white men could serve as jurors. We can be con-
fident that no State now has such a law. The Constitution
requires, however, that we look beyond the face of the statute
defining juror qualifications and also consider challenged selec-
tion practices to afford “protection against action of the State
through its administrative officers in effecting the prohibited dis-
crimination.” Thus, the Court has found a denial of equal protec-
tion where the procedures implementing a neutral statute oper-
ated to exclude persons from the venire on racial grounds, and
has made clear that the Constitution prohibits all forms of pur-
poseful racial discrimination in selection of jurors. While deci-
sions of this Court have been concerned largely with discrimina-
tion during selection of the venire, the principles announced
there also forbid discrimination on account of race in selection of
the petit jury. Since the Fourteenth Amendment protects an
accused throughout the proceedings bringing him to justice, the
State may not draw up its jury lists pursuant to neutral proce-
dures but then resort to discrimination at “other stages in the
selection process.”
168
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Accordingly, the component of the jury selection process at
issue here, the State’s privilege to strike individual jurors through
peremptory challenges, is subject to the commands of the Equal
Protection Clause. Although a prosecutor ordinarily is entitled to
exercise permitted peremptory challenges “for any reason at all,
as long as that reason is related to his view concerning the out-
come” of the case to be tried . . . the Equal Protection Clause for-
bids the prosecutor to challenge potential jurors solely on account
of their race or on the assumption that black jurors as a group will
be unable impartially to consider the State’s case against a black
defendant. . . .
Since the ultimate issue is whether the State has discrimi-
nated in selecting the defendant’s venire, however, the defendant
may establish a prima facie case “in other ways than by evidence
of long-continued unexplained absence” of members of his race
“from many panels.” Cassell v. Texas, 339 U.S. 282, 290 (1950)
(plurality opinion). In cases involving the venire, this Court has
found a prima facie case on proof that members of the defen-
dant’s race were substantially underrepresented on the venire
from which his jury was drawn, and that the venire was selected
under a practice providing “the opportunity for discrimination.”
Whitus v. Georgia, supra, at 552; see Castaneda v. Partida, supra,
at 494; Washington v. Davis, supra, at 241; Alexander v.
Louisiana, supra, at 629–631. This combination of factors raises
the necessary inference of purposeful discrimination because the
Court has declined to attribute to chance the absence of black cit-
izens on a particular jury array where the selection mechanism is
subject to abuse. When circumstances suggest the need, the trial
court must undertake a “factual inquiry” that “takes into account
all possible explanatory factors” in the particular case. Alexander
v. Louisiana, supra, at 630.
Thus, since the decision in Swain, this Court has recognized
that a defendant may make a prima facie showing of purposeful
racial discrimination in selection of the venire by relying solely on
the facts concerning its selection in his case. These decisions are in
accordance with the proposition, articulated in Arlington Heights
v. Metropolitan Housing Development Corp., that “a consistent
pattern of official racial discrimination” is not “a necessary predi-
cate to a violation of the Equal Protection Clause. A single invidi-
ously discriminatory governmental act” is not “immunized by the
absence of such discrimination in the making of other comparable
decisions.” 429 U.S., at 266, n. 14. For evidentiary requirements to
Cases
169

dictate that “several must suffer discrimination” before one could
object, McCray v. New York, 461 U.S., at 965 (MARSHALL, J., dis-
senting from denial of certiorari), would be inconsistent with the
promise of equal protection to all. [19]
In deciding whether [purposeful discrimination in jury
selection has taken place], the trial court should consider all rele-
vant circumstances. For example, a “pattern” of strikes against
black jurors included in the particular venire might give rise to
an inference of discrimination. Similarly, the prosecutor’s ques-
tions and statements during voir dire examination and in exer-
cising his challenges may support or refute an inference of dis-
criminatory purpose. These examples are merely illustrative. We
have confidence that trial judges, experienced in supervising voir
dire, will be able to decide if the circumstances concerning the
prosecutor’s use of peremptory challenges creates a prima facie
case of discrimination against black jurors.
Once the defendant makes a prima facie showing [of dis-
crimination], the burden shifts to the State to come forward with
a neutral explanation for challenging black jurors. Though this
requirement imposes a limitation in some cases on the full
peremptory character of the historic challenge, we emphasize
that the prosecutor’s explanation need not rise to the level justi-
fying exercise of a challenge for cause. But the prosecutor may
not rebut the defendant’s prima facie case of discrimination by
stating merely that he challenged jurors of the defendant’s race
on the assumption—or his intuitive judgment—that they would
be partial to the defendant because of their shared race.
The State contends that our holding will eviscerate the fair
trial values served by the peremptory challenge. Conceding that
the Constitution does not guarantee a right to peremptory chal-
lenges and that Swain did state that their use ultimately is sub-
ject to the strictures of equal protection, the State argues that the
privilege of unfettered exercise of the challenge is of vital impor-
tance to the criminal justice system.
While we recognize, of course, that the peremptory chal-
lenge occupies an important position in our trial procedures, we
do not agree that our decision today will undermine the contri-
bution the challenge generally makes to the administration of
justice. The reality of practice, amply reflected in many state- and
federal-court opinions, shows that the challenge may be, and
unfortunately at times has been, used to discriminate against
black jurors. By requiring trial courts to be sensitive to the
170
Selected Cases and State Statutes

racially discriminatory use of peremptory challenges, our deci-
sion enforces the mandate of equal protection and furthers the
ends of justice. In view of the heterogeneous population of our
Nation, public respect for our criminal justice system and the rule
of law will be strengthened if we ensure that no citizen is dis-
qualified from jury service because of his race. . . .
In this case, petitioner made a timely objection to the prose-
cutor’s removal of all black persons on the venire. Because the
trial court flatly rejected the objection without requiring the pros-
ecutor to give an explanation for his action, we remand this case
for further proceedings. If the trial court decides that the facts
establish, prima facie, purposeful discrimination and the prose-
cutor does not come forward with a neutral explanation for his
action, our precedents require that petitioner’s conviction be
reversed.
It is so ordered.
United States v. Sokolow, 490 U.S. 1 (1989)
The case of Sokolow was heard by the Supreme Court during the height
of the drug war in the United States. Indeed, as discussed earlier in the
book, the use of profiles to identify potential criminals was expanded
and popularized by the successful use of drug courier profiles. Such a
profile was used in this case.
Here, the Supreme Court made it clear that profiling is a permissi-
ble police tactic for generating the reasonable suspicion required for an
investigatory stop and detention. It reaffirmed its position in Prouse
that the discretionary reliance on hunches is not enough for the officer
to detain. Profiles that are built upon articulable facts and probabilities
and that do not rely primarily on the protected status of a suspect—par-
ticularly race or ethnicity—are however acceptable and indeed valuable.
CHIEF JUSTICE REHNQUIST delivered the opinion of the
Court.
Respondent Andrew Sokolow was stopped by Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) agents upon his arrival at
Honolulu International Airport. The agents found 1,063 grams of
cocaine in his carry-on luggage. When respondent was stopped,
the agents knew, inter alia, that (1) he paid $2,100 for two air-
plane tickets from a roll of $20 bills; (2) he traveled under a name
that did not match the name under which his telephone number
was listed; (3) his original destination was Miami, a source city
Cases
171

for illicit drugs; (4) he stayed in Miami for only 48 hours, even
though a round-trip flight from Honolulu to Miami takes 20
hours; (5) he appeared nervous during his trip; and (6) he
checked none of his luggage. A divided panel of the United States
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that the DEA agents
did not have a reasonable suspicion to stop respondent, as
required by the Fourth Amendment. We take the contrary view.
This case involves a typical attempt to smuggle drugs
through one of the Nation’s airports. On a Sunday in July 1984,
respondent went to the United Airlines ticket counter at Hon-
olulu Airport, where he purchased two round-trip tickets for a
flight to Miami leaving later that day. The tickets were purchased
in the names of “Andrew Kray” and “Janet Norian” and had
open return dates. Respondent paid $2,100 for the tickets from a
large roll of $20 bills, which appeared to contain a total of $4,000.
He also gave the ticket agent his home telephone number. The
ticket agent noticed that respondent seemed nervous; he was
about 25 years old; he was dressed in a black jumpsuit and wore
gold jewelry; and he was accompanied by a woman, who turned
out to be Janet Norian. Neither respondent nor his companion
checked any of their four pieces of luggage.
After the couple left for their flight, the ticket agent informed
Officer John McCarthy of the Honolulu Police Department of
respondent’s cash purchase of tickets to Miami. Officer McCarthy
determined that the telephone number respondent gave to the
ticket agent was subscribed to a “Karl Herman,” who resided at
348-A Royal Hawaiian Avenue in Honolulu. Unbeknownst to
McCarthy (and later to the DEA agents), respondent was Her-
man’s roommate. The ticket agent identified respondent’s voice
on the answering machine at Herman’s number. Officer
McCarthy was unable to find any listing under the name
“Andrew Kray” in Hawaii. McCarthy subsequently learned that
return reservations from Miami to Honolulu had been made in
the names of Kray and Norian, with their arrival scheduled for
July 25, three days after respondent and his companion had left.
He also learned that Kray and Norian were scheduled to make
stopovers in Denver and Los Angeles.
On July 25, during the stopover in Los Angeles, DEA agents
identified respondent. He “appeared to be very nervous and was
looking all around the waiting area.” App. 43–44. Later that day,
at 6:30 P. M., respondent and Norian arrived in Honolulu. As
before, they had not checked their luggage. Respondent was still
172
Selected Cases and State Statutes

wearing a black jumpsuit and gold jewelry. The couple pro-
ceeded directly to the street and tried to hail a cab, where Agent
Richard Kempshall and three other DEA agents approached
them. Kempshall displayed his credentials, grabbed respondent
by the arm, and moved him back onto the sidewalk. Kempshall
asked respondent for his airline ticket and identification; respon-
dent said that he had neither. He told the agents that his name
was “Sokolow,” but that he was traveling under his mother’s
maiden name, “Kray.”
Respondent and Norian were escorted to the DEAoffice at the
airport. There, the couple’s luggage was examined by “Donker,” a
narcotics detector dog, which alerted on respondent’s brown
shoulder bag. The agents arrested respondent. He was advised of
his constitutional rights and declined to make any statements. The
agents obtained a warrant to search the shoulder bag. They found
no illicit drugs, but the bag did contain several suspicious docu-
ments indicating respondent’s involvement in drug trafficking.
The agents had Donker reexamine the remaining luggage, and this
time the dog alerted on a medium-sized Louis Vuitton bag. By
now, it was 9:30 P.M., too late for the agents to obtain a second war-
rant. They allowed respondent to leave for the night, but kept his
luggage. The next morning, after a second dog confirmed
Donker’s alert, the agents obtained a warrant and found 1,063
grams of cocaine inside the bag.
Respondent was indicted for possession with the intent to
distribute cocaine in violation of 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1). The United
States District Court for Hawaii denied his motion to suppress
the cocaine and other evidence seized from his luggage, finding
that the DEA agents had a reasonable suspicion that he was
involved in drug trafficking when they stopped him at the air-
port. Respondent then entered a conditional plea of guilty to the
offense charged.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
reversed respondent’s conviction by a divided vote, holding that
the DEA agents did not have a reasonable suspicion to justify the
stop. The majority divided the facts bearing on reasonable suspi-
cion into two categories. In the first category, the majority placed
facts describing “ongoing criminal activity,” such as the use of an
alias or evasive movement through an airport; the majority
believed that at least one such factor was always needed to sup-
port a finding of reasonable suspicion. In the second category, it
placed facts describing “personal characteristics” of drug couriers,
Cases
173

such as the cash payment for tickets, a short trip to a major source
city for drugs, nervousness, type of attire, and unchecked luggage.
The majority believed that such characteristics, “shared by drug
couriers and the public at large,” were only relevant if there was
evidence of ongoing criminal behavior and the Government
offered “[e]mpirical documentation” that the combination of facts
at issue did not describe the behavior of “significant numbers of
innocent persons.” Ibid. Applying this two-part test to the facts of
this case, the majority found that there was no evidence of ongo-
ing criminal behavior, and thus that the agents’ stop was imper-
missible. The dissenting judge took the view that the majority’s
approach was “overly mechanistic” and “contrary to the case-by-
case determination of reasonable articulable suspicion based on all
the facts.” We granted certiorari to review the decision of the Court
of Appeals because of its serious implications for the enforcement
of the federal narcotics laws. We now reverse.
The Court of Appeals held that the DEAagents seized respon-
dent when they grabbed him by the arm and moved him back
onto the sidewalk. The Government does not challenge that con-
clusion, and we assume—without deciding—that a stop occurred
here. Our decision, then, turns on whether the agents had a rea-
sonable suspicion that respondent was engaged in wrongdoing
when they encountered him on the sidewalk. In Terry v. Ohio, we
held that the police can stop and briefly detain a person for inves-
tigative purposes if the officer has a reasonable suspicion sup-
ported by articulable facts that criminal activity “may be afoot,”
even if the officer lacks probable cause.
The officer, of course, must be able to articulate something
more than an “inchoate and unparticularized suspicion or
‘hunch.’” The Fourth Amendment requires “some minimal level
of objective justification” for making the stop. INS v. Delgado
(1984). That level of suspicion is considerably less than proof of
wrongdoing by a preponderance of the evidence. We have held
that probable cause means “a fair probability that contraband or
evidence of a crime will be found,” and the level of suspicion
required for a Terry stop is obviously less demanding than that
for probable cause.
The concept of reasonable suspicion, like probable cause, is
not “readily, or even usefully, reduced to a neat set of legal rules.”
We think the Court of Appeals’ effort to refine and elaborate the
requirements of “reasonable suspicion” in this case creates
unnecessary difficulty in dealing with one of the relatively sim-
174
Selected Cases and State Statutes

ple concepts embodied in the Fourth Amendment. In evaluating
the validity of a stop such as this, we must consider “the totality
of the circumstances—the whole picture.” As we said in Cortez:
The process does not deal with hard certainties, but
with probabilities. Long before the law of probabilities
was articulated as such, practical people formulated
certain common-sense conclusions about human behav-
ior; jurors as factfinders are permitted to do the same—
and so are law enforcement officers.
The rule enunciated by the Court of Appeals, in which evi-
dence available to an officer is divided into evidence of “ongoing
criminal behavior,” on the one hand, and “probabilistic” evi-
dence, on the other, is not in keeping with the quoted statements
from our decisions. It also seems to us to draw a sharp line
between types of evidence, the probative value of which varies
only in degree. The Court of Appeals classified evidence of trav-
eling under an alias, or evidence that the suspect took an evasive
or erratic path through an airport, as meeting the test for showing
“ongoing criminal activity.” But certainly instances are conceiv-
able in which traveling under an alias would not reflect ongoing
criminal activity: for example, a person who wished to travel to a
hospital or clinic for an operation and wished to conceal that fact.
One taking an evasive path through an airport might be seeking
to avoid a confrontation with an angry acquaintance or with a
creditor. This is not to say that each of these types of evidence is
not highly probative, but they do not have the sort of ironclad sig-
nificance attributed to them by the Court of Appeals.
On the other hand, the factors in this case that the Court of
Appeals treated as merely “probabilistic” also have probative
significance. Paying $2,100 in cash for two airplane tickets is out
of the ordinary, and it is even more out of the ordinary to pay that
sum from a roll of $20 bills containing nearly twice that amount
of cash. Most business travelers, we feel confident, purchase air-
line tickets by credit card or check so as to have a record for tax
or business purposes, and few vacationers carry with them thou-
sands of dollars in $20 bills. We also think the agents had a rea-
sonable ground to believe that respondent was traveling under
an alias; the evidence was by no means conclusive, but it was suf-
ficient to warrant consideration. [3] While a trip from Honolulu
to Miami, standing alone, is not a cause for any sort of suspicion,
here there was more: surely few residents of Honolulu travel
Cases
175

from that city for 20 hours to spend 48 hours in Miami during the
month of July.
We do not agree with respondent that our analysis is some-
how changed by the agents’ belief that his behavior was consis-
tent with one of the DEA’s “drug courier profiles.” [6] Brief for
Respondent 14–21. A court sitting to determine the existence of
reasonable suspicion must require the agent to articulate the fac-
tors leading to that conclusion, but the fact that these factors may
be set forth in a “profile” does not somehow detract from their
evidentiary significance as seen by a trained agent.
We hold that the agents had a reasonable basis to suspect
that respondent was transporting illegal drugs on these facts. The
judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore reversed, and the
case is remanded for further proceedings consistent with our
decision.
It is so ordered.
Whren et al. v. United States (1996)
No case has received as much attention within the context of discus-
sions about racial profiling, and other unlawful profiling, as has the pre-
sent case. The facts in Whren are as follows: Plainclothes police officers
were on patrol in a neighborhood considered to be a “high drug area.”
The officers observed a vehicle in which Whren was a passenger stopped
at a stop sign for an unusually long period of time. The vehicle then
made the turn without signaling and sped off. The police officers
stopped the vehicle, using the unlawful turn as the basis for the stop.
Upon approaching the vehicle, officers observed crack cocaine being held
by passenger Whren.
Whren argued that the officers used the minor traffic violation to
investigate other crimes for which they had no probable cause. He urged
the Supreme Court to require demonstration that a reasonable officer
would make a traffic stop for the purpose of enforcing the traffic viola-
tion in question in any given traffic stop situation. The Supreme Court
ruled unanimously that the traffic stop and subsequent arrest and pros-
ecution of Whren were legal. Where probable cause exists that a traffic
violation has occurred, police are not required to demonstrate that they
did not have ulterior motives in the stop.
JUSTICE SCALIA delivered the opinion of the Court.
In this case we decide whether the temporary detention of a
motorist who the police have probable cause to believe has com-
176
Selected Cases and State Statutes

mitted a civil traffic violation is inconsistent with the Fourth
Amendment’s prohibition against unreasonable seizures unless a
reasonable officer would have been motivated to stop the car by
a desire to enforce the traffic laws.
On the evening of June 10, 1993, plainclothes vice-squad offi-
cers of the District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department
were patrolling a “high drug area” of the city in an unmarked
car. Their suspicions were aroused when they passed a dark
Pathfinder truck with temporary license plates and youthful
occupants waiting at a stop sign, the driver looking down into
the lap of the passenger at his right. The truck remained stopped
at the intersection for what seemed an unusually long time—
more than 20 seconds. When the police car executed a U-turn in
order to head back toward the truck, the Pathfinder turned sud-
denly to its right, without signaling, and sped off at an “unrea-
sonable” speed. The policemen followed, and in a short while
overtook the Pathfinder when it stopped behind other traffic at a
red light. They pulled up alongside, and Officer Ephraim Soto
stepped out and approached the driver’s door, identifying him-
self as a police officer and directing the driver, petitioner Brown,
to put the vehicle in park. When Soto drew up to the driver’s
window, he immediately observed two large plastic bags of what
appeared to be crack cocaine in petitioner Whren’s hands. Peti-
tioners were arrested, and quantities of several types of illegal
drugs were retrieved from the vehicle.
Petitioners were charged in a four-count indictment with
violating various federal drug laws, including 21 U. S. C. Sec-
tion(s) 844(a) and 860(a). At a pretrial suppression hearing, they
challenged the legality of the stop and the resulting seizure of the
drugs. They argued that the stop had not been justified by prob-
able cause to believe, or even reasonable suspicion, that petition-
ers were engaged in illegal drug-dealing activity; and that Officer
Soto’s asserted ground for approaching the vehicle—to give the
driver a warning concerning traffic violations—was pretextual.
The District Court denied the suppression motion, concluding
that “the facts of the stop were not controverted,” and “[t]here
was nothing to really demonstrate that the actions of the officers
were contrary to a normal traffic stop.”
Petitioners were convicted of the counts at issue here. The
Court of Appeals affirmed the convictions, holding with respect
to the suppression issue that, “regardless of whether a police offi-
cer subjectively believes that the occupants of an automobile may
Cases
177

be engaging in some other illegal behavior, a traffic stop is per-
missible as long as a reasonable officer in the same circumstances
could have stopped the car for the suspected traffic violation.”
The Fourth Amendment guarantees “[t]he right of the people
to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against
unreasonable searches and seizures.” Temporary detention of
individuals during the stop of an automobile by the police, even
if only for a brief period and for a limited purpose, constitutes a
“seizure” of “persons” within the meaning of this provision. An
automobile stop is thus subject to the constitutional imperative
that it not be “unreasonable” under the circumstances. As a gen-
eral matter, the decision to stop an automobile is reasonable
where the police have probable cause to believe that a traffic vio-
lation has occurred.
Petitioners accept that Officer Soto had probable cause to
believe that various provisions of the District of Columbia traffic
code had been violated. They argue, however, that “in the unique
context of civil traffic regulations” probable cause is not enough.
Since, they contend, the use of automobiles is so heavily and
minutely regulated that total compliance with traffic and safety
rules is nearly impossible, a police officer will almost invariably
be able to catch any given motorist in a technical violation. This
creates the temptation to use traffic stops as a means of investi-
gating other law violations, as to which no probable cause or even
articulable suspicion exists. Petitioners, who are both black, fur-
ther contend that police officers might decide which motorists to
stop based on decidedly impermissible factors, such as the race of
the car’s occupants. To avoid this danger, they say, the Fourth
Amendment test for traffic stops should be, not the normal one
(applied by the Court of Appeals) of whether probable cause
existed to justify the stop; but rather, whether a police officer, act-
ing reasonably, would have made the stop for the reason given.
Petitioners contend that the standard they propose is consis-
tent with our past cases’ disapproval of police attempts to use
valid bases of action against citizens as pretexts for pursuing
other investigatory agendas. We are reminded that in Florida v.
Wells (1990), we stated that “an inventory search must not be
used as a ruse for a general rummaging in order to discover
incriminating evidence”; that in Colorado v. Bertine (1987), in
approving an inventory search, we apparently thought it signifi-
cant that there had been “no showing that the police, who were
following standard procedures, acted in bad faith or for the sole
178
Selected Cases and State Statutes

purpose of investigation”; and that in New York v. Burger (1987),
we observed, in upholding the constitutionality of a warrantless
administrative inspection, that the search did not appear to be “a
‘pretext’ for obtaining evidence of . . . violation of . . . penal
laws.” But only an undiscerning reader would regard these cases
as endorsing the principle that ulterior motives can invalidate
police conduct that is justifiable on the basis of probable cause to
believe that a violation of law has occurred. In each case we were
addressing the validity of a search conducted in the absence of
probable cause. Our quoted statements simply explain that the
exemption from the need for probable cause (and warrant),
which is accorded to searches made for the purpose of inventory
or administrative regulation, is not accorded to searches that are
not made for those purposes.
. . . Not only have we never held, outside the context of
inventory search or administrative inspection (discussed above),
that an officer’s motive invalidates objectively justifiable behav-
ior under the Fourth Amendment; but we have repeatedly held
and asserted the contrary. In United States v. Villamonte-Mar-
quez (1983), we held that an otherwise valid warrantless board-
ing of a vessel by customs officials was not rendered invalid
“because the customs officers were accompanied by a Louisiana
state policeman, and were following an informant’s tip that a
vessel in the ship channel was thought to be carrying mari-
huana.” We flatly dismissed the idea that an ulterior motive
might serve to strip the agents of their legal justification. In
United States v. Robinson (1973), we held that a traffic-violation
arrest (of the sort here) would not be rendered invalid by the fact
that it was “a mere pretext” for a narcotics search and that a law-
ful postarrest search of the person would not be rendered invalid
by the fact that it was not motivated by the officer-safety concern
that justifies such searches. In rejecting the contention that wire-
tap evidence was subject to exclusion because the agents con-
ducting the tap had failed to make any effort to comply with the
statutory requirement that unauthorized acquisitions be mini-
mized, we said that “[s]ubjective intent alone . . . does not make
otherwise lawful conduct illegal or unconstitutional.” We
described Robinson as having established that “the fact that the
officer does not have the state of mind which is hypothecated by
the reasons which provide the legal justification for the officer’s
action does not invalidate the action taken as long as the circum-
stances, viewed objectively, justify that action.”
Cases
179

We think these cases foreclose any argument that the consti-
tutional reasonableness of traffic stops depends on the actual
motivations of the individual officers involved. We of course
agree with petitioners that the Constitution prohibits selective
enforcement of the law based on considerations such as race. But
the constitutional basis for objecting to intentionally discrimina-
tory application of laws is the Equal Protection Clause, not the
Fourth Amendment. Subjective intentions play no role in ordi-
nary, probable-cause Fourth Amendment analysis.
Recognizing that we have been unwilling to entertain Fourth
Amendment challenges based on the actual motivations of indi-
vidual officers, petitioners disavow any intention to make the
individual officer’s subjective good faith the touchstone of “rea-
sonableness.” They insist that the standard they have put for-
ward—whether the officer’s conduct deviated materially from
usual police practices, so that a reasonable officer in the same cir-
cumstances would not have made the stop for the reasons given—
is an “objective” one.
But although framed in empirical terms, this approach is
plainly and indisputably driven by subjective considerations. Its
whole purpose is to prevent the police from doing under the
guise of enforcing the traffic code what they would like to do for
different reasons. Petitioners’ proposed standard may not use the
word “pretext,” but it is designed to combat nothing other than
the perceived “danger” of the pretextual stop, albeit only indi-
rectly and over the run of cases. Instead of asking whether the
individual officer had the proper state of mind, the petitioners
would have us ask, in effect, whether (based on general police
practices) it is plausible to believe that the officer had the proper
state of mind.
Why one would frame a test designed to combat pretext in
such fashion that the court cannot take into account actual and
admitted pretext is a curiosity that can only be explained by the
fact that our cases have foreclosed the more sensible option. If
those cases were based only upon the evidentiary difficulty of
establishing subjective intent, petitioners’ attempt to root out
subjective vices through objective means might make sense. But
they were not based only upon that, or indeed even principally
upon that. Their principal basis—which applies equally to
attempts to reach subjective intent through ostensibly objective
means—is simply that the Fourth Amendment’s concern with
“reasonableness” allows certain actions to be taken in certain cir-
180
Selected Cases and State Statutes

cumstances, whatever the subjective intent. But even if our con-
cern had been only an evidentiary one, petitioners’ proposal
would by no means assuage it. Indeed, it seems to us somewhat
easier to figure out the intent of an individual officer than to
plumb the collective consciousness of law enforcement in order
to determine whether a “reasonable officer” would have been
moved to act upon the traffic violation. While police manuals
and standard procedures may sometimes provide objective assis-
tance, ordinarily one would be reduced to speculating about the
hypothetical reaction of a hypothetical constable—an exercise
that might be called virtual subjectivity.
Moreover, police enforcement practices, even if they could
be practicably assessed by a judge, vary from place to place and
from time to time. We cannot accept that the search and seizure
protections of the Fourth Amendment are so variable and can be
made to turn upon such trivialities. The difficulty is illustrated by
petitioners’ arguments in this case. Their claim that a reasonable
officer would not have made this stop is based largely on District
of Columbia police regulations which permit plainclothes offi-
cers in unmarked vehicles to enforce traffic laws “only in the case
of a violation that is so grave as to pose an immediate threat to
the safety of others.” This basis of invalidation would not apply
in jurisdictions that had a different practice. And it would not
have applied even in the District of Columbia, if Officer Soto had
been wearing a uniform or patrolling in a marked police
cruiser. . . .
In what would appear to be an elaboration on the “reason-
able officer” test, petitioners argue that the balancing inherent in
any Fourth Amendment inquiry requires us to weigh the gov-
ernmental and individual interests implicated in a traffic stop
such as we have here. That balancing, petitioners claim, does not
support investigation of minor traffic infractions by plainclothes
police in unmarked vehicles; such investigation only minimally
advances the government’s interest in traffic safety, and may
indeed retard it by producing motorist confusion and alarm—a
view said to be supported by the Metropolitan Police Depart-
ment’s own regulations generally prohibiting this practice. And
as for the Fourth Amendment interests of the individuals con-
cerned, petitioners point out that our cases acknowledge that
even ordinary traffic stops entail “a possibly unsettling show of
authority”; that they at best “interfere with freedom of move-
ment, are inconvenient, and consume time” and at worst “may
Cases
181

create substantial anxiety. . . .” That anxiety is likely to be even
more pronounced when the stop is conducted by plainclothes
officers in unmarked cars. . . .
Petitioners urge as an extraordinary factor in this case that
the “multitude of applicable traffic and equipment regulations”
is so large and so difficult to obey perfectly that virtually every-
one is guilty of violation, permitting the police to single out
almost whomever they wish for a stop. But we are aware of no
principle that would allow us to decide at what point a code of
law becomes so expansive and so commonly violated that infrac-
tion itself can no longer be the ordinary measure of the lawful-
ness of enforcement. And even if we could identify such exorbi-
tant codes, we do not know by what standard (or what right) we
would decide, as petitioners would have us do, which particular
provisions are sufficiently important to merit enforcement.
For the run-of-the-mine case, which this surely is, we think
there is no realistic alternative to the traditional common-law
rule that probable cause justifies a search and seizure.
Here the District Court found that the officers had probable
cause to believe that petitioners had violated the traffic code.
That rendered the stop reasonable under the Fourth Amend-
ment, the evidence thereby discovered admissible, and the
upholding of the convictions by the Court of Appeals for the Dis-
trict of Columbia Circuit correct.
Judgment affirmed.
State Statutes
Although many state executives and legislatures have proposed
legislation concerning profiling, fewer than half of them have actu-
ally enacted related legislation. At the time of this writing, twenty
states had enacted laws directly related to profiling by the criminal
justice system—usually with specific attention to law enforcement.
To aid the reader interested in such resources, statutes relating
to profiling from these twenty states are reprinted below. As is evi-
dent, some states address the issue through prohibition; other
states simply have made it a legal obligation for government agen-
cies to collect information concerning profiling so that future leg-
islative decisions can be made. Depending on the intent of legisla-
tures, the laws reprinted below can and do serve as models for
future legislation in those remaining states lacking such laws.
182
Selected Cases and State Statutes

California
Section 13519.4 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
13519.4. (a) On or before August 1, 1993, the commission shall
develop and disseminate guidelines and training for all law enforce-
ment officers in California as described in subdivision (a) of Section
13510 and who adhere to the standards approved by the commission,
on the racial and cultural differences among the residents of this state.
The course or courses of instruction and the guidelines shall stress
understanding and respect for racial and cultural differences, and
development of effective, noncombative methods of carrying out law
enforcement duties in a racially and culturally diverse environment.
(b) The course of basic training for law enforcement officers shall,
no later than August 1, 1993, include adequate instruction on racial
and cultural diversity in order to foster mutual respect and cooperation
between law enforcement and members of all racial and cultural
groups. In developing the training, the commission shall consult with
appropriate groups and individuals having an interest and expertise in
the field of cultural awareness and diversity.
(c) For the purposes of this section, “culturally diverse” and “cul-
tural diversity” include, but are not limited to, gender and sexual ori-
entation issues. The Legislature finds and declares as follows:
(1) Racial profiling is a practice that presents a great danger to the
fundamental principles of a democratic society. It is abhorrent and can-
not be tolerated.
(2) Motorists who have been stopped by the police for no reason
other than the color of their skin or their apparent nationality or ethnic-
ity are the victims of discriminatory practices.
(3) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting the changes to Sec-
tion 13519.4 of the Penal Code made by the act that added this subdivi-
sion that more than additional training is required to address the per-
nicious practice of racial profiling and that enactment of this bill is in
no way dispositive of the issue of how the state should deal with racial
profiling.
(4) The working men and women in California law enforcement
risk their lives every day. The people of California greatly appreciate
the hard work and dedication of law enforcement officers in protecting
public safety. The good name of these officers should not be tarnished
by the actions of those few who commit discriminatory practices.
(d) “Racial profiling,” for purposes of this section, is the practice
of detaining a suspect based on a broad set of criteria which casts sus-
picion on an entire class of people without any individualized suspi-
cion of the particular person being stopped.
(e) A law enforcement officer shall not engage in racial profiling.
(f) Every law enforcement officer in this state shall participate in
State Statutes
183

expanded training as prescribed and certified by the Commission on
Peace Officers Standards and Training. Training shall begin being
offered no later than January 1, 2002. The curriculum shall be created
by the commission in collaboration with a five-person panel, appointed
no later than March 1, 2001, as follows: the Governor shall appoint
three members and one member each shall be appointed by the Senate
Committee on Rules and the Speaker of the Assembly. Each appointee
shall be appointed from among prominent members of the following
organizations: 
(1) State Conference of the NAACP. 
(2) Brotherhood Crusade. 
(3) Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund. 
(4) The League of United Latin American Citizens. 
(5) American Civil Liberties Union. 
(6) Anti-Defamation League. 
(7) California NOW. 
(8) Asian Pacific Bar of California. 
(9) The Urban League.
(g) Members of the panel shall not be compensated, except for
reasonable per diem expenses related to their work for panel purposes.
(h) The curriculum shall utilize the Tools for Tolerance for Law
Enforcement Professionals framework and shall include and examine
the patterns, practices, and protocols that make up racial profiling. This
training shall prescribe patterns, practices, and protocols that prevent
racial profiling. In developing the training, the commission shall con-
sult with appropriate groups and individuals having an interest and
expertise in the field of racial profiling. The course of instruction shall
include, but not be limited to, adequate consideration of each of the
following subjects:
(1) Identification of key indices and perspectives that make up
cultural differences among residents in a local community.
(2) Negative impact of biases, prejudices, and stereotyping on
effective law enforcement, including examination of how historical per-
ceptions of discriminatory enforcement practices have harmed police-
community relations.
(3) The history and the role of the civil rights movement and
struggles and their impact on law enforcement.
(4) Specific obligations of officers in preventing, reporting, and
responding to discriminatory or biased practices by fellow officers.
(5) Perspectives of diverse, local constituency groups and experts
on particular cultural and police-community relations issues in a local
area.
(i) Once the initial basic training is completed, each law enforce-
ment officer in California as described in subdivision (a) of Section
13510 who adheres to the standards approved by the commission shall
184
Selected Cases and State Statutes

be required to complete a refresher course every five years thereafter,
or on a more frequent basis if deemed necessary, in order to keep cur-
rent with changing racial and cultural trends.
(j) The Legislative Analyst shall conduct a study of the data being
voluntarily collected by those jurisdictions that have instituted a pro-
gram of data collection with regard to racial profiling, including, but
not limited to, the California Highway Patrol, the City of San Jose, and
the City of San Diego, both to ascertain the incidence of racial profiling
and whether data collection serves to address and prevent such prac-
tices, as well as to assess the value and efficacy of the training herein
prescribed with respect to preventing local profiling. The Legislative
Analyst may prescribe the manner in which the data is to be submitted
and may request that police agencies collecting such data submit it in
the requested manner. The Legislative Analyst shall provide to the Leg-
islature a report and recommendations with regard to racial profiling
by July 1, 2002.
Colorado
24-31-309—Profiling—officer identification—training.
(1) (a) The general assembly finds, determines, and declares that
profiling is a practice that presents a great danger to the fundamental
principles of our constitutional republic and is abhorrent and cannot be
tolerated.
(b) The general assembly further finds and declares that motorists
who have been stopped by peace officers for no reason other than the
color of their skin or their apparent race, ethnicity, age, or gender are
the victims of discriminatory practices.
(c) The general assembly further finds and declares that Colorado
peace officers risk their lives every day. The people of Colorado greatly
appreciate the hard work and dedication of peace officers in protecting
public safety. The good name of these peace officers should not be tar-
nished by the actions of those who commit discriminatory practices.
(d) It is therefore the intent of the general assembly in adopting
this section to provide a means of identification of peace officers who
are engaging in profiling, to underscore the accountability of those
peace officers for their actions, and to provide training to those peace
officers on how to avoid profiling.
(2) For purposes of this section, “profiling” means the practice of
detaining a suspect based on race, ethnicity, age, or gender without the
existence of any individualized suspicion of the particular person
being stopped.
(3) Any peace officer certified pursuant to this part 3 shall not
engage in profiling.
State Statutes
185

(4) (a) A peace officer certified pursuant to this part 3 shall pro-
vide, without being asked, his or her business card to any person
whom the peace officer has detained in a traffic stop, but has not cited
or arrested. The business card shall include identifying information
about the peace officer including, but not limited to, the peace officer’s
name, division, precinct, and badge or other identification number and
a telephone number that may be used, if necessary, to report any com-
ments, positive or negative, regarding the traffic stop. The identity of
the reporting person and the report of any such comments that consti-
tutes a complaint shall initially be kept confidential by the receiving
law enforcement agency, to the extent permitted by law. The receiving
law enforcement agency shall be permitted to obtain some identifying
information regarding the complaint to allow initial processing of the
complaint. If it becomes necessary for the further processing of the
complaint for the complainant to disclose his or her identity, the com-
plainant shall do so or, at the option of the receiving law enforcement
agency, the complaint may be dismissed.
(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) of this subsection (4) shall not
apply to authorized undercover operations conducted by any law
enforcement agency.
(c) Each law enforcement agency in the state shall compile on at
least an annual basis any information derived from telephone calls
received due to the distribution of business cards as described in para-
graph (a) of this subsection (4) and that allege profiling. The agency
shall make such information available to the public but shall not
include the names of peace officers or the names of persons alleging
profiling in such information. The agency may also include in such
information the costs to the agency of complying with the provisions
of this subsection (4).
(5) The training provided for peace officers shall include an exam-
ination of the patterns, practices, and protocols that result in profiling
and prescribe patterns, practices, and protocols that prevent profiling.
On or before August 1, 2001, the P.O.S.T. board shall certify the curricu-
lum for such training.
(6) No later than six months after the effective date of this section,
each law enforcement agency in the state shall have written policies,
procedures, and training in place that are specifically designed to
address profiling. Each peace officer employed by such law enforce-
ment agency shall receive such training. The written policies and pro-
cedures shall be made available to the public for inspection during reg-
ular business hours.
Source: L. 2001: Entire section added, p. 934, § 2, effective June 5.
42-4-115—Information on traffic law enforcement—collection—
profiling—annual report—repeal.
(1) The Colorado state patrol and any law enforcement agency per-
186
Selected Cases and State Statutes

forming traffic stops that serves the city and county of Denver shall col-
lect and maintain the following information regarding each traffic stop:
(a) The number of persons detained for routine traffic infractions
and whether a citation or warning was issued as a result of the traffic
stop;
(b) Identifying characteristics of the persons detained during the
traffic stop, including race or ethnicity, age, and gender;
(c) The approximate date, time, and location of the traffic stop;
(d) The reason for the traffic stop;
(e) Whether a search of the person occurred as a result of the traf-
fic stop;
(f) Whether, as a result of the traffic stop, the person’s vehicle or
personal effects or the vehicle’s driver or passengers were searched
and the race or ethnicity, age, and gender of any person searched;
(g) Whether the search was conducted pursuant to consent, prob-
able cause, or reasonable suspicion to suspect a crime;
(h) Whether any contraband was found as a result of the traffic
stop;
(i) Whether an arrest was made as a result of the traffic stop; and
(j) Whether any property was seized as a result of the traffic stop.
(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the collec-
tion and maintenance of information in connection with roadblocks,
vehicle checks, or checkpoints, except when such traffic stops result in
a warning, search, seizure, or arrest.
(3) Beginning January 1, 2002, and continuing through January 1,
2004, the Colorado state patrol and any law enforcement agency per-
forming traffic stops that serves the city and county of Denver shall
annually compile the information gathered pursuant to subsection (1)
of this section and shall make such information available to the public.
(4) This section is repealed, effective January 1, 2004.
Source: L. 2001: Entire section added, p. 933, § 1, effective June 5.
Connecticut
Connecticut Public Act No. 99–198
An Act Concerning Traffic Stops Statistics.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in Gen-
eral Assembly convened:
Section 1. (NEW) (a) For the purposes of this section, “racial pro-
filing” means the detention, interdiction or other disparate treatment of
an individual solely on the basis of the racial or ethnic status of such
individual.
(b) No member of the Division of State Police within the Depart-
ment of Public Safety, a municipal police department or any other law
State Statutes
187

enforcement agency shall engage in racial profiling. The detention of
an individual based on any noncriminal factor or combination of non-
criminal factors is inconsistent with this policy.
(c) The race or ethnicity of an individual shall not be the sole factor
in determining the existence of probable cause to place in custody or
arrest an individual or in constituting a reasonable and articulable sus-
picion that an offense has been or is being committed so as to justify the
detention of an individual or the investigatory stop of a motor vehicle.
Sec. 2. (NEW) (a) Not later than January 1, 2000, each municipal
police department and the Department of Public Safety shall adopt a
written policy that prohibits the stopping, detention or search of any
person when such action is solely motivated by considerations of race,
color, ethnicity, age, gender or sexual orientation, and the action would
constitute a violation of the civil rights of the person.
(b) Commencing on January 1, 2000, each municipal police
department and the Department of Public Safety shall, using the form
developed and promulgated pursuant to section 3 of this act, record
and retain the following information: (1) The number of persons
stopped for traffic violations; (2) characteristics of race, color, ethnicity,
gender and age of such persons, provided the identification of such
characteristics shall be based on the observation and perception of the
police officer responsible for reporting the stop and the information
shall not be required to be provided by the person stopped; (3) the
nature of the alleged traffic violation that resulted in the stop; (4)
whether a warning or citation was issued, an arrest made or a search
conducted as a result of the stop; and (5) any additional information
that such municipal police department or the Department of Public
Safety, as the case may be, deems appropriate.
(c) Each municipal police department and the Department of Pub-
lic Safety shall provide to the Chief State’s Attorney (1) a copy of each
complaint received pursuant to this section, and (2) written notification
of the review and disposition of such complaint.
(d) Any police officer who in good faith records traffic stop infor-
mation pursuant to the requirements of this section shall not be held
civilly liable for the act of recording such information unless the offi-
cer’s conduct was unreasonable or reckless.
(e) If a municipal police department or the Department of Public
Safety fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the Chief
State’s Attorney may recommend and the Secretary of the Office of Pol-
icy and Management may order an appropriate penalty in the form of
the withholding of state funds from such department or the Depart-
ment of Public Safety.
(f) On or before October 1, 2000, and annually thereafter, each
municipal police department and the Department of Public Safety shall
provide to the Chief State’s Attorney, in such form as the Chief State’s
188
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Attorney shall prescribe, a summary report of the information recorded
pursuant to subsection (d) of this section.
(g) The Chief State’s Attorney shall, within the limits of existing
appropriations, provide for a review of the prevalence and disposition
of traffic stops and complaints reported pursuant to this section. Not
later than January 1, 2002, the Chief State’s Attorney shall report to the
Governor and General Assembly the results of such review, including
any recommendations.
(h) The provisions of subsections (f) and (g) of this section shall be
in effect from the effective date of this act until January 1, 2002.
Sec. 3. Not later than January 1, 2000, the Chief State’s Attorney, in
conjunction with the Commissioner of Public Safety, the Attorney Gen-
eral, the Chief Court Administrator, the Police Officer Standards and
Training Council, the Connecticut Police Chiefs Association and the
Connecticut Coalition of Police and Correctional Officers, shall develop
and promulgate: (1) A form, in both printed and electronic format, to
be used by police officers when making a traffic stop to record per-
sonal identifying information about the operator of the motor vehicle
that is stopped, the location of the stop, the reason for the stop and
other information that is required to be recorded pursuant to subsec-
tion (b) of section 2 of this act; and (2) a form, in both printed and elec-
tronic format, to be used to report complaints pursuant to section 2 of
this act by persons who believe they have been subjected to a motor
vehicle stop by a police officer solely on the basis of their race, color,
ethnicity, age, gender or sexual orientation.
Approved June 28, 1999
Florida
An act relating to law enforcement; amending s. 943.1758, F.S.; provid-
ing that instruction in interpersonal skills relating to diverse populations
shall consist of a module developed by the Criminal Justice Standards
and Training Commission on the topic of discriminatory profiling;
amending ss. 30.15 and 166.0493, F.S.; requiring sheriffs and municipal
law enforcement agencies to incorporate antiracial or other antidiscrim-
inatory profiling policies into their policies and practices; providing
guidelines and requirements for such policies; providing an effective
date.
Be It Enacted by the Legislature of the State of Florida:
Section 1. Section 943.1758, Florida Statutes, is amended to read:
943.1758 Curriculum revision for diverse populations; skills train-
ing.—
(1) The Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission shall
revise its standards and training for basic recruits and its requirements
State Statutes
189

for continued employment by integrating instructions on interpersonal
skills relating to diverse populations into the criminal justice standards
and training curriculum. The curriculum shall include standardized
proficiency instruction relating to high-risk and critical tasks which
include, but are not limited to, stops, use of force and domination, and
other areas of interaction between officers and members of diverse
populations.
(2) The commission shall develop and implement, as part of its
instructor training programs, standardized instruction in the subject of
interpersonal skills relating to diverse populations.
(3) Culturally sensitive lesson plans, up-to-date videotapes, and
other demonstrative aids developed for use in diverse population-
related training shall be used as instructional materials.
(4) By October 1, 2001, the instruction in the subject of interper-
sonal skills relating to diverse populations shall consist of a module
developed by the commission on the topic of discriminatory profiling.
Section 2. Subsection (3) is added to section 30.15, Florida
Statutes, to read:
30.15 Powers, duties, and obligations.—
On or before January 1, 2002, every sheriff shall incorporate an
antiracial or other antidiscriminatory profiling policy into the sheriff’s
policies and practices, utilizing the Florida Police Chiefs Association
Model Policy as a guide. Antiprofiling policies shall include the ele-
ments of definitions, traffic stop procedures, community education and
awareness efforts, and policies for the handling of complaints from the
public.
Section 3. Section 166.0493, Florida Statutes, is created to read:
166.0493 Powers, duties, and obligations of municipal law
enforcement agencies.—On or before January 1, 2002, every municipal
law enforcement agency shall incorporate an antiracial or other anti-
discriminatory profiling policy into the agency’s policies and prac-
tices, utilizing the Florida Police Chiefs Association Model Policy as a
guide.
Antiprofiling policies shall include the elements of definitions,
traffic stop procedures, community education and awareness efforts,
and policies for the handling of complaints from the public.
Section 4. This act shall take effect upon becoming a law.
06/19/01 Approved by Governor; Chapter No. 2001–264
Illinois
Signed into law on July 17, 2003
Section 5. The Department of State Police Law within the Civil
Administrative Code of Illinois is amended by adding Section 2605-85
as follows:
190
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Sec. 2605-85. Training; cultural diversity. The Department shall
provide training and continuing education to State Police officers con-
cerning cultural diversity, including sensitivity toward racial and eth-
nic differences. This training and continuing education shall include,
but not be limited to, an emphasis on the fact that the primary purpose
of enforcement of the Illinois Vehicle Code is safety and equal and uni-
form enforcement under the law.
Section 10. The Illinois Police Training Act is amended by chang-
ing Section 7 as follows:
Sec. 7. Rules and standards for schools. The Board shall adopt
rules and minimum standards for such schools which shall include but
not be limited to the following:
a. The curriculum for probationary police officers which shall be
offered by all certified schools shall include but not be limited to
courses of arrest, search and seizure, civil rights, human relations, cul-
tural diversity, including racial and ethnic sensitivity, criminal law, law
of criminal procedure, vehicle and traffic law including uniform and
non-discriminatory enforcement of the Illinois Vehicle Code . . .
Section 15. The Illinois Vehicle Code is amended by adding Sec-
tion 11-212 as follows:
Sec. 11-212. Traffic stop statistical study.
(a) From January 1, 2004 until December 31, 2007, whenever a
State or local law enforcement officer issues a uniform traffic citation or
warning citation for an alleged violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, he
or she shall record at least the following:
(1) the name, address, gender, and the officer’s subjective determi-
nation of the race of the person stopped; the person’s race shall be
selected from the following list: Caucasian, African-American, His-
panic, Native American/Alaska Native, or Asian/Pacific Islander;
(2) the alleged traffic violation that led to the stop of the motorist;
(3) the make and year of the vehicle stopped;
(4) the date and time of the stop;
(5) the location of the traffic stop;
(6) whether or not a search contemporaneous to the stop was con-
ducted of the vehicle, driver, passenger, or passengers; and, if so,
whether it was with consent or by other means; and
(7) the name and badge number of the issuing officer.
(b) From January 1, 2004 until December 31, 2007, whenever a
State or local law enforcement officer stops a motorist for an alleged
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code and does not issue a uniform traf-
fic citation or warning citation for an alleged violation of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, he or she shall complete a uniform stop card, which
includes field contact cards, or any other existing form currently used
by law enforcement containing information required pursuant to this
Act, that records at least the following:
State Statutes
191

(1) the name, address, gender, and the officer’s subjective determi-
nation of the race of the person stopped; the person’s race shall be
selected from the following list: Caucasian, African-American, His-
panic, Native American/Alaska Native, or Asian/Pacific Islander;
(2) the reason that led to the stop of the motorist;
(3) the make and year of the vehicle stopped;
(4) the date and time of the stop;
(5) the location of the traffic stop;
(6) whether or not a search contemporaneous to the stop was con-
ducted of the vehicle, driver, passenger, or passengers; and, if so,
whether it was with consent or by other means; and
(7) the name and badge number of the issuing officer.
(c) The Illinois Department of Transportation shall provide a stan-
dardized law enforcement data compilation form on its website.
(d) Every law enforcement agency shall, by March 1 in each of the
years 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007, compile the data described in subsec-
tions (a) and (b) on the standardized law enforcement data compilation
form provided by the Illinois Department of Transportation and trans-
mit the data to the Department.
(e) The Illinois Department of Transportation shall analyze the
data provided by law enforcement agencies required by this Section
and submit a report of the findings to the Governor, the General
Assembly, and each law enforcement agency no later than July 1 in
each of the years 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008. The Illinois Department of
Transportation may contract with an outside entity for the analysis of
the data provided. In analyzing the data collected under this Section,
the analyzing entity shall scrutinize the data for evidence of statisti-
cally significant aberrations. The following list, which is illustrative,
and not exclusive, contains examples of areas in which statistically sig-
nificant aberrations may be found:
(1) The percentage of minority drivers or passengers being
stopped in a given area is substantially higher than the proportion of
the overall population in or traveling through the area that the minor-
ity constitutes.
(2) A substantial number of false stops including stops not result-
ing in the issuance of a traffic ticket or the making of an arrest.
(3) A disparity between the proportion of citations issued to
minorities and proportion of minorities in the population.
(4) A disparity among the officers of the same law enforcement
agency with regard to the number of minority drivers or passengers
being stopped in a given area.
(5) A disparity between the frequency of searches performed on
minority drivers and the frequency of searches performed on nonmi-
nority drivers.
Signed into law on July 17, 2003
192
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Kansas
Session of 2000 Effective: July 1, 2000
Substitute for HOUSE BILL No. 2683 An Act concerning criminal
procedure; relating to the collection and reporting of certain statistics
involving law enforcement activities.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Kansas:
Section 1. (a) The governor, with the assistance of the attorney
general and the Kansas law enforcement training commission, shall
develop a request for a proposal for a system to collect and report sta-
tistics relating to the race, ethnicity, gender, age and residency by
county and state of those who come in contact with law enforcement
activities.
(b) Proposals submitted pursuant to the request shall contain, at a
minimum:
(1) A system to collect data on a statistically significant sample of
those persons who:
(A) Are arrested;
(B) while operating a motor vehicle, are stopped by a law enforce-
ment officer; and
(C) while a pedestrian, are stopped by a law enforcement officer;
(2) which contains the race, ethnicity, gender, age and residency
by county and state of such persons;
(3) which has a schedule and plan of implementation, including
training;
(4) other factors which may be relevant to law enforcement offi-
cers in stopping or arresting individuals;
(5) civilian complaints received by law enforcement agencies
alleging bias based on race, ethnicity, gender, age or residency by
county or state; and
(6) a survey of policies of law enforcement agencies relating to the
investigation of complaints based on alleged race, ethnicity, gender,
age or residency bias.
(c) Data acquired pursuant to this proposal shall not contain any
information that may reveal the identity of any individual.
(d) The governor, with the assistance of the attorney general, shall
select the most comprehensive proposal and implement such proposal,
subject to the availability of any grant or grants for such purpose from
the United States department of justice or any other governmental or
private agency.
(e) The results of such study shall be submitted to the governor
and attorney general within 90 days after conclusion of such study. The
governor shall submit the study to the legislature with one or more of
the following:
(1) An evaluation of the study;
State Statutes
193

(2) an implementation plan to expand the data collection and
reporting system to other law enforcement agencies and whether such
system should be made permanent; and
(3) recommendations to improve law enforcement training and
operations to address racial, ethnic, gender, age or residency bias.
Kentucky
15A.195 Prohibition against racial profiling—Model policy—Local law
enforcement agencies’ policies.
(1) No state law enforcement agency or official shall stop, detain,
or search any person when such action is solely motivated by consider-
ation of race, color, or ethnicity, and the action would constitute a vio-
lation of the civil rights of the person.
(2) The secretary of the Justice Cabinet, in consultation with the
Kentucky Law Enforcement Council, the Attorney General, the Office
of Criminal Justice Training, the secretary of the Transportation Cabi-
net, the Kentucky State Police, the secretary of the Natural Resources
and Environmental Protection Cabinet, and the secretary of the Public
Protection and Regulation Cabinet, shall design and implement a
model policy to prohibit racial profiling by state law enforcement agen-
cies and officials.
(3) The Kentucky Law Enforcement Council shall disseminate the
established model policy against racial profiling to all sheriffs and local
law enforcement officials, including local police departments, city
councils, and fiscal courts. All local law enforcement agencies and sher-
iffs’ departments are urged to implement a written policy against racial
profiling or adopt the model policy against racial profiling as estab-
lished by the secretary of the Justice Cabinet within one hundred
eighty (180) days of dissemination of the model policy. A copy of any
implemented or adopted policy against racial profiling shall be filed
with the Kentucky Law Enforcement Council and the Kentucky Law
Enforcement Foundation Program Fund.
(4) (a) Each local law enforcement agency that participates in the
Kentucky Law Enforcement Foundation Program fund under KRS
15.420 in the Commonwealth shall implement a policy, banning the
practice of racial profiling, that meets or exceeds the requirements of
the model policy disseminated under subsection (3) of this section. The
local law enforcement agency’s policy shall be submitted by the local
law enforcement agency to the secretary of the Justice Cabinet within
one hundred eighty (180) days of dissemination of the model policy by
the Kentucky Law Enforcement Council under subsection (3) of this
section. If the local law enforcement agency fails to submit its policy
within one hundred eighty (180) days of dissemination of the model
194
Selected Cases and State Statutes

policy, or the secretary rejects a policy submitted within the one hun-
dred and eighty (180) days, that agency shall not receive Kentucky
Law Enforcement Foundation Program funding until the secretary
approves a policy submitted by the agency.
(b) If the secretary of the Justice Cabinet approves a local law
enforcement agency’s policy, the agency shall not change its policy
without obtaining approval of the new policy from the secretary of the
Justice Cabinet. If the agency changes its policy without obtaining the
secretary’s approval, the agency shall not receive Kentucky Law
Enforcement Foundation Program funding until the secretary approves
a policy submitted by the agency.
(5) Each local law enforcement agency shall adopt an administra-
tive action for officers found not in compliance with the agency’s pol-
icy. The administrative action shall be in accordance with other penal-
ties enforced by the agency’s administration for similar officer
misconduct. Effective: June 21, 2001 History: Created 2001 Ky. Acts ch.
158, sec. 1, effective June 21, 2001.
Maryland
Law Enforcement Officers—Vehicle Laws—Race-Based Traffic Stops
FOR the purpose of requiring certain law enforcement officers to
record certain information pertaining to traffic stops; requiring certain
law enforcement agencies to report certain information to the Mary-
land Justice Analysis Center (MJAC); requiring the Police Training
Commission to develop a certain format and guidelines and a stan-
dardized format for the reporting of certain data; requiring the Police
Training Commission to develop a certain model policy; requiring the
MJAC to analyze certain data based on a methodology developed in
conjunction with the Police Training Commission; requiring the MJAC
to make certain reports to the General Assembly, the Governor, and
law enforcement agencies; requiring law enforcement agencies to
adopt certain policies regarding race-based traffic stops for certain pur-
poses; providing for the phasing in of certain requirements; requiring
the MJAC to report to the Police Training Commission law enforce-
ment agencies that fail to comply with certain reporting requirements;
requiring specified actions following a report on the failure of a law
enforcement agency to comply; providing certain exceptions applicable
to law enforcement agencies that have entered into certain agreements;
defining certain terms; requiring the Governor to appropriate certain
funding in certain fiscal years to assist local law enforcement agencies
to implement certain provisions of this Act; providing for the termina-
tion of this Act; and generally relating to law enforcement procedures
and traffic stops.
State Statutes
195

BY adding to
Article—Transportation Section 25-113 Annotated Code of Mary-
land
SECTION 1. Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Maryland
that the Laws of Maryland read as follows:
Article—Transportation 25-113.
(a) (1) In this section the following words have the meanings indi-
cated.
(2) “Law enforcement agency” means an agency that is listed in §
3-101(e) of the Public Safety Article and that, in accordance with sub-
section (c) of this section, is subject to the provisions of this section.
(3) “Law enforcement officer” means any person who, in an offi-
cial capacity, is authorized by law to make arrests and who is an
employee of a law enforcement agency that is subject to this section.
(4) “Maryland Justice Analysis Center” means the center operated
by the Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice at the Univer-
sity of Maryland, College Park.
(5) “Police Training Commission” means the unit within the
Department of Public Safety and Correctional Services established
under § 3-202 of the Public Safety Article.
(6) (i) Subject to subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, “traffic stop”
means any instance when a law enforcement officer stops the driver of
a motor vehicle and detains the driver for any period of time for a vio-
lation of the Maryland Vehicle Law.
(ii) “Traffic stop” does not include:
1. A checkpoint or roadblock stop;
2. A stop of multiple vehicles due to a traffic accident or emer-
gency situation requiring the stopping of vehicles for public safety pur-
poses; or
3. A stop based on the use of radar, laser, or vascar technology.
(b) The Police Training Commission, in consultation with the
Maryland Justice Analysis Center, shall develop:
(1) A model format for the efficient recording of data required
under subsection (d) of this section on an electronic device, or by any
other means, for use by a law enforcement agency;
(2) Guidelines that each law enforcement agency may use as a
management tool to evaluate data collected by its officers for use in
counseling and improved training;
(3) A standardized format that each law enforcement agency shall
use in reporting data to the Maryland Justice Analysis Center under
subsection (e) of this section; and
(4) On or before July 1, 2002, a model policy against race-based
traffic stops that a law enforcement agency covered under subsection
(c)(1) of this section can use in developing its policy in accordance with
subsection (g) of this section.
196
Selected Cases and State Statutes

(c) (1) Subject to paragraph (2) of this subsection, this section
applies to each law enforcement agency that:
(i) On January 1, 2002, has 100 or more law enforcement officers;
(ii) On January 1, 2003, has 50 or more law enforcement officers;
and
(iii) On January 1, 2004, has 1 or more law enforcement officers.
(2) Except as provided in subsection (e)(2) of this section, this sec-
tion does not apply to a law enforcement agency that, on or before July
1, 2001, has entered into an agreement with the United States Depart-
ment of Justice that requires it to collect data on the race or ethnicity of
the drivers of motor vehicles stopped.
(d) Each time a law enforcement officer makes a traffic stop, that
officer shall report the following information to the law enforcement
agency that employs the officer using the format developed by the law
enforcement agency under subsection (b)(1) of this section:
(1) The date, location, and the time of the stop;
(2) The approximate duration of the stop;
(3) The traffic violation or violations alleged to have been commit-
ted that led to the stop;
(4) Whether a search was conducted as a result of the stop;
(5) If a search was conducted, the reason for the search, whether
the search was consensual or nonconsensual, whether the person was
searched, and whether the person’s property was searched;
(6) Whether any contraband or other property was seized in the
course of the search;
(7) Whether a warning, safety equipment repair order, or citation
was issued as a result of the stop;
(8) If a warning, safety equipment repair order, or citation was
issued, the basis for issuing the warning, safety equipment repair
order, or citation;
(9) Whether an arrest was made as a result of either the stop or
the search;
(10) If an arrest was made, the crime charged;
(11) The state in which the stopped vehicle is registered;
(12) The gender of the driver;
(13) The date of birth of the driver;
(14) The state and, if available on the driver’s license, the county
of residence of the driver; and
(15) The race or ethnicity of the driver as:
(i) Asian;
(ii) Black;
(iii) Hispanic;
(iv) White; or
(v) Other.
(e) (1) A law enforcement agency shall:
State Statutes
197

(i) Compile the data described in subsection (d) of this section for
the calendar year as a report in the format required under subsection
(b)(3) of this section; and
(ii) Submit the report to the Maryland Justice Analysis Center no
later than March 1 of the following calendar year.
(2) A law enforcement agency that is exempt under subsection
(c)(2) of this section shall submit to the Maryland Justice Analysis Cen-
ter copies of reports it submits to the United States Department of Jus-
tice in lieu of the report required under paragraph (1) of this subsec-
tion.
(f) (1) The Maryland Justice Analysis Center shall analyze the
annual reports of law enforcement agencies submitted under subsec-
tion (e) of this section based on a methodology developed in consulta-
tion with the Police Training Commission.
(2) The Maryland Justice Analysis Center shall submit a report of
the findings to the Governor, the General Assembly as provided in § 2-
1246 of the State Government Article, and each law enforcement
agency before September 1 of each year.
(g) (1) A law enforcement agency shall adopt a policy against
race-based traffic stops that is to be used as a management tool to pro-
mote nondiscriminatory law enforcement and in the training and coun-
seling of its officers.
(2) The policy shall prohibit the practice of using an individual’s
race or ethnicity as the sole justification to initiate a traffic stop. How-
ever, the policy shall make clear that it may not be construed to alter
the authority of a law enforcement officer to make an arrest, conduct a
search or seizure, or otherwise fulfill the officer’s law enforcement
obligations.
(3) The policy shall provide for the law enforcement agency to
periodically review data collected by its officers under subsection (d)
of this section and to review the annual report of the Maryland Justice
Analysis Center for purposes of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
(h) (1) If a law enforcement agency fails to comply with the
reporting provisions of this section, the Maryland Justice Analysis Cen-
ter shall report the noncompliance to the Police Training Commission.
(2) The Police Training Commission shall contact the law enforce-
ment agency and request that the agency comply with the required
reporting provisions.
(3) If the law enforcement agency fails to comply with the
required reporting provisions within 30 days after being contacted by
the Police Training Commission, the Maryland Justice Analysis Center
and the Police Training Commission jointly shall report the noncompli-
ance to the Governor and the Legislative Policy Committee of the Gen-
eral Assembly.
198
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Massachusetts
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Acts of 2000 Chapter 228
AN ACT PROVIDING FOR THE COLLECTION OF DATA RELA-
TIVE TO TRAFFIC STOPS.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in Gen-
eral Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. As used in this act, “racial and gender profiling”
means the practice of detaining a suspect based on a broad set of crite-
ria which casts suspicion on an entire class of people without any indi-
vidualized suspicion of the particular person being stopped.
SECTION 2. The executive office of public safety shall work with
the department of state police and municipal police departments to
ensure that adequate efforts are being made to identify and eliminate
any instances of racial and gender profiling by police officers in the
performance of their official duties.
SECTION 3. The department of state police and the Massachusetts
Chiefs of Police Association, shall develop policies and procedures on
how to identify and prevent racial and gender profiling by police offi-
cers, and shall submit them to the secretary of public safety for review
not later than December 31, 2000. If the secretary approves such poli-
cies and procedures, the secretary shall direct the criminal justice train-
ing council to include them in (a) the new recruit basic training cur-
riculum under section 116A of chapter 6 of the General Laws; (b) any
in-service training for veteran officers; (c) any supervisory training for
all superior officers; and (d) any dispatcher and communication officer
training.
SECTION 4. The executive office of public safety shall initiate a
public awareness campaign on racial and gender profiling not later than
January 1, 2001. The campaign shall emphasize the responsibility of
public safety officials and residents of the commonwealth to identify
unlawful or potentially unlawful behavior by an individual, as opposed
to the individual’s race or gender, before taking any action. As a part of
this public awareness campaign, the executive office of public safety
shall establish a procedure whereby motorists who allege that an inci-
dent of racial or gender profiling has occurred may register a complaint
by calling a toll-free telephone number. The executive office of public
safety shall periodically analyze such complaints, and shall share the
data with the appropriate state or local police departments.
SECTION 5. The registry of motor vehicles shall revise the Massa-
chusetts Uniform Citation to include a field that allows officers to note
whether a search of a vehicle occurred at the time a citation was
issued.
State Statutes
199

SECTION 6. The executive office of public safety shall develop a
uniform protocol for state police and municipal police officers on how
to use the Massachusetts Uniform Citation to record the race and sex of
each individual cited by an officer for a motor vehicle violation, and
whether or not a search occurred. The protocol shall be put into effect
not later than January 1, 2001.
SECTION 7. The registry of motor vehicles shall, in consultation
with the department of state police, incorporate in any driver educa-
tion manual prepared by the registry a section on how motorists
should respond if they are stopped by police officers, including what
they can do if they believe they were stopped as a result of racial or
gender profiling.
SECTION 8. The registry of motor vehicles shall collect data from
any issued Massachusetts Uniform Citation regarding the following
information:
(1) identifying characteristics of the individuals who receive a
warning or citation or who are arrested, including the race and gender
of the individual;
(2) the traffic infraction;
(3) whether a search was initiated as a result of the stop; and
(4) whether the stop resulted in a warning, citation or arrest.
The registry of motor vehicles shall maintain statistical informa-
tion on the data required by this section and shall report that informa-
tion monthly to the secretary of public safety, who shall determine
when it is also appropriate to transmit such data to the attorney gen-
eral. The data collection shall commence not later than January 1, 2001.
SECTION 9. Individual data acquired under this section shall be
used only for statistical purposes and may not contain information that
may reveal the identity of any individual who is stopped or any law
enforcement officer.
SECTION 10. Not later than one year after the effective date of
this act, the secretary of public safety shall transmit the necessary data
collected by the registry of motor vehicles to a university in the com-
monwealth with experience in the analysis of such data, for annual
preparation of an analysis and report of its findings. The secretary shall
forthwith transmit the university’s annual report to the department of
the attorney general, the department of state police, the Massachusetts
Chiefs of Police Association, the executive office of public safety and
the clerks of the house of representatives and the senate. The executive
office of public safety shall, in consultation with the attorney general, if
such data suggest that a state police barracks or municipal police
department appears to have engaged in racial or gender profiling,
require said state police barracks or municipality for a period of one
year to collect information on all traffic stops, including those not
resulting in a warning, citation or arrest. This information shall include
200
Selected Cases and State Statutes

the reason for the stop in addition to the other information already
required under the Massachusetts Uniform Citation. Upon appeal by
the colonel of state police or the municipality, respectively, the attorney
general may determine that collecting such information is not required.
Approved August 10, 2000.
Minnesota
626.8471 Avoiding racial profiling; policies and learning objectives
required.
Subdivision 1. Purpose.
The legislature finds that the reality or public perception of racial
profiling alienates people from police, hinders community policing
efforts, and causes law enforcement to lose credibility and trust among
the people law enforcement is sworn to protect and serve. No stop ini-
tiated by a peace officer should be made without a legitimate reason;
race, ethnicity, or national origin alone should never provide a suffi-
cient reason. Law enforcement policies and training programs must
emphasize the need to respect the balance between the rights of all per-
sons to be free from unreasonable governmental intrusions and law
enforcement’s need to enforce the law.
Subd. 2. Definition.
“Racial profiling” means any action initiated by law enforcement
that relies upon the race, ethnicity, or national origin of an individual
rather than: (1) the behavior of that individual; or (2) information that
leads law enforcement to a particular individual who has been identi-
fied as being engaged in or having been engaged in criminal activity.
Racial profiling includes use of racial or ethnic stereotypes as factors in
selecting whom to stop and search. Racial profiling does not include
law enforcement’s use of race or ethnicity to determine whether a per-
son matches a specific description of a particular subject.
Subd. 3. Statewide model policy.
(a) The board of peace officer standards and training shall consult
with the Minnesota chiefs of police association, the Minnesota sheriffs
association, the racial profiling advisory committee, and the Minnesota
police and peace officers association in developing an antiracial profil-
ing model policy governing the conduct of peace officers engaged in
stops of citizens. This policy shall define racial profiling and identify
conduct that violates the law. The policy must also include a duty to
give the officer’s name or badge number and identify the officer’s
department during routine traffic stops.
(b) The board shall adopt a model policy and distribute the model
policy to all chief law enforcement officers by August 1, 2001.
Subd. 4. Agency policies required.
State Statutes
201

(a) By November 1, 2001, the chief law enforcement officer of
every state and local law enforcement agency must establish and
enforce a written antiracial profiling policy governing the conduct of
peace officers engaged in stops of citizens. The chief law enforcement
officer shall ensure that each peace officer receives a copy of the
agency’s antiracial profiling policy. The chief law enforcement officer
also must ensure that each peace officer is aware of the policy’s pur-
pose and the conduct prohibited by it.
(b) The policy must, at a minimum, comply with the requirements
of the model policy adopted by the board under subdivision 3.
(c) Every state and local law enforcement agency must certify to
the board that it has adopted a written policy in compliance with the
board’s model policy.
(d) The board shall assist the chief law enforcement officer of each
state and local law enforcement agency in developing and implement-
ing antiracial profiling policies under this subdivision.
Subd. 5. Preservice training learning objectives; requirements.
(a) By August 1, 2001, the board shall prepare learning objectives
for preservice training to instruct peace officers in avoiding racial pro-
filing when making stops of citizens. These learning objectives shall be
included in the required curriculum of professional peace officer edu-
cation programs.
(b) An individual is not eligible to take the peace officer licensing
examination or the part-time peace officer licensing examination on or
after June 1, 2002, unless:
(1) the individual has received the training described in para-
graph (a); and
(2) the individual has completed a psychological evaluation
demonstrating that the individual is not likely to engage in racial pro-
filing.
Subd. 6. In-service training learning objectives.
By August 1, 2001, the board shall prepare learning objectives for
in-service training to instruct peace officers in avoiding racial profiling
when making stops of citizens. The board shall evaluate and monitor
in-service training courses to ensure they satisfy the learning objectives.
Subd. 7. Chief law enforcement officers and supervisors; require-
ments.
The executive director of the board of peace officer standards and
training shall prepare training materials to provide chief law enforce-
ment officers and other peace officers with supervisory authority with
information on how to detect and respond to racial profiling by peace
officers under their command. The training materials must address
both the agency’s antiracial profiling policy and procedural compo-
nents aimed at eliminating racial profiling in stops of citizens. The
materials must include information on federal and state constitutional
202
Selected Cases and State Statutes

and statutory laws prohibiting discrimination by law enforcement. The
procedural information must describe conduct that is unlawful or
inappropriate and present guidelines for reinforcing techniques that
are lawful and appropriate. The procedural information shall discuss
appropriate search and seizure and interviewing techniques.
Subd. 8. Post board; compliance reviews authorized.
The board has authority to inspect state and local agency policies
to ensure compliance with subdivision 4. The board may conduct this
inspection based upon a complaint it receives about a particular
agency or through a random selection process.
Missouri
Chapter 304 Traffic Regulations Section 304.670
Eff. August 28, 2000
Collection and maintenance of certain information regarding traf-
fic law enforcement, analyses to be Missouri conducted. 304.670. 1. The
highway patrol and any local law enforcement agency may collect, cor-
relate and maintain the following information regarding traffic law
enforcement:
(1) The number of drivers stopped for routine traffic enforcement
and whether or not a citation or warning was issued;
(2) Identifying characteristics of the drivers stopped, including
race, ethnicity, age and gender;
(3) The alleged violation that led to the stop;
(4) Whether a search was instituted as a result of the stop;
(5) Whether the vehicle, personal effects, driver or passengers
were searched, and the race, ethnicity, age and gender of any person
searched;
(6) Whether the search was conducted pursuant to consent, proba-
ble cause or reasonable suspicion to suspect a crime, including the
basis for the request for consent, or the circumstances establishing
probable cause or reasonable suspicion;
(7) Whether any contraband was found and the type and amount
of any contraband;
(8) Whether an arrest was made;
(9) Whether any property was seized and a description of such
property;
(10) Whether the officers making the stop encountered any physi-
cal resistance from the driver or passengers;
(11) Whether the officers making the stop engaged in the use of
force against the driver or any passengers;
(12) Whether the circumstances surrounding the stop were the
subject of any investigation, and the results of such investigation.
State Statutes
203

2. The information to be collected pursuant to subsection 1 of this
section need not be collected in connection with roadblocks, vehicle
checks or checkpoints, except when such stops result in a warning,
search, seizure or arrest.
3. The highway patrol shall conduct analyses of the information
collected pursuant to this section to determine whether law enforce-
ment officers are using profiles in law enforcement activities.
Nebraska
20-501 Racial profiling; legislative intent.
Racial profiling is a practice that presents a great danger to the
fundamental principles of a democratic society. It is abhorrent and can-
not be tolerated. Motorists who have been stopped by the police for no
reason other than the color of their skin or their apparent nationality or
ethnicity are the victims of discriminatory practices.
20-502 Racial profiling prohibited.
(1) No member of the Nebraska State Patrol or a county sheriff’s
office, officer of a city or village police department, or member of any
other law enforcement agency in this state shall engage in racial profil-
ing. The disparate treatment of an individual whose motor vehicle has
been stopped by a law enforcement officer is inconsistent with this pol-
icy.
(2) Racial profiling shall not be used to justify the detention of an
individual or to conduct a motor vehicle stop.
For purposes of sections 20-501 to 20-505:
(1) Disparate treatment means differential treatment of persons on
the basis of race, color, or national origin;
(2) Motor vehicle stop means any stop of a motor vehicle; and
(3) Racial profiling means detaining an individual or conducting a
motor vehicle stop based upon disparate treatment of an individual.
(1) On or before January 1, 2002, the Nebraska State Patrol, the
county sheriffs, all city and village police departments, and any other
law enforcement agency in this state shall adopt a written policy that
prohibits the detention of any person or a motor vehicle stop when
such action is motivated by racial profiling and the action would con-
stitute a violation of the civil rights of the person.
(2) With respect to a motor vehicle stop, on and after January 1,
2002, the Nebraska State Patrol, the county sheriffs, all city and village
police departments, and any other law enforcement agency in this state
shall record and retain the following information using the form devel-
oped and promulgated pursuant to section 20-505:
(a) The number of motor vehicle stops;
204
Selected Cases and State Statutes

(b) The characteristics of race or ethnicity of the person stopped.
The identification of such characteristics shall be based on the observa-
tion and perception of the law enforcement officer responsible for
reporting the motor vehicle stop and the information shall not be
required to be provided by the person stopped;
(c) If the stop is for a law violation, the nature of the alleged law
violation that resulted in the motor vehicle stop;
(d) Whether a warning or citation was issued, an arrest made, or a
search conducted as a result of the motor vehicle stop. Search does not
include a search incident to arrest or an inventory search; and
(e) Any additional information that the Nebraska State Patrol, the
county sheriffs, all city and village police departments, or any other
law enforcement agency in this state, as the case may be, deems appro-
priate.
(3) The Nebraska Commission on Law Enforcement and Criminal
Justice may develop a uniform system for receiving allegations of
racial profiling. The Nebraska State Patrol, the county sheriffs, all city
and village police departments, and any other law enforcement agency
in this state shall provide to the commission
(a) a copy of each allegation of racial profiling received and
(b) written notification of the review and disposition of such alle-
gation. No information revealing the identity of the law enforcement
officer involved in the stop shall be used, transmitted, or disclosed in
violation of any collective bargaining agreement provision or person-
nel rule under which such law enforcement officer is employed. No
information revealing the identity of the complainant shall be used,
transmitted, or disclosed in the form alleging racial profiling.
(4) Any law enforcement officer who in good faith records infor-
mation on a motor vehicle stop pursuant to this section shall not be
held civilly liable for the act of recording such information unless the
law enforcement officer’s conduct was unreasonable or reckless or in
some way contrary to law.
(5) On or before October 1, 2002, and annually thereafter until Jan-
uary 1, 2004, the Nebraska State Patrol, the county sheriffs, all city and
village police departments, and all other law enforcement agencies in
this state shall provide to the commission, in such form as the commis-
sion prescribes, a summary report of the information recorded pur-
suant to subsection (2) of this section.
(6) On and after January 1, 2002, and until January 1, 2004, the
commission may, within the limits of its existing appropriations, pro-
vide for a review of the prevalence and disposition of motor vehicle
stops based on racial profiling and allegations reported pursuant to
this section. The results of such review shall be reported to the Gover-
nor and the Legislature on or before April 1, 2004.
State Statutes
205

On or before January 1, 2002, the Nebraska Commission on Law
Enforcement and Criminal Justice, the Superintendent of Law Enforce-
ment and Public Safety, the Attorney General, and the State Court
Administrator may adopt and promulgate:
(1) A form, in printed or electronic format, to be used by a law
enforcement officer when making a motor vehicle stop to record per-
sonal identifying information about the operator of such motor vehicle,
the location of the stop, the reason for the stop, and any other informa-
tion that is required to be recorded pursuant to subsection (2) of sec-
tion 20-504 and
(2) a form, in printed or electronic format, to be used to report an
allegation of racial profiling by a law enforcement officer.
Nevada
NRS 289.820 Peace officer prohibited from engaging in racial profiling;
retaliatory or punitive action prohibited against peace officer for disclo-
sure of information concerning racial profiling.
1. A peace officer shall not engage in racial profiling.
2. No retaliatory or punitive action may be taken against a peace
officer who discloses information concerning racial profiling.
3. For purposes of this section, “racial profiling” means reliance
by a peace officer upon the race, ethnicity or national origin of a person
as a factor in initiating action when the race, ethnicity or national ori-
gin of the person is not part of an identifying description of a specific
suspect for a specific crime.
North Carolina
AN ACT TO REQUIRE THE DIVISION OF CRIMINAL STATISTICS TO
COLLECT AND MAINTAIN STATISTICS ON TRAFFIC LAW EN-
FORCEMENT.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
Section 1. G.S. 114-10 reads as rewritten:
§ 114-10. Division of Criminal Statistics.
The Attorney General shall set up in the Department of Justice a
division to be designated as the Division of Criminal Statistics. There
shall be assigned to this Division by the Attorney General duties as fol-
lows:
(1) To collect and correlate information in criminal law adminis-
tration, including crimes committed, arrests made, dispositions on pre-
liminary hearings, prosecutions, convictions, acquittals, punishment,
appeals, together with the age, race, and sex of the offender, and such
206
Selected Cases and State Statutes

other information concerning crime and criminals as may appear sig-
nificant or helpful. To correlate such information with the operations of
agencies and institutions charged with the supervision of offenders on
probation, in penal and correctional institutions, on parole and pardon,
so as to show the volume, variety and tendencies of crime and crimi-
nals and the workings of successive links in the machinery set up for
the administration of the criminal law in connection with the arrests,
trial, punishment, probation, prison parole and pardon of all criminals
in North Carolina.
(2) To collect, correlate, and maintain access to information that will
assist in the performance of duties required in the administration of
criminal justice throughout the State. This information may include, but
is not limited to, motor vehicle registration, drivers’ licenses, wanted and
missing persons, stolen property, warrants, stolen vehicles, firearms reg-
istration, sexual offender registration as provided under Article 27A of
Chapter 14 of the General Statutes, drugs, drug users and parole and
probation histories. In performing this function, the Division may
arrange to use information available in other agencies and units of State,
local and federal government, but shall provide security measures to
insure that such information shall be made available only to those whose
duties, relating to the administration of justice, require such information.
(2a) To collect, correlate, and maintain the following information
regarding traffic law enforcement by law enforcement officers:
a. The number of drivers stopped for routine traffic enforcement
by law enforcement officers and whether or not a citation or warning
was issued;
b. Identifying characteristics of the drivers stopped, including the
race or ethnicity, approximate age, and gender;
c. The alleged traffic violation that led to the stop;
d. Whether a search was instituted as a result of the stop;
e. Whether the vehicle, personal effects, driver, or passenger or
passengers were searched, and the race or ethnicity, approximate age,
and gender of each person searched;
f. Whether the search was conducted pursuant to consent, proba-
ble cause, or reasonable suspicion to suspect a crime, including the
basis for the request for consent, or the circumstances establishing
probable cause or reasonable suspicion;
g. Whether any contraband was found and the type and amount
of any such contraband;
h. Whether any written citation or any oral or written warning
was issued as a result of the stop;
i. Whether an arrest was made as a result of either the stop or the
search;
j. Whether any property was seized, with a description of that
property;
State Statutes
207

k. Whether the officers making the stop encountered any physical
resistance from the driver or passenger or passengers;
l. Whether the officers making the stop engaged in the use of force
against the driver, passenger, or passengers for any reason;
m. Whether any injuries resulted from the stop; and
n. Whether the circumstances surrounding the stop were the sub-
ject of any investigation, and the results of that investigation.
o. The geographic location of the stop; if the officer making the
stop is a member of the State Highway Patrol, the location shall be the
Highway Patrol District in which the stop was made; for all other law
enforcement officers, the location shall be the city or county in which
the stop was made.
For purposes of this subdivision, “law enforcement officer”
means:
1. All State law enforcement officers;
2. Law enforcement officers employed by county sheriffs or
county police departments;
3. Law enforcement officers employed by police departments in
municipalities with a population of 10,000 or more persons; and
4. Law enforcement officers employed by police departments in
municipalities employing five or more full-time sworn officers for
every 1,000 in population, as calculated by the Division for the calen-
dar year in which the stop was made.
The information required by this subdivision need not be col-
lected in connection with impaired driving checks under G.S. 20-16.3A
or other types of roadblocks, vehicle checks, or checkpoints that are
consistent with the laws of this State and with the State and federal
constitutions, except when those stops result in a warning, search,
seizure, arrest, or any of the other activity described in sub-subdivi-
sions d. through n. of this subdivision.
The identity of the law enforcement officer making the stop
required by sub-subdivision a. of this subdivision may be accom-
plished by assigning anonymous identification numbers to each officer
in an agency. The correlation between the identification numbers and
the names of the officers shall not be a public record, and shall not be
disclosed by the agency except when required by order of a court of
competent jurisdiction to resolve a claim or defense properly before the
court.
The Division shall publish and distribute by December 1 of each
year a list indicating the law enforcement officers that will be subject to
the provisions of this subdivision during the calendar year commenc-
ing the following January 1.
(3) To make scientific study, analysis and comparison from the
information so collected and correlated with similar information gath-
ered by federal agencies, and to provide the Governor and the General
208
Selected Cases and State Statutes

Assembly with the information so collected biennially, or more often if
required by the Governor.
(4) To perform all the duties heretofore imposed by law upon the
Attorney General with respect to criminal statistics.
(5) To perform such other duties as may be from time to time pre-
scribed by the Attorney General.
(6) To promulgate rules and regulations for the administration of
this Article.
Section 2. This act shall not be construed to obligate the General
Assembly to make any appropriation to implement the provisions of
this act. Each department and agency to which this act applies shall
implement the provisions of this act from funds otherwise appropri-
ated to that department or agency.
Oklahoma
Oklahoma Statutes Title 22. Criminal Procedure Chapter 2 § 34.3. Stop
Racial Profiling
A. For the purposes of this section, “racial profiling” means the
detention, interdiction or other disparate treatment of an individual
solely on the basis of the racial or ethnic status of such individual.
B. No officer of any municipal, county or state law enforcement
agency shall engage in racial profiling.
C. The race or ethnicity of an individual shall not be the sole fac-
tor in determining the existence of probable cause to take into custody
or to arrest an individual or in constituting a reasonable and articulable
suspicion that an offense has been or is being committed so as to jus-
tify the detention of an individual or the investigatory stop of a motor
vehicle.
D. A violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor.
E. Every municipal, county, and state law enforcement agency
shall adopt a detailed written policy that clearly defines the elements
constituting racial profiling. Each agency’s policy shall prohibit racial
profiling based solely on an individual’s race or ethnicity. The policy
shall be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
F. If the investigation of a complaint of racial profiling reveals the
officer was in direct violation of the law enforcement agency’s written
policy regarding racial profiling, the employing law enforcement
agency shall take appropriate action consistent with applicable laws,
rules, ordinances or policy.
Historical Data
Added by Laws 2000, c. 325, § 1, eff. June 5, 2000. Oklahoma
Statutes Citationized Title 22. Criminal Procedure Chapter 2 § 34.4. Fil-
ing Racial Profiling Complaint
State Statutes
209

Whenever a person who is stopped or arrested believes the stop
or arrest was in violation of Section 1 of this act, that person may file a
complaint with the Oklahoma Human Rights Commission and may
also file a complaint with the district attorney for the county in which
the stop or arrest occurred. A copy of the complaint shall be forwarded
to the arresting officer’s employer by the Commission. The employer
shall investigate the complaint for purposes of disciplinary action
and/or criminal prosecution.
Historical Data
Added by Laws 2000, c. 325, § 2, eff. June 5, 2000.
Oklahoma Statutes Citationized Title 22. Criminal Procedure
Chapter 2 § 34.5. Procedures for Filing Racial Profiling Complaint—
Annual Report
A. The Oklahoma Human Rights Commission shall promulgate
rules establishing procedures for filing a racial profiling complaint
with the Oklahoma Human Rights Commission and the district attor-
ney and the process for delivering a copy of the complaint by the Com-
mission to the employing agency. The Commission, in consultation
with the Governor’s Cabinet Secretary for Safety and Security, shall
promulgate forms for complaints of racial profiling.
B. The Commission shall compile an annual report of all com-
plaints received for racial profiling and submit the report on or before
January 31 of each year to the Governor, the President Pro Tempore of
the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Rhode Island
Enacted 7/13/2000
SECTION 1. Title 31 of the General Laws entitled “Motor and
Other Vehicles” is hereby amended by adding thereto the following
chapter:
CHAPTER 21.1 TRAFFIC STOP STATISTICS
31-21.1-1. Title.—This Chapter may be cited as the “Traffic Stops
Statistics Act.”
31-21.1-2. Declaration and Policy.—The General Assembly hereby
declares that racial profiling as the sole reason for stopping or search-
ing motorists on our public highways is against public policy and vio-
lates the civil rights of the motorist. For purposes of this chapter,
“racial profiling” means the detention, interdiction or other disparate
treatment of an individual solely on the basis of the racial or ethnic sta-
tus of such individual. The purpose of this chapter is to conduct a
study of the traffic stops by the police to determine whether such racial
profiling is occurring and to require that police prohibit the practice of
racial profiling.
210
Selected Cases and State Statutes

31-21.1-3. Advisory Committee Established.—There is hereby
established an advisory committee to be called the “Traffic Stop Study
Advisory Committee.” Said committee shall consist of thirteen (13)
members: three (3) of whom shall be from the House of Representa-
tives, not more than two (2) from the same political party, to be
appointed by the Speaker; three (3) of whom shall be from the Senate,
not more than two (2) from the same political party, to be appointed by
the Majority Leader; two (2) of whom shall be appointed by the Gover-
nor; one (1) of whom shall be the Attorney General’s designee, who
shall be the president of the Rhode Island Police Chiefs Association;
one (1) of whom shall be the executive director of the Urban League of
Rhode Island or his or her designee; (1) of whom shall be the executive
director of the National Conference for Community and Justice (NCCJ)
or his or her designee; one (1) of whom shall be the executive director
of the Rhode Island Commission for Human Rights or his or her
designee; and one (1) of whom shall be a representative from a college
or university in Rhode Island, who shall be a professor of statistics, to
be appointed by the Governor.
Said committee shall advise the Attorney General throughout the
course of the traffic stop study authorized by this chapter. The Attor-
ney General shall work in cooperation with the committee and shall
keep the committee informed on all matters relating to the implemen-
tation and enforcement of this chapter, including but not limited to,
information on all data collected and budgetary expenditures. The
committee is advisory only with all power under the chapter resting
with the Attorney General.
31-21.1-4. Traffic Stop Study.—(a) The Attorney General is hereby
authorized to and shall conduct a study of routine traffic stops by the
Rhode Island State Police and each municipal police department. The
study shall include the collection and analysis of the data received
from the police department pursuant to this section, which shall
include the following information for each traffic stop conducted by
the police;
(1) The date, time and general location of the traffic stop;
(2) The race or ethnicity, gender and approximate age of the dri-
ver stopped; provided that the identification of such characteristics
shall be based on the observation and perception of the police officer
making the stop and the information shall not be requested of the per-
son stopped;
(3) The reason for the stop;
(4) Whether a search was instituted as a result of the stop;
(5) The scope of any search conducted;
(6) Whether the search was conducted pursuant to consent, proba-
ble cause, or reasonable suspicion to suspect a crime;
State Statutes
211

(7) Whether any contraband, including money, was seized in the
course of the search, and if so, the nature of the contraband;
(8) Whether any warning or citation was issued as a result of the
stop;
(9) Whether an arrest was made as a result of either the stop or
the search;
(10) The approximate duration of the stop; and
(11) Whether the vehicle is registered in Rhode Island or out of
the state;
(b) Not later than ninety (90) days after the passage of this act, the
Attorney General, with the advice of the committee, shall develop a
form, in both printed and electronic format, to be used by each police
officer when making a traffic stop to record the data required under
this chapter.
(c) Beginning January 15, 2001, and monthly thereafter, each
municipal police department and the Rhode Island State Police shall
transmit to the Attorney General a report containing:
(1) All of the forms collected to date of motorists who were
stopped;
(2) Any complaints filed by motorists who believed they were the
subject of racial profiling, provided that no information revealing the
identity of the complainant, witnesses or the law enforcement officer
involved in the traffic stop shall be used, transmitted or disclosed in
violation of the provisions of Chapter 28.6 of Title 42, the Law Enforce-
ment Officers’ Bill of Rights; and
(3) Any other information the police department or Rhode Island
State Police deem appropriate.
(d) The study authorized under this chapter shall include a multi-
variate analysis of the collected data in accordance with general statis-
tical standards. The Attorney General shall collect data for a period of
not less than twenty-four (24) months and report its findings and con-
clusions to the Governor and the General Assembly not later than
twenty-eight (28) months after the commencement of the collection of
data under this chapter. The report, findings and conclusions submit-
ted pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed a public record.
(e) In addition, the Attorney General, with the advice of the com-
mittee, shall prepare, on a quarterly basis, a summary report of the
monthly data provided by each police department and the State Police
for that quarterly period. Said report shall be a public record. The sum-
mary report shall include a monthly breakdown by race for each police
department of the number of traffic stops made and of searches con-
ducted, and any other information deemed appropriate by the Attor-
ney General with the advice of the committee. The report shall be
released not more than ninety (90) days after the end of each quarterly
212
Selected Cases and State Statutes

period. No information revealing the identity of any individual shall
be contained in the report.
(f) Upon passage of this Act, the Attorney General with the advice
of the committee shall procure the services of an organization, com-
pany, person or other entity with sufficient expertise in the field of sta-
tistics to assist with the implementation of this chapter. The organiza-
tion, company, person or other entity so retained shall assist the
Attorney General and the committee with the design of the methodol-
ogy for gathering statistics pursuant to this chapter, monitor compli-
ance with the act throughout the study, and conduct a statistical analy-
sis at the conclusion of the study to determine the extent to which
racial profiling exists within the state.
(g) Appropriate funding shall be made available to implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(h) The department of attorney general shall be exempt from the
provisions of chapter 37-2 of the general laws in connection with its
procurement of equipment and services necessary to the implementa-
tion of this act.
31-21.1-5. Adoption of Written Policies.—Not later than ninety
(90) days after the passage of this act each police department and the
State Police shall adopt written policies which shall;
(a) Provide a system for the collection of the data required under
section 31–21.1–3 and the transmission of the data to the Attorney Gen-
eral as required; and
(b) Prohibit the use of racial profiling as the sole reason for stop-
ping or searching motorists for routine traffic stops. Copies of the poli-
cies adopted pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the Attorney
General and the committee, and shall be public records.
31-21.1-6. Data Collection and Use.—(a) Except as otherwise spec-
ified herein, data acquired under this section shall be used only for
research or statistical purposes. Data acquired under this section shall
not be used in any legal or administrative proceeding to establish an
inference of discrimination on the basis of particular identifying char-
acteristics, except by court order. Notwithstanding the foregoing, dur-
ing the collection of data, the information and forms collected pursuant
to this chapter shall be public for those stops where a citation was
issued or an arrest was made, and said forms shall include a citation or
arrest number for reference. All data collected pursuant to this chapter
shall be made public upon the completion of the study and the submis-
sion of the report; provided, however, that any complaints filed pur-
suant to 31-21.1-4(c)(2) shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
28.6 of Title 42.
(b) Any police officer who in good faith records traffic stop infor-
mation pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall not be held
State Statutes
213

civilly liable for the act of recording such information unless the offi-
cer’s conduct was reckless.
31-21.1-7. Penalties for refusal to act.—An organization chartered
for the purpose of combating discrimination, racism, or of safeguard-
ing civil liberties, or of promoting full, free, or equal employment
opportunities may seek appropriate relief in a civil action against any
police department for failing to collect or transmit the data as required
herein, and may be awarded its costs, including attorneys’ fees, for
bringing such an action. As a condition precedent to the filing of a civil
action by an organization under this section, the organization shall
send a notice to the Attorney General and the committee identifying
the police department which is failing to collect or transmit the data
and the organization shall then allow fifteen (15) days to elapse to
allow the police department to come into compliance or to allow the
Attorney General to commence a civil action to enforce compliance
with this chapter.
Tennessee
AN ACT To amend Tennessee Code Annotated, Title 4, Chapter 7, Part
1; Title 6, Chapter 54 and Title 8, Chapter 8, Part 2, relative to law
enforcement.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE
OF TENNESSEE:
SECTION 1. It is the intent of the General Assembly that the pro-
visions of this act shall serve as a permissive pilot project and as such
shall apply to the Tennessee Highway Patrol and any municipal police
department or sheriff’s department whose commissioner, safety direc-
tor, chief or sheriff notifies the Comptroller of the Treasury by Septem-
ber 1, 2000, of its willingness to participate in such project.
SECTION 2. (a) Commencing on January 1, 2001, and continuing
through the calendar year, the highway patrol and each municipal
police department and sheriff’s office to which this act applies, using
the form developed and promulgated pursuant to subsection (d) of this
section, shall record and retain the following information:
1) The number of persons stopped for traffic violations;
2) Characteristics of race, color, ethnicity, gender and age of such
persons, provided the identification of such characteristics shall be
based on the observation and perception of the law enforcement officer
responsible for reporting the stop and the information shall not be
required to be provided by the person stopped;
3) The nature of the alleged traffic violation that resulted in the
stop;
214
Selected Cases and State Statutes

4) Whether a warrant or citation was issued, an arrest made or a
search conducted as a result of the stop; and
5) If a search was conducted, the type of search and the legal basis
for that search, and whether contraband was discovered and property
was seized.
(b) The highway patrol and each municipal police department or
sheriff’s office to which this act applies shall begin submitting such data
and information to the Comptroller of the Treasury on a monthly basis,
beginning not later than February 1, 2001, by submitting or electroni-
cally transferring a copy of the form prescribed by the Comptroller.
(c) Any law enforcement officer who in good faith records traffic
stop information pursuant to the requirements of this section shall not
be held civilly liable for the act of recording such information.
(d) The Comptroller shall, within the limits of existing resources,
provide for a review of the prevalence and disposition of traffic stops
reported pursuant to this section and develop and promulgate a form,
in both printed and electronic format, to be used by law enforcement
officers to which this act applies when making a traffic stop to record
personal identifying information about the operator of the motor vehi-
cle that is stopped, the location of the stop, the reason for the stop and
other information that is required to be recorded pursuant to subsec-
tion (a) of this section. Not later than April 1, 2002, the Comptroller
shall report to the Governor and General Assembly the results of such
review, including any recommendations.
(e) The provisions of this act shall be in effect from the effective
date of this act until July 1, 2002.
APPROVED this 19th day of June 2000
Texas
SECTION 1. Chapter 2, Code of Criminal Procedure, is amended by
adding Articles 2.131 through 2.138 to read as follows:
Art. 2.131. RACIAL PROFILING PROHIBITED. A peace officer
may not engage in racial profiling.
Art. 2.132. LAW ENFORCEMENT POLICY ON RACIAL PROFIL-
ING.
(a) In this article:
(1) “Law enforcement agency” means an agency of the state, or of
a county, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state, that
employs peace officers who make traffic stops in the routine perfor-
mance of the officers’ official duties.
(2) “Race or ethnicity” means of a particular descent, including
Caucasian, African, Hispanic, Asian, or Native American descent.
State Statutes
215

(b) Each law enforcement agency in this state shall adopt a
detailed written policy on racial profiling. The policy must:
(1) clearly define acts constituting racial profiling;
(2) strictly prohibit peace officers employed by the agency from
engaging in racial profiling;
(3) implement a process by which an individual may file a com-
plaint with the agency if the individual believes that a peace officer
employed by the agency has engaged in racial profiling with respect to
the individual;
(4) provide public education relating to the agency’s complaint
process;
(5) require appropriate corrective action to be taken against a
peace officer employed by the agency who, after an investigation, is
shown to have engaged in racial profiling in violation of the agency’s
policy adopted under this article;
(6) require collection of information relating to traffic stops in
which a citation is issued and to arrests resulting from those traffic
stops, including information relating to:
(A) the race or ethnicity of the individual detained; and
(B) whether a search was conducted and, if so, whether the per-
son detained consented to the search; and
(7) require the agency to submit to the governing body of each
county or municipality served by the agency an annual report of the
information collected under Subdivision (6) if the agency is an agency
of a county, municipality, or other political subdivision of the state.
(c) The data collected as a result of the reporting requirements of
this article shall not constitute prima facie evidence of racial profiling.
(d) On adoption of a policy under Subsection (b), a law enforce-
ment agency shall examine the feasibility of installing video camera
and transmitter-activated equipment in each agency law enforcement
motor vehicle regularly used to make traffic stops and transmitter-acti-
vated equipment in each agency law enforcement motorcycle regularly
used to make traffic stops. If a law enforcement agency installs video
or audio equipment as provided by this subsection, the policy adopted
by the agency under Subsection (b) must include standards for review-
ing video and audio documentation.
(e) A report required under Subsection (b)(7) may not include
identifying information about a peace officer who makes a traffic stop
or about an individual who is stopped or arrested by a peace officer.
This subsection does not affect the collection of information as required
by a policy under Subsection (b)(6).
(f) On the commencement of an investigation by a law enforce-
ment agency of a complaint described by Subsection (b)(3) in which a
video or audio recording of the occurrence on which the complaint is
based was made, the agency shall promptly provide a copy of the
216
Selected Cases and State Statutes

recording to the peace officer who is the subject of the complaint on
written request by the officer.
Art. 2.133. REPORTS REQUIRED FOR TRAFFIC AND PEDES-
TRIAN STOPS.
(a) In this article:
(1) “Race or ethnicity” has the meaning assigned by Article
2.132(a).
(2) “Pedestrian stop” means an interaction between a peace officer
and an individual who is being detained for the purpose of a criminal
investigation in which the individual is not under arrest.
(b) A peace officer who stops a motor vehicle for an alleged viola-
tion of a law or ordinance regulating traffic or who stops a pedestrian
for any suspected offense shall report to the law enforcement agency
that employs the officer information relating to the stop, including:
(1) a physical description of each person detained as a result of
the stop, including:
(A) the person’s gender; and
(B) the person’s race or ethnicity, as stated by the person or, if the
person does not state the person’s race or ethnicity, as determined by
the officer to the best of the officer’s ability;
(2) the traffic law or ordinance alleged to have been violated or
the suspected offense;
(3) whether the officer conducted a search as a result of the stop
and, if so, whether the person detained consented to the search;
(4) whether any contraband was discovered in the course of the
search and the type of contraband discovered;
(5) whether probable cause to search existed and the facts sup-
porting the existence of that probable cause;
(6) whether the officer made an arrest as a result of the stop or the
search, including a statement of the offense charged;
(7) the street address or approximate location of the stop; and
(8) whether the officer issued a warning or a citation as a result of
the stop, including a description of the warning or a statement of the
violation charged.
Art. 2.134. COMPILATION AND ANALYSIS OF INFORMATION
COLLECTED.
(a) In this article, “pedestrian stop” means an interaction between
a peace officer and an individual who is being detained for the pur-
pose of a criminal investigation in which the individual is not under
arrest.
(b) A law enforcement agency shall compile and analyze the infor-
mation contained in each report received by the agency under Article
2.133. Not later than March 1 of each year, each local law enforcement
agency shall submit a report containing the information compiled dur-
ing the previous calendar year to the governing body of each county or
State Statutes
217

municipality served by the agency in a manner approved by the
agency.
(c) A report required under Subsection (b) must include:
(1) a comparative analysis of the information compiled under
Article 2.133 to:
(A) determine the prevalence of racial profiling by peace officers
employed by the agency; and
(B) examine the disposition of traffic and pedestrian stops made
by officers employed by the agency, including searches resulting from
the stops; and
(2) information relating to each complaint filed with the agency
alleging that a peace officer employed by the agency has engaged in
racial profiling.
(d) A report required under Subsection (b) may not include identi-
fying information about a peace officer who makes a traffic or pedes-
trian stop or about an individual who is stopped or arrested by a peace
officer. This subsection does not affect the reporting of information
required under Article 2.133(b)(1).
SECTION 2. Chapter 3, Code of Criminal Procedure, is amended
by adding Article 3.05 to read as follows:
Art. 3.05. RACIAL PROFILING. In this code, “racial profiling”
means a law enforcement–initiated action based on an individual’s
race, ethnicity, or national origin rather than on the individual’s behav-
ior or on information identifying the individual as having engaged in
criminal activity.
SECTION 3. Section 96.641, Education Code, is amended by
adding Subsection (j) to read as follows:
(j) As part of the initial training and continuing education for
police chiefs required under this section, the institute shall establish a
program on racial profiling. The program must include an examination
of the best practices for:
(1) monitoring peace officers’ compliance with laws and internal
agency policies relating to racial profiling;
(2) implementing laws and internal agency policies relating to
preventing racial profiling; and
(3) analyzing and reporting collected information.
SECTION 4. Section 1701.253, Occupations Code, is amended by
adding Subsection (e) to read as follows:
(e) As part of the minimum curriculum requirements, the commis-
sion shall establish a statewide comprehensive education and training
program on racial profiling for officers licensed under this chapter. An
officer shall complete a program established under this subsection not
later than the second anniversary of the date the officer is licensed
under this chapter or the date the officer applies for an intermediate
proficiency certificate, whichever date is earlier.
218
Selected Cases and State Statutes

SECTION 5. Section 1701.402, Occupations Code, is amended by
adding Subsection (d) to read as follows:
(d) As a requirement for an intermediate proficiency certificate, an
officer must complete an education and training program on racial pro-
filing established by the commission under Section 1701.253(e).
Washington
Sec. 1. A new section is added to chapter 43.43 RCW to read as follows:
(1) Beginning May 1, 2000, the Washington state patrol shall col-
lect, and report semiannually to the criminal justice training commis-
sion, the following information: (a) The number of individuals stopped
for routine traffic enforcement, whether or not a citation or warning
was issued; (b) Identifying characteristics of the individual stopped,
including the race or ethnicity, approximate age, and gender; (c) The
nature of the alleged violation that led to the stop; (d) Whether a
search was instituted as a result of the stop; and (e) Whether an arrest
was made, or a written citation issued, as a result of either the stop or
the search. (2) The criminal justice training commission and the Wash-
ington state patrol shall compile the information required under sub-
section (1) of this section and make a report to the legislature no later
than December 1, 2000.
Sec. 2. A new section is added to chapter 43.43 RCW to read as
follows: (1) The Washington state patrol shall work with the criminal
justice training commission and the Washington association of sheriffs
and police chiefs to develop (a) further criteria for collection and evalu-
ation of the data collected under section 1 of this act, and (b) training
materials for use by the state patrol and local law enforcement agencies
on the issue of racial profiling. (2) The Washington state patrol, crimi-
nal justice training commission, and Washington association of sheriffs
and police chiefs shall encourage local law enforcement agencies to
voluntarily collect the data set forth under section 1(1) of this act.
Sec. 3. The Washington association of sheriffs and police chiefs
shall report to the legislature by December 1, 2000, the following infor-
mation: (1) The names and number of local law enforcement agencies
voluntarily collecting data on potential racial profiling; (2) The type of
data being collected by each participating agency; and (3) The manner
in which the agencies are using the data collected.
Sec. 4. This act is necessary for the immediate preservation of the
public peace, health, or safety, or support of the state government and
its existing public institutions, and takes effect immediately. Passed the
Senate February 15, 2000. Passed the House March 1, 2000. Approved
by the Governor March 24, 2000. Filed in Office of Secretary of State
March 24, 2000.
State Statutes
219

West Virginia
[Signed by the Governor, March 7, 2002]
AN ACT to amend article twenty-nine, chapter thirty of the code
of West Virginia, one thousand nine hundred thirty-one, as amended,
by adding thereto a new section, designated section ten, relating to
prohibiting racial profiling by law-enforcement officers and agencies.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of West Virginia:
That article twenty-nine, chapter thirty of the code of West Vir-
ginia, one thousand nine hundred thirty-one, as amended, be amended
by adding thereto a new section, designated section ten, to read as fol-
lows:
ARTICLE 29. LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING AND CERTIFI-
CATION.
§30-29-10. Prohibition of racial profiling.
(a) The Legislature finds that the use by a law-enforcement officer
of race, ethnicity, or national origin in deciding which persons should
be subject to traffic stops, stops and frisks, questioning, searches, and
seizures is a problematic law-enforcement tactic. The reality or public
perception of racial profiling alienates people from police, hinders com-
munity policing efforts, and causes law-enforcement officers and law-
enforcement agencies to lose credibility and trust among the people
law-enforcement is sworn to protect and serve. Therefore, the West Vir-
ginia Legislature declares that racial profiling is contrary to public pol-
icy and should not be used as a law-enforcement investigative tactic.
(b) For purposes of this section:
(1) The term “law-enforcement officer” means any duly autho-
rized member of a law-enforcement agency who is authorized to main-
tain public peace and order, prevent and detect crime, make arrests
and enforce the laws of the state or any county or municipality thereof.
(2) The term “municipality” means any incorporated town or city
whose boundaries lie within the geographic boundaries of the state.
(3) The term “racial profiling” means the practice of a law-
enforcement officer relying, to any degree, on race, ethnicity, or
national origin in selecting which individuals to subject to routine
investigatory activities, or in deciding upon the scope and substance of
law-enforcement activity following the initial routine investigatory
activity. Racial profiling does not include reliance on race, ethnicity, or
national origin in combination with other identifying factors when the
law-enforcement officer is seeking to apprehend a specific suspect
whose race, ethnicity, or national origin is part of the description of the
suspect.
(4) The term “state and local law-enforcement agencies” means
any duly authorized state, county or municipal organization employ-
220
Selected Cases and State Statutes

ing one or more persons whose responsibility is the enforcement of
laws of the state or any county or municipality thereof.
(c) No law-enforcement officer shall engage in racial profiling.
(d) All state and local law-enforcement agencies shall establish
and maintain policies and procedures designed to prevent racial profil-
ing. Policies and procedures shall include the following:
(1) A prohibition on racial profiling;
(2) Independent procedures for receiving, investigating, and
responding to complaints alleging racial profiling by law-enforcement
officers;
(3) Procedures to discipline law-enforcement officers who engage
in racial profiling; and
(4) Any other policies and procedures deemed necessary by state
and local law-enforcement agencies to eliminate racial profiling.
State Statutes
221


7
Organizations and Agencies
M
any people interested in criminal justice profiling find them-
selves unsure of where to turn to research the issue further.
Fortunately, there are many government agencies and orga-
nizations that are available to serve as resources. In this chapter,
a number of the public and private organizations are presented
to the reader. The purposes of these organizations are summa-
rized, as are the types of information one can receive from them.
Information concerning how to contact these agencies and orga-
nizations is provided as well.
When researching an issue that is potentially controversial,
as criminal profiling is, it is important to remember that many
relevant organizations exist with a specific agenda in mind. This
does not mean the information those organizations provide is
invalid; but in some cases, the information may not be complete.
As with most issues, people and organizations who advocate a
particular position are inclined to emphasize information that
supports that position.
So, when conducting research using these organizations,
readers must be mindful that not all the information they receive
is gospel. This caveat now having been given, the organizations
that follow in this chapter can serve as a wealth of information
and support for those interested in the issue of profiling. In many
cases, the organizations summarized below have a broader pur-
pose than simply addressing or responding to the issue of profil-
ing. Nonetheless, these organizations can serve as an invaluable
source for becoming thoroughly familiar with profiling and its
ramifications.
223

Private Organizations
Academy of Behavioral Profiling
336 Lincoln Street, P.O. Box 6406
Sitka, AK 99835
http://www.profiling.org
The Academy of Behavioral Profiling is a professional association
whose mission is to advance the application of evidence-based
criminal profiling techniques within the criminal justice system.
The emphasis with this organization is to improve the science
behind using offender behavior to predict and solve crimes. The
association recognizes that race, gender, sexual orientation, and
other such classifications are not sufficient criteria by themselves
to build a profile. The association publishes a journal that is avail-
able to members.
American Civil Liberties Union
125 Broad Street, 18th Floor
New York, NY 10004
http://www.aclu.org
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) is a nonprofit orga-
nization founded in 1920. The purpose of the ACLU is to defend
civil liberties—particularly those granted under the U.S. Consti-
tution’s Bill of Rights. It was originally founded in response to
the widespread jailing of foreign-born political radicals in the
early part of the twentieth century as the United States geared up
for and then fought World War I. The ACLU advances its agenda
through dissemination of information and through legal action.
Common issues of importance to the ACLU include immigrant
rights, women in prison, police misconduct, and religious liber-
ties (usually seeking the removal of religion from the public
square). Information concerning these issues, and on the ACLU’s
national “Campaign against Racial Profiling” specifically, can be
accessed through the ACLU Web site. The Web site also links to
ACLU press releases, legal briefs, and legislation around the
United States.
American Civil Rights Institute
P.O. Box 188350
Sacramento, CA 95818
http://www.acri.org
224
Organizations and Agencies

The American Civil Rights Institute exists for the purpose of edu-
cating the public about race and gender preferences. The Institute
publishes summaries of cases relating to the issue of preferences
on its Web site. Further, the Web site contains links to pertinent
legislation, legal briefs, speeches, and a full bibliography of sug-
gested reading materials. The institute monitors the implementa-
tion of legislation and legal decisions concerning race and gender
neutrality and then works to educate public officials and private
citizens on the issue.
Americans for Effective Law Enforcement
841 W. Touhy Avenue
Park Ridge, IL 60068
http://www.aele.org
Americans for Effective Law Enforcement (AELE) was formed in
1966. It created a legal research center in 1973. AELE is a research-
driven educational organization. Its primary mission is to dis-
seminate legal information through seminars, other training, use
of the legal center, and through the Web. AELE maintains infor-
mation concerning law enforcement practice, including the use
of profiling. AELE also maintains information concerning jails
and prisoner rights issues.
Amnesty International
322 8th Avenue
New York, NY 10001
http://www.amnesty.org
Amnesty International is the premiere privately funded global
organization concerned with human rights issues. Amnesty
International conducts investigations of alleged abuses around
the world. It has chapters located in dozens of countries around
the world. From the Web site, a researcher can access reports
relating to abuses in the United States and abroad. Frequently,
the abuses tie directly to the military and criminal justice author-
ities of a given country. Amnesty International is a leading oppo-
nent of the death penalty. It also fights inhumane treatment of the
incarcerated. Reports and other documents concerning racism,
sexism, and homophobia are also available through the Web site.
The Cato Institute
1000 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Private Organizations
225

Washington, DC 20001
http://www.cato.org
The Cato Institute is a think tank whose purpose is to promote
public policies consistent with the traditional American princi-
ples of limited government, individual liberty, free markets, and
peace. The Cato Institute pursues this goal through involvement
in public presentations and debates, conducting research, pub-
lishing, and through maintaining its Web site. Although often
considered a conservative organization, the Cato Institute is
actually libertarian and a good resource for information con-
cerning the dangers of excessive police authority and actions. A
search of the Web site will link to several documents concerning
profiling.
Center for Constitutional Rights
666 Broadway, 7th Floor
New York, NY 10012
http:///www.ccr-ny.org
The Center for Constitutional Rights uses litigation and advocacy
to advance the law in a direction it views as positive, to empower
poor communities and communities of color, and to guarantee
the rights of people with few legal resources. The center also
seeks to train constitutional and human rights attorneys and to
foster a broad movement for constitutional and human rights.
Through the center and through its Web site, much information
is available concerning constitutional rights generally and profil-
ing specifically.
Center for Equal Opportunity
14 Pidgeon Hill Drive, Suite 500
Sterling, VA 20165
http://www.ceousa.org
The Center for Equal Opportunity is a nonprofit organization
established out of devotion to a truly color-blind society in which
equal opportunity and racial harmony can reign. The organiza-
tion maintains an extensive Web site for the research to peruse.
The site offers an “in the news” section with current stories relat-
ing to equal opportunity. The organization has a significant sec-
tion relating to immigration issues as well as issues concerning
disparate impact between the races.
226
Organizations and Agencies

Commission on the Accreditation of 
Law Enforcement Agencies
10302 Eaton Place, Suite 100
Fairfax, VA 22030
http://www.calea.org
The Commission on the Accreditation of Law Enforcement Agen-
cies (CALEA) was founded in 1979. It is an organization dedi-
cated to the standardization of professional police practice.
CALEA does this by assessing police agencies seeking accredita-
tion against a list of standards. Many of the standards are mea-
sured by whether a police agency has adopted certain policies
supported by CALEA. Although CALEA officially finds profiling
generally to be a potentially useful tool in law enforcement, it
requires of its member organizations strict policies governing the
misuse of profiling—particularly making law enforcement deci-
sions based solely on race, ethnicity, religion, gender, and sexual
orientation. The CALEA Web site offers its model policy con-
cerning profiling for any viewer who wishes to read it.
Community Policing Consortium
1726 M Street NW, Suite 801
Washington, DC 20036
http://www.communitypolicing.org
The Community Policing Consortium is a partnership of five
major police executive organizations: the International Associa-
tion of Chiefs of Police, the National Sheriffs Association, the
National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives, the
Police Executive Research Forum, and the Police Foundation.
The consortium is funded and administered by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice, Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS).
The consortium was established in 1993 and works to provide
community policing training and support to law enforcement
agencies. The Web site provides access to a wealth of resources
concerning the relationship between police and the communities
being served. Links to sites and documents with specific refer-
ence to profiling are available through the consortium site.
Congressional Black Caucus Foundation
1720 Massachusetts Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
http://www.cbcfonline.org
Private Organizations
227

The Congressional Black Caucus Foundation was established in
1976. It was set up for the purpose of broadening the influence of
African Americans in the public policy and legal arenas. The
foundation’s Web site is an excellent source of information con-
cerning public policies, research, and education in the many
areas of importance to the African American community.
Through the foundation Web site, a researcher can access audio/
video materials and publications relating to bias and discrimina-
tion in the criminal justice system, among other topics.
Drug Policy Alliance
70 W. 36th Street, 16th Floor
New York, NY 10018
http://www.drugpolicy.org
This organization’s purpose is to primarily focus on drug laws
and policies in the United States. The Drug Policy Alliance seeks
to reform the drug laws so as to deemphasize the use of punitive
criminal justice measures. Key issues for the alliance include sen-
tencing reform, police conduct, and profiling. The alliance pub-
lishes position papers on a variety of topics. Additionally, the
Web site serves as a portal to an online library, from which docu-
ments can be viewed concerning the effect of drugs and drug
laws on different communities, including racial minorities,
women, and homosexuals.
Drug Reform Coordination Network
1623 Connecticut Avenue NW, 3rd Floor
Washington, DC 20009
http://www.stopthedrugwar.org
The Drug Reform Coordination Network is an organization that
seeks to reform U.S. drug laws through decriminalization. The
organization’s Web site is very thorough, with links to attorney
general opinions, research data, and commercial documents relat-
ing to drug use and drug crimes. The site permits users to access
a citizen’s guide to police encounters and also offers information
concerning profiling within the context of drug enforcement.
EthnicMajority.com
655 13th Street, Suite 303
Oakland, CA 95612
http://www.ethnicmajority.com
228
Organizations and Agencies

EthnicMajority.com is a privately funded organization commit-
ted to exposing discrimination against minorities in various
walks of life. The group is funded by an organization called
Diverse Strategies. EthnicMajority.com emphasizes minority
issues in the workplace, politics, the criminal justice system,
housing, and other areas. The organization Web site, which is the
group’s primary product, provides several links and publications
of relevance to profiling.
Human Rights Watch
350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor
New York, NY 10118
http://www. hrw.org
The purpose of Human Rights Watch is to advocate on behalf of
victims of human rights abuses. The organization investigates
various types of abuses and discrimination. It then presents its
findings to governmental bodies to encourage them to respect
human rights laws that are implicated in their findings. Human
Rights Watch also seeks to increase public support for ending
various human rights abuses in the United States and around the
world. Key issues of interest for this organization include pris-
oner rights, the rights of immigrants and refugees, and women’s
rights.
International Association of Chiefs of Police
515 North Washington Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
http://www.theiacp.org
The International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) was
founded in 1893 for the purposes of advancing police profes-
sionalism through modern (at the time) administrative practices
and reform, increased use of technology to fight crime, improv-
ing training and education among the police ranks, and fostering
high ethical standards in policing. The IACP provides a vast
array of resources to those interested in researching police prac-
tices. It offers police professionals model policies for their depart-
ments, including policies concerning the use of profiling. The
IACP publishes one of the leading police trade journals avail-
able—Police Chief. Archived articles from past issues of Police
Chief can be accessed through the Web site. Additionally, many
links are available to other sites and documents concerning
Private Organizations
229

police/community encounters and the issue of profiling as a tool
for law enforcement.
International Association of Directors of Law Enforcement
Standards and Training
2521 Country Club Way
Albion, MI 49224
http://www.iadlest.org
The International Association of Directors of Law Enforcement
Standards and Training (IADLEST) is an organization made up
of the various state agencies that guide the standards for police
training and practice. These agencies generally are responsible
for certifying police officers in a given state and revoking that
certification or license when officers engage in serious miscon-
duct. The IADLEST Web site provides users links to relevant law
enforcement organizations in every state. The site also provides
model policies for standards and training boards to use, as well
as police agencies. Among the model policies are ones that relate
to profiling and traffic stops.
John M. Ashbrook Center for Public Affairs
401 College Avenue
Ashland, OH 44805
http://www.ashbrook.org
The Ashbrook Center for Public Affairs is housed by Ashland
University. The purpose of the center is to conduct research and
promote discussion of the principles and practices of U.S. consti-
tutional government and politics. The center emphasizes the
scholarly defense of individual liberty, limited government, and
civil morality—all of which together make up America’s “demo-
cratic way of life.” The Ashbrook Center Web site offers users a
search engine through which one can access well over 100 docu-
ments relating to profiling.
Leadership Conference on Civil Rights
1629 K Street NW, 10th Floor
Washington, DC 20006
http://www.civilrights.org
The Leadership Conference on Civil Rights is a socially con-
cerned, issue-oriented organization that attempts to promote a
230
Organizations and Agencies

civil rights agenda through education. Resources available
through the conference include audio resources, videos, and pub-
lications. The Web site is intended to serve as an online “nerve
center” for people struggling against discrimination of all types
and for the public at large to gain a better understanding of the
nation’s need for social and economic justice. The Web site offers
users links to a variety of other relevant sites and organizations,
including sites related to profiling.
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People
4805 Mt. Hope Drive
Baltimore, MD 21215
http://www.naacp.org
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored Peo-
ple (NAACP) is a long-standing civil rights organization specifi-
cally founded to promote equality and justice among the races
and to advance opportunities to succeed for minorities—particu-
larly African Americans. The organization was founded in 1909
by Ida Wells-Barnett, W. E. B. DuBois, and others. The purpose of
the organization then was to fight segregation and violence per-
petrated against black Americans. Today, the organization con-
tinues to be among the premiere civil rights organizations in the
United States, representing itself as standing for civil and politi-
cal liberty. The NAACP maintains volumes of resources govern-
ing a wide variety of topics concerning justice and equality.
Although headquartered in Baltimore, the organization has
chapters in every major urban center in the country. The Web site
presents a wealth of resources concerning civil rights matters,
including racial profiling. The site also links to many other
sources of information. People interested in calling the NAACP
twenty-four-hour hotline can do so at (410) 521–4939.
National Coalition on Police Accountability
59 East Van Buren, 2418
Chicago, IL 60605
http://www.websyr.edu/~nkrhodes/N-COPA.html
The National Coalition on Police Accountability (N-COPA)
describes itself as an organization of religious, community, and
legal groups and progressive law enforcement representatives
working to hold police accountable to their communities through
public education, community organizing, legislation, litigation,
Private Organizations
231

and promotion of empowered independent oversight. It was
founded as a subsidiary of Citizen Alert, which is a nonprofit
group primarily concerned about environmental justice. The N-
COPA site, although dated, links to several publications concern-
ing the oversight of police.
National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives
4609 Pinecrest Office Park Drive, Suite F
Alexandria, VA 22312
http://www.noblenatl.org
The National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives
(NOBLE) was founded in 1976 for the purpose of confronting the
issue of high crime in urban, low-income areas. Today, NOBLE
sets out to work closely with urban communities to create greater
cooperation with the criminal justice system so as to have a
favorable impact on crime and violence. The organization also
seeks to create a unified front of African American law enforce-
ment executives in order to affect public policy, further opportu-
nities for minorities in policing, and disseminate information,
training, and consultation where needed. NOBLE emphasizes
the need for law enforcement officers to be respectful of all citi-
zens they deal with and for police personnel and organizations to
be accountable to the public. The NOBLE Web site provides a sec-
tion on “areas of concern,” which then link to several documents
and publications on biased policing.
National Sheriffs’ Association
1450 Duke Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
http://www.sheriffs.org
The National Sheriffs’ Association (NSA) is a nonprofit organiza-
tion founded to advance professionalism and best practices in
criminal justice, including both law enforcement and corrections.
The NSA focuses on the unique role that sheriffs’ departments
have in that they serve law enforcement and correctional
(through their jail operations) purposes at the same time. The
NSA sponsors training around the country to modernize and
improve criminal justice practice. The organization also helps
local sheriffs’ departments to secure grant funding for hot issues
of the day (for example, antiterrorism, dealing with metham-
232
Organizations and Agencies

phetamine labs, and so on). The NSA Web site, like the IACP site,
offers useful information to those researching the relationship
between the criminal justice system and minority communities.
October 22 National Day of Protest to Stop Police Brutality,
Repression and the Criminalization of a Generation
P.O. Box 2627
New York, NY 10009
http://www.october22.org
The October 22 National Day of Protest to Stop Police Brutality,
Repression and the Criminalization of a Generation (NDP) was
organized in 1995. Its name refers, in part, to the date on which
the organization was formed. As the Web site notes, the NDP was
initiated by a diverse coalition of organizations and individuals
that came together out of a concern that the resistance against
police brutality needed to take place at a national level. Every
October 22, the NDP organizes a day of protest in several cities
across the nation against police misconduct. These protests
sometimes involve civil disobedience. The NDP Web site offers a
variety of resources concerning the fight against police brutality.
The perspective of the organization is radically left but neverthe-
less can serve as a useful resource site.
Police Complaint Center
1220 L Street NW, Suite 100–164
Washington, DC 20005
http://www.policeabuse.com
The Police Complaint Center (PCC) serves as a clearinghouse for
information concerning police misconduct—especially unlawful
profiling. The PCC invites victims of police abuse from around
the country to report their experiences to the center, which then
publishes the alleged abuses online. The PCC works to document
the extent of police misconduct in the United States so that pub-
lic policy may be affected. The PCC assists citizens in filing for-
mal complaints against law enforcement and ensures that those
complaints are given fair hearing without falling through the
cracks. The PCC maintains a phone number to receive com-
plaints: (202) 359–6406. The PCC Web site publishes several
pieces of information concerning racial profiling and other dubi-
ous police activities.
Private Organizations
233

Police Executive Research Forum
1120 Connecticut Avenue NW, Suite 930
Washington, DC 20036
http://www.policeforum.org
The Police Executive Research Forum (PERF) describes itself as
an organization made up of progressive police executives around
the United States. The mission of PERF is to advance profession-
alism and best practices in policing and to help foster good pub-
lic policy relating to law enforcement issues. PERF maintains an
excellent Web site with an entire online library available to users.
A whole section linked to the Web site deals with the issue of pro-
filing. Most of the information concerns racial and ethnic profil-
ing; however, there are items of information that relate to profil-
ing along other lines, for example, gender, sexual orientation,
religion, and so on. PERF sponsors many studies and publica-
tions. PERF also partners with the U.S. Department of Justice
(DOJ). The PERF Web site links to several DOJ publications.
Police Foundation
1201 Connecticut Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20036
http://www.policefoundation.org
The Police Foundation is a nonprofit organization founded in
1970. The foundation is committed to improving the ability of
police officers to perform their duties, which cover a wide vari-
ety of police practice. The foundation works closely with police
organizations around the country to conduct pragmatic and use-
ful research concerning the best practices in policing. Addition-
ally, the Police Foundation produces several practitioner-ori-
ented publications to improve policing. The Police Foundation
Web site maintains a whole section dedicated to community
policing. Additionally, the Web site links to current and proposed
legislation relating to police practices such as profiling.
Public Agenda
6 East 39th Street
New York, NY 10016
http://www.publicagenda.org
Public Agenda is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization created
to address a wide range of policy issues through its research and
234
Organizations and Agencies

citizen education programs. Issues the organization regularly
confronts include health care, schools, national security matters,
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), crime, the envi-
ronment, and economics. By accessing its Web site and following
the links to sections on crime, several documents concerning pro-
filing can be viewed.
The Racial Fairness Project
1027 Superior Avenue, Room 140
Cleveland, OH 44114
http://www.racialfairness.org
The Racial Fairness Project was formed for the purpose of pursu-
ing racial and ethnic justice through education of the public,
advocacy efforts, and empowerment of communities and institu-
tions by providing information and support. The project distrib-
utes a newsletter that can be delivered to subscribers via e-mail.
The project’s Web site links to many articles and research data
concerning matters of racial justice. The project tends to empha-
size the context of Ohio, although the information at the site also
has general appeal as well.
Rainbow/PUSH Coalition
930 E. 50th Street
Chicago, IL 60615
http://www.rainbowpush.org
Rainbow/PUSH is a progressive organization founded by Jesse
Jackson. The mission of Rainbow/PUSH is to fight for social
change and social justice. The organization fields several speak-
ers to events around the country. Many of the speeches can be
read online. Additionally, the organization’s Web site offers press
releases, commentaries, and a weekly newsletter. A search of the
documents online will yield several resources concerning profil-
ing—particularly racial profiling.
Southern Poverty Law Center
400 Washington Avenue
Montgomery, AL 36104
http://www.splcenter.org
The Southern Poverty Law Center was founded in 1971 as a
small civil rights law firm in the racially tense South. The organi-
Private Organizations
235

zation in recent years has come to be known for its aggressive
battles against white supremacist organizations on behalf of vic-
tims of hate crimes. Law enforcement agencies frequently utilize
the center’s thorough tracking of hate groups. The center pub-
lishes an e-newsletter that contains articles and commentary on
the center’s work. The center does engage in advocacy relating to
the criminal justice system. The Southern Poverty Law Center is
an ardent foe of the death penalty and disparate sentencing of
minorities.
Federal Government Agencies
U.S. Department of Justice
http://www.usdoj.gov
Easily, the most useful Internet site for the study of police prac-
tices generally and profiling specifically is the Web site main-
tained by the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ). There are literally
dozens of DOJ agencies with their own Web sites that can be
accessed through the main DOJ Web site address. The DOJ is the
lead federal entity responsible for setting law enforcement prac-
tice standards in the United States, gauging the extent of crime in
the United States, researching the merits of particular police
practices, and researching the extent of police misconduct. Addi-
tionally, the DOJ investigates and adjudicates criminal and civil
action against law enforcers and their parent organizations when
misconduct is alleged.
Some of the many Web sites of interest to those researching
biases in the criminal justice system are listed below. Almost an
unlimited number of links and publications relating to profiling
and police/community relations are available through these
sites. Even so, they represent only a partial list.
Bureau of Justice Statistics: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjs
Bureau of Justice Assistance: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/BJA
Bureau of Prisons: http://www.bop.gov
Civil Rights Division: http://www.usdoj.gov/crt/crt-home.
html
236
Organizations and Agencies

Community Oriented Policing Services: http://www.cops.
usdoj.gov
Community Relations Service: http://www.usdoj.gov/crs/
index.html
Federal Bureau of Investigation: http://www.fbi.gov
National Criminal Justice Reference Service: http://www.
ncjrs.org
National Institute of Justice: http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij
Office of Police Corps and Law Enforcement Education:
http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/opclee
Office of Legislative Affairs: http://www. usdoj.gov/ola
U.S. Department of State: http://www.state.gov
The U.S. Department of State represents the United States to the
world. Consequently, the State Department is the chief agency in
the federal government to advocate America’s values to other
countries, including values concerning fair and equitable treat-
ment in the criminal justice system. From the State Department
Web site, one can navigate to several documents and other sites
concerning prosecution and punishment of criminals and dissi-
dents.
Interestingly, the State Department Web site also maintains a
section specifically on profiling. From the section, one can link to
a variety of government documents, legislation, and opinion on
the matter.
The profiling section of the U.S. Department of State Web
site is: http://usinfo.state.gov/usa/race/profile/official.htm.
State Government Agencies
It is safe to say that criminal justice practice is a major public pol-
icy issue in every state of the union. Many states are presently
confronting the issues of discrimination in policing, prosecution,
and punishment. Other states have confronted such issues in the
State Government Agencies
237

past. Still others are exploring these types of issues tangentially
while dealing with other criminal justice matters.
The best way to ascertain what a particular state is doing or
saying about the issue of criminal justice profiling is to go
directly to a state’s Web site and do a search. Commonly, the
attorney general’s office and the Department of Corrections for
any given state are good places to start. When accessing a state
Web site, there will always be a link to the various state agencies,
to include the attorney general and the Corrections Department.
Other potentially useful sites in the state’s executive branch of
government include the Department of Public Safety (or a state’s
equivalent), the state police or highway patrol, and the state’s
Peace Officer Standards and Training Board.
Also accessible from a state’s Web site are the legislative and
judicial branches.
By accessing the state legislature, a researcher will be able to
conduct a search for proposed legislation concerning profiling.
One could also search for existing statutes as well as studies and
working papers commissioned and drafted at the behest of the
legislature as a part of the public policy process.
Likewise, by accessing the judicial branch a researcher
would be able to search court cases at the state and local level
that relate to or involve the issue of profiling, either directly or
indirectly. What’s more, the judicial branch Web sites may
include studies or policies concerning sentencing practices and
guidelines.
As can be seen below, most state Web site addresses follow a
simple pattern: http://www.state.??.us, where the “??” is simply
the mail code for the state. So for Minnesota, the state Web site is
http://www.state.mn.us.
The Web site for each state is provided below.
Alabama: http://www.alabama.gov
Alaska: http://www.state.ak.us
Arkansas: http://www.state.ar.us or http://www.
arkansas.gov
California: http://www.state.ca.us
Colorado: http://www.state.co.us or http://www.
colorado.gov
Connecticut: http://www.state.ct.us or http://www.ct.gov
Delaware: http://www.state.de.us or http://www.
delaware.gov
238
Organizations and Agencies

District of Columbia: http://www.dc.gov
Florida: http://www.state.fl.us or http://www.MyFlorida.
com
Georgia: http:// www.state.ga.us or http://www.georgia.
gov
Hawaii: http://www.state.hi.us
Idaho: http://www.state.id.us
Illinois: http://www.state.il.us or http://www.illinois.gov
Indiana: http://www.state.in.us or http://www.in.gov
Iowa: http://state.ia.us
Kansas: http://www.state.ks.us
Kentucky: http://www.kentucky.gov
Louisiana: http://www.state.la.us
Maine: http://www.state.me.us or http://www.maine.gov
Maryland: http://www.maryland.gov
Massachusetts: http://www.mass.gov
Michigan: http://www.michigan.gov
Minnesota: http://www.state.mn.us
Mississippi: http://www.state.ms.us or http://www.
mississippi.gov
Missouri: http://www.state.mo.us or http://www.
missouri.gov
Montana: http://www.state.mt.us
Nebraska: http://www.state.ne.us or http://www.
nebraska.gov
Nevada: http://www.nv.gov
New Hampshire: http://www.state.nh.us or http://www.
nh.gov
New Jersey: http://www.state.nj.us
New Mexico: http://www.state.nm.us
New York: http://www.state.ny.us
North Carolina: http://www.ncgov.com
North Dakota: http://www.discovernd.com
Ohio: http://www.state.oh.us or http://www.ohio.gov
Oklahoma: http://www.state.ok.us
Oregon: http://www.oregon.gov
Pennsylvania: http://www.state.pa.us
Rhode Island: http://www.state.ri.us
South Carolina: http://www.myscgov.com
South Dakota: http://www.state.sd.us
Tennessee: http://www.state.tn.us or http://www.
tennessee.gov
State Government Agencies
239

Texas: http://www.TexasOnline.com
Utah: http://www.utah.gov
Vermont: http://www.vermont.gov
Virginia: http://www.virginia.gov
Washington: http://www.access.wa.gov
West Virginia: http://www.wv.gov
Wisconsin: http://www.wisconsin.gov
Wyoming: http://www.state.wy.us
240
Organizations and Agencies

8
Print and Nonprint 
Resources
I
n this chapter, summaries of pertinent academic studies along
with lists of various other print and nonprint resources are pro-
vided to those interested in researching further the issue of
criminal justice profiling.
Academic Studies
In this section, we will examine several of the most recent stud-
ies that in some way relate to profiling in the criminal justice sys-
tem. Interestingly, very few studies have actually been conducted
on profiling specifically. Instead, many studies have set out to
examine inequities that may exist in the criminal justice system.
According to most of the contemporary criminal justice and
criminological research findings, these inequities typically form
along racial and gender lines. Most of the research efforts (but not
all) summarized below relate to disparities felt between races
and gender at the sentencing phase of the criminal justice system.
Most of the research (but not all) indeed found that unequal
treatment does exist when race or gender is taken into account.
Although most researchers do not suggest a purposeful bias, as
profiling would necessarily require, they argue that bias does
exist nonetheless and constitutes a serious problem for a system
that claims to put everyone on equal footing before the law. Let
us now take a look at some select studies relating to these areas.
241

Benda, Brent, and Nancy Toombs. “Religiosity and Violence:
Are They Related after Considering the Strongest Predictors?”
Journal of Criminal Justice 28, pp. 483–496 (2000).
Much attention has been paid in this handbook and in the schol-
arly literature to the interaction of race and, to a lesser (but still
significant) extent, gender. But profiling can, of course, involve a
variety of suspect variables beyond race and gender. One such
variable is the religious background of people under scrutiny. If
you ask the average police officer on the street to describe the role
religion plays in the officer’s enforcement actions, you would get
the answer “none.” For one thing, the religious background of
suspects is not typically known. For another, the religious back-
ground, if known, has typically not yet been associated with fre-
quent and particular violations. There is no sense in the law
enforcement community that drug use is a Catholic problem, for
example. There is no sense that Lutherans make up an inordinate
share of prostitutes. Religious background, except for certain
types of offenses and cases commonly associated with domestic
and international terrorism, is not seen as relevant.
In this study, the authors set out to examine the relationship,
if any, between religion and general crime. In doing so, the
authors administered a 150-question survey to approximately
600 men housed at the only adult boot camp correctional facility
in Arkansas. The questionnaire, among other things, measured
religious background, intensity of faith, church attendance, fam-
ily background, age, and number and type of past criminal acts.
Through regression analysis, the researchers found that
church attendance, which was affirmatively defined as attending
church more than once a month, was not significantly related to
criminal activity. Attending church predicted neither criminal
activity nor a lack of crime. Religiosity, however, was found to be
significantly and inversely related. That is to say, as the religious
convictions and personal commitment to one’s faith went up, the
number and severity of criminal acts went down. Although the
authors made no claim that the lack of religious conviction in
people makes them more likely to offend, it does appear from the
study that the presence of religious conviction makes one less
likely to offend.
This finding is particularly interesting given the belief by
some in society that devoutly religious people are problematic in
the modern, indeed postmodern, United States. The anecdotal
242
Print and Nonprint Resources

stories of Baptist televangelists involved in sex scandals and
fraud, radicalized Catholics bombing abortion clinics, or devout
American Muslims engaging in terror are just that—anecdotes.
These offenses and events have happened, but the research sug-
gests that they are anomalies. In fact, religious people tend to be
law abiding and therefore of little or no concern to the police.
Perhaps that’s why police officers don’t spend too much time
running a check on license plates in church parking lots on Sun-
day looking for people with outstanding warrants. Perhaps
police officers have always known what this study purports—
religious folks are generally not the problem.
Crawford, Charles. “Gender, Race, and Habitual Offender Sen-
tencing in Florida.” Criminology 38, no. 1, pp.263–280 (2000).
In this study, gender was added to the mix in examining sen-
tencing practices and potential disparities. In particular, 1,103
female offenders who were eligible for enhanced penalties under
Florida’s habitual offender statute in fiscal year 1992–1993 were
analyzed and compared against 9,960 male habitual offenders
previously studied by the author in 1998.
Under the habitual offender law in Florida, an offender can
receive harsher penalties at sentencing than he or she would oth-
erwise be eligible for if the offender had been convicted of two
prior felonies within five years of a current felony conviction. All
three felonies must be unrelated to each other, that is, three sep-
arate offenses.
Of the 1,103 females eligible for sentencing as habitual offend-
ers, only sixty-six women were so sentenced. This represents only
6 percent of the eligible female offenders, compared to 20 percent
of the eligible men who were sentenced as habitual offenders
according to the author’s 1998 study. This does suggest that
women in Florida are not as aggressively sentenced as men are.
About two-thirds of the women and 70 percent of men sen-
tenced as habitual offenders were African American. In fact, the
study indicated that after controlling for (that is, taking into
account) the prior records of the offenders, the seriousness of the
crime, the type of crime, and the Florida county in which the sen-
tencing took place, black women were almost twice as likely to
be sentenced as habitual offenders as white women.
In sum, the state of Florida appears to avoid targeting
women for habitual offender sentencing compared to eligible
Academic Studies
243

male offenders. If either gender has a claim that they are subject
to profiling in sentencing, this study would suggest it is men. The
study also suggested that when the habitual offender law is used
against women, however, it is possibly discriminatorily used
against black women as opposed to white women.
DeLisi, Matt, and Bob Regoli. “Race, Conventional Crime, and
Criminal Justice: The Declining Importance of Skin Color.”
Journal of Criminal Justice 27, no. 6, pp. 549–557 (1999).
The authors in this study wanted to examine the truthfulness of
the common claim in criminal justice academic literature that
racial discrimination explains why blacks are arrested, prose-
cuted, convicted, and imprisoned in numbers disproportionate
to their percentage of the U.S. population.
Going into the study, the authors noted that there was no
doubt that blacks were overrepresented participants in the crim-
inal justice system. According to the U.S. Department of Justice,
the incarceration rate per 100,000 adults in 1996 was 289 for
whites and 1,860 for blacks. The chance of a black male going to
prison in his lifetime was 29 percent, whereas for white males it
was only 4 percent. Black women were also more likely than
white women to be incarcerated in their lifetimes—seven times
more likely, to be exact.
These troubling statistics provided the backdrop for the
authors’ study in exploring the answers to five research ques-
tions. They were:
1. Is police discretion racially biased, resulting in higher
black arrests?
2. Is the arrest setting an example of the practice of racial
bias?
3. Are incarceration rates indicative of racial bias?
4. What do racial victimization rates say about racial bias?
5. Is the war on drugs biased against blacks?
To answer these questions, the authors conducted a secondary
analysis of existing data.
In answering question number 1, the authors examined two
studies relating to driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI)
arrests. It was thought by the authors that DUI enforcement rep-
resents an area of significant police discretion. If there were a
244
Print and Nonprint Resources

general tendency or desire within the law enforcement commu-
nity to discriminate against blacks, one would expect to see
greater proportions of blacks arrested for DUI, where police dis-
cretion is greatest. The authors, however, did not see a dispro-
portionate level of black arrests. In fact, whites were nine times
more likely than blacks to be arrested for DUI.
Regarding the second question, the authors found that arrest
data show most arrests emerging out of police response to calls.
Police respond to 911 calls, disturbances, and drug-related calls
by witnesses. Further, the handling of these calls is frequently
hampered by the intoxicating effects of drugs and alcohol among
those they are dealing with. In such chaotic and fluid situations
as a domestic disturbance involving a drunk, combative
boyfriend, the police have little opportunity to be racially selec-
tive in whom they arrest.
Regarding question number 3, the authors again found that
claims of racism’s being behind the incarceration rates of blacks
were spurious. The authors examined several studies, some of
which supported the notion of disparate treatment against
blacks, whereas others suggested harsher treatment (relatively)
against whites. For example, one study showed that blacks were
more likely than whites to be released from jail without having to
post money for bond. Another study showed the average elapsed
time from conviction to execution in death penalty cases between
1977 and 1996 was 110 months for whites and 117 months for
blacks. The authors noted, however, there is compelling evidence
that blacks are improperly sentenced to death at higher rates than
whites.
Question number 4 relates to the race of the victim and sug-
gests that the criminal justice system, if it were racist, would
ignore victims of color. But according to the authors, the aggres-
sive drug and street crime campaigns of urban law enforcement
agencies benefit minority potential victims or actual victims at
far greater rates than white victims or potential victims. The
authors demonstrated that blacks were more likely to be victim-
ized than whites and therefore the intensification of police
efforts, if absent, would demonstrate a lack of interest in the well-
being of minorities.
Finally, in answering question number 5, the authors exam-
ined studies relating to the harsher penalties associated with
crack cocaine over powder cocaine. Crack tends to be the form of
choice for black cocaine users, whereas powder tends to be used
Academic Studies
245

more by whites. The authors argued that harsher treatment of
crack cocaine by the law is not necessarily rooted in racism.
Crack is a more transitory and compulsive drug than powder
cocaine, said the authors. Its trafficking is also associated with
more violence and tends to involve and affect younger people.
Therefore, there are alternative public policy explanations for the
harsher treatment of crack cocaine than simply institutional
racism.
In discussing the findings, the authors pointed out that the
racial gap in state prisons in 1932 was 4 black prisoners to every
1 white prisoner., when accounting for their representation in the
total population. In 1979, the gap was 8 to 1. And in 1999, there
were more than 500,000 blacks in state prisons and just less than
400,000 whites; blacks comprise only 13 percent of the U.S. pop-
ulation whereas whites comprise 82 percent. The authors asked
the rhetorical question: does this mean the United States is more
racist as a society today than it was in the 1930s? Clearly, some-
thing other than racism alone must explain these incarceration
rates. From their evaluation of the research questions posed
above, the authors determined that the contemporary criminal
justice system is essentially fair to minorities. Further, the unspo-
ken implication is conveyed that some minority communities,
and African Americans in particular, have a crime problem that
must be addressed from within.
Griffin, Timothy, and John Wooldredge. “Judges’ Reactions to
Sentencing Reform in Ohio.” Crime and Delinquency 47, no. 4,
pp. 491–512 (2001).
As you may have already gathered, a very hot topic in the gen-
eral realm of criminal justice profiling is the way convicted
offenders who are persons of color are treated by the system at
the point of sentencing. Although we often debate the predispo-
sition of police officers to discriminate against minorities, we
rarely talk about the predisposition of judges to do the same. And
yet, if discrimination or bias does exist in sentencing, judges are
necessarily implicated.
In this study, the authors sought to gauge the feelings that
Ohio judges had concerning recent sentencing reforms. Tradi-
tionally and predictably, judges tend to vigorously defend their
autonomy and discretion in sentencing offenders. Reforms put in
246
Print and Nonprint Resources

place as a check against potential bias necessarily reduce judicial
discretion. The authors wanted to test this assumption.
The reform effort, known as Senate Bill 2 and implemented
by the Ohio Criminal Sentencing Commission in 1996, did sev-
eral things. The key element affecting judicial discretion, how-
ever, was the implementation of presumptive sentences (that is,
judges would be expected to follow the recommended sentence
within the guidelines and would have to justify not doing so).
Also, “truth-in-sentencing” was a key provision. Offenders
would be required to serve the majority of the sentence they
received.
The authors crafted a survey and sent it out to 221 judges
who presided over felony cases in Ohio courts. A total of 138
usable surveys were eventually returned. The survey measured
the degree to which judges viewed the reforms favorably or
unfavorably, along with specific elements of the reforms.
The majority of judges who responded to the survey
believed that the guidelines diminished judicial authority (68
percent), did not feel their input was considered in the reform
process by the Ohio Criminal Sentencing Commission (66 per-
cent), and did not feel the commission understood the perspec-
tive of judges (70 percent). Interestingly, a majority (55 percent)
responded, however, that the new sentencing guidelines were
good for the sentencing process. The 45 percent who did not
believe the guidelines were appropriate tended to be against
them because of their perceived undue restriction on judicial dis-
cretion. Additional statistical analysis demonstrated a significant
correlation between the fear of losing judicial authority and a
belief that punishment for offenders was not being achieved.
This makes sense given that the reforms proscribed a presump-
tive sentence of community service for less serious offenders.
It was not surprising to the authors that judges would be
somewhat reluctant to give up their absolute autonomy in sen-
tencing, even for the noble cause (in part) of ensuring equal
application of the law through standardization. The slight major-
ity that generally believed the reforms to be a good idea sug-
gested, however (optimistically perhaps), that judges can be per-
suaded to passively if not actively endorse self-limiting reforms.
To the extent that bias exists at the sentencing phase of the crim-
inal justice system, reforms such as those in Ohio remain among
the best hopes for change.
Academic Studies
247

Hebert, Christopher. “Sentencing Outcomes of Black, Hispanic,
and White Males Convicted under Federal Sentencing Guide-
lines.” Criminal Justice Review 22, no. 2, pp. 133–156 (Autumn
1997).
In this study, the author attempted to fill a void perceived to exist
in the literature on sentencing disparities. Although much had
been written about black and white offenders, little had been
done to consider Hispanic offenders side by side with black and
white offenders. Given the growth of the Hispanic population in
the United States, the author thought that this was an important
gap to fill.
The data set relied upon by the author to study sentencing
disparities was rooted in federal drug offenses for the calendar
year 1989. By choosing to examine the sentences for federal drug
law violations, the author was able to examine a set of crimes that
is relatively new in U.S. jurisprudence. Also, drug violations tend
to be more regulatory in nature and therefore mens rea, that is, a
criminal state of mind, was less relevant. Rather, federal sentenc-
ing guidelines simply call for a certain sentence for a certain
amount of a particular drug. If bias in sentencing existed, it
would be easy to identify in this context.
In this study, the author examined 5,557 single-count drug
charges (that is, cocaine, marijuana, and opiates) through records
maintained by the U.S. Sentencing Commission.
After analysis of the data, the author concluded that blacks
and Hispanics were not more likely than whites to be imprisoned
for drug offenses generally; African Americans convicted of
cocaine offenses and Hispanics convicted of marijuana offenses,
however, were more likely than whites convicted of the same
offenses to be sentenced to imprisonment. Additionally, African
Americans were more likely to receive longer sentences than
white offenders.
Three weaknesses of the study, as acknowledged by its
author, center on limitations of the U.S. Sentencing Commission
data. First, they did not reflect criminal history scores of the
offenders. Federal sentencing guidelines and the guidelines of
every state in the union provide for higher penalties for prior
offenders, with sentences progressively harsher the more serious
the offender’s criminal history.
A second shortcoming was that the data did not reflect
248
Print and Nonprint Resources

downward departures from the guidelines for those who coop-
erated with authorities. Under federal sentencing guidelines, an
offender will likely receive less than the normally prescribed
penalty if that offender helps the police and/or prosecution in a
significant way. These data take no account of that.
Third, the data sometimes miscoded crack cocaine as “other
drug” rather than as cocaine. Given that the penalties for crack
cocaine are harsher than for powder cocaine, some opportunity
was missed in the study to observe an anticipated disparity
between black and white cocaine users given that blacks tended
to use crack cocaine whereas whites tended to use powder.
Despite these weaknesses, there was general support from
the study for the assertion that persons of color are treated dif-
ferently than whites at the sentencing phase of federal drug
offenses, which by design is supposed to be rather mechanical
and uniform in its application.
Henderson, Martha, Francis Cullen, Liqun Cao, Sandra Lee
Browning, and Renee Kopache. “The Impact of Race on Percep-
tions of Criminal Justice.” Journal of Criminal Justice 25, no. 6, pp.
447–462 (1997).
Almost as important as the question of whether the criminal jus-
tice system is discriminatory against minorities is the perception
by minorities of whether the criminal justice system discrimi-
nates against them. Research has shown that perception matters.
Perception is reality for those holding to the perceptions. A per-
son’s perception that crime is at an all-time high and that it is
unsafe to walk to the store dramatically affects the quality of life
for that person, whether or not the perception is consistent with
the facts.
Consequently, an important question when considering the
issue of whether criminal justice profiles and treats people dif-
ferently according to their group affiliation is the perception that
people have regarding the fairness of the system. The present
study attempted to gauge just that.
In this study, the authors administered a telephone survey to
240 Cincinnati, Ohio, residents about their perceptions of the crim-
inal justice system. Whites totaled 136 of the respondents; blacks
totaled 104. Females slightly outnumbered males: 53 percent to 47
percent. All income and education levels were represented.
Academic Studies
249

A number of interesting findings about perceptions of police
practice and the courts emerged from the survey. For example, 95
percent of blacks indicated that police officers on patrol are more
likely to stop black motorists in white neighborhoods, as
opposed to white motorists in black neighborhoods or treating
all motorists the same. Whites were evenly split on this question,
with 47 percent believing blacks would more likely be stopped
and 47 percent believing that black and white motorists would be
treated the same.
When asked whom an officer would more likely give a ticket
to after pulling a speeding vehicle over, 46 percent of blacks
believed that black motorists would most likely get the ticket,
whereas 50 percent of blacks believed that whites and blacks
would be treated the same. The vast majority of whites (93 per-
cent) believed that blacks and whites would be ticketed in equal
proportions after being pulled over for speeding.
Blacks also perceived inequity from the courts. A full 80 per-
cent of black respondents believed that a black person would
likely be sentenced to jail for shoplifting. Only 2 percent believed
whites were more likely to receive jail time for the same offense.
Seventeen percent believed blacks and whites would be treated
the same. On the other hand, 59 percent of whites believed that
both races would be treated the same.
Eighty-nine percent of blacks surveyed believed that a black
person convicted of murder was more likely to receive the death
penalty. Forty-one percent of whites agreed with them; 50 per-
cent of whites thought both races would face the death penalty in
equal proportions.
As the authors pointed out, the results of the survey pointed
to a “deep and persistent racial cleavage in perceptions of racial
injustice in the criminal justice system” (p. 455). This cleavage
makes achieving common ground between the races on criminal
justice matters truly a daunting task, for the very assumptions
about the system are dramatically different. It is hard to meet in
the middle with an opposing viewpoint when you are not on the
same planet.
The implications of this study certainly include the fact that
officials in the criminal justice system have a long way to go in
winning the trust and confidence of minorities. Simply sending a
police officer to a community meeting, or visiting a black church
once a year on Martin Luther King Day, is not going to bridge
this gap.
250
Print and Nonprint Resources

Koons-Witt, Barbara A. “The Effect of Gender on the Decision
to Incarcerate before and after the Introduction of Sentencing
Guidelines.” Criminology 40, no. 2, pp. 297–328 (2002).
A research article discussed later entitled “Gender Bias and
Juvenile Justice Revisited” by John MacDonald and Meda Ches-
ney-Lind cites other studies and their research in Hawaii to sug-
gest that females may be treated unfairly at least during certain
phases of the criminal justice process. When bias exists against
one group or another at the sentencing phase, then talk of estab-
lishing or reforming sentencing guidelines invariably comes 
up.
In the present study, the author sought to determine if the
establishment of sentencing guidelines did anything to make the
sentencing process fairer in Minnesota. In particular, the author
examined the decision to put female offenders behind bars before
and after the introduction of sentencing guidelines in Minnesota.
Unlike some other studies, the author first recognized the
existence of prior research indicating that women tend to be
treated more leniently than men when judges have maximum
discretion in sentencing—particularly in urban felony courts.
This is not to say there isn’t sexism in the criminal justice system,
however. Scholars suggest the leniency is afforded especially to
those women who meet the gender role expectations of a pater-
nalistic, chivalrous, patriarchal system. In particular, women
who live up to their gender roles by being mothers of children are
especially likely to receive leniency at sentencing, whereas
fathers of children are not.
In testing whether or not the sentencing guidelines have ade-
quately created an equal application of sentences for equal
offenses, the author posed two primary research questions: (1)
Were Minnesota’s female offenders sentenced more leniently than
male offenders prior to the establishment of sentencing guide-
lines, but not after? (2) Did having dependent children result in
more lenient sentences for women than for men, both before and
after the creation of the guidelines?
Minnesota’s sentencing guidelines were adopted in May 1980.
The guidelines were intended to uniformly regulate the decision to
impose imprisonment and the duration of such imprisonment.
The objective of the guidelines was to maintain equality and pro-
portionality in sentencing while assuring that deserving people
were still punished.
Academic Studies
251

In this study, the author compiled data from the Minnesota
Sentencing Guidelines Commission and the presentencing inves-
tigation reports of Hennepin and Ramsey counties (the counties
of Minneapolis and St. Paul, respectively). Data for drug and
property offenses during three separate time periods were con-
sidered (including before, immediately after, and well after the
installation of the guidelines).
Interestingly, several significant findings held true across all
three periods of time. For one, women were always more likely
to be incarcerated than men. Also, men were more likely to have
criminal histories and to have committed more serious offenses.
And women were more likely to have dependent children than
were men.
The authors also found that women, even with dependent
children, were more likely to be sentenced to incarceration in the
immediate aftermath of the guidelines as compared to similarly
situated women before the guidelines. This suggests that the
guidelines initially served to turn a blind eye to circumstances that
had previously mattered in determining sentencing. By the third
time period, however, that is, after the guidelines had been around
a while, women with dependent children were incarcerated at no
greater rates than before the guidelines. This suggests that judges
grew increasingly comfortable returning to making chivalrous
decisions, even if it meant departing from the guidelines.
In sum, the answer to the first research question posed by
the author is “no.” Women were not treated more leniently than
men before but not after the guidelines. Rather, women were
treated more leniently before and after the guidelines. The guide-
lines did not correct the gender inequity of sentencing against
men. The second question’s answer is “yes”: having dependent
children helped women to receive more lenient sentences in rela-
tion to men, both before and after the guidelines. In relation to
themselves, however, women were treated most harshly during
the immediate period after the establishment of guidelines. That
development, depending on one’s perspective, could be viewed
as a time that was harmful to women and dependent children or
as a time when the gender gap at least closed a bit regarding sen-
tencing disparity.
Lahm, Karen. “Equal or Equitable: An Exploration of Educa-
tional and Vocational Program Availability for Male and
Female Offenders.” Federal Probation 64, no. 2, pp. 39–46 (2000).
252
Print and Nonprint Resources

Although considerable scholarly effort has been devoted to the
existence of inequalities between male and female offenders
within the criminal justice system leading up to and including
sentencing, there is another body of literature that has examined
the quality of programs available to male and female offenders
once imprisoned. Historically, very valid claims have been levied
against prison officials for devoting more resources per prisoner
to males for their rehabilitation than to females.
Researchers in the 1970s found female prisons to be charac-
terized by inadequate health care, stereotypical job training (for
example, programs to learn sewing or secretarial skills instead of
how to fix electronic components or manufacturing). In light of
the past research, and with the female prison population in the
United States growing rapidly, the author sought to examine the
current status of educational and training programs for female
prisoners.
In this study, the author was able to survey 474 correctional
institutions, including 47 female-only institutions, in 30 states.
The survey simply assessed the presence or absence of various
types of educational and vocational programs that prisoners can
take part in. The results of the author’s findings suggest that
opportunities for female prisoners have dramatically increased
over the past 30 years.
Specifically, the results showed that 100 percent of both male
and female institutions offered general education/high school
equivalency programs. Furthermore, female institutions offered
greater opportunities than did the male institutions regarding
college education, managerial skill training, technical and sales
training, service training, and operator/fabricator training. The
two areas of training that favored the male institutions were pro-
duction and farming/forestry/fishing.
The author found that female institutions are offering equal
or even superior training and educational opportunities as com-
pared with male prisons. The author also noted with dismay,
however, the lingering presence of stereotypical training pro-
grams at the female prisons in addition to the other opportuni-
ties. The author may be failing to consider the possibility that
some women may want to learn how to sew or clean or type.
Although the author was correct in noting that many of the jobs
women train for in prison result in low-paying positions once
released and back in society, the same is clearly true of male pris-
oners who are released. The matriculation of released prisoners
Academic Studies
253

into society at the lower socioeconomic rungs is likely a problem
across gender.
Lundman, Richard, and Robert Kaufman. “Driving while Black:
Effects of Race, Ethnicity, and Gender on Citizen Self-Reports
of Traffic Stops and Police Actions.” Criminology 41, no. 1, pp.
195–220 (2003).
At the time of this writing, this study represented the most cur-
rent academic findings concerning the perceptions of minorities
regarding their risk for being subject to police action because of
their race or ethnicity. The researchers in this study posed similar
questions to those, in part, of Ronald Weitzer and Steven Tuch, in
“Perceptions of Racial Profiling,” which is discussed later—that
is, what do citizens perceive as the basis for police actions taken
against them. Unlike the Weitzer and Tuch project, however, this
study did not limit the comparison racially by only considering
whites and blacks. Instead, the study assessed the opinions of
whites, blacks, and Hispanics.
In the present research, the authors sought to answer three
specific questions:
1. Are African American men, compared to white men,
more likely to report being stopped by police for traffic
violations?
2. Are African American and Hispanic drivers less likely to
report that police had a legitimate reason to stop them?
3. Are African American and Hispanic drivers less likely to
report that police acted properly during an encounter?
Researchers Lundman and Kaufman set out to answer these
questions by consulting and analyzing data from a section of the
1999 National Crime Victimization Survey conducted by the U.S.
Department of Justice. This section, titled “Contacts between
Police and the Public,” hereinafter will be referred to as CBPP.
The data Lundman and Kaufman had to work with were
very comprehensive. The survey, conducted nationally, required
that participants be at least sixteen years old. The CBPP portion
of the survey focused on the participants’ contacts with the police
in the previous twelve months. Over 80,000 subjects were ran-
domly selected for this study; of those, 7,034 (8.7 percent)
254
Print and Nonprint Resources

reported that they had been pulled over by law enforcement at
least once in the past year in which they were the driver.
For these respondents, additional questions were then asked
concerning the number of stops they had, the nature of the stops,
and their perceptions concerning the legitimacy of the stops and
the properness of police actions. The researchers also captured
data concerning a variety of possible explanatory factors specific
to the driver. These factors, which were controlled for, included
• history of police contact with the driver
• geographic location (large city, small town, and so on)
• social class of the driver
• age of the driver
• gender of the driver
• race/ethnicity of the driver
• race/ethnicity of the driver by gender
Using regression analysis, the researchers in this study made
several determinations. These included the following:
• Drivers with previous stops were less likely to report
legitimate reasons for the stops.
• Drivers in larger geographic settings were less likely to
report legitimate reasons for stops than those in smaller
settings.
• African Americans and Hispanics were much less likely
than whites to report legitimate reasons for stops and to
report that police acted properly during stops and
encounters.
From these findings, Lundman and Kaufman concluded that
police were indeed more likely to use traffic stops as pretexts for
pulling over minorities. They argued that despite the serious
threats to validity in self-report surveys, the overwhelming dif-
ference in responses between African Americans and Hispanics
on the one hand and whites on the other cannot be dismissed;
where there is smoke, there’s fire.
Although some scholars could argue that the methodology
of the study did not permit sweeping conclusions about what the
police are doing and why they are doing it, the study demon-
strated—once again—the undeniable perception that minorities
Academic Studies
255

have concerning the legitimacy of policing services they receive.
Law enforcement does not fare well in the eyes of minority com-
munities in the United States, especially in urban areas.
The cliché “perception is reality” may not hold up against
rigorous scientific inquiry. After all, for the scientist—even the
social scientist—reality is reality. But that fact is of little solace to
those who understand that community cooperation with the
police hinges on quality of life and service satisfaction—impor-
tant intangibles that do indeed revolve around perceptions. Per-
haps perception is reality after all.
MacDonald, John, and Meda Chesney-Lind. “Gender Bias and
Juvenile Justice Revisited: A Multiyear Analysis.” Crime and
Delinquency 47, no. 2, pp. 173–195 (2001).
A considerable amount of research exists concerning race and the
criminal justice system. Many of the preceding studies are sam-
pled from that body of literature. This study focuses on gender
bias in the criminal justice system. Specifically, the authors exam-
ined the extent of gender bias existing in the juvenile justice sys-
tem in Hawaii. Based on prior research, the authors entered this
study with the theory that female juveniles, once found to be
delinquent by a juvenile court, tend to be punished more
severely than male juvenile delinquents.
To test this theory, the authors examined data that had been
collected by the Hawaii State Judiciary and provided to the
National Juvenile Court Data Archive. The data set covered all
delinquency cases in the state of Hawaii from 1980 to 1991. In
total, 85,692 cases were included for analysis in the study.
As with some of the previously discussed studies, a regres-
sion analysis was used to assess the relationship of several vari-
ables, including gender, to the severity of punishment one
receives. Other variables considered included race/ethnicity,
geographic location within Hawaii, urban versus rural areas, the
year of adjudication, and so on. Of the 85,000-plus cases exam-
ined, 30 percent (nearly 26,000) involved female offenders. From
the raw data, the authors noted that in most cases, boys were
more likely than girls to be referred to juvenile court for property
and violent offenses. The tendency was to handle female delin-
quency more informally at the early stages of the process.
The analysis showed that once boys and girls who were in
the system were found to be delinquent (the juvenile court term
256
Print and Nonprint Resources

for “guilty”), however, girls were treated more harshly. For the
authors, this demonstrated a built-in antifemale bias in Hawaii’s
juvenile justice system. Efforts were taken to control for all rele-
vant factors. If it is true that females are given a pass at the front
end of the system while boys are not, however, then perhaps the
females making it all the way through to sentencing for their
delinquent acts are there precisely because they are more deserv-
ing of harsher punishment (otherwise, informal measures to
address their misconduct would have been pursued).
In any case, the study certainly does raise the possibility of
institutional bias against female offenders, at least in Hawaii,
despite the common perception that females always get off more
easily for their offenses by the criminal justice system.
Mosher, Clayton. “Predicting Drug Arrest Rates: Conflict and
Social Disorganization Perspectives.” Crime and Delinquency 47,
no. 1, pp. 84–104 (2001).
Many studies focus on the discretion that takes place by criminal
justice officials—particularly judges—at the time of sentencing.
And yet profiling is generally associated with law enforcement
actions. The present study examines exactly that: law enforce-
ment actions in the field. The author of this research examined
1989 data on illegal drug possession and trafficking arrests
against the backdrop of socioeconomic data from the 1990 census
in a sample of U.S. cities.
Drug enforcement reached its zenith in the late 1980s and
early to mid-1990s. In light of the heightened intensity of enforce-
ment brought on by the war on drugs, many scholars had been
concerned about a disproportionate application of the drug
enforcement activities against minorities. In 1996, there were
approximately 1,500,000 arrests for drug offenses in the United
States. That comes to 1,078 arrests per 100,000—about one and a
half times the arrest rate of the second-highest crime category:
larceny/theft. Interestingly, in California, more than 80 percent of
adults arrested for drug violations in the late 1980s were black or
Hispanic. In New York State, more than 90 percent were minori-
ties; and in Baltimore, black juveniles were arrested at nearly 100
times the arrest rate for whites. Do these figures amount to a clear
case of police bias?
Within the parameters of this study, the authors were able to
examine the arrest rates for drug possession and drug trafficking
Academic Studies
257

by race against the community variables of geographic region of
the country, police-to-population ratio, gender and age makeup,
percentage of high school graduates, percentage of population
employed, average income, and others.
Using a statistical process known as regression analysis
involving the variables listed above, the author found that racial
composition of a particular city, even after controlling for all the
other community variables, was the strongest predictor of drug
arrest rates for that city. Essentially, the greater the black or His-
panic population, the greater were the drug offense arrest rates.
Given that other studies cited by the author demonstrated a
greater rate of possession by whites compared to minorities and
a basically equal rate of drug dealing between the races, the
author suggested that a bias exists in police culture that favors
enforcement actions against persons of color. The study rein-
forced the author’s position that U.S. drug laws are being used
by authorities to control racial minorities in America.
Pratt, Travis. “Race and Sentencing: A Meta-Analysis of Con-
flicting Empirical Research Results.” Journal of Criminal Justice
26, no. 6, pp. 513–523 (1998).
This study differs from others in that it amounts to a study of the
studies. The researcher here conducted a meta-analysis (that is, a
grand analysis) of prior research concerning the impact race has
on sentencing. As the author noted, prior research over the years
had suggested any one of three possibilities explaining the rela-
tionship between race in sentencing.
The first explanation is the differential involvement perspec-
tive. This perspective says that African Americans are overrepre-
sented in the prisons and receive harsher sentences because they
are involved in more crimes than are whites and their crimes are
more serious. Theorists who believe this would not deny the
existence of racial bias in sentencing in the past. They would
argue that at some point in contemporary history, however, the
criminal justice system became sufficiently professional, formal,
and bureaucratic to eliminate or severely mitigate against overt
racism within the system
The second perspective that emerges from the literature is
the direct-impact perspective. This approach says that racial bias
does indeed exist and exists on purpose, with the goal of keeping
minorities powerless and oppressed. This position amounts to a
258
Print and Nonprint Resources

very cynical view of the U.S. criminal justice system, seeing it
really as a tool to maintain the power elite’s institutions and val-
ues in place.
Finally, the interactionist perspective claims that race does
play a role in sentencing, but not in isolation. Rather, race in
interaction with other variables and varied contexts has been
found to be statistically significant in predicting sentences for
offenders.
In the study, the author set out to examine the contradictory
research findings that propped up the three different perspec-
tives. In doing so, the author attempted to pool the data from
prior research and analyze the overall effect of race on sentencing
while considering legally relevant variables (for example, prior
criminal history, severity of crime, and so on). The analysis exam-
ined the data from race and sentencing studies contained in soci-
ological and criminal justice academic journals from 1974 to 1996.
The author noted and accounted for the fact that the earlier stud-
ies tended to be less statistically rigorous than the latter studies.
In total, 48,251 cases were examined from 47 studies.
The author performed regression analysis to determine the
effects of race, prior criminal history, and seriousness of the
offense on sentencing outcomes. The results showed that race
and prior criminal history had a relatively small effect on the sen-
tencing outcomes. The severity of the offense, however, had a
very large effect on the variance in sentencing. Put another way,
the variations in sentences the people received most often could
be explained primarily by the respective difference in the sever-
ity of crimes.
The author noted that his findings do not suggest that there
is no racial bias in the criminal justice system or in the sentencing
process specifically. The evidence from this study, however, sup-
ported the idea that legally relevant factors play the greatest role
in sentencing outcomes.
Son, In Soo, Mark Davis, and Dennis Rome. “Race and Its Effects
on Police Officers’ Perceptions of Misconduct.” Journal of Crim-
inal Justice 26, no. 1, pp. 21–28 (1998).
In contrast to studies that focus on the perceptions of minorities
toward the criminal justice system, the present study flipped that
around. Here, the authors conducted a survey of 718 Ohio police
officers to determine if race played a role in how they perceived
Academic Studies
259

the seriousness of another officer’s misconduct toward a suspect.
It was hypothesized by the authors that if the police were biased
against minorities, then they would view misconduct directed
against minorities as less serious than misconduct directed
against white citizens.
To measure police perceptions about misconduct and the
influence race has on those perceptions, the researchers devel-
oped a survey that included thirty-five short stories or vignettes.
In each vignette, a hypothetical police officer engaged in some
form of misconduct. Examples of misconduct included drug use,
theft from a crime scene, forcing a confession, and so on. Fewer
than one-third of the vignettes made any reference to the race of
the suspect or officer in the scenario. This was considered an
important design feature in the study because the researchers did
not want the officers to know the purpose of the survey.
In contradiction to the anticipated results of the study, the
researchers found that the citizen’s race in each of the vignettes
did not play a significant role when officers characterized the
seriousness of the misconduct. Rather, the acts of misconduct of
the officers in the vignettes and the consequences of the actions
played the greatest role in determining how seriously the survey
respondents viewed the misconduct. Another factor was the sus-
pect’s behavior toward the officer in each vignette. This is con-
sistent with other research that shows officers are harsher with
uncooperative citizens than they are with cooperative ones.
The authors noted the cycle that exists when minorities, who
presume the existence of police bias, manifest that bias in the
form of uncooperativeness. This, of course, is met with harsher
tactics, which then only serve to reinforce the idea that it is all
about bias.
Thomson, Ernie. “Discrimination and the Death Penalty in 
Arizona.” Criminal Justice Review 22, no. 1, pp. 65–76 (Spring,
1997).
The author of this study noted that many other studies had been
conducted concerning suspected patterns of racial bias in death
sentences. Considerable focus has fallen on southern states
where the history of racial tension is obvious. Studies on death
penalty bias have also been conducted in nonsouthern states,
however, and have found similar bias.
260
Print and Nonprint Resources

In this study, the author examined whether racial and ethnic
discrimination in death sentences occurs in the state of Arizona,
which has many ethnic groups represented among its popula-
tion. In particular, the author sought to find out whether African
Americans and Hispanics were more likely to be sentenced to
death for capital offenses than were white offenders, particularly
if the victims were white.
To answer this research question, the author examined the
racial and ethnic characteristics of reported homicides in Arizona
from 1982 through 1991 and compared that data against the
racial or ethnic characteristics of death row inmates in 1993 who
were convicted during the 1982–1991 time frame. As the author
acknowledged, he made no attempt to evaluate the role that
prosecutorial, judicial, or jury discretion played in the sentence.
Instead, he focused on the gross “beginning to end disparities.”
The study’s findings suggested that in Arizona, white mur-
derers were more likely to receive the death penalty than minor-
ity murderers. Further, murderers of all ethnic backgrounds were
more likely to receive the death penalty if their victims were
white.
When the data are taken in combination, the study found
that minorities were three times more likely to receive the death
penalty if they murdered white victims as opposed to minority
victims. And white murderers were twice as likely to receive the
death penalty if their victims were white as opposed to minority
victims.
The implication of the study is that an inequitable profiling
of sorts takes place at sentencing in homicide cases—the profile
relates to the victim rather than the offender. The author admit-
ted the study’s limitations with regard to details of those homi-
cides, however. Not all homicides are capital offenses eligible for
the death penalty. Aggravating circumstance must accompany
the crime to elevate it to a capital offense.
Most murders are intraracial—that is, murderers tend to kill
victims of the own race. This makes sense given that most mur-
derers and the victims know each other. Typically, the victim is a
family member, domestic partner, friend, coworker, or acquain-
tance of the murderer. On the other hand, most capital offenses,
such as those involving murder combined with rape, or murder
during a liquor store robbery, are stranger crimes. Further, white
individuals are more likely to be in a position to fall prey to a
Academic Studies
261

stranger-committed, capital murder because of their socioeco-
nomic status in relation to minorities. Regardless of whether the
offender is white, black, or Hispanic, the store owner who is
robbed and shot is quite often white. These unforeseen variables
may explain some of the tendency to favor capital sentences
when white victims are involved—perhaps the killings tended to
be capital offenses when those victims were involved.
In any case, the study reminds us of the need to be vigilant
in avoiding unfair discrimination against suspects but also in
unfairly elevating the value of some victims over others when
otherwise the crimes are equally abhorrent.
Weitzer, Ronald, and Steven Tuch. “Perceptions of Racial Profil-
ing: Race, Class, and Personal Experience.” Criminology 40, no.
2, pp. 435–456 (2002).
This study represents one of the few research efforts directly
aimed at broadening our understanding of racial profiling by the
police. The authors noted early in the article that very little
existed in scholarly literature concerning the experiences people
have had with profiling or their perceptions of it. One exception
is the police-public contact survey conducted by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice (DOJ) in 1999. That study found that blacks were
more likely than whites or Hispanics to report being stopped by
the police in 1999. Of those citizens stopped by the police, blacks
and Hispanics were more likely than whites to report being tick-
eted, arrested, or searched during the stop. They were also more
likely to indicate that officers had used force or threatened to use
force during the stop. That study relied on survey respondents
who had reported being stopped by the police. The present study
sought to expand the DOJ one by analyzing perceptions of police
actions according to the wider population.
The data analyzed by the authors came from a 1999 nation-
wide Gallup survey of 2,006 U.S. residents. The authors restricted
their analysis to the 903 whites and 961 blacks who took part in
the survey. The survey questionnaire polled respondents about
their attitudes toward racial profiling and the police. Addition-
ally, demographic and background data were obtained (for
example, education level, income range, gender, where they
lived, and so on).
When asked about the use of racial profiling to stop
motorists because the police perceive certain racial groups as
262
Print and Nonprint Resources

more likely to be engaged in criminal activity, 94 percent of
blacks and 84 percent of whites disapproved of the practice.
Among whites, women tended to be slightly more disapproving
then men. When asked if they thought the practice was wide-
spread, 82 percent of blacks and 60 percent of whites believed
that it was.
When the survey respondents were asked if they had ever
been stopped by the police because of their race or ethnic back-
ground, 40 percent of blacks said they had. Only 5 percent of
whites reported being stopped by the police because of race or
ethnicity. The percentage of blacks reporting being stopped by
the police went up when just considering males and in particu-
lar, the 18 to 34 age range. Seventy-three percent of black males
in that age group reported having been stopped because of their
race.
The authors pointed out that this last statistic was consistent
with other studies that showed young black males more fre-
quently encountered law enforcement. Lost on the authors, iron-
ically, is the fact that these statistics suggest that racial profiling—
taking police action solely because of a suspect’s race—is not
occurring. Race is not the sole criteria if age and gender are play-
ing a significant role. Profiling may indeed be taking place, but
not racial profiling. Otherwise, one would expect to see equal
percentages claiming victimization of racial profiling by blacks
across variables of age, gender, location, and so on.
In any event, the study highlighted the fact that prior per-
sonal experiences with law enforcement significantly help shape
people’s attitudes toward the police and police practice. Officers
need to be reminded that however mundane a traffic stop or
other minor offense encounter may be for them, such an
encounter is a significant event in the lives of most people. Police
officers must do their best to demonstrate fairness, professional-
ism, and solid, legal tactics to leave a lasting favorable impres-
sion on members of the public, regardless of race.
Williams, Marian, and Jefferson Holcomb. “Racial Disparity and
Death Sentences in Ohio.” Journal of Criminal Justice 29, pp.
207–218 (2001).
In this study, the authors analyzed data from the Supplemental
Homicide Report (SHR) for the state of Ohio from 1981 through
1994. The SHR is a database of information gathered by the FBI
Academic Studies
263

from police departments around the country. Although not every
police agency submits data, the vast majority of police agencies
of any size or consequence submit data to be counted in the SHR.
The SHR reflects the number of homicides that took place in
any particular jurisdiction, along with specific information about
the homicides. This information includes details about the homi-
cide, the classification of the homicide, information about the
offenders, and information about the victims. The data from the
SHR were then matched against Ohio death penalty information
from the same period of time using data from the Office of the
Ohio Public Defender.
In their analysis, the authors found that from 1981 through
1994, only 4 percent of the 6,441 cases in which the death sen-
tence could have been imposed actually saw the death sentence
handed down. White killers were more likely than black killers to
receive the death penalty (5 percent to 3 percent respectively).
Not unlike the results shown in Ernie Thomson’s study, “Dis-
crimination and the Death Penalty in Arizona,” however, mur-
ders involving white victims were twice as likely to result in a
death sentence for the offender as were murders with victims of
color. Additionally, blacks who killed whites were five times
more likely to receive the death penalty than were blacks who
killed blacks. Not surprisingly, offenders who killed multiple vic-
tims of any race were significantly more likely to receive the
death sentence than were those who killed only one victim. Fur-
ther, male offenders who killed female victims were more likely
to receive a death sentence than those who murdered male vic-
tims. Also, older offenders were more likely than younger
offenders to be sentenced to death.
Once again, a significant profiling question that emerges
from this study is whether or not offenders are sentenced accord-
ing to profiles of the victims. The victim’s race and gender in
these cases seem to have a relationship to the sentencing out-
come. Although a relationship may exist, this falls short of claim-
ing causation. There may be additional intervening variables that
affect the sentencing outcome that are also related to the vari-
ables of victim race and gender. In other words, when A is seen
to be related to B, as in this study, further analysis is needed
before we can say if A causes B, or B causes A, or C causes A and
B. From this study, by the authors’ own admission, we just don’t
know.
264
Print and Nonprint Resources

Books, Government 
Publications, and Videos
In this section of the chapter, lists of various print and nonprint
resources are provided. The majority of such resources that one
can find on profiling tend to address specifically the issue of
racial profiling. Unfortunately, few books or documentaries have
been produced that confront the criminal justice system’s inten-
tional reliance on suspect gender, sexual orientation, or religion
in making decisions or arriving at conclusions. What follows is a
selected list of recent books, government publications, and video
documentaries that may be of interest to one who desires to
research a variety of criminal justice profiling issues.
Books
Bireda, Martha. Eliminating Racial Profiling in School Disci-
pline. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2002. 128 pp. ISBN: 0-8108-
4201-7.
This book examined the question of why suspensions, expul-
sions, and other sanctions were so high for African American stu-
dents, particularly males. Although the book focused on the sec-
ondary education setting, there are parallels to the perceived
problem of profiling by the criminal justice system. The book
examined cultural assumptions that contribute to the higher rate
of punitive interventions against black males. The reader may
find these assumptions to likewise be at work in the decisions
made by justice officials.
Douglas, John, Ann Burgess, Alan Burgess, and Robert Ressler.
Crime Classification Manual: Standard System for Investigating
and Classifying Violent Crimes, rev. ed. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass, 1997. 400 pp. ISBN: 0-7879-3885-8.
Although last published in 1997, this book is appropriate to list
here because it remains a classic in the field of profiling and
offender classification. John Douglas is a founding father of the
practice as employed in criminal investigative work. The book
focused on the criminal intent of offenders and delivered a mech-
anism for developing a suspect profile within the context of vio-
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
265

lent crimes. The authors in particular examined the offender “sig-
natures” commonly left behind at violent crime scenes. The book
devoted attention to serial types of violent crime, including
homicides, sexual offenses, and arson. The book is intended to be
a reference manual for criminal justice and forensic mental health
practitioners.
Fredrickson, Darin, and Raymond Siljander. Racial Profiling:
Eliminating the Confusion between Racial and Criminal Profil-
ing and Clarifying What Constitutes Unfair Discrimination and
Persecution. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas Publishing, 2002.
170 pp. ISBN: 0-398-07255-8.
This text attempted to distinguish between legitimate criminal
profiling techniques and the controversial practice of racial pro-
filing. The position of the authors in this book was that profiling
is a legitimate police technique but that bias and prejudice in
police officers can spoil or pollute the process and therefore
diminish the practice’s legitimacy. Solutions, according to the
authors, can be found in understanding the issue thoroughly and
through hiring unbiased police officers and enforcing stringent
antibias policies. Legal remedies, such as consent decrees
between police departments and the federal justice department,
were also explored.
Fridell, Lorie, Robert Lunney, Drew Diamond, and Bruce Kubu.
“Racially Biased Policing: A Principled Response.” Police Exec-
utive Research Forum. http://www.policeforum.org. 2001.
To download this book, one needs the Adobe Acrobat reader pro-
gram on one’s computer. The book critically examined the issue
of racially biased policing, encouraging law enforcement admin-
istrators to recognize its existence generally and the potential
damage it can cause within a department and community. Chap-
ter 4 is key in that it offered up model policies for governing
police conduct in this regard. Police executives were advised to
embrace the policies in whole or in part, as the needs of their par-
ticular departments dictate.
Harris, David. Profiles in Injustice: Why Racial Profiling Can-
not Work. New York: New Press, 2002. 320 pp. ISBN: 1-56584-
818-7.
266
Print and Nonprint Resources

This book, written by one of the leading thinkers on the issue of
racial profiling, confronted the arguments made by law enforce-
ment that profiling is a useful and effective police tool. Profiling
is used by local police officers, state troopers, and federal cus-
toms and border officials in their respective law enforcement
roles, and many argue for the practice. Harris attempted to refute
arguments favoring profiling by calling into question the ethical
and legal problems that profiling generates. Harris also produced
statistical evidence, however, to demonstrate that profiling, apart
from questions of legality or morality, was simply ineffective as a
law enforcement tool. The book also included a chapter on pro-
filing in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks.
Holmes, Ronald, and Stephen Holmes. Profiling Violent Crimes:
An Investigative Tool. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2002.
299 pp. ISBN: 0-761-92593-7.
This is the third edition of what many call a classic work in crim-
inal profiling. The text focused on behavioral and psychological
profiling in solving violent crimes. The authors have included a
new chapter since previous editions, which addresses crimes and
the occult. The dark role that unconventional religious sects and
Satanism can play in certain crimes was explored thoroughly.
Sexual crimes, and particularly the psychological profile of
pedophiles, were also examined. The book is intended to be a
resource for the criminal justice practitioner, as well as for stu-
dents destined for careers in investigating violent and often
bizarre crimes.
Jackson, Janet, and Debra Bekerian, eds. Offender Profiling: The-
ory, Research, and Practice. Indianapolis, IN: Wiley Publishing,
1998. 254pp. ISBN: 0-471-97565-6.
This text is a compilation of works by several authors whose
expertise lies in profiling as an investigative tool. Among the
chapters contained this book are ones focused on the role of per-
sonality theories in developing offender profiles, the use of data-
bases in investigatory profiling, and geographic profiling.
Although this type of profiling cannot be equated with racial pro-
filing or gender profiling per se, the criteria of race, gender, cul-
ture, geography, and other objective factors are potential compo-
nent parts in developing an offender profile. This text, through
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
267

its contributors, helped distinguish unlawful and unethical pro-
filing based on prejudice from profiling based on objective obser-
vations and facts.
Marks, Kenneth, Driving while Black: Highways, Shopping
Malls, Taxi Cabs, Sidewalks: How to Fight Back if You Are a Vic-
tim of Racial Profiling. New York: Broadway Publishing, 2000.
272 pp. ISBN: 0-7679-0549-0.
This publication was framed as a handbook for surviving police
encounters. Its premise was that class, age, race, and dress (such
as baggy pants or baseball caps on sideways) are factors in who
has an encounter with the police, whether one’s objective behav-
ior warrants such an encounter or not. It also speaks to readers
who believe they have been discriminated against in other ways
outside of the criminal justice system, such as cab drivers failing
to stop for a black man on the corner in favor of a white man far-
ther down the street, or a black person being persistently fol-
lowed by mall or store security when browsing. The book pro-
vided guidance on what actions can be taken when one believes
one’s civil rights have been violated.
Milovanovic, Dragon, and Katheryn Russell, eds. Petit
Apartheid in the U.S. Criminal Justice System. Durham, NC:
Carolina Academic Press, 2001. 124 pp. ISBN: 0-89089-951-7.
This publication took a theoretical approach to explaining the
relationship of African Americans to the criminal justice system.
Contributions from different authors form the various chapters
of the book. The chapters included discussions of racial profiling
in the drug war, the perspective of African American officers in
policing other African Americans, the interest in law enforcement
held by African Americans, and how “petit apartheid” is mani-
fested at the macro as well as micro levels.
O’Reilly, James. Police Traffic Stops and Racial Profiling:
Resolving Management, Labor, and Civil Rights Conflicts.
Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas Publishing, 2002. 304 pp.
ISBN: 0-398-07295-7.
The book is broken into four main parts. The first part addressed
the issue of racial profiling within the specific context of traffic
268
Print and Nonprint Resources

stops. The legal standards necessary for police encounters and
detentions were explained, along with the political ramifications
that accompany the practice of racial profiling. The second part of
the book looked at the multitude of remedies for the practice of
profiling, as advocated by civil rights activists, the courts, and
politicians. The third part of the text addressed in detail the role of
politics and elected officials in responding to racial profiling. Addi-
tionally, the role that the police unions play, as a political con-
stituency, was addressed. Last, the book offered preventative steps
that police administrations and communities can take to avoid the
controversy that invariably comes with the practice of profiling.
Schultz, David, and Christina DeJong. Good Cop, Bad Cop:
Racial Profiling and Competing Views of Justice. New York: P.
Lang Publishing, 2003. 246 pp. ISBN: 0-8204-5829-5.
This book, part of a larger series related to studies on crime and
punishment, examined the history of racial profiling. The prac-
tice of profiling as a tool for drug enforcement on the highways
and airports was highlighted. The authors attempted to provide
a balanced view of profiling, examining what the courts have
said with regard to racial profiling and how politicians have
responded. The book also attempted to convey the arguments for
and against the use of racial profiles, particularly in the wake of
the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001.
Turvey, Brent. Criminal Profiling: An Introduction to Behavioral
Evidence Analysis. London: Academic Press, 2002. 717 pp. ISBN:
0-12-705041-8.
This book is suitable as a text for working criminal investigators
as well as would-be sleuths. This text teaches the deductive rea-
soning approach to investigative work, covering case types such
as homicides, arson, stalking, and sex offenses. Turvey’s deduc-
tive profiling approach treated criminal profiling as an investiga-
tive process that requires the investigator to gain a genuine
understanding of behavioral and environmental contributions to
criminality. This book did not examine profiling from a racial,
gender, religious, or sexual orientation consciousness, except
insofar as these characteristics inform the investigator about cul-
tural or environmental issues of relevance in a particular instance
of criminality.
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
269

Vogel, Robert. Fighting to Win. Nashville, TN: Turner Publish-
ing, 2001. 248 pp. ISBN: 1-56311-627-8.
In this book, famed Florida law enforcer Robert Vogel described
his career as a Florida state trooper and then as a sheriff. Vogel
explained his effort to fight drug trafficking throughout his
career and addressed the controversy surrounding the practice of
profiling. Vogel defended the practice of profiling drug runners
as an effective and ethical law enforcement tool. He attempted to
debunk the criticisms that his brand of profiling was racist and
unfair. The bulk of his book discussed his ultimately successful
legal fight with his critics and with the U.S. Department of Jus-
tice over the practice of profiling.
Williams, Mary, ed. Discrimination. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven
Press, 2002. 200 pp. ISBN: 0-7377-1226-0.
This is a compilation of essays addressing the degree of discrimi-
nation in society still being felt by racial minorities, women, and
homosexuals. Although the book is not exclusively devoted to
discrimination within the context of the U.S. criminal justice sys-
tem, a number of the essays do touch pervasive discrimination by
justice officials. Further, the general discussions and arguments
that emerged from the various essays have relevance to the justice
system if only because the justice system is made up of people,
and it is in the hearts of people, either because of malice or unwit-
ting ignorance, that the roots of discrimination are found.
Government Publications
Characteristics of Drivers Stopped by Police in 1999
http://www.ojp.gov/bjs
This Department of Justice publication offered to the reader data
concerning the characteristics of traffic stops. The data were col-
lected through a 1999 Police-Public Contact Survey. Factors such
as race, gender, age, and driving record were all sorted in this
study. Additionally, the outcomes of the stops and the use of force
to effect those outcomes, where applicable, were also examined.
Contacts between Police and Public: Findings from the 1999
National Survey
http://www.ojp.gov/bjs
270
Print and Nonprint Resources

This report provided data from a 1999 national survey in which
contacts between the police and citizens were characterized by
reason for the contact, circumstances surrounding the contact,
characteristics of the citizens and officers, and a variety of other
factors.
Differences in the Background and Criminal Justice
Characteristics of Young Black, White, and Hispanic Male
Federal Prison Inmates
http://www.bop.gov
This study looked at a variety of characteristics that describe the
federal male inmate population, broken down along racial lines.
The offenses that were committed, demographic factors, criminal
history, and so on were all examined to get a snapshot of who is
in prison and why. A researcher of bias in sentencing will find the
raw data contained in this report very informative.
The End Racial Profiling Act of 2001
http://purl.access.gpo.gov/GPO/LPS22239 or /LPS22240
This document serves as the record for the Senate Judiciary Com-
mittee, 107th Congress, concerning the hearing for Senate Bill
989, which would ban racial profiling in the United States. This
was the Senate’s second hearing on the practice of racial profiling
in two years. The bill was not passed into law during the 107th
Congress. However, a similar bill—S. 2132—known as the “End
Racial Profiling Act of 2004” was introduced in the 108th Con-
gress. To date, it has not become law.
Fact Sheet: Racial Profiling
http://www.usdoj.gov
This six-page-long fact sheet summarized the controversy that is
racial profiling in law enforcement and made distinctions of
when it is legitimate to use race in identifying criminal suspects.
Guidance regarding the Use of Race by Federal Law
Enforcement Agencies
http://www.usdoj.gov/crt
This document represents the law of the land insofar as federal
law enforcement and the use of racial profiling are concerned. The
document specified when race is a permitted consideration for
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
271

federal law officers. It also drew a line between the use of race for
routine law enforcement purposes and for national security pur-
poses. The federal government permits greater latitude in using
race when national security and border security are implicated.
How to Correctly Collect and Analyze Racial Profiling Data:
Your Reputation Depends on It!
http://www.ojp.gov/bja
Demonstrative of the importance the U.S. Department of Justice
places on data collection techniques for profiling studies, this
document serves as an update from previously published ones
and provides additional insights from the benefit of hindsight.
As the subtitle suggests, emphasis was placed on proper tech-
niques, as the reputation of police administrators or researchers
could certainly suffer given the volatility of this issue and the
enormous potential for error in collection of key data.
Minnesota Statewide Racial Profiling Report
http://www.umn.edu/irp
Report of a landmark study involving the analysis of traffic stops
conducted by sixty-five Minnesota law enforcement agencies.
The agencies that participated in the study included urban, sub-
urban, and rural departments. The study involved the analysis of
thousands of traffic stops and vehicle searches where whites,
blacks, Hispanics, and Native Americans were the drivers and
occupants in the vehicles being pulled over. The results of the
study indicated that nonwhite motorists were pulled over at
greater rates than were white motorists. The study also showed,
however, that white motorists were more likely to have drugs or
other contraband in their possession inside the motor vehicle as
compared to nonwhite motorists. These results tended to debunk
the notion that minorities are pulled over at greater rates owing
to a greater likelihood that minorities will have contraband in
their possession.
Principles of Good Policing: Avoiding Violence between Police
and Citizens
http://www.usdoj.gov/crs
This lengthy publication examined the role of the police in con-
temporary American society and the values of good policing. A
272
Print and Nonprint Resources

number of contemporary issues were explored in light of effec-
tive police leadership and practice. Key elements of the report
related to the police-community relationship and the need for
police to understand the culture, expectations, and environment
of those being policed. Also discussed was how to achieve police
departments’ employment of culturally sensitive officers.
Racial Profiling Studies in Law Enforcement (by Jim Cleary)
http://www.house.leg.state.mn.us/hrd/pubs/raceprof.pdf
This report serves as a “how to” to conduct valid and reliable
studies concerning the practice of racial profiling. The report
highlighted the history of profiling by law enforcement and
reflected on arguments for and against the practice. It provided
detailed information on working with law enforcement agencies
to construct a study so that the role race plays in discretionary
police action could be gauged.
Racial Profiling within Law Enforcement Agencies
http://purl.access.gpo.gov/GPO/LPS15529 or /LPS15530
This document recounted the testimony and findings of the U.S.
Senate Judiciary Committee of the 106th Congress concerning the
use of racial profiling by American law enforcement. Testimony
came from law enforcement officers, victims of profiling, the
attorney general, and others. Arguments for and against the use
of profiling were also part of the record.
Resource Guide on Racial Profiling Data Collection Systems:
Promising Practices and Lessons Learned
http://www.ojp.gov/bja
This publication provided an overview concerning the issue of
racial profiling. It also discussed the nature of profiling data col-
lection. The document highlighted data collection activities in
California, New Jersey, North Carolina, and even Great Britain.
Recommendations for collection procedures were made.
Traffic Stop Data Collection Policies for State Police
http://www.ojp.gov/bjs
In March 2001, sixteen of forty-nine state police agencies required
their officers to record data concerning the traffic stops they made.
In some cases, the data collection requirement extended to other
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
273

types of citizen contacts as well. This report examined the methods
of collection that were employed and summarized the findings.
Women and Girls in the Criminal Justice System
http://www.ncjrs.org and http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/nij
This large publication explored the changing involvement of
females with the criminal justice system in the United States. The
historical trends of women and criminal conduct were discussed,
culminating in the recognition of increased levels of female crim-
inal conduct—particularly violent crimes. This document is a
must-see for readers interested in the disparate treatment of
women by the criminal justice system—sometimes to the benefit
of women, and sometimes not.
Videos
Behind the Blue Wall: Police Brutality
Date:
1999
Type:
VHS
Length:
50 min.
Cost:
$24.95
Source:
Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
http://www.aetv.com
This Arts and Entertainment production explored the issue of
police brutality by focusing on two relatively recent, high-profile
events involving the New York City Police Department. In par-
ticular, the cases of Abner Louima and Amadou Diallo—both
black immigrants—were examined. In the Louima case, white
police officers were accused and convicted of sexually assaulting
Louima with a toilet plunger while he was in custody in 1997. In
the Diallo case, four white police officers were accused but
acquitted of unlawfully gunning down Diallo in an alleyway in
1999. It was determined that Diallo was incorrectly thought to be
reaching for a gun when confronted by the officers; it turned out
he was reaching for his wallet. Former New York Police commis-
sioner Howard Safir was interviewed and attempted to explain
the perceived police propensity to use violence against suspects,
especially minorities.
Cops under Fire
Date:
1996
274
Print and Nonprint Resources

Type:
VHS
Length:
50 min.
Cost:
$24.95
Source:
Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
http://www.aetv.com
This Arts and Entertainment program, hosted by Mike Wallace,
explored the selective targeting of minorities by law enforce-
ment. The program reviewed high profile cases, such as the Rod-
ney King beating and the Amadou Diallo shooting. Wallace inter-
viewed citizens and law enforcers alike to gain their perspectives
on the degree to which the problem of biased policing exists and
what must be done to end it.
Cultural Diversity for Law Enforcement
Date:
1995
Type:
VHS
Length:
23 min.
Cost:
$29.95
Source:
Distributed by Performance Dimensions
http://www.lawenforcementvideos.com
This police training video was hosted by noted police training
expert Ed Nowicki. The video was designed to equip police offi-
cers with an understanding of the cultures and subcultures that
are found in the areas they police. Issues such as racial profiling,
stereotyping, the CARD system (class, age, race, dress), and hate
crimes were all explored as practical matters and from the per-
spective of professional, legal, and moral police work. The video
contained scenarios to help facilitate discussion in a training
environment.
Cultural Diversity: Myths and Stereotypes
Date:
1999
Type:
VHS
Length:
60 min
Cost:
$259.00
Source:
Distributed by Insight Media
http://www.insight-media.com
This video serves as a tool for police officers by teaching them
how to avoid making judgments about others based upon false
assumptions. The natural tendency of police officers to draw con-
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
275

clusions about people upon initial contact is addressed. The use
of stereotyping to assess not only suspects, but victims and wit-
nesses as well, is confronted in this production. This video can be
used alone or in conjunction with Cultural Diversity: Professional-
ism (described below).
Cultural Diversity: Professionalism
Date:
1999
Type:
VHS
Length:
60 min
Cost:
$259.00
Source:
Distributed by Insight Media
http://www.insight-media.com
This police training video addresses the issue of police profes-
sionalism. It reveals how the standards of police professionalism
are inconsistent with the nature of prejudice and actions that fol-
low. This video can be used alone or in conjunction with Cultural
Diversity: Myths and Stereotypes (described above).
Protect and Serve: De-Policing in Urban Neighborhoods
Date:
2001
Type:
VHS or DVD
Length:
23 min.
Cost:
$69.95 (VHS) or $79.95 (DVD)
Source:
Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
http://www.films.com
This ABC News special hosted by Ted Koppel explored the reac-
tion by law enforcement to the criticism of biased policing and
racial profiling. Many large cities have seen police department
production drop as measured by contacts with public, arrests,
citations, and so on. Koppel interviewed several individuals
from law enforcement, community organizations, and politics to
gauge the degree to which police officers were pulling back
under the premise of “no contact, no complaint.”
Racial Profiling and Law Enforcement: America in Black and
White
Date:
1998
Type:
VHS or DVD
Length:
41 min.
276
Print and Nonprint Resources

Cost:
$129.95 (VHS) or $139.95 (DVD)
Source:
Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
http://www.films.com
This two-part series hosted by Ted Koppel and Michael
McQueen of ABC News examined both sides of the “driving
while black” (DWB) debate. What law enforcement personnel
consider to be a valuable and proven technique of interdicting
crime—profiling—community activists decry as racial profiling,
claiming it is unfair, humiliating, and often ineffective. Part One
of the series investigated this issue from the victim’s point of
view, that is, innocent black citizens pulled over or otherwise
confronted by police because of their race. Part Two examined
the issue from the law enforcement perspective and included
commentary by former O. J. Simpson prosecutor Christopher
Darden.
The Rodney King Incident: Race and Justice in America
Date:
1998
Type:
VHS or DVD
Length:
57 min.
Cost:
$89.95 (VHS) or $99.95 (DVD)
Source:
Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
http://www.films.com
This is a fascinating revisitation of the Rodney King beating by
four Los Angeles police officers and the subsequent local and
federal trials of the officers. All the key individuals involved in
the incident were interviewed for the program, including Rod-
ney King, King’s attorney, all four police officers charged in the
beating, the local prosecutor in the case, former police chief Dar-
rel Gates, and several others. The unedited version of the Rodney
King videotape, which captured the beating, was played in its
entirety. All sides of the issue were examined. A discussion of the
outrage in the community after the initial verdict of not guilty
and the resulting riot in South Central Los Angeles was also
included in the program.
Serial Killers: Profiling the Criminal Mind
Date:
1998
Type:
DVD
Length:
200 min.
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
277

Cost:
$14.95
Source:
Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
http://www.aetv.com
This four-part program examined why serial killers commit the
offenses they do. Interviews with a variety of experts, including
former FBI agent John Douglas, were the mainstay of the pro-
gram. Also included were prison interviews with actual offend-
ers, including Charles Manson and John Wayne Gacy. Other ser-
ial killers were also considered in the analysis, including Wayne
Williams and Jeffrey Dahmer.
Should We Fear the Police?
Date:
1999
Type:
VHS
Length:
30 min.
Cost:
$99.00
Source:
Distributed by Insight Media
http://www.insight-media.com
This video examined two different contexts thought to be repre-
sentative of police antagonism toward minorities. The first con-
text was in the city of New York, where Amadou Diallo was mis-
taken for an armed suspect and shot several times by four police
officers. The incident was reviewed and the reasons why so
many in the African American community believed the shooting
was racially motivated were revealed. The second context the
video explored is that of the New Jersey State Police. In that seg-
ment of the video, black New Jersey state troopers were featured,
along with their claims that their white colleagues systematically
engaged in racially biased policing.
To Catch a Killer: Use and Abuse of Criminal Profiling
Date:
2001
Type:
VHS or DVD
Length:
46 min.
Cost:
$149.95 (VHS) or $159.95 (DVD)
Source:
Distributed by Films for the Humanities and Sciences
http://www.films.com
In this video, a retired FBI profiler, a police psychologist, and sev-
eral British law enforcement officials discussed a couple of highly
sensationalized cases in England that involved the use of crimi-
278
Print and Nonprint Resources

nal profiling. In one case, involving a serial rapist, profiling was
successfully used to identify and apprehend the offender. In
another case, this time involving a murder, the use of profiling
nearly scuttled the entire investigation.
20th Century with Mike Wallace: Profiling Killers
Date:
1998
Type:
VHS
Length:
50 min.
Cost:
$24.95
Source:
Distributed by Arts and Entertainment Networks
http://www.aetv.com
This episode of 20th Century with Mike Wallace examined the his-
tory of criminal profiling. Pioneering profilers formerly with the
FBI, such as John Douglas and Clint Van Zandt, were interviewed
about the struggle to legitimacy for profiling as an investigatory
tool. The creation of the FBI’s Behavioral Science Unit at Quantico,
Virginia, in 1972 was also examined. After viewing this video,
there will be little doubt that the FBI as an agency remains the pre-
mier holding organization of expertise concerning profiling.
Books, Government Publications, and Videos
279


Glossary
atavism
The theory that criminality is rooted in primitive and savage
biological traits.
beat patrol
A policing strategy that concentrates an officer’s attention
on a particular, relatively small geographic location, thus enabling the
officer to become very familiar with the area and people being policed.
behavioral profiling
A composite of behavioral patterns observed by
law enforcement and used to predict future criminality.
Bill of Rights
The first ten amendments of the U.S. Constitution, most
of which establish the limitations to which government is subject when
infringing upon individual freedom.
blue curtain/wall
Terms used to describe the culturally ingrained
reluctance of police officers to report on the misconduct of other police
officers
broken windows
A strategy of policing based on the theory that fail-
ure to address the minor offenses and public nuisances in a neighbor-
hood will lead to more serious crime problems.
Carroll search
A permissible warrantless bumper-to-bumper search of
a motor vehicle by law enforcement without the owner’s consent, pro-
vided probable cause exists that the vehicle contains evidence of a crime.
Civil Rights Act of 1964
A federal act outlawing discrimination in
housing, employment, and other areas on the basis of race, ethnicity,
religion, and gender.
civilian review board
A panel of citizens who are organized to evalu-
ate the legitimacy of specific police-citizen encounters and to make rec-
ommendations or impose sanctions (depending on the degree of power
conferred upon a board in a particular jurisdiction).
classical criminology
Theories of crime rooted in the notion that peo-
ple commit crimes after making a rational choice of their own free will.
code of ethics
A framework for what is considered appropriate, moral,
and professional behavior on the part of criminal justice professionals.
Police officers, prosecutors, judges, and correctional officials all have
standing codes of ethics.
281

code of silence
Similar to the “blue wall” or “blue curtain”; this is an
unofficial code of conduct thought to exist in many police organizations
that requires officers not to divulge to the public information about con-
duct or misconduct on the part of other officers.
community-based policing
Any police program in place to foster
partnerships between the community and police officers for the purpose
of reducing crime and the fear of crime.
community policing
A strategy of policing that involves connecting
specific officers to specific communities and subcommittees over the
long term in order to reduce crime and the fear of crime.
conflict model
A political philosophy that argues that criminal laws
and enforcement mechanisms have been crafted by society’s powerful
elite and for their benefit.
consensus model
A political philosophy that holds to the notion that
criminal laws are an expression of society’s widely shared values and
beliefs.
consent decree
An agreement that allows a police department to avoid
being sued by the U.S. Justice Department for civil rights violations pro-
vided that the police department in question consents to set conditions
and oversight by the U.S. Justice Department.
crime control model
A conceptualization of the criminal justice system
that emphasizes the need for efficiency and effectiveness in catching,
punishing, and incapacitating criminals.
criminal justice profiling
The activity of criminal justice officials
strategically considering characteristics such as race, gender, religion, or
sexual orientation as they make discretionary decisions in the course of
their duties.
criminal justice system
Generally considered to be the combination of
law enforcement, the courts, and the correctional system—all working
(sometimes at odds with each other) toward the goal of achieving jus-
tice.
criminal profiling
The term generally used to describe all types of
profiling utilized in the investigation of unsolved crime.
criminogenics
The theory that some people are just born criminals.
cultural diversity
A topic of periodic training for many criminal justice
professionals that emphasizes a recognition that society in the United
States is made up of people with many different cultural and social back-
grounds that impact their behavior and their relationships with the
criminal justice system.
driving while black (DWB)
A play on the words “driving while intox-
282
Glossary

icated”; the phrase used to describe the “crime” being committed by
black motorists when they are pulled over for no apparent reason by the
police.
drug courier profile
A composite of traits identified by law enforce-
ment as consistent with those commonly possessed by those engaged in
drug trafficking.
due process model
A conceptualization of the criminal justice system
that emphasizes the need to protect individual rights and freedoms from
a potentially overzealous or mistaken government.
ethnicity
Generally, the combination of cultural, religious, national,
and racial groupings to which one belongs to or from which one comes.
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)
The federal law enforcement
agency with the broadest federal enforcement powers; it pioneered the
use of criminal profiling to solve crime.
Fourteenth Amendment
Ratified in 1868, this amendment to the U.S.
Constitution declared that the states were prohibited from depriving
any person of life, liberty, or property without due process of law; court
cases over time used the Fourteenth Amendment to apply the Bill of
Rights to state and local government action.
gender
One’s status of being male or female.
GLBT
An acronym meaning “gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender.”
incident-driven policing
A reactive style of policing whereby officers
merely respond to one incident after another with little or no effort or
opportunity to develop relationships with the community.
institutional discrimination
The concept that consistent bias is felt by
certain groups in the criminal justice system due to otherwise neutral
factors, such as criminal record or family status.
legalistic model
A style of policing that emphasizes following the let-
ter of the law.
peremptory challenge
The ability of a trial attorney to strike a prospec-
tive juror from hearing a case for almost any reason or no reason.
phrenology
A theory of crime that proposed that deviant thought and
behavior were rooted in localized parts of the brain and that, therefore,
an examination of one’s skull could help predict future criminality.
police brutality
A term used to describe unlawful use of force by
police officers.
police-community relations
A general term referring to the state of
understanding and relationship between a police organization and the
community it serves.
Glossary
283

police discretion
The ability of police officers to make enforcement
decisions in the field without consulting others higher up in the chain of
command or elsewhere in the criminal justice process.
police misconduct
Nonprofessional, unethical, and/or unlawful con-
duct by police officers.
problem-oriented policing
A policing strategy that empowers officers
to determine the source of problems within their jurisdiction and take
sweeping steps to solve those problems, as opposed to repeatedly react-
ing to the symptoms of those problems.
prosecutorial discretion
The ability of prosecutors to decide whom to
prosecute and whom not to prosecute without consulting others in the
criminal justice process.
prosecutorial misconduct
Unprofessional, unethical, or unlawful con-
duct by a prosecutor either while building a case for prosecution or
while in trial.
psychological profiling
Drawing conclusions about unidentified
criminal offenders through the analysis of psychological traits and
application of psychological theories.
race
Distinguishing biological features among human beings that are
genetically passed on from generation to generation.
racial profiling
The exclusive use of race by criminal justice officials in
identifying criminals or potential criminal activity.
religion
A belief system concerning that which governs nature and the
universe.
selective enforcement
A police and prosecutive strategy that aggres-
sively takes enforcement action against particular offenses deemed to be
an acute problem.
serial offender
A criminal offender who repeatedly reoffends in a sim-
ilar manner, often out of compulsion.
service model
A style of policing that emphasizes aiding the commu-
nity in nonenforcement ways and building relationships.
sexual orientation
The status of sexual preference one has toward
either the same or opposite gender.
slave patrols
A law enforcement operation in the American South dur-
ing the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries devoted to curbing rebel-
lious slave activities and conducting general patrol duties.
social contract
The concept that the people consent to be policed by
the government in exchange for protection of individual rights and lib-
erties.
284
Glossary

stereotyping
A shortcut to perceiving a person or persons by relying
on assumptions about groups to which they belong, whether true or
untrue.
street justice
The term used to describe the extralegal remedies taken
against criminal offenders by police officers prior to or in lieu of arrest
and formal charges; generally involves unlawful use of force.
systematic discrimination
The concept that bias is built into the very
processes and mechanisms of the criminal justice system, thus resulting
in consistent discrimination against certain groups of people.
Terry search/frisk
A permissible, brief detention and search for
weapons by law enforcement if reasonable suspicion exists that a subject
has a weapon and is committing or about to commit a crime.
Title 42 USC 1983
A federal law permitting citizens to sue nonfederal
law enforcement officers and agencies for violation of one’s civil rights.
voir dire
The process by which prospective jurors are selected for or
eliminated from jury service in a trial; the process is generally accom-
plished through questions asked of would-be jurors by the trial attor-
neys and the judge in the case.
Glossary
285


Aborigines, 87
Academy of Behavioral Profiling, 224
ACLU. See American Civil Liberties
Union
Adler, Freda, 112, 123–124
Adversarial legal process, 83–84
AELE. See Americans for Effective
Law Enforcement
African Americans
and cocaine use, 13–14, 245–246,
249
crime statistics/incarceration rates,
67, 87, 244–246, 257–258
and death penalty, 260–264
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 104–105, 142
and drug arrest rates, 257–258
and fabricated evidence, 116
Jim Crow laws, 106
and jury selection, 114–115, 166–171
and perceptions of judicial
system/law enforcement,
249–250, 262–263
and poll taxes, 109
role of race in police perceptions of
misconduct, 259–260
and sentencing decisions, 243–244,
246–249, 258–259
slave patrols, 21–22, 103
and traffic stops, 59, 113, 117,
120–121, 158–162, 254–256,
262–263
as victims of violent crimes, 69
See also Race/ethnicity
Aggravating factors in sentencing, 50,
243. See also Death penalty
Airlines. See Hijackers
Albrecht, H. J., 90
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), 224
American Civil Rights Institute,
224–225
Americans for Effective Law
Enforcement (AELE), 225
Amish, 111–112
Amnesty International, 225
Anatomy and Physiology of the Nervous
System (Gall), 104
Anti-Drug Abuse Act (1986), 113–114
Antisodomy laws, 14, 114, 120
Arizona, death penalty in, 260–262
Ashcroft, John, 118
Asian Americans
internment of Japanese Americans,
108, 150–154
stereotypes of, 36–37
Atavism, defined, 281
Atlanta. See Olympic Park bombing
Australia, 86–88
Batson v. Kentucky, 46, 114, 138,
166–171
Beat patrol, defined, 281
Beccaria, Cesare, 23, 103
Behavioral profiling, defined, 281
Behind the Blue Wall (video), 274
Bekerian, Debra, 267–268
Benda, Brent, 242–243
Bill of Rights, 53–54, 281
Biological theories of crime, 24–25,
135
Bireda, Martha, 265
Blackmun, Harry A., 124
Blue curtain/wall, defined, 281
“Bobbies,” name origin, 17
287
Index
Page numbers in bold type refer to major discussions of topics covered in the text.

Bond, Julian, 125
Bowers v. Hardwick, 114, 162–166
Bratton, Bill, 29
Brawley, Tawana, 141
Briseno, Theodore, 115
“Broken windows” approach to patrol
work, 29–30, 113, 146, 281
Broken Windows (Wilson and Kelling),
113
Brown, Henry, 125–126
Brown, James, 59–60
Brown v. Board of Education, 108, 136
Browning, Sandra Lee, 249–250
Bureaucracy, and traffic stops, 39–40
Burger, Warren E., 126
Burgess, Alan, 265–266
Burgess, Ann, 265–266
Bush, George W.
and 9/11, 75–76, 119–120
statements prior to 9/11, 74–75,
118–119
CALEA. See Commission on the
Accreditation of Law
Enforcement Agencies
California
consent decree between DOJ and
LAPD, 70
state statutes, 183–185
Camp, C. G. and G. M., 87
Cantwell v. Connecticut, 107
Cao, Liqun, 249–250
Carlson, Daniel, 5
Carrol v. United States, 58
Carroll search, 58, 281
Cars
criteria for vehicle searches, 57–60
and drug courier profile, 30–31
See also Traffic stops
Cato Institute, 225–226
Caucasians
and cocaine use, 13–14, 245–246,
249
crime statistics/incarceration rates,
67, 244–246, 257–258
and death penalty, 260–264
and perceptions of judicial
system/law enforcement,
249–250, 262–263
and sentencing decisions, 248–249
and traffic stops, 120–121, 262–263
Center for Constitutional Rights, 226
Center for Equal Opportunity, 226
Challenges for cause, 44
Chambers v. Maroney, 58
Champion, Dean, 38–39
Chaney, James, 110
Characteristics of Drivers Stopped by
Police in 1999 (government
publication), 270
Charging decisions, 41–43, 106
Chesney-Lind, Meda, 256–257
China, 94–96
Chronology, 103–121
Cincinnati, consent decree between
DOJ and police, 70–72
Civil law tradition, 80
Civil rights, 52–61
Civil Rights Act of 1875, 105
Civil Rights Act of 1957, 108–109
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 55, 58, 110
Civil Rights Movement, 109–110
Civil Rights of Institutionalized
Persons Act (CRIPA) (1980), 69
Civilian review board, defined, 281
Classical criminology, defined, 281
Clayton, Mosher, 257–258
Cleary, Jim, 61, 67, 273
Clinton, Bill, 116, 126–127
Cocaine, 13–14, 113, 245–246, 249
Code of ethics, defined, 281
Code of silence, defined, 282
Cole, David, 45
Cole, George, 23
Color of law, 72
Colorado
and rights of homosexuals, 116
state statutes, 185–187
Commission on the Accreditation of
Law Enforcement Agencies
(CALEA), 227
Committee on Civil Rights, 108
Common law tradition, 81
Community Oriented Policing Service
(COPS), 127
Community policing, 66–67, 112,
129–130, 282
Community Policing Consortium, 227
Community-based policing, defined,
282
288
Index

Community–police relations, 61–62
Conflict model, defined, 10–11, 282
Congressional Black Caucus
Foundation, 227–228
Connecticut state statutes, 187–189
Consensus vs. conflict models of
political philosophy, 10–11, 282
Consent, and vehicle searches, 57–58
Consent decrees, 70–72, 117–120, 282
Constitutional rights, 52–61. See also
specific amendments
Contacts between Police and Public
(government publication),
270–271
Contextual discrimination, 14–15
COPS. See Community Oriented
Policing Service
Cops under Fire (video), 274–275
Corruption, 19–20, 94–95
Court cases
on charging decisions, 43, 106
on Jehovah’s Witnesses, 107
and jury selection. See Jury
selection
on privacy rights, 110, 112
and reasonable suspicion criterion,
56–58, 171–176
remedies for citizens illegally
profiled, 72–74
on rights of homosexuals, 116, 120,
162–166
on rights of Japanese Americans,
108, 150–154
on school attendance, 111–112
on search warrants, 109
on separate but equal education,
108
on sodomy, 114, 162–166
and Title 42 USC 1983, 72–73, 285
on traffic stops/vehicle searches,
58–60, 113, 116–117, 158–162
Crack cocaine, 13–14, 113, 245–246,
249
Crawford, Charles, 243–244
Crime
and broken windows theory, 29–30,
113, 146, 281
crime control model, 9–10, 282
due process model, 9–10, 84, 293
and gender, 68, 112, 124
and race, 67, 87, 244–246, 257–258
theories of, 22–25, 104–106
See also specific countries
Crime Classification Manual (Douglas et
al.), 265–266
Criminal justice profiling. See
Profiling
Criminal justice system
characteristics of, 8–11
charging decisions, 41–43
crime control vs. due process, 9–10
and elitism, 13
plea bargaining, 42
theories of crime and profiling,
22–25
types of discrimination in, 14–15
See also Incarceration; Judicial
system; Police; Sentencing
decisions; specific countries
Criminal Man (Lombroso), 105–106
Criminal Profiling (Turvey), 269
Criminogenic theories of crime, 24,
282
CRIPA. See Civil Rights of
Institutionalized Persons Act
Cullen, Francis, 249–250
Cultural diversity, defined, 282
Cultural Diversity for Law Enforcement
(video), 275
Cultural Diversity: Myths and
Stereotypes (video), 275–276
Cultural Diversity: Professionalism
(video), 276
Cumulative similarities, 28
Davis, Mark, 259–260
Death penalty, 46, 245, 260–264
DeJong, Christina, 269
Delaware v. Prouse, 57, 60, 113, 158–162
Delisi, Matt, 244–246
Determinate sentences, 50
Diallo, Amadou, 142
Diamon, Drew, 266
Differences in the Background and
Criminal Justice Characteristics of
Young Black, White, and Hispanic
Male Federal Prison Inmates
(government publication), 271
Discrimination
and charging decisions, 43
Index
289

Discrimination, cont.
definitions, 283, 285
and jury selection, 44–46
systematic, institutional, and
contextual discrimination, 14–15
types of discriminatory laws, 13
See also Gender; Race/ethnicity
Discrimination (Williams, ed.), 270
Dogs, police, 59
DOJ. See U.S. Department of Justice
Douglas, John, 27, 128, 265–266
Dred Scott v. Sandford, 104–105, 142
Driving while black (DWB), 282–283.
See also Traffic stops
Driving While Black (Marks), 268
Drug Policy Alliance, 228
Drug Reform Coordination Network,
228
Drugs
courier profiles, 27–28, 30–31, 114,
171–176, 283
drug trade in India, 99
and predicting arrest rates, 257–258
searches for, 59
sentencing for crack cocaine vs.
powder, 13–14, 245–246
and sentencing under federal
sentencing guidelines, 248–249
Vogel’s Selective Enforcement
Team (Florida), 114, 270
War on Drugs, 113–114
DuBois, W. E. B., 128
Due process, 9–10, 84, 283
DUI arrests, 244–245
DWB. See Driving while black
Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete
Company, Inc., 46, 47
Educational opportunities in prison,
252–254
Eighth Amendment, 54
Eisenstadt v. Baird, 112
Eliminating Racial Profiling in School
Discipline (Bireda), 265
Elitism, 12–15
End Racial Profiling Act of 2001
(government publication), 271
English Riot Act (1716), 17
Equality before the law, 5–6
Essays on Crimes and Punishment
(Beccaria), 23, 103
Ethics, code of, 281
EthnicMajority.com, 228–229
European Union, 89
Fact Sheet: Racial Profiling (government
publication), 271
FBI
Academy’s Behavioral Science
Unit, 27, 31–32
defined, 283
and Hoover, 131–132
Fifth Amendment, 53–54
Fighting to Win (Vogel), 270
First Amendment
interpretation of, 81
and school attendance, 111–112
statement of, 53–54
Florida
drug trafficking in, 114, 270
sentencing in, 243–244
state statutes, 189–190
Florida v. Wells, 60
Fourteenth Amendment, 105
and discriminatory laws, 13
and Plessy v. Ferguson, 106–107
and privacy, 110
statement of, 54, 283
and traffic stops, 113
Fourth Amendment
statement of, 53–54
and traffic stops, 60
France, 80, 91–94
Francis, Robert E., 117
Fredrickson, Darin, 29, 266
Fridell, Lorie, 266
Gall, Franz Joseph, 104, 128–129
Gendarmerie (France), 91–92
Gender
and availability of
educational/vocational
programs, 252–254
crime statistics, 68
death penalty and gender of
victim, 263–264
and jury selection, 44, 46–47, 109,
112, 115–116, 154–158
and juvenile justice, 256–257
290
Index

and sentencing decisions, 243–244,
251–252
Gerald, Rossano, 62–66
Germany, 88–90
Ginsburg, Ruth Bader, 129
GLBT, defined, 283
Global perspectives on profiling,
79–102
Australia, 86–88
China, 94–96
civil law tradition, 80
common law tradition, 81
France, 91–94
Germany, 88–90
India, 98–100
Islamic law tradition, 82–84
Japan, 96–98
socialist law tradition, 82
types of legal processes, 83–85
Goldstein, Herman, 129–130
Good Cop, Bad Cop (Schultz and
DeJong), 269
Goodman, Andrew, 110
Great Britain, and origins of police,
16–19, 104
Griffin, Timothy, 246–247
Griswold v. Connecticut, 110, 140
Guidance Regarding the Use of Race by
Federal Law Enforcement Agencies
(government publication),
271–272
Habitual offenders, 243
Harlan, John M., 130
Harris, David, 26, 266–267
Harris, Thomas, 128
Hawaii, juvenile justice in, 256–257
Hebert, Christopher, 248–249
Henderson, Martha, 249–250
Hijackers, 26, 111, 119
Hispanics
and death penalty, 260–262
and drug arrest rates, 257–258
illegal aliens, 68
and sentencing decisions, 248–249
and traffic stops, 120–121, 254–256
Hobbes, Thomas, 12, 130–131
Holcolm, Jefferson, 263–264
Holmes, Ronald, 267
Holmes, Stephen, 267
Homicide
death penalty and race of victim,
261, 263–264
serial killer profile, 27–28
Homosexuality
and antisodomy laws, 14, 114,
162–166
Bowers v. Hardwick, 114, 162–166
“Don’t ask, don’t tell” policy, 127
Romer v. Evans, 116
Hoover, J. Edgar, 131–132
How to Correctly Collect and Analyze
Racial Profiling Data
(government publication), 272
Hoyt v. Florida, 109, 154–158
Hughes, Johnny, 68
Human Rights Watch, 229
IACP. See International Association of
Chiefs of Police
IADLEST. See International
Association of Directors of Law
Enforcement Standards and
Training
Illegal immigrants, 68
Illinois
consent decree between DOJ and
Highland Park police, 70, 119
state statutes, 190–192
Incarceration
and gender, 251–254
goals of punishment, 49–50
minorities in Australia, 87
minorities in France, 93
minorities in Germany, 90
minorities in the Netherlands, 85
and race/ethnicity, 87, 244–246
Incident-driving policing, 283
Indeterminate sentences, 50
India, 98–100
Informal legal process, 83–84
Inquisitorial legal process, 83–84
Institutional discrimination, 14, 283
International Association of Chiefs of
Police (IACP), 229–230
International Association of Directors
of Law Enforcement Standards
and Training (IADLEST), 230
Islamic law tradition, 82–84
Index
291

Jackson, Janet, 267–268
Jackson, Jesse, 132–133
Japan, 96–98, 107–108
Japanese Americans, internment of,
108, 150–154
J. E. B. v. Alabama, 46–47, 115–116
Jehovah’s Witnesses, 107
Jewell, Richard, 1–2
Jim Crow laws, 106
John M. Ashbrook Center for Public
Affairs, 230
Judicial review process, 81
Judicial system
and charging decisions, 41–43
civil law tradition, 80
common law tradition, 81
equality before the law, 5–6
judges’ reactions to sentencing
reform, 246–247
in other countries. See Global
perspectives on profiling
perceptions of, 249–250
prosecutorial and judicial profiling,
32–33
remedies for citizens illegally
profiled, 69–74
See also Court cases; Criminal
justice system; Incarceration;
Jury selection; Sentencing
decisions
Jury selection, 43–49
Batson v. Kentucky, 114, 166–171
Civil Rights Act of 1875, 105
and gender, 44, 46–47, 109, 112,
115–116, 154–158
Hoyt v. Florida, 109, 154–158
J. E. B. v. Alabama, 46–47, 115–116
Powers v. Ohio, 114–115
and race/ethnicity, 44–46, 106,
114–115, 166–171
Strauder v. West Virginia, 106
Taylor v. Louisiana, 112
Juvenile justice, 256–257
Kansas state statutes, 193–194
Katz, Charles, 14
Kaufman, Robert, 254–256
Kelling, George E., 29, 113
Kennedy, Randall, 61–62
Kentucky state statutes, 194–195
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 109, 133
King, Rodney, 43, 115, 134, 277
KKK. See Ku Klux Klan
Koon, Stacey, 115, 134
Koons-Witt, Barbara A., 251–252
Kopache, Renee, 249–250
Korematsu v. United States, 108,
150–154
Ku Klux Act (1871), 105
Ku Klux Klan (KKK), 22, 105, 110
Kubu, Bruce, 266
Kurds, 89–90
Lahm, Karen, 252–254
Law enforcement. See Police; Traffic
stops
Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration, 111
Lawrence v. Texas, 120, 162
Lawsuits. See Court cases
Leadership Conference on Civil
Rights, 230–231
Legal sufficiency model for charging
decisions, 42
Legalistic model, defined, 283
Legislation
Anti-Drug Abuse Act (1986),
113–114
Civil Rights Act of 1875, 105
Civil Rights Act of 1957, 108–109
Civil Rights Act of 1964, 58, 110
Civil Rights of Institutionalized
Persons Act (CRIPA) (1980), 69
Ku Klux Act (1871), 105
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe
Streets Act (1968), 69, 111
Patriot Act, 119–120
Title 42 USC 1983, 72–73, 285
types of discriminatory laws, 13
Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act (1994), 7–8,
69–70, 116
See also specific states
Leviathan (Hobbes), 12
Lewis, John, 134–135
Litigation. See Court cases
Lombroso, Cesare, 24, 105–106, 135
London, and origins of police, 17
292
Index

Los Angeles
consent decree between DOJ and
LAPD, 70, 119
Rodney King incident, 43, 115, 134
Louima, Abner, 142
Lundman, Richard, 254–256
Lunney, Robert, 266
MacDonald, John, 256–257
Mandatory sentences, 50
Mapp v. Ohio, 109
Marks, Kenneth, 268
Marshall, Thurgood, 135–136
Maryland
consent decree between DOJ and
Montgomery County police, 70,
118
state statutes, 195–198
Massachusetts state statutes, 199–201
McDonald, William, 74
Men. See Gender
Metropolitan Police Act of 1829
(England), 17–18, 104
Mfume, Kweisi, 136–137
Mills, C. Wright, 13
Milovanovic, Dragon, 268
Minnesota
sentencing and gender in, 251–252
state statutes, 201–203
Minnesota Statewide Racial Profiling
Report (government publication),
272
Minorities
in Australia, 87
benefits of policing to minority
communities, 69, 245
crime statistics, 67–68
and death penalty, 260–262
and drug arrest rates, 257–258
in France, 92–93
in Germany, 89–90
in Japan, 98
and jury selection, 44
in the Netherlands, 85
and perceptions of criminal justice
system, 249–250
and traffic stops, 254–256
as victims of violent crimes, 69
See also African Americans; Asian
Americans; Hispanics;
Race/ethnicity
Missouri state statutes, 203–204
Mitigating factors in sentencing, 50–51
Muller, Robert, 74
Murder. See Homicide
NAACP. See National Association for
the Advancement of Colored
People
Napoleonic Code, 80
National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People
(NAACP), 231
National Coalition on Police
Accountability (N-COPA),
231–232
National Commission on Crime
Control and Prevention, 7–8
National Organization of Black Law
Enforcement Executives
(NOBLE), 232
National Police Agency (Japan), 96
National Police (France), 91–92
National Sheriffs’ Association (NSA),
232–233
N-COPA. See National Coalition on
Police Accountability
NDP. See October 22 National Day of
Protest to Stop Police Brutality,
Repression and the
Criminalization of a Generation
Neal v. Delaware, 45
Nebraska state statutes, 204–206
Netherlands, 85
Nevada state statutes, 206
New Jersey
consent decree between DOJ and
police, 70, 117–118
Governor Whitman controversy,
118
racial bias in traffic stops, 117
New York City
crack cocaine in, 113
Transit Police/NYPD, 29–30
See also “Broken windows”
approach to patrol work
Nineteenth Amendment, 107
Index
293

No Equal Justice (Cole), 45
NOBLE. See National Organization of
Black Law Enforcement
Executives
North Carolina
slave patrols, 103
state statutes, 206–209
NSA. See National Sheriffs’
Association
October 22 National Day of Protest to
Stop Police Brutality, Repression
and the Criminalization of a
Generation, 233
Offender Profiling (Jackson and
Bekerian), 267–268
Ohio
consent decree between DOJ and
Cincinnati police department,
70–72
death penalty in, 263–264
sentencing in, 246–247
Oklahoma state statutes, 209–210
Olympic Park bombing (Atlanta
1996), 1–2
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe
Streets Act (1968), 69, 111
O’Reilly, James, 268–269
Organized crime
in China, 95
in Europe, 89
in Japan, 97
Parks, Rosa, 137
Patriot Act (2001), 119–120
PCC. See Police Complaint Center
Pedophilia, 25
Peel, Sir Robert, 17–18, 104
People’s Mediation Committees
(China), 95
People’s Public Security Forces
(China), 95–96
Peremptory challenges, 44, 114–116,
166–171, 283
PERF. See Police Executive Research
Forum
Petit Apartheid in the U.S. Criminal
Justice System (Milovanovic and
Russell, eds.), 268
Philadelphia, evidence fabricated in,
116
Phrenology, 104, 128–129, 283
Plain view, and vehicle searches, 58
Plea-bargaining, 42
Plessy v. Ferguson, 106–107, 130
Pluralism, 11–12
Police
blue curtain/wall, 281
“broken windows” approach to
patrol work, 29–30, 113, 146, 281
charging decisions, 41–43, 106
code of ethics, 281
code of silence, 282
community policing, 66–67, 112,
129–130, 282
community relations, 61–62, 283
consent decrees, 70–72, 117
and corruption, 19–20
cultural/diversity training for, 6
factors affecting police perceptions
of misconduct, 259–260
functions of, 16
origins of institutions, 16–21, 104
in other countries. See specific
countries
police discretion, 38–41, 171–176,
284
police misconduct, defined, 284
probable cause, 57–59, 111, 176–182
problem-oriented policing, 284
profiling by, 15–25
reasonable suspicion criterion,
56–58, 171–176
reform efforts, 19–21, 107
service model of policing, 284
slave patrols, 21–22
Vollmer’s contributions, 107,
142–143
Wilson’s contributions, 147
See also Searches; Traffic stops
Police Administration (Wilson), 147
Police brutality, defined, 283
Police Complaint Center, 233
Police dogs, 59
Police Executive Research Forum
(PERF), 67, 234
Police Foundation, 234
Police Misconduct Initiative, 72
294
Index

Police Traffic Stops and Racial Profiling
(O’Reilly), 268–269
Policing the Community (Champion
and Rush), 38–39
Political philosophy, 10–15
consensus vs. conflict models,
10–11, 282
elitism, 12–15
pluralism, 11–12
social contract theory, 12, 284
Poll tax, 109
Powell, Lawrence, 115, 134, 137–138
Powers v. Ohio, 46, 114–115
Pratt, Travis, 258–259
Principles of Good Policing (government
publication), 272–273
Privacy, right to, 110, 112, 120
and homosexuality, 114, 120,
152–166
Proactive profiling, 28–32
Probable cause, 57–59, 111, 176–182
Problem-oriented policing, defined,
284
Profiles in Injustice (Harris), 26,
266–267
Profiling
applications of, 15–25
arguments against, 61–67
arguments in favor of, 67–69
charging decisions, 41–43
chronology of events, 103–121
and constitutional/civil rights,
52–61
debate over constitutionality of,
55–56
definitions, 3–5
global perspectives. See Global
perspectives on profiling
hijackers, 26
and law enforcement, 15–25
and police discretion, 38–41
and political philosophy, 10–15
proactive and reactive profiling,
28–32
prosecutorial and judicial profiling,
32–33
remedies for citizens illegally
profiled, 69–74
research on, 242–264
sentencing, 49–52
and September 11, 74–76
and stereotyping, 35–38
See also Gender; Race/ethnicity
Profiling Violent Crimes (Holmes and
Holmes), 267
Prosecutorial discretion, 284
Prosecutorial misconduct, 284
Prosecutorial profiling, 32–33
Protect and Serve (video), 276
Psychological profiling, defined, 
284
Public Agenda, 234–235
Purkett v. Elem, 48
Race/ethnicity
and charging decisions, 43, 106
crime statistics/incarceration rates,
67, 87, 244–246, 257–258
and criminal justice system,
244–246, 249–250
and death penalty, 260–264
and drug arrest rates, 257–258
and education, 108
Jim Crow laws, 106
and jury selection, 44–46, 106,
114–115, 166–171
and perceptions of criminal
justice/law enforcement,
249–250, 254–256, 262–263
and poll taxes, 109
role of race in police perceptions of
misconduct, 259–260
and sentencing decisions, 243–244,
246–249, 258–259
and traffic stops, 59, 113, 120–121,
158–162, 254–256, 262–263
See also African Americans; Asian
Americans; Caucasians;
Hispanics; Minorities
Racial Fairness Project, 235
Racial Profiling and Law Enforcement
(video), 276–277
Racial Profiling (Fredrickson and
Siljander), 266
Racial Profiling Studies in Law
Enforcement (government
publication), 273
Index
295

Racial Profiling within Law Enforcement
Agencies (government
publication), 273
Racially Biased Policing: A Principled
Response (e-book; Fridell et al.),
266
Rainbow/PUSH Coalition, 235
Reactive profiling, 28–32
Reagan, Ronald, 113
Reasonable suspicion criterion, 56–58,
111, 114, 171–176
Red Dragon (Harris), 128
Regoli, Bob, 244–246
Rehabilitation, 50
Rehnquist, William H., 138
Reichel, Philip, 80, 82, 84, 95
Religion
research on religiosity and
violence, 242–243
and school attendance, 111–112
Remedies for citizens illegally
profiled, 69–74
Reno, Janet, 138–139
Rental vehicles, 30–31
Research on profiling, 242–264. See
also Gender; Race
Resource Guide on Racial Profiling Data
Collection Systems (government
publication), 273
Ressler, Robert, 265–266
Rhode Island state statutes, 210–214
Ring v. Arizona, 50
Roach, Steve, 119
The Rodney King Incident (video), 277
Roman law, 80
Rome, Dennis, 259–260
Romer v. Evans, 116
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 139
Rudolph, Eric Robert, 2
Rush, George, 38–39
Russell, Katheryn, 268
Sanger, Margaret, 140
Scalia, Antonin, 60–61, 140–141
Schultz, David, 269
Schwerner, Michael, 110
Searches
Carroll search, 58, 281
criteria for vehicle searches, 57–60
Terry search, 58, 59, 285
Terry v. Ohio, 56, 111
Selective enforcement, defined, 284
Selective Enforcement Team (Florida),
114
Sentencing decisions, 49–52
aggravating and mitigating factors,
50–51, 252
in Florida, 243–244
and gender, 243–244, 251–252
goals of punishment, 49–50
in Ohio, 246–247
and race/ethnicity, 243–244,
248–249, 258–259
and severity of the offense, 259
types of sentences, 50
September 11, 2001, 74–76, 119
Serial killer profile, 27–28
Serial Killers: Profiling the Criminal
Mind (video), 277–278
Serial offender, defined, 284
Service model, defined, 284
Sexual orientation, defined, 284
Sexuality. See Homosexuality; Privacy,
right to
Shari’a, 82–83, 84
Sharpton, Al, 141–142
“Sheriff,” name origin, 17
Shire reeve, 17, 21
Should We Fear the Police? (video), 278
Silence of the Lambs (Harris), 128
Siljander, Raymond, 29, 266
Sisters in Crime (Adler), 112, 124
Sixth Amendment, 53–54
Slave patrols, 21–22, 103, 284
Smith, Christopher, 23
Smith v. Mississippi, 45
Social contract theory, 12, 284
Socialist law tradition, 82
Sociological theories of crime, 25
Sodomy, laws against, 14, 114, 120
Sokolow, Andrew. See U.S. v. Sokolow
Son, In Soo, 259–260
South Carolina
data on traffic stops, 6
slave patrols, 103
Southern Poverty Law Center,
235–236
Soviet Union, 82
296
Index

Spurzheim, Gaspar, 104
Stare decisis, 81
Stereotyping, 35–38, 285
accuracy and valance, 35–36
Strauder v. West Virginia, 44–46, 106
Street justice, defined, 285
System efficiency model for charging
decisions, 42
Systematic discrimination, 14, 285
Taney, Roger, 142
Taylor v. Louisiana, 112
Tennessee state statutes, 214–215
Terrorism
in Germany, 90
hijackers, 26
impact of September 11, 74–76
in India, 99
Olympic Park bombing (Atlanta
1996), 1–2
Terry search, 58, 59, 285
Terry v. Ohio, 56, 111
Texas state statutes, 215–219
Thomas, Timothy, 119
Thomson, Ernie, 260–262
Title 42 USC 1983, 72–73, 285
To Catch a Killer: Use and Abuse of
Criminal Profiling (video),
278–279
Toombs, Nancy, 242–243
Traffic Stop Data Collection Policies for
State Police (government
publication), 273–274
Traffic stops
and black motorists, 59, 113, 117,
120–121, 158–162, 254–256,
282–283
criteria for vehicle searches, 57–60
data required on (South Carolina),
6
Delaware v. Prouse, 57, 60, 113,
158–162
and drug courier profile, 30–31
DUI arrests, 244–245
and perceptions of criminal justice
system, 249–250, 262–263
and police discretion, 39–41
reasonable suspicion criterion,
56–58
state statutes. See specific states
University of Minnesota study,
120–121
use of minor violations as reason
for stops, 59–60, 116–117,
176–182
Whren v. U.S., 116–117, 176–182
Traffic Stops Statistics Study Act (not
passed), 118
Trial sufficiency model for charging
decisions, 42
Tuch, Steven, 262–263
Turks, 89–90
Turvey, Brent, 269
20th Century with Mike Wallace:
Profiling Killers (video), 279
Twenty-Fourth Amendment, 109
United Nations, 101
University of Minnesota School of
Law, 120–121
U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ),
69–72, 117, 236–237
U.S. Department of Justice Guidance
Regarding Use of Race by
Federal Law Enforcement
Agencies, 74–75
U.S. Patriot Act (2001), 119–120
U.S. v. Sokolow, 28, 114, 171–176
Utah, race required on identification
cards, 6
Valance, 35–36
Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act (1994), 7–8,
69–70, 116
Virginia
cultural/diversity training for
police officers, 6
slave patrols, 103
Vocational training, 252–254
Vogel, Robert, 28, 114, 270
Voire dire, 43–44, 285
Vollmer, August, 107, 142–143
Walker, Samuel, 14, 39
War on Drugs, 113–114
Warrants. See Searches
Warren, Earl, 143–144
Index
297

Washington, D.C., consent decree
between DOJ and police, 70, 119
Washington state statutes, 219
Weapons. See Terry search
Weitzer, Ronald, 262–263
Wells, Ida B., 144
West Virginia
state statutes, 220–221
stops based solely on
race/ethnicity banned, 6
When Cultures Clash (Carlson), 5
White, Byron, 144–145
Whitman, Christine Todd, 118,
145–146
Whren, Michael, 59–60
Whren v. U.S., 116–117, 176–182
Wievorka, Michel, 94
Williams, Marian, 263–264
Williams, Mary, 270
Wilson, James Q., 29, 113, 146
Wilson, O. W., 147
Wind, Timothy, 115
Women
and availability of
educational/vocational
programs, 252–254
crime statistics, 68, 112
death penalty and gender of
victim, 263–264
and jury selection, 44, 46–47, 112,
115–116, 154–158
and juvenile justice, 256–257
and sentencing decisions, 52,
243–244, 251–252
See also Gender
Women and Girls in the Criminal Justice
System (government
publication), 274
Wooldredge, John, 246–247
Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 43, 106
Yoder v. Wisconsin, 111–112
298
Index

About the Author
Jeffrey B. Bumgarner, Ph.D., is a faculty member within the Department
of Political Science and Law Enforcement at Minnesota State University,
Mankato. He earned a B.A. in political science from the University of Illi-
nois (Champaign-Urbana), an M.P.A. in public administration from
Northern Illinois University, and a Ph.D. in training and organization
development from the University of Minnesota.
Dr. Bumgarner is also a licensed Minnesota peace officer and has several
years of experience in local and federal law enforcement as an officer,
criminal investigator, and trainer. He has written several articles and
reports concerning police training and professionalism.
299

