Professor's Summary:
Course No. 1483
24 lectures, 30 minutes/lecture
Taught by Paul Zeitz
University of San Francisco
Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley
 
 
 
This is a course about mathematical problem solving. The phrase "problem solving" has become
quite popular lately, so before we proceed, it is important that you understand how I define this
term.
I contrast problems with exercises. The latter are mathematical questions that one knows how
to answer immediately: for example, "What is 3 + 8?" or "What is 3874?" Both of these are
simple arithmetic exercises, although the second one is rather difficult, and the chance of getting
the correct answer is nil. Nevertheless, there is no question about how to proceed.
In contrast, a problem is a question that one does not know, at the outset, how to approach.
This is what makes mathematical problem solving so important, and not just for mathematicians.
Arguably, all pure mathematical research is just problem solving, at a rather high level. But the
problem-solving mind-set is important for all who take learning seriously, especially lifelong
learners. Much of the current craze in brain strengthening focuses merely on exercises. These
are not without merit—indeed, mental exercise is essential for everyone—but they miss out on a
crucial dimension of intellectual life. Our brains are not just for doing crosswords or
sudoku—they also can and should help us with intensive contemplation, openended
experimentation, long wild goose chases, and moments of hard-earned triumph. That is what
problem solving is all about.
An analogy that I frequently use compares an exerciser to a gym rat and a problem solver to a
mountaineer. The latter's experience is riskier, messier, dirtier, less constrained, less certain,
but much more fun. For those of you who prefer more civilized pursuits, consider 2 ways to
learn Italian. One involves toiling over grammar exercises and translations of texts. The other
method is to spend a few months, perhaps after a short bit of preparation, in a small town in
Italy where no one else speaks English. Again, the latter approach is messier but fundamentally
richer.
Becoming a good problem solver requires new skills (mathematical as well as psychological)
and patient effort. My pedagogical philosophy is both experiential and analytic. In other words,
you cannot learn problem solving without working hard at lots of problems. But I also want you
to understand what you are doing at as high a level as possible. We will break down the
process of solving a problem into investigation, strategy, tactics, and finer-grained tools, and we
will often step back to discuss not just how we solved a problem but why our methods worked.
Problems, by definition, are hard to solve. Solving problems requires investigation, and
successful investigations need strategies and tactics. Strategies are broad ideas, often not just
mathematical, that facilitate investigation. Some strategies are psychological, others
organizational, and others simply commonsense ideas that apply to problems in any field.
Tactics are more narrowly focused, mostly mathematical ideas that help solve many problems
that have been softened by good strategy. Additionally, there are very specialized techniques,
called tricks by some, that I call tools.
This course is devoted to the systematic development of investigation methods, strategies, and
tactics. Besides this "problemsolvingology," I will introduce you to mathematical folklore: classic
problems as well as mathematical disciplines that play an important role in the problem-solving
world. For example, no course on problem solving is complete without some discussion of graph
theory, which is an important branch of math on its own but is also a very accessible laboratory
https://www.teach12.com/Accounts/ProfSummary.aspx?cid=1483
1 of 2
2/11/2010 11:20 PM

for exploring problem-solving themes. Many of the lectures will include small amounts of new
mathematics that we will build up and stitch together as the course progresses. The topics are
largely drawn from discrete mathematics (graph theory, integer sequences, number theory, and
combinatorics), because this branch of math does not require advanced skills such as calculus.
That does not mean it is easy, but we will move slowly and develop new ideas carefully.
A small but important part of the course explores the culture of problem solving. I will draw on
my experience as a competitor, coach, and problem writer for various regional, national, and
international math contests, to make the little-known world of math Olympiads come to life. And
I will discuss the recent educational reform movement (in which I am a key player) to bring
Eastern European–inspired mathematical circles to the United States.
Problem solving is not a vertically organized discipline; it is not something that one learns in a
linear fashion. Thus the overall organization of this course has a recursive, spiral nature. The
first few lectures introduce the main ideas of strategy and tactics, which then are revisited and
illuminated by different examples. We will often return to and refine previously introduced ideas.
Overall, the topics get more complex toward the end of the course, but the underlying concepts
do not really change. An analogy is a theme and variations musical piece, where the main theme
is introduced with a slow, stately rhythm and later ends in complex avant-garde interpretations.
By the end of the course, you should understand the main theme (the basic and powerful
strategies and tactics of problem solving) quite well because you had to struggle with the
complex interpretations (the advanced folklore problems that used the basic strategies in novel
ways).
Problem solving is not just solving math problems. It is a mental discipline; successful
investigations demand concentration and patient contemplation that few of us can do, at least at
first. Also, problem solving is an aesthetic discipline—in other words, an art— where we create
and contemplate objects of elegance and beauty. I hope that you enjoy learning about this
wonderful subject as much as I have!
https://www.teach12.com/Accounts/ProfSummary.aspx?cid=1483
2 of 2
2/11/2010 11:20 PM

