Professional 
COMMUNICATION
Deliver effective written, 
spoken and visual 
messages
4
F O U R T H  E D I T I O N
EDITOR: Jane English
CONTRIBUTORS: Sally Burt & Gabi Nudelman

Lecturer Support
Lecturer resources are available to lecturers who teach courses where the book is prescribed.  To 
access the support material, lecturers register on the Juta Academic website and create a profile.   
Once registered, log in and click on My Resources.   
All registrations are verified to confirm that the request comes from a prescribing lecturer.
This textbook comes with the following lecturer resources:
•	
PowerPoint® chapter outline
•	
Full colour copies of posters used in the text
•	
Example PowerPoint® slideshows used and referred to in the text
•	
PDF sample reports
•	
Report template.
Student Support
This book comes with the following online resources accessible from the resource page on the 
Juta Academic website:
•	
Exam and study skills
Juta Support Material
To access supplementary student and lecturer resources for this title visit the support material web page at
http://juta.co.za/support-material/detail/professional-communication-4e
Help and Support	
	
	
	
	
	
	
For help with accessing support material, email supportmaterial@juta.co.za 
For print or electronic desk and inspection copies, email academic@juta.co.za

Professional  
Communication:
Deliver effective written, spoken 
and visual messages
Fourth Edition
Jane English
Sally Burt
Gabi Nudelman

Professional Communication
Deliver effective written, spoken and visual messages
First published 2002
Second edition 2006
Reprinted 2010
Reprinted 2011
Third edition 2012
Reprinted 2015
Fourth Edition 2017
Juta and Company (Pty) Ltd
PO Box 14373, Lansdowne 7779, Cape Town, South Africa
© 2017 Juta & Company Ltd
ISBN 978 1 48511 712 4 (Print)
ISBN 978 1 48512 474 0 (WebPDF)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any 
information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher. 
Subject to any applicable licensing terms and conditions in the case of electronically supplied 
publications, a person may engage in fair dealing with a copy of this publication for his or 
her personal or private use, or his or her research or private study. See section 12(1)(a) of the 
Copyright Act 98 of 1978. 
Project manager: Carlyn Bartlett-Cronje 
Copy editor: Simone van der Merwe 
Proofreader: Niki Sampson
Indexer: Language Mechanics 
Typesetter: LT Design Worx
Cover designer: Eugene Badenhorst 
Cover photograph: Nina de Jager 
Typeset in Rotis Serif Std 10.5pt
The author and the publisher believe on the strength of due diligence exercised that this work 
does not contain any material that is the subject of copyright held by another person.  In the 
alternative, they believe that any protected pre-existing material that may be comprised in it 
has been used with appropriate authority or has been used in circumstances that make such 
use permissible under the law.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction	
x
Contributing author	
x
Editor and principle author	
xi
Contributing author	
xi
Preface	
xii
Acknowledgements	
xiv
Chapter 1 Writing effectively	
1
1.1	
Purpose and planning	
2
Select information and use visual note-taking tools	
2
Pitch appropriately to your reader	
2
Decide on a purpose	
3
Plan the message: mind maps and topic outlines 	
3
1.2	
How to produce the document	
7
Write the draft(s)	
7
Avoid common abuses of logic	
7
Check the discourse structure	
11
Include the basic elements of written documents	
12
1.3	
How to write in Plain English	
14
Use short, crisp sentences without nominalisation	
15
Use simple, clear words and avoid jargon	
17
Avoid ambiguity and apply the rule of proximity	
20
Apply effective paragraphing and use topic sentences	
20
Use good grammar	
21
Check your references and/or bibliography	
22
1.4 	 How to edit the final draft for visual readability and impact	
23
Include illustrations	
23
Choose typefaces for readability	
24
Use variations between and within typeface families	
25
Chapter 2 The digital footprint: social media, templates, 
Microsoft® Word™	
28
2.1	
Research and understand social media spaces	
28
Personal versus professional social media accounts	
29
Personal versus professional email accounts	
29

See yourself as an employer or client might see you	
30
Check your privacy settings	
30
Promote your professional profile online	
31
2.2 	 Develop smart digital work skills	
32
Online collaboration tools	
32
Online training	
33
2.3	
Develop smarter documentation skills	
33
The importance of using templates	
33
Microsoft® Word™ templates	
35
Use styles rather than formatting	
39
2.4 	 How to use Microsoft® Word™ to improve your output	
46
Customise your Microsoft® Word™ environment	
46
Word Options dialog box 	
49
Reviewing options	
53
Viewing options	
55
Breaks, headers and footers as ways to organise documents	
57
Automated features in Word	
61
Referencing	
64
Tables	
68
Chapter 3 Correspondence: mail to digital text	
73
3.1	
Levels of style and tone	
73
Formal and informal tone	
74
A courteous and tactful tone	
76
3.2 	 Readability and structure	
77
Readability	
77
Structure	
77
Styles and purpose of message formats	
78
Templates	
80
3.3 	 Types of emails and letters	
81
Covering letter or email accompanying a document and letter reports	
82
Letters of enquiry (request or complaint) and adjustment	
85
Replies to requests	
86
Refusals of requests	
88
Mail written to claim or complain	
89
Mail offering or refusing adjustment	
92
3.4 	 Etiquette for digital correspondence	
94
3.5 	 How to manage email 	
97

Chapter 4 Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews	
99
4.1 	 Types of curricula vitae	
99
Traditional or chronological curricula vitae	
100
Non-traditional or functional curricula vitae	
111
Infographic curricula vitae	
117
Academic curricula vitae	
119
4.2 	 Letters or emails of application or covering letters	
122
Structure of a covering letter	
123
Presentation and formatting	
127
4.3 	 Interviews for job or funding applications	
127
Before the interview	
128
During the interview	
129
Closing the interview and follow-up	
130
Chapter 5 Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically	
131
5.1 	 Building effective teams	
132
Characteristics and life cycles of teams	
132
Process and task roles in groups	
133
5.2 	 Styles of leadership	
134
Autocratic leadership 	
134
Laissez-faire leadership	
134
Democratic leadership	
135
5.3 	 Techniques for solving problems	
135
5.4 	 Negotiation and persuasion	
136
Approaches to negotiation	
137
Stages in negotiation	
138
Roles in the negotiating team	
140
5.5 	 Ethics at work	
140
Ethics: from the person to society	
141
Theoretical views of ethics	
142
Ethics at work	
143
Corporate governance in South Africa	
145
Conflicts of interest	
146
Chapter 6 Meetings, agendas and minutes	
148
6.1 	 Reasons to hold meetings and take minutes	
148
6.2 	 Different stages of meetings	
149
Before the meeting	
150

During the meeting	
153
After the meeting	
156
6.3 	 Agendas: purpose, organisation and style	
158
Agendas: what to do and what not to do	
158
Standard agenda items	
160
Agenda numbering	
163
Working agendas	
165
6.4 	 Minutes: purpose, organisation and style	
170
Minutes: what to do and what not to do	
170
Action minutes and tables of action	
177
Style for minutes	
180
Chapter 7 Business proposals and business plans	
184
7.1 	 Business proposals as persuasive documents	
185
7.2 	 Different types of proposals	
186
Requested proposals	
186
Non-requested proposals	
188
7.3 	 Write the sections of a business proposal	
189
7.4 	 Business plans as a form of raising finance	
198
7.5 	 How to develop a business plan	
199
Marketing and sales plan	
201
Financial plan	
202
7.6 	 Write the sections of a business plan	
202
Chapter 8 Report writing	
212
8.1 	 Nature of reports	
213
Relationship of reports to other documents	
213
Readers of reports 	
213
Reports as permanent records	
214
8.2 	 Writing techniques for reports	
215
Techniques to improve readability	
212
Plan for a logical sequence of ideas (discourse structure)	
216
Language and style of reports	
217
8.3 	 Types of reports	
220
Write the sections of informative reports	
220
Write the sections of evaluative reports	
222
8.4 	 Letters of transmittal	
223
8.5 	 Example of an evaluative report	
224

Preliminary pages 	
224
Body of the report 	
233
End matter	
243
Chapter 9 Presentation skills	
246
9.1 	 Before the presentation	
247
Analyse the audience	
247
Select and organise information	
247
Support your speech with key phrases	
249
Paired and group presentations	
251
Practise, practise, practise	
253
9.2 	 During the presentation	
254
Maintain a positive attitude	
254
Establish a rapport with the audience 	
255
Speak with expression and projection	
257
Appropriate non-verbal cues: posture and gestures	
260
Visual aids and presentation software and hardware	
261
Dress appropriately	
265
9.3 	 At the end of the presentation	
265
Question-and-answer (Q&A) session	
265
Close the presentation 	
266
9.4 	 Overcome barriers to effective presentations	
266
Chapter 10 Graphics, visual aids and posters	
269
10.1 	Advantages of using illustrations	
269
10.2 	Conventions for using illustrations	
270
Captions and titles	
270
Placement of graphics	
271
10.3 	How to generate illustrations	
272
10.4 	Tables	
273
Parts of a table	
276
Unlabelled tables in text	
277
10.5 	Figures	
278
Parts of a chart	
278
Line graphs	
279
Bar graphs	
282
Pie charts	
285
Pictograms	
287

Flow charts	
288
Gantt charts	
289
Scientific models	
290
10.6 	Posters	
291
Rules for research and business posters	
292
Guidelines for text sizes in posters	
293
Chapter 11 Visuals to support oral messages	
296
11.1 	 Importance of using visuals 	
296
Dangers of bullet points	
297
Effective visuals in presentations	
298
11.2 	 Guidelines for the design of effective visuals	
299
Use of text on slides	
300
Use of colour on slides	
301
11.3 	 Slides in Microsoft® PowerPoint™	
301
Create templates	
301
How to insert a graphic or chart	
305
Animations	
306
Viewing modes in Microsoft® PowerPoint™	
308
11.4 	 Non-linear presentations	
309
Non-linear presentations in Microsoft® PowerPoint™	
309
Other non-linear presentation software	
312
Chapter 12 Foundations: approaching the research journey	
314
12.1 	Research paradigms and approaches	
314
Research paradigms	
315
Research approaches	
316
12.2 	How to locate your research question	
318
12.3 	Research ethics	
319
12.4 	Referencing and citation	
322
Basics of referencing	
322
Author–date methods	
323
Number methods	
327
Online referencing tools	
330
12.5 	Integrating sources into your work	
331
Quotes	
331
Paraphrasing	
332

Chapter 13 Working with data and research methodologies	
334
13.1	 How to locate sources	
335
Libraries	
335
The Internet	
336
13.2 	Research methodologies	
339
Sampling	
339
Quantitative methodologies	
341
Qualitative methodologies	
344
13.3 	Data analysis	
348
Quantitative data analysis	
348
Qualitative data analysis	
349
13.4 	How to present your research	
351
Academic writing	
351
Collaborative writing	
355
New media for your research	
356
Chapter 14 Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers	
363
14.1 	How to manage the process of writing up research	
364
14.2 	Academic proposals	
364
Identify the problem and research methodology	
365
Main elements of a proposal	
366
Suggested layout for your proposal	
367
14.3 	Academic theses	
373
Sections of a thesis	
373
Appropriate style for a thesis	
382
Presentation of a thesis	
383
Timetable and tasks for writing a thesis	
384
14.4 	Papers and journal articles	
388
Bibliography and suggested reading	
391
Index		
394

x
Introduction
This textbook is a long-established aide to anyone needing to hone their 
communication skills – those skills which are the cornerstone to personal and 
professional success. This edition has been re-devised in the context of digital 
communication but keeps the timeless, core elements required in fluent delivery 
in speech or writing. It has the benefit of long use and feedback from tertiary 
and commercial users (see the Preface) but also the contributions from two new 
authors, Sally Burt and Gabrielle Nudelman, both highly qualified and known in 
their areas of expertise. 
The content remains sound in its theoretical base whilst having a strong 
practical focus: every chapter offers tips and skills – particularly those for using 
digital tools to your advantage whether in writing, managing, researching, 
presenting or creating graphics. We as the author team are confident that this 
edition will be an essential reference to take you to the next stage of your 
professional journey.
Jane English
Cape Town, 2017
Contributing author
SALLY BURT (chapters 2, 6, 9 and 11) runs a communication 
consultancy focusing on professional communication 
including business writing and presentation skills, plain 
language and document design, reporting strategies and 
improving digital workplace skills, as well as offering 
editing services, and materials and template development. 
She has also written a range of English textbooks and study 
guides for the South African and various international 
curricula. She has worked in both the public and private 
sectors as well as in higher education. Sally obtained her honours and masters 
in Modern History at Magdalen College, Oxford in England and a postgraduate 
certificate of education from Roehampton Institute in London. 
www.footprintcommunications.co.za

xi
Editor and principle author 
DR JANE ENGLISH (chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 14) is 
an Associate Professor at the University of Cape Town (UCT) 
where she heads up Professional Communication Studies and 
is responsible for lecturing, administration and curriculum 
design. Jane lectures on aspects of communication to the 
UCT Research Office and to master’s students across UCT. 
She obtained her PhD from Glasgow Caledonian University, 
Scotland. Her research interests are in communication in 
business and industry and also women working in industry. 
She is established in her field: publishes in accredited journals and presents 
regularly at international conferences and for the International Labour Office (ILO). 
Jane consults on written, spoken and interpersonal communication to 
numerous organisations and corporations, such as Anglo American, Aurecon, 
Botswana National Productivity Centre, Cape Town City Council, Coega, GIBB, 
Investec, Old Mutual, Parliament, Transnet and Woolworths.
She has been an author on this textbook since its first edition and the editor 
for the last two editions.
www.janeenglish.co.za
Contributing author
GABRIELLE NUDELMAN (chapters 12 &13) holds a Masters 
from UCT and is currently undertaking her PhD in Higher 
Education Studies through Rhodes University. She has 
taught in a variety of higher education institutions in 
Cape Town, including Stellenbosch University, CPUT and 
UCT’s Graduate School of Business. She currently teaches 
in Professional Communications Studies, located in UCT’s 
Faculty of Engineering and the Built Environment. She has, 
in addition, run team-building and training workshops with various individuals 
and groups. Gabrielle has worked as a moderator and editor, has presented at 
conferences and published in academic journals. Her research interests include 
employability skills development and student learning in higher education.  

xii
Preface
Communication may not be the first thing that springs 
to mind when thinking about entrepreneurship, yet it’s 
certainly one of the handful of factors that separate great 
entrepreneurs from mediocre ones. 
The effective communication of thoughts and ideas 
lies at the core of entrepreneurial success. Without this, 
entrepreneurs cannot sell their ideas to early-stage partners 
and investors, convince clients to use their products 
or services, or find and retain great team members. Like many engineers, I 
underestimated this subject while doing it, only realising the importance of the 
lessons and principles in this book when I needed to raise venture capital. 
I have carried four key learnings from university through my career as 
an entrepreneur: how to look for opportunity, how to solve a wide variety of 
problems, how to work with others and, lastly, how to communicate professionally. 
The greater portion of this final lesson was facilitated by reading this book and 
practising its principles. Effective communication is like any other skill: aptitude 
helps to get you started, but then it needs a solid foundation of theory, and plenty 
of practice.
Those who hone this skill inevitably succeed. 
JP Kloppers
CEO, BrandsEye

xiii
Preface
I am fortunate to have a unique perspective on the textbook, 
Professional Communication – Delivering effective written, 
spoken and visual messages, having encountered it at both 
undergraduate level and professional stages in my career. 
My first contact with the textbook was as a student studying 
civil engineering at the University of Cape Town. I found 
it a practical and useful guide to polishing my writing 
and presenting skills – areas of expertise essential in all 
professions. My second contact came about as CEO of a company that realises 
the importance of equipping employees with business communication skills. This 
proved particularly important as we became a leading African firm competing with 
the best in the world, where excellence is the norm. 
This book is a first-class, comprehensive tool with quality content that reflects 
the knowledge and experience of the authors. It is a reference work for good 
management practice in writing reports, managing meetings, writing agendas and 
minutes, and creating and delivering persuasive presentations. It is, in addition, 
useful for those who are continuing with studies or who publish as industry 
specialists, as it incorporates research methods, referencing and writing up papers 
and theses. The authors have ensured the content of this edition remains relevant, 
especially in our new world order of digital communication, office and social 
media. It will add value to your working life.
Richard de Vries 
CEO, GIBB

xiv
Acknowledgements
The content in the book, the examples and explanations that relate to computer 
software, refer mainly to the Microsoft Office package. However, the authors 
acknowledge that a variety of similar packages is available.
We are indebted for the advice and content that has enrich this book. Our 
thanks go to past and present staff of Professional Communication Studies, UCT, in 
particular: Vivienne Basckin, Dr Mignonne Breier, Alison Gwynne-Evans, Evelyn 
Howard, Dr Lara Raffaeli and Nan van der Merwe. 
We also thank the students and personal acquaintances who have given us 
permission to include samples of their work.

1
1
Writing effectively
The requirements for effective writing remain the same regardless of the 
medium used – paper, a computer, a tablet or a mobile phone. Writing emails, 
reports, minutes and business plans are part of virtually every workday, and, for 
academics, there are papers and theses to write. We all need to access information 
quickly and we therefore require clearly organised and well-written messages. 
Your writing must attract the reader’s attention through an appealing layout, hold 
it through logical content and persuade the reader by using a convincing style. It 
is important to remember that the reader has an active role in making meaning 
out of your message. You therefore need to write as clearly as possible to avoid 
misinterpretation. 
Good writing at work is not only about correct grammar and spelling, but also 
about selecting and managing information and using clear reasoning for ease of 
understanding on the part of the reader. We often write and read in digital spaces 
and we often write collaboratively (as described in Chapter 2). It therefore becomes 
increasingly important to write appropriately, as the reader may well have English 
as a second language. In addition, few readers make contact with the writer for 
further explanation if something is unclear — they simply lose interest. 
Many documents are written but never read. The reason is that they are 
unreadable; that is, they display some or all of the common errors in the areas 
of planning and purpose, style and grammar, and presentation and layout. This 
chapter addresses these areas and is divided into four main sections, namely:
1.	 Purpose and planning
2.	 How to produce the document
3.	 How to write in Plain English
4.	 How to edit the final draft for visual readability and impact.
Once you have worked through this chapter, you will:
••
know the characteristics of effective writing
••
have practised selecting relevant information
••
have practised writing in clear, simple English
••
know how to organise information so that your message is unified, logical 
and has the right emphasis.

Professional Communication
2
1.1	 Purpose and planning
Select information and use visual note-taking tools
In most instances, the first stage of the planning process consists of reading a 
message that you are responding to, and reading other texts for background and/
or content to use in your document.
Understand the brief
If you are required to write a document in response to a set question, you need to 
understand the brief, task or question:
1.	 Read the brief or assignment very carefully.
2.	 Write a purpose statement; that is, write out the topic in your own words to 
clarify for yourself what is required.
3.	 Before you start, choose a format appropriate for the finished product.
Find and record information
Sources of information might include discussions (such as recordings or transcripts 
of meetings), interviews and other texts, which can be found on the Internet or 
in printed form. In business writing the referencing of sources has not been done 
regularly, but today awareness of copyright issues is increasing. Writers should 
always track and record their sources and, in some cases, reference them in the 
document. See chapters 12 and 13 for approaches to gathering information, data 
collection tools and appropriate referencing styles.
Mind mapping is a useful technique for taking notes in lectures and for 
writing review notes. Essentially, you create a visual diagram that represents all 
the ideas from a meeting, reading or lecture. Mind maps show how ideas are inter-
related and make for accessible, interesting notes. The creation of visual diagrams 
allows you to avoid rereading notes (left-brain activity), as it provides an instant 
summary (right-brain activity). There are programs you can use to create mind 
maps (eg Visio and Freeplane), but hand-drawn mind maps are still considered 
valuable.
Order your notes in suitably titled folders (electronic or physical) and in a 
logical sequence so that you can easily access them.
Pitch appropriately to your reader 
A message that is appropriate for one receiver (readership or audience) may need 
to be written in a different style for another receiver, even though it contains the 
same content. Before you write, ask yourself the following questions:
••
Will your reader(s) expect to read about this subject? 
••
Will your reader(s) be interested in this subject?
••
What will your reader(s) know about this subject?

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
3
••
Will this document be read immediately and only once, thus having a finite 
period of use, or will it be read over time and referred to years after it was 
written?
••
Will your reader(s) be able to contact you and will you always be available 
for reference?
••
Under what circumstances will your reader(s) read your writing: in what 
place, at what time and in what psychological state?
Decide on a purpose
Before you begin writing, you have to know why you are writing.
Each written message must open with a statement of the purpose of the topic 
covered. Having a clear purpose or topic statement helps you to select information 
that will serve this purpose. A clear  purpose  helps  you  to  decide  how  to 
arrange  and  express information that is most suited to the purpose. For example, 
if your purpose is to inform and educate your readers, you should keep your 
information factual and precise. On the other hand, there is no reason to load the 
reader with heavy technical information if your purpose is to entertain. For a text 
you are required to write in the course of your studies, the purpose may be to:
••
show that you understand the topic
••
show that you have read the prescribed references
••
score high marks.
In addition to your main purpose, it is common to have a number of secondary 
purposes. These can overlap at times. For example, if you write a regular blog, 
your purpose may be to:
••
convince your readers to change their points of view
••
promote yourself as a forward thinker
••
contribute to the professional reputation of the company that employs you.
Other purposes for writing include to describe, explain, inform, instruct, specify, 
record, evaluate and/or recommend. 
Plan the message: mind maps and topic outlines
Now that you have completed your preparation, you should be ready for the 
planning stage, in which you will:
••
organise and create a mind map of your ideas
••
arrange your material to suit your purpose and readership
••
devise a topic outline.
It is tempting just to start writing with one thought flowing into the next and 
without organising these thoughts beforehand. The reader then has the task of not 
only reading, but also trying to find the logic pattern used by the writer, which 

Professional Communication
4
may not be logical at all. If the writer cannot organise his or her own thoughts and 
content, it is an indication of how difficult it will be for the reader to fathom the 
meaning. Most readers will not take on this task and will stop reading.
Organise and create a mind map of your ideas
With mind mapping, messages can be planned in two forms: linear diagrams, in 
the form of ‘trees’ with main and sub-branches, or spray-type diagrams. The map 
can be a hand-drawn sketch which grows organically, as shown in Figure 1.1. 
From this sketch, the author developed a linear, logical sequence of content. This 
initial ordering can also be translated into a visual plan by using drawing software 
such as Visio or Freeplane.
Figure 1.1  An example of a mind map
Arrange your material to suit your purpose and readership
You can arrange your content by using a diagram (eg a mind map), as described 
above, and then in a list as illustrated in the example that follows.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
5
eg
Question/task:  
Describe the factors that influence empathetic listening and 
recommend ways to improve this.
Readership:  
Non-specialists, teachers, lecturers
Purpose:  
To inform, stimulate thinking, persuade
The following is an example of information that a writer may collect on the subject 
described in the brief above:
••
Listening: a definition
••
Concentration: techniques
••
Barrier: daydreaming
••
Mentally summarise as you listen
••
Listen for key words
••
Barrier: no clear purpose
••
Be self-aware
••
Bias or prejudice
••
Environmental noise
••
Non-verbal cues to assist listening
••
Speech delivery too fast
••
Responsibility of listener and speaker
••
Credibility of speaker
••
Negative attitude to content
••
How to overcome barriers
••
Eye contact
••
Take notes
••
Evaluate the message
••
Build empathy
••
Tell someone about the message
This information could be arranged as follows:
Listening
Definition
Barriers
••
Daydreaming
••
Bias
••
No clear purpose
••
Speech too fast
••
Adverse environment
••
Poorly organised  
message
••
Negative attitude
How to overcome barriers
••
Mentally summarise
••
Self-awareness
••
Listen for key words
••
Tell someone
••
Use non-verbal cues
••
Positive attitude
••
Eye contact
••
Take notes
••
Concentrate
••
Build empathy
Devise a topic outline 
A topic outline is a tool that enables you to select and organise your material to 
develop a logical argument. It serves various functions, namely:
••
giving an overview of complex material
••
helping you to determine the completeness of your thinking
••
allowing you to check your chosen order and make changes
••
indicating if any one section is too detailed
••
subdividing the material into sections and subsections
••
saving you time and effort in the later editing stages.
A topic outline of a piece of writing consists of numbered headings and 
subheadings. The headings and subheadings give your reader an overview. Good 
headings tell your reader about the subject in each section. A good structure and 

Professional Communication
6
appropriate headings will make it easier for your readers to refer back to specific 
sections of your report.
The headings and subheadings are numbered using a decimal numbering 
system, showing the hierarchy and the relationship of the topics to each other and 
to the subject of the document as a whole. However, you should limit the decimal 
numbering system to three places. Some documents however may have numbering 
systems of up to four levels, but then only three levels are reflected in the table 
of contents. 
Using a word processor such as Microsoft® Word™, you can create your own 
template for headings and subheadings, as in the example below. You can also 
use one of the many variants offered online. A good template uses a variety of 
fonts (see the section Use variations between and within typeface families, on 
page 25) and usually uses a decimal numbering hierarchy as described. It ensures 
consistency throughout your document. See Chapter 2 for extensive information 
on using and creating templates. The following example shows a possible topic 
outline for the task discussed earlier.
eg
2.	
BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE LISTENING
2.1 	
Barriers within the Listener
2.1.1	
Physical barriers
2.1.2	
Psychological barriers
2.2 	
Barriers within the Speaker
2.2.1 	 Physical barriers
2.2.2 	 Psychological barriers
2.3 	
Barriers within the Message
2.4 	
Environmental Barriers
3.	
STRATEGIES FOR OVERCOMING BARRIERS TO EFFECTIVE LISTENING
3.1 	
Mental Processes and Attitudes
3.2 	
Note-taking
3.2.1 	 Manual notes
3.2.2 	 Electronic notes
Having a plan such as this will enable you to keep the full document or report 
in place while you concentrate on parts of it. You will also be able to write up 
sections in any part of the document.
This type of structure is essential for collaborative work where different people 
are contributing to the same document, as they will be able to identify the sections 
that they need to cover. Here it is crucial to use a template which can be uploaded 
to Google Docs or shared across a cloud system such as Dropbox. General good 
practice needs to be adhered to by all writers in a collaborative project, such as 
using the Track Changes feature properly to make changes to the text and using 

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
7
the comments feature to ensure that a record of the dialogue is kept within the 
document itself rather than in stray conversations or emails. Chapter 2 covers the 
use of Microsoft® Word™ and templates for collaborative writing.
1.2	 How to produce the document
This section deals with the practical steps for effective writing. If you apply these 
steps carefully, your readers will have material evidence of your ability to write 
well. This is crucial for establishing your credibility. 
Write the draft(s)
No matter how brilliant or unusual your ideas are, if they are poorly expressed in 
your writing, your readers are unlikely to pay them attention. Write out drafts of 
sections – according to your topic outline – as quickly as possible in order to create 
a flow of information. Write those sections that you are most comfortable with 
first, as this will give you confidence and help you avoid developing writer’s block. 
You do not have to write all the sections of a well-planned document sequentially. 
However, do use your created or chosen template (topic outline) from the start. You 
will then avoid later problems with formatting.
Set your draft aside for a while so that you can be more objective when you 
look at it again. It is more than likely that you will be forced to write within very 
tight time constraints, but if you plan for this step, it will serve you well in the end.
You need to write well to establish your credibility. You can do so by following 
these steps (discussed in the rest of this chapter):
••
Check the logic of your argument and the structure of the discourse.
••
Write in an appropriate style and adhere to the principles of Plain English.
Avoid common abuses of logic
At this point, it is worth stopping to consider one of the most powerful influences 
on a writer’s credibility; that is, the way in which logic is used when arguing a 
point of view.
In the process of arguing a point, look out for the following flaws:
••
The argument must not avoid the issue by:
◗◗
introducing emotive expression instead of concentrating on the facts: 
eg
Instead of writing:
Everyone knows that none of the relief aid reached the starving people in the district.

Professional Communication
8
Rather write:
It is difficult to know exactly how much of the relief aid has reached the starving 
people in the district. In an interview last week with the London Times, Red Cross Relief 
Director Herr Schmidt estimated that not more than 30 of the donated  
1 000 tonnes had been distributed.
◗◗
attacking the person rather than the principle:
eg
Instead of writing:
Ms Stone’s leadership is distinguished by decisions that, when they are made, are 
too little and too late.
Rather write:
Decisions by the leadership in the company are often too little and too late.
••
The argument must not manipulate the evidence by:
◗◗
introducing irrelevant data that detracts from the essence of the matter
◗◗
distorting data, eg when statistics are used out of context
◗◗
suppressing information that would weaken the argument.
Fear-inducing headlines may attract attention, but Mark Twain was right – we 
should be wary of meaningless or manipulative statistics, as illustrated in the 
following example.
eg
Lies, damn lies and statistics 
Bread Kills!
…
3. 	 In the 18th century, when virtually all bread was baked in the home, the average 
life expectancy was less than 50 years; infant mortality rates were unacceptably 
high; many women died in childbirth; and diseases such as typhoid, yellow fever, 
and influenza ravaged whole nations.
4. 	 Every piece of bread you eat brings you nearer to death.
5. 	 Bread is associated with all the major diseases of the body. 
….
6. 	 Evidence points to the long-term effects of bread eating: Of all the people born 
since 1839 who later dined on bread, there has been a 100% mortality rate.
Source: Virtual Dr 2016

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
9
When you reason from facts rather than from what you suppose, you arrive at 
stronger conclusions. It is critical that you understand the difference between:
••
deductions  
••
inferences
••
assumptions.
Deduction 
Deduction is reasoning from facts, from the general to the particular.
eg
Cape Town is in South Africa. 
Claremont is in Cape Town.
Therefore, Claremont is in South Africa.
In deduction, you have to be sure that your first premise is true and that the 
relationship between the premises is valid. The inaccuracy of the following 
deduction speaks for itself:
eg
Students live in communes.
Nudists live in communes.
Therefore, all students are nudists.
Inference 
Inference is based on fact, but is not fact. Look at the example provided and the 
comparison between inference and deduction outlined in Table 1.1.
eg
Two brands of milk product
Cost
Annual sales
A
R5.00
3 million
B
R5.50
R1.5 million
Inference: A outsells B because it is cheaper.
You ask 500 people if the lower cost of A motivates them to prefer it to B. 
Results: 300 say they buy A because it is cheaper; 200 say they buy B because they have 
not noticed A.

Professional Communication
10
This adds strength to your conclusion, but it is still inference, because those interviewed 
reacted only to the cost feature of the products. There could be many other reasons for 
buying A rather than B; for example packaging and ingredients.
Table 1.1  Inferences versus facts in argumentation
Inferences
Deductions
are made anytime: before, during or after an 
observation
follow from observation
go beyond what one observes
are confined to what one observes
represent only some degree of probability
represent a situation as close to certainty as 
possible
usually generate disagreement
tend to generate agreement
are unlimited in number
are limited in number
Assumption
Assumption is based on common sense or intuition (gut feel). Let us use the 
previous example again to illustrate this:
eg
Inference: A outsells B because it is cheaper. 
Assumption: Consumers prefer lower prices.
When data is unavailable to us, we have to make assumptions. However, we must 
always ask ourselves whether our assumptions:
••
are consistent with available data
••
have a reasonable chance of being accurate.
eg
You cannot assume categorically that no one will buy product B if you know that people 
are buying it. The most you can venture is that it is unlikely that many people will buy B, 
because it is more expensive.
There are instances in which a writer needs to work from inferences or assumptions. 
There may be no facts available, and the material may be extrapolated from 
another area; thus, inferences are drawn or assumptions made for this area. There 
is nothing wrong with this, as long as the reader is told that these are inferences 
or assumptions and is not left to assume that they are facts.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
11
Check the discourse structure
Every successful piece of writing has an overall internal shape. This is called the 
discourse structure. This is achieved by making sure that your message has certain 
elements, namely:
••
unity
••
coherence
••
emphasis.
Unity
Unity is achieved when the ideas in a piece of writing all relate to the dominant 
topic, which is stated in the opening topic sentence of the introduction. The 
conclusion must relate to the objectives set out in the introduction. Each paragraph 
must also have unity; it must deal with one idea.
Coherence
Coherence is achieved when the ideas in a piece of writing flow logically. This 
means that the thought or idea contained in one sentence must be clearly linked 
to that of the preceding sentence.
There are many ways of arranging information according to a sequence that is 
coherent, namely:
••
definition
••
order of importance
••
question and answer
••
problem and solution
••
cause and effect
••
reasons
••
contrast or comparison
••
order of familiarity
••
order of support
••
analysis
••
a conclusion followed by supporting data
••
presentation of data, followed by a conclusion
••
chronological order (ie time)
••
order of space
••
particular to general
••
general to particular.
Coherence is also achieved by links that take the reader from one sentence and 
idea to the next. Connectors, or transition words and phrases, provide continuity 
in the content. Transitional words and phrases have different functions, as shown 
in Table 1.2. 

Professional Communication
12
Table 1.2  Some examples of linking words and transitions
Linking words
Function
this, that, it, those
reference
further, another, moreover, and
adding
some, a few, seldom, occasionally
limiting
as a result, consequently, thus
consequence
but, however, whereas, yet
contrast
so that, in order
purpose
still, nevertheless
continuation
because, since, so
reason
finally, thus, therefore
conclusion
Emphasis
When a message has the correct emphasis, the intended scale of importance of the 
items of information is clear to the reader. This means that minor topics are less 
important than major topics and are not given prominence or much space.
You can achieve emphasis in your writing by:
••
starting and ending with the content you wish to emphasise
••
allocating more space to main points and repealing important facts
••
supporting an idea with a statistic, quotation or sample
••
including an illustration or graphic to support the verbal information.
Include the basic elements of written documents 
In general, written documents include the following elements:
1.	 The cover page should provide full information regarding the:
••
title. For example, The development of a training plan for the project 
management team
••
author’s name and position
••
author’s place of work
••
date of the document.
2. 	 The introduction should immediately orientate the reader to the topic. You 
may do this by restating the topic and your approach to it. For example: ‘This 
document outlines the company procedure for project management training 
according to the specifications laid out by the Sector Education Training 
Authority (SETA).’ In this example, you may begin by quoting the relevant 
section from the SETA manual and then linking this content directly to the 
way in which the company plans to train its project managers.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
13
3. 	 The body should clearly reflect the requirements for good readability and style 
(described later in this chapter).
4. 	 The conclusion draws the discussion together and should end on a note of 
finality.
The following example of an article clearly illustrates the elements of a well-
constructed and well-written piece of continuous writing:
eg
The need for communication courses for engineering students 
Introduction
The teaching of communication skills is low in the priorities of most 
engineering faculties and departments. This phenomenon applies 
equally in developing and first world countries.
It is therefore important to examine why there is a need for 
communication courses for engineers. 
This article will focus on the:
•	 level of communication required by practising engineers
•	 communicative ability of engineering students
•	 feasibility of acquiring competence without a formal course
•	 need for courses in communication.
The design of an appropriate course and the teaching methodology 
are not considered. 
1.	
The level of communication required by practising engineers 
The view is sometimes expressed that the writing of engineers and 
scientists is merely part of the conventional wisdom, a view which is 
based on the assumption that engineers and scientists are expected 
to be numerate rather than literate. Supporters of this view contend 
that technical writing is not particularly difficult or demanding. They 
argue that experience on the job is sufficient to produce adequate 
writing ability, that anything beyond this is merely embellishment 
and that time spent on technical writing is not worth the effort. 
Such views are frequently expressed by students and recently 
graduated engineers. Curley [1] discusses these arguments and 
concludes that they are not valid. 
Three points in support of Curley will be discussed in detail.  
These are the level of difficulty in technical writing, the need for 
communication skills and the need for specialised teaching. 
1.1 	 The level of difficulty of technical writing as a subject
1.2 	 The communication needs of the engineering profession
1.3 	 The need for specialised teaching
The writer now 
gives the scope 
of the article and 
also states the 
limitations or the 
areas that the article 
does not cover. 
The first point listed 
in the description 
of the scope of the 
article appears as 
the first item in the 
body. 
In this paragraph, 
the word ‘view’ is 
repeated to develop 
a logical connection 
between sentences.
Note how this 
paragraph forms a 
clear link between 
the previous one 
and the sections 
that follow, each 
of which are 
indicated clearly 
by a numbered 
subheading.
The topic is 
expressed in the 
first one or two 
sentences of the 
introduction. 

Professional Communication
14
2. 	 The communicative abilities of engineering students
3. 	 The feasibility of acquiring competence without formal courses
4. 	 The need for courses in communication
In assessing the need for communication courses at university, various aspects need to be 
considered, namely:
•	 whether school has prepared the students adequately for university and professional life
•	 whether the students will acquire the necessary skills at university without formal 
instruction
•	 whether communication skills can be more effectively taught during postgraduate 
training.
4.1 	 The abilities of students entering university
4.2 	 The possibility of acquiring communication skills without formal training
4.3 	 The possibility of teaching communication skills at postgraduate level
Conclusion 
If engineers aim to be considered as a professional group, they 
should ensure that their communicative abilities are on the same 
level as their technical abilities. To ensure this, it is necessary for 
functional language to be taught at schools. This teaching should 
be followed by formal instruction at university level and further 
guidance at postgraduate level. Thus, while the university is not 
solely responsible for communicative competence, it should not 
abdicate its responsibility for teaching some of the communication skills and insights 
necessary for producing professionally competent engineers.
The connecting 
words and phrases 
are italicised. 
These words show 
continuity and help 
the reader follow the 
argument. 
1.3	 How to write in Plain English
Plain English is an approach to writing that espouses formal and consultative 
writing styles that are neither too formal and pompous (also known as ‘frozen’ as 
they do not come across as consultative or friendly) nor too casual and intimate 
to be regarded as professional. Plain English may be described in terms of five 
different levels, as illustrated in Table 1.3:
Table 1.3  Levels of formality in writing style
Style
Example sentence
Frozen:
It would be appreciated if you would convey the book to the writer.
Formal:
Please give (send) the book to me.
Consultative:
Have you got the book, please?
Casual:
Got the book?
Intimate:
Book?

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
15
A formal style is appropriate for essays, articles and case studies, because they are 
intended to give factual information. A formal style enhances the readability of 
the message and your credibility as a professional.
The characteristics of effective Plain English are: 
••
short, crisp sentences
••
simple, clear words and the absence of jargon
••
the absence of ambiguity
••
effective paragraphing and the use of topic sentences
••
clear links between and within paragraphs
••
good grammar
••
the use of direct rather than indirect expression where possible (the active 
rather than the passive voice).
Each of these will be dealt with in more detail in the sections that follow. Note that 
Microsoft® Word™ incorporates some style and grammar checks which can aid you. 
For example, prompts (wavy underlining) appear to indicate style suggestions such 
as changing passive to active voice and to highlight spelling errors. You need to set 
the proofing language in Microsoft® Word™ to the version of English you want to 
use (USA, UK or SA). As these aids differ between versions of Microsoft® Word™, 
familiarise yourself with what your word processor checks for and follow the prompts. 
In certain versions of Microsoft® Word™, once the document has been closed, the 
prompts will not appear again. Thus, it is advisable to respond to the prompts on first 
appearance. And on top of this, run a full spellcheck when you have finished writing. 
Use short, crisp sentences without nominalisation
Effective sentences
If you are writing on a simple topic, you may write a long sentence with various clauses 
and your readers would have no problem understanding it, provided that they have good 
language skills. As a rough guide, such a sentence can run to over 25 words. If you are 
writing on a technical or some other intellectually demanding topic, the reader needs 
the material to be broken up into one idea per sentence in order to understand it easily. 
Such sentences need to be 15 to 25 words. Use conjunctions, such as ‘since’, ‘because’ 
and ‘when’ – they help the reader predict the kind of information that is to follow and 
also show which ideas are less important than others. Read the following two examples:
eg
The Development Department is interested in the possibility of using resin cloth for electrical 
insulation, and because overheating of electrical equipment could cause heating of the resin 
cloth, which could lead to the evolution of flammable gases from the resin, an investigation 
into the pyrolysis products of the resin was requested.

Professional Communication
16
The following version is much easier to read:
eg
The Development Department is interested in the possibility of using resin cloth for electrical 
insulation. However, the overheating of electrical equipment could cause heating of the resin 
cloth. This could lead to the evolution of flammable gases from the resin. For this reason, an 
investigation into the pyrolysis products was requested.
Did you notice the way transitional words were used in the second example in 
order to increase the flow?
In the following sentence of 71 words, there are four different ideas:
eg
The adoption of an information technology (IT) programme in an organisation can cause 
work performance to decrease in the short term because staff need to become familiar with 
it and comfortable in its application, but over time there will be a meaningful improvement 
in productivity: not productivity aligned to the programme introduced, but rather from the 
adjustments made to the business systems which evolved from the adoption of the  
IT programme.
Separate but linked sentences convey the ideas more clearly:
eg
The adoption of an information technology (IT) programme in an organisation can cause 
work performance to decrease in the short term. This negative outcome is because staff 
need to become familiar with the programme and comfortable in its application. Over 
time, however, there will be a meaningful improvement in productivity. This will not be 
productivity aligned to the programme introduced, but rather a result of the adjustments 
made to the business systems which evolved from the adoption of the IT programme.
Nominalisation
You can see how important it is to write sentences containing only one main 
idea. However, clarity and Plain English are not achieved if the sentences are 
reduced by simply using a stack of nouns without prepositions. This practice of 
stacking nouns is called nominalisation. Phrases with prepositions are preferable 
to nominalisation. Look at the following example:

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
17
eg
Early childhood thought patterns misdiagnosis was the cause of problems.
Here, the meaning is unclear, as it is not clear what the adjective ‘early’ refers to. 
Was the misdiagnosis made early? Or was the research conducted on very young 
children, thus in early childhood? Using prepositions to rewrite the phrase would 
clarify the meaning:
eg
The problems were caused by the thought patterns in very young children being 
misdiagnosed.
OR
Problems occurred because the misdiagnosis of thought patterns in children was made too 
early in the study.
Use simple, clear words and avoid jargon
Keep the number of syllables per word as low as possible. It is not clever or 
professional to deliberately use language that your readers will find hard to 
understand. This often causes confusion and irritation and can lead to costly 
delays. The following are a few guidelines you can follow:
••
Avoid using unnecessary words. Sometimes writers pad their writing with 
redundant words and indirect expressions.
••
Use concrete, specific terms (eg ‘Spaniel’) where required rather than vague, 
emotive or generic terms (eg ‘canine breed’).
••
Use familiar terms (eg ‘suitcase’) where possible instead of long, foreign or 
abstract words (eg ‘portmanteau’).
Clear vocabulary
Use a single adjective or adverb instead of using an adverbial phrase or clause:
eg
A delay which is to be regretted = A regrettable delay
A point which is in doubt = A doubtful point
He spoke in a manner that was courteous = He spoke courteously
The committee which was established to study housing problems = The housing committee

Professional Communication
18
Use the original verb form rather than a phrasal verb or a noun. Original words 
are more accessible to the reader than derivative words. 
eg
The environmental laws place an emphasis on the need to train farmers in the conservation 
of water.
This is more direct and easier to understand:
eg
The environmental laws emphasise the need to train farmers in conserving water.
Use a direct style and avoid double negatives. Double negatives do not exist in 
many languages, and are therefore particularly difficult for second-language users 
of English to understand.
eg
Instead of writing: 
The institution is not unknown 
That is not a bad dress on you.
Rather write:
The institution is well known. 
That is a good dress on you.
Avoid unnecessary jargon 
Avoid jargon and gobbledygook wherever possible. Gobbledygook – a word coined 
from the noise a turkey makes – means language that uses, to an unnecessary 
degree, vocabulary drawn from business, science and technology and that ends up 
lacking meaning (Wordhippo.com, 2016).
eg
Instead of writing:
The optimum operational capabilities of the computer are contiguous on the parameters 
of its support systems.
Rather write:
The quality of the support systems installed on the computer will affect its performance.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
19
Avoiding jargon does not mean getting rid of necessary technical terms. The 
correct defining terms need to be used rather than general terms. 
eg
Instead of writing:
The engine is running very fast. 
The additional amount of memory made the computer run faster.
Rather write:
The engine is running at 30 rpm.
The additional 20 RAM of memory increased the computer’s speed by 20%.
If you are writing for non-specialist readers, one way of accommodating a less 
technically knowledgeable readership is to include definitions of essential terms 
within the text or to include a glossary at the start or end of your text.
Measure readability 
Chapter 2 deals with the tools offered by Microsoft® Word™ for checking your 
writing, but the measurement tool for readability is pertinent here. Readability 
scoring exercises read the weighting of terms used – more sophisticated words 
have a higher number of syllables – with the length of sentences. High scores 
indicate dense language, which can be difficult to read. The readability statistics 
feature in Microsoft® Word™ produces a summary (see Figure 1.2) with statistics, 
including the Flesch Reading Ease score and the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level score. 
See Chapter 2 for a full explanation of how to score the readability of your writing.
Figure 1.2  Readability statistics in Microsoft® Word™

Professional Communication
20
Avoid ambiguity and apply the rule of proximity 
Ambiguity
Ambiguity is where there is more than one meaning that can be read into a phrase, 
sentence or passage. It can occur because a word has more than one meaning. 
Find the causes of ambiguity in the following passage:
eg
I must write to tell you how sorry I am that my golf ball narrowly missed you yesterday. I 
certainly thought for a moment I had hit you behind the bunker. When I got there you had 
already passed on, so I decided to waste no time in writing. What happened was that as I 
was about to strike the ball, my eye was caught by a passing squirrel which deflected the 
ball to the right where you were standing. I have said for years that somebody would get hit 
there and something needed doing badly about it, so I am particularly distressed at coming 
so near to offending myself.
The rule of proximity
An important thing to remember is the rule of proximity, of which the passage 
above also gives examples. A phrase will take its meaning from the phrase closest 
to it before it takes meaning from the phrase which is separated from it by a 
comma or colon.
The following three sentences each have a different meaning:
eg
Only I told her I loved her. 
I told only her I loved her.
I told her I loved only her.
Apply effective paragraphing and use topic sentences
The topic sentence
A paragraph should deal with one topic only. It should have a topic sentence that 
expresses the main idea in the paragraph. The rest of the paragraph expands on 
this idea. The topic sentence is usually the first sentence in the paragraph. For the 
rest of the paragraph, vary the length of sentences while avoiding short, choppy 
sentences or long, involved sentences. Use punctuation correctly, so that the 
message can be more easily understood.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
21
In the following example the topic sentence is in italics at the start of the 
paragraph:
eg
Technology has revolutionised activities in the digital business office. For example, 
messages written on computers or other devices are transmitted instantly. In addition, 
computer software manages many other kinds of writing, recording, designing, etc.
Clear links between paragraphs
Look at the list of linking words or conjunctions that was given in Table 1.2 on 
page 12.
Use good grammar
Finite verbs
A complete sentence must contain a finite verb; otherwise it is called a fragment.
eg
The following are incorrect, as some of these are fragments:
In order to succeed in professional sport. Players must train regularly. 
Since joining the company and gaining promotion.
Running fast. He planned to win.
The following are all correct, full sentences:
Players must train regularly in order to succeed in professional sport. 
Since joining the company, she has gained promotion.
He planned to win by running fast.
Concord between nouns, pronouns and verbs
A singular subject (the noun preceding the verb) takes a singular verb and a plural 
subject takes a plural verb.
eg
A member of staff is on the Committee of Health and Safety.
If the subject consists of a singular and a plural noun connected by ‘or’ or ‘nor’, the 
rule of proximity applies. This means the noun nearest the verb dictates whether 
the verb will be singular or plural. 

Professional Communication
22
eg
Neither the students nor the lecturer expects a positive set of results. (The singular 
antecedent is closest to the verb.)
Neither the lecturer nor the students expect a positive set of results. (The plural antecedent 
is closest to the verb.)
The use of direct versus indirect expression
The English language has two voices: active and passive.
eg
Active voice:
Janet filed the letter.
The R&M Group recommends the following steps.
Passive voice:
The letter was filed by Janet.
The following steps are recommended by the R&M Group.
A direct, active style is more effective, because it is emphatic and vigorous. The 
passive voice makes writing indirect, which often makes it long-winded and boring 
to read.
However, there are sometimes legitimate reasons for using the passive voice, such as:
••
when you need to emphasise the object of the action, for example: The lathe 
has been broken again is more emphatic than Someone has broken the lathe 
again.
••
when you do not wish to assign blame to anyone specific, for example: The 
required documents were not included is more neutral than You failed to include 
the required documents.
••
in report writing, when you want to convey an objective point of view, for 
example: It was found that ... is more objective than I found that ...
Check your references and/or bibliography
The reasons for including a list of references and/or bibliography and how to 
compile it are explained in Chapter 12.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
23
1.4	 How to edit the final draft for visual 
readability and impact
Readability requires that the message be visually pleasing. The physical layout of 
the text plays a role in attracting and holding a reader’s attention. Readability in 
layout can be created by using:
••
readable typefaces
••
headings and subheadings that are informative phrases
••
bold or italics to emphasise certain words, phrases and sentences
••
numbering, spacing and indentation
••
white space and wide margins to rest the eye of the reader, help organise 
the message in the text, create an elegant layout and reduce the eye span 
required to read the text
••
lists and bullets where appropriate: 
◗◗
Remember that bulleted lists must be parallel; that is, each bulleted item 
must begin with the same type of word, such as a verb, noun or gerund.
◗◗
Each of the items in the list must run on from the introductory sentence, 
or each item must form a full sentence on its own.
Breaks in text are important for readability. Be extravagant with white space; it 
rests the eye of the reader, helps organise the message in the text and results in a 
more elegant page. 
Include illustrations
Illustrations include photographs, diagrams, pictures, tables and all types of 
graphs. See Chapter 10 for details on these aspects.
Always remember the following points when including graphics in your message:
••
Do not place the illustration before it has been mentioned or introduced in 
the text. Always prepare the reader, however briefly, for the illustration and 
its content. 
••
Once you have placed the illustration, you are in a position to direct your 
reader’s attention to specific aspects contained within the illustration.
••
Position illustrations as close as possible to the point in the text at which the 
readers will need the information provided by the illustration.
••
Always acknowledge the source if the illustration is not your own.
An illustration can be judged according to the criteria given in Table 1.4.
Table 1.4  Criteria for readability of illustrations in text
Criterion
Description
Accuracy
If it is not both numerically and visually accurate, the design is at best 
useless, at worst dishonest.

Professional Communication
24
Criterion
Description
Brevity
The message conveyed should be as immediate as possible. Avoid trying to 
make too many points through one illustration.
Clarity
Make every effort to reduce clutter – numeric or verbal – by carefully 
selecting information and positioning labels.
Emphasis
Guide the reader to the focus of the illustration by using colour, arrows or 
symbols.
Choose typefaces for readability
When you choose or create a template for your document, be aware of the 
factors that will either improve the presentation of your writing or hinder it. This 
particularly applies to your choice of typefaces.
When choosing a font size, you need to ask yourself if it is easy to read. 
Printing a well-written email or letter in unreadably small text is self-defeating. 
Most readers are comfortable reading type in 12 point rather than in 10 point. 
Fonts have different X sizes – the measure of the body of the letter. Times New 
Roman (TNR) 12 and Calibri 12 are equivalent to Arial 11 and to Verdana 10, which 
have a large X size and short ascenders (upward extensions on the h, t, k, etc) and 
descenders (downward extensions on the y, g, q, etc). Thus, for the smaller fonts, 
such as TNR and Calibri, anything smaller than 11 point is too small to be read 
with ease.
eg
Times New Roman
This is 14-point type.
This is 12-point type.
This is 11-point type.
This is 10-point type.
This is 9-point type.
Point size in Calibri
This is 14-point type.
This is 12-point type.
This is 11-point type.
This is 10-point type.
This is 9-point type.
Point size in Arial
This is 14-point type.
This is 12-point type.
Point size in Verdana
This is 14-point type.
This is 12-point type.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
25
This is 11-point type.
This is 10-point type.
This is 9-point type.
This is 11-point type.
This is 10-point type.
This is 9-point type.
Serif and sans serif fonts
A typeface that has a serif (a little line or stroke that finishes off a letter) is a 
traditional typeface. The serif originated from the days of hard copy printing when 
a letter created out of a small piece of lead imprinted ink onto the page. Times 
New Roman is an example of a serif font. Arial is an example of a sans serif font. 
A serif font has more shape. 
For older readers, who were educated with textbooks printed in a serif font 
and who have read serif text most of their lives, a sans serif text is tiring to read. 
However, for younger readers who have a lot of experience of reading text in 
sans serif text on screens and in textbooks, it presents no problem. Sans serif is 
preferred for business documents, such as reports, as it has a more contemporary 
look. Such documents do not consist of pages filled to the maximum with text; 
they contain headings and white space, which rests the eye.
For the same reason, always put extensive blocks of text into lower case. Upper 
case has less variety in shape (BECAUSE IT IS SQUARED OFF) and is harder to 
read. The ascenders and descenders of lower case text give the line of type shape 
and this is what catches the reader’s eye.
Use variations between and within typeface families 
Consider using a second style of typeface to make certain items stand out. For 
example, for the text of a report you may use a serif typeface, such as:
eg
Georgia, Times New Roman or Courier New(serif)
However, for headings and captions, you may use a sans serif typeface, such as:
eg
Arial or Verdana

Professional Communication
26
Note from these examples how the typefaces come across as having different point 
sizes, even though all the examples are in 10.5 point. The typefaces that appear 
larger have a bigger X height and shorter descenders and ascenders than do the 
other typefaces. The smaller-looking typefaces have the opposite; that is, a smaller 
X height with longer descenders and ascenders.
Headings and subheadings
Use headings and subheadings to aid readability – even in a one-page document 
– to ensure that the overall order of the message is clear to the reader. Headings 
will also make the inter-relationship of ideas come across; that is, what is more 
important or less important. 
It is also effective to use variations within a font for headings to emphasise the 
relationship between headings: 
••
To emphasise headings, for example the subject line and subheadings, you 
can present them in a larger font size, such as 14 point, in bold, in italics or 
even in bold and italics. 
••
Preferably do not use underlining, as it is considered to make the page 
appear heavy. It is also considered out of date: other forms of emphasising 
type have taken over.
••
In choosing the font for an effective and striking subject line, you may 
also consider the UPPER CASE of the typeface. However, if the heading or 
subject line runs over more than one line, it can be too heavy. You may also 
consider small caps.
For example, in designing your overall combination of typefaces, you may choose 
to use Garamond (a serif font) for the text of the report and Arial (a sans serif font) 
for headings, which are then also printed in bold and small caps. The variety in 
size, colour and weight of your typeface will add interest to the page.
Columns
In a document or an attachment that carries extensive text – that is, full 
paragraphs and pages of text – your column of text can be justified or can run 
ragged right. When text is set to run ragged right (as this paragraph does), it 
means that the right side of the column is not justified.
Justification on the right as well as the left of the page (as in this paragraph) 
gives a more orderly look. The disadvantage, however, is that where there is little 
text on a page – and thus few words per line – or where text is placed in narrow 
columns (as in a journal or for captions to illustrations) it can cause ugly spaces to 
appear in certain lines, as the characters are spaced out to reach to the end of each 
line. A line printed in 12 point that spans the width of the page will be unlikely to 
create any gaps (called ‘rivers and lakes‘). However, if you create your document 
in two columns, gaps will occur in the spacing across these narrow lines.

Writing effectively     Chapter 1
27
The alternative to justifying text on the right as well as the left of the page is to 
allow words at the end of lines to be split (as shown in the example in this para- 
graph). This outcome also makes for poor readability.
eg
If you choose narrow columns and a large 
font size, it is preferable to leave the right 
side of your page unjustified.
The computer is then able to space the 
letters naturally without any unnecessary 
kerning (spacing) or gaps occurring.
✔
Checklist for a well-organised and coherent message
Writing is a skill that can be learnt. The more you practise it, the better you will become as 
a writer. Bear in mind that your degree or diploma may secure you your first job, but what 
will determine your promotion and continuing success will be your ability to express yourself 
well, particularly in your writing. 
In order for your message to lead to the outcome you desire, it must be readable. Use the 
following checklist when you prepare a message:
•	 Select content according to the purpose of the message and the designated readership.
•	 Use brainstorming and mind mapping techniques in the initial planning.
•	 Create a topic outline out of the mind map.
•	 Make sure the formatting and template are appropriate to the document.
•	 Use informative headings, subheadings and a numbering system.
•	 Use logical argumentation with a sound discourse structure (unity, coherence and 
emphasis).
•	 Make sure your style is appropriate.
•	 Use correct grammar.
•	 Incorporate illustrative matter and give the sources. 
•	 List your references (if required).
•	 Use a readable layout.

2
28
The digital footprint:  
social media, templates,  
Microsoft® Word™ 
Living in a digital world gives you access to a wealth of information and 
knowledge. It also allows you to remain in easy contact with friends, relatives and 
other followers as well as colleagues. It enables you to create a digital presence. 
The ease of using social media and other digital platforms can, however, lead 
to a blurring of the interface between your personal and professional profiles. 
While some sites are overtly aimed at allowing professionals and businesspeople 
to network and create public profiles, other more socially oriented sites may still 
have an impact on your professional reputation, as they also form part of your 
digital footprint. 
This chapter will enable you to become more aware of and learn how to 
manage your online presence. It also covers tools and techniques for being more 
professional and efficient when dealing with electronic documentation, both 
to enhance your personal brand and to support your organisation’s brand and 
reputation. For example, Microsoft® Word™ is an extremely powerful program and 
we can work faster and more effectively by using it more fully.
By the end of this chapter, you will know how to:
••
research and understand social media spaces, separating your personal and 
professional accounts
••
promote your professional profile online
••
develop smart digital work skills
••
develop smarter documentation skills
••
use the tools, features and commands in Microsoft® Word™ to improve your 
output.
2.1 	Research and understand social media spaces
A myriad of platforms already exists through which you are able to communicate 
with others and develop your online presence. New platforms are created all 
the time, each of which has a different purpose and audience, with a different 
combination of content, whether text-based or visual. The spaces in which you 
choose to operate and how you do so can make an enormous difference to your 
online reputation. As with any other reputation, once you have damaged your 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
29
professional reputation it can take a long time to rebuild. Take time to understand 
the purpose and value of a presence on any platform or online activity and how 
it really works. Do this to assess whether it is worth your professional time to 
maintain a presence, and, on a personal level, how much control you will have 
over what is done with your posts, what happens to information after you post it 
and what others say and post about you.
Personal versus professional social media accounts
While many of us use social media primarily for social purposes, regularly updating 
our status, uploading new content and sharing posts, tweets or images, many 
employers also review the social media accounts of applicants or of employees as 
part of their policies to maintain their own reputation and integrity. Employers 
require more from a potential employee than a clean record and good initial 
references. Many companies and organisations have a code of conduct that seeks 
to guide employees to behave in a way that is congruent with the organisation’s 
values and image. 
Inappropriate content or images, even if they appear in your social space, 
would negatively affect your image and may even contravene the organisation’s 
code of conduct and so make you a greater risk as an employee. It is not just 
your own accounts that can create risk: friends and even colleagues can post 
photographs or share content in which you may be tagged or tracked without your 
being aware of it. 
Even the most cursory online search by a potential or current employer could 
throw up content that would not necessarily accord with how you wish to present 
yourself in your workplace. Furthermore, if you are starting out in your working 
career, you will not have an employment track record to bolster your CV and 
covering letter, and many recruitment organisations and potential employers will 
search for your profile on social media to assess you.
Personal versus professional email accounts 
If you are in employment or work for yourself, you should avoid using work 
email for any personal correspondence or transactions. Maintain a personal email 
account for all personal emails and use your work email account only for work-
related issues. While your personal email is your own affair, you still need to 
maintain a level of awareness; while you can control what you send and to whom, 
you cannot control how your messages will be forwarded or shared. 
Treat an employer’s reputation with as much respect as you would wish for your 
own reputation: 
••
Always ensure your work-related correspondence, whether internal 
or external, is courteous and appropriate, even in potentially difficult 
circumstances. (Also see Chapter 3.) 

Professional Communication
30
••
Always include a signature at the bottom of your emails, containing your 
full name, your title or position, the company name, the company logo (if 
applicable) and the relevant contact details. Electronic signatures may also 
be specified for staff within an organisation and may include a similar logo 
and typeface to the company letterhead to confirm the brand. You may 
also choose to give additional information, such as your qualifications (see 
Chapter 3). If your organisation has no requirements in this regard, set up 
your own electronic signature containing the relevant information and use it 
for all your work correspondence. These pre-set electronic signatures can be 
dropped in manually or automatically.
••
Never add anything personal to the end of an email, such as a quotation 
or saying. It is inappropriate, as it has not been approved by the company 
or organisation you work for, and it may not send the message that the 
company wishes to convey. 
See yourself as an employer or client might see you 
Without running your own checks, it is impossible to know what is out there online 
attached to your name or your profile. At any rate, it is a worthwhile exercise to 
regularly run a search using your name and review what each search turns up, 
particularly if you are active online. If you have had various social media accounts 
for some time and you regularly post comments, content, links or images, it is likely 
that some of this may have been shared and re-shared and thus reached an audience 
that you are unaware of. In an extreme case, you might have the same name as 
someone whose online profile portrays an undesirable image, and so it may become 
necessary to actively differentiate your profile from that of your namesake. 
Regardless of the outcome, awareness and a strategy are important: once you 
are aware of any potential problems, you are better placed to mitigate or manage 
damaging content. On the flip side, if nothing much turns up, it may indicate to 
a potential employer or client that you are not active in the social media space. 
Depending on the industry you are in and the people whom you hope to impress, 
a lack of presence may not be a good thing. This may indicate that you need to 
promote your profile and online activity more successfully.
Check your privacy settings
Check, and if necessary customise, the privacy settings on all your social media 
accounts to ensure you are aware of who is able to see your content and that you 
are able to review content you are tagged in. Before posting any content on any 
site where you have an account, click on the privacy button or option, and read 
the options carefully before selecting how you want to proceed. It is important to 
know not only who will be able to view your profile but also what the organisation 
will do with your details and content. 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
31
Even on personal accounts, you should be prudent about whom you allow to see 
your content. Avoid adding people to your network that you do not personally 
know — quality trumps quantity in most cases. 
Promote your professional profile online
In addition to creating a presence on professional networks such as LinkedIn, 
consider setting up a separate public or professional profile on various social 
media platforms, such as Facebook and Twitter, and use those accounts to manage 
your professional online presence. Before you set up your accounts, research 
various platforms to find out what you like and to locate professional networks 
or groups that would be useful given your interests and skills. Do not try to be 
active across too many platforms, however, as managing your profile across all 
of them becomes extremely time-consuming and it is likely that some will end up 
becoming inactive or forgotten. 
Many working or aspiring professionals set up or maintain a blog, as this 
allows them to post commentary on industry-related matters or to follow and 
post links to relevant sites. Sharing links to relevant articles, blogging and 
commenting on others’ posts – courteously and thoughtfully – can be a useful way 
to boost your profile. For certain industries, a personal blog or personal/individual 
professional webpage – if carefully managed and compiled – can act as an online 
portfolio (e-portfolio) of your work and creative talents as well as showcase any 
relevant or meaningful projects you are or have been engaged in, whether as paid 
work or voluntarily. It can also act as an extended CV. (See Chapter 4 for more on 
CVs and Chapter 13 for more on academic blogs and e-portfolios.) 
Various easy-to-use, free online platforms are available for creating personal 
or professional blogs or individual webpages or websites, including WordPress, 
Wix.com and Blogger. Some are tools for creating simple blog sites or landing 
pages for dropping images, video, text and links that reflect your profile quickly 
and efficiently. Others enable you to create full websites allowing more depth of 
content, which may be more suitable for displaying a portfolio of your working 
career. Most offer extensive online tutorials via the platforms themselves (or 
YouTube), as well as a variety of examples you can research to get ideas. 
While many platforms already exist and many more are being created all the 
time, you need to exercise judgement and caution about which platforms you 
choose to be active on — less is sometimes more. All social media platforms require 
maintenance and regular updating if they are not to appear irrelevant or out of 
date. As mentioned, if you have a presence on too many platforms, it is likely to 
become time-consuming and difficult to maintain this dynamically. It is better to 
close an account than to have it reappear at an inopportune moment. Finally, it is 
important to maintain a strict division between social sites and those you set up 
to promote your online presence for professional or academic purposes.

Professional Communication
32
2.2 	Develop smart digital work skills
The concept of the workplace has changed enormously and is likely to continue 
to do so as new possibilities for communication and collaboration develop and 
become widespread. Workplace flexibility has increased as people work from 
home, work flexi-hours or work remotely (such as when on-site or travelling) to 
suit their personal circumstances. Different businesses obviously require diverse 
interaction modes, but widespread interconnectivity has expanded collaboration 
potential and permitted real-time collaboration even across multiple sites.
Online collaboration tools
There are numerous methods of collaborating online, whether in real time or just 
to collate opinions and expertise on documentation. Facilities such as Dropbox 
or Google Docs create a shared storage space that is accessible wherever you can 
access the Internet. These types of collaboration tools allow you to share folders 
and documents for small projects, or transient and one-off collaborations. While 
many organisations have shared network drives, it can be cumbersome or even 
impossible to use remote servers, in which case free tools such as Dropbox, Google 
Docs and other cloud solutions can provide alternative collaboration options. 
Many commercial collaboration tools, such as Microsoft® SharePoint™, allow 
organisations and project managers to control access and editing rights to 
documentation and resources through role-based access. These tools also help to 
manage version control, as a document is effectively ‘checked out’ and so cannot be 
worked on by anyone else until it is ‘checked in’ again. Other tools are more dynamic 
and allow people in different locations to interact, edit and add commentary while 
online at the same time. As a professional, it is important for you to get to know and 
understand how such tools work and how to make the most of them in your career.
In addition to collaboration tools that allow people to share documentation, 
video- and audioconferencing facilities are common, as well as tools such as Skype 
and other messaging services that allow multiple participants. These tools allow 
people to take part in meetings in a meaningful way while in different locations 
and across time zones.
Other, more informal group options, such as WhatsApp, iMessage or similar, 
may be very useful for small groups and teams, but their informal nature can lead 
to inappropriate or overly abbreviated communication, which in turn may lead to 
misunderstandings. In addition, this informality can allow work communication 
and requests to spill over too easily into personal time. Groups making use of such 
communication tools should ensure clear protocols around when people can be 
contacted or requested to take action, especially if the person making the request 
is in a senior position.
Note that work decisions need to be recorded so that, if necessary, a clear 
audit trail can be traced relating to decisions and the responsibility for actions. 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
33
Even informal messaging systems can be used as evidence and so it is important 
to maintain courteous and professional standards at all times. 
Online Training
Online training is a growing form of professional development. Information is 
available on almost every subject; and this can assist you to do research, find out 
about work-related issues and develop your workplace communication skills. It is 
worth signing up to or following relevant and reputable industry or development 
sites to increase your knowledge and skills. More and more webinar-based training 
is being offered on the Internet — and much of it is free. Webinars are an extremely 
useful way to take part in continuing professional development, as they often 
allow real-time interactions, unlike straightforward online courses that consist of 
non-dynamic training videos.
2.3 	Develop smarter documentation skills
The increasingly digital nature of the workplace shifts the burden of developing 
personal skills onto the individual more than ever before. While workplaces 
will always provide training, particularly for proprietary software or in specific 
environments, personal knowledge, skills and flexibility are essential due to the 
rapidly changing environment. While keeping abreast of changing technology is 
important, it is equally important to ensure that your everyday skills match your 
communication ability. A well-worded and informative report, proposal or even 
letter can lose its effectiveness if there are flaws in the document’s visual impact 
or if it is riddled with grammar, spelling and punctuation errors. 
Your documents are ambassadors for you and your organisation. Consistency 
is extremely important and forms a big part of branding. Documents need to 
look correct and appealing, and must conform to an organisation’s style guide. 
If no style guide is provided, you should, as a professional individual, develop a 
personal set of templates to guide both your thinking and your presentation. Good 
templates allow you to concentrate fully on the document.
The importance of using templates 
Most organisations regularly use a range of documents, for example for minutes, 
reports, proposals, letters and so on. Rather than set each one up from scratch 
every time, it is common to find a document similar to the one required, save 
the file under a new name and then delete whatever content is not required. The 
difficulty with this is that documents end up being used over and over, each time 
with slight changes to formatting and layout as well as content. This can often 
prevent a document from working as you would expect, with numbering and 
formatting going awry and sometimes being very difficult to fix, especially with 

Professional Communication
34
multilevel numbering. This problem can be avoided by putting in a little work 
upfront and setting up templates. 
The term ‘template’ carries a range of meanings, depending on context. Most 
people think of templates as documents with pre-set layout formatting and required 
content. In Microsoft® Word™, however, a template differs from a document. When 
you open Microsoft® Word™, the blank document is based on the default template 
‘Normal.dotx’. Effectively, a document (with the file extension .docx) is launched 
based on the default template. Templates operate exactly like documents in that they 
can include a defined set of styles, formatting, layout and fixed text or headings. The 
important difference is that when you double-click on the template icon (see Figure 
2.1), a document is launched rather than the template being opened (the function of 
the .dotx extension). This means that regardless of the changes that are made to that 
document, the original template remains exactly as it should be, ready to be used 
again, with all the required text, formatting and layout.  
A Microsoft® Word™ 
template is indicated 
by the file extension 
.dotx and can be visually 
identified by the coloured 
strip at the top of the 
icon.
Double-clicking on the 
template icon launches a 
document based on the 
template but separate 
from it. Changes to the 
document do not affect 
the template.
A regular Microsoft® 
Word™ document is 
indicated by the file 
extension .docx. 
Double-clicking on the 
document icon opens the 
document for changes to 
be made. 
Figure 2.1  Template and document icons in Microsoft® Word™
Using a Microsoft® Word™ template as a base for a new document rather than 
re-using an old document is the best way to ensure that a document does not 
degrade from being used repeatedly. Documents carry with them all the formatting 
changes made in each subsequent version, thereby storing up potential frustration 
for the user when the old formatting conflicts with the new. Using a template ensures 
consistency; no one is impressed by poorly or inconsistently laid-out documents. 
Furthermore, using templates speeds up the process of creating documents that 
have to be laid out in a particular way. You can also transform lengthy documents 
with incorrect or inconsistent formatting in a matter of minutes by dropping them 
into a template with all the fixed, pre-set styles and applying the correct styles as 
appropriate. Microsoft® Word™ has a number of built-in styles for text, headings, 
bullets, numbering and so on. For example, the default style is called ‘Normal’: it 
is left-aligned, uses Calibri in 11 point and applies automatic line and paragraph 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
35
spacing. (Later in this chapter you will learn how to create and modify styles in 
Microsoft® Word™.)
Each style acts as a base onto which additional formatting may be added. 
However, each additional formatting change effectively creates a new style, 
for example ‘Normal + bold’, ‘Normal + bold + italic + 10 pt’ and so on. These 
new styles become associated with the document, together with the original 
styles, but are not necessarily deleted when the underlying text is deleted in a 
revised version of the document or when the file is saved using the Save As 
command. This means that if the document has been repeatedly resaved and/or 
renamed, the formatting changes and resulting styles continue to be part of the 
document, potentially causing it to become unstable, corrupt or difficult to work 
with, especially regarding numbering and bullet styles. Furthermore, if text with 
different formatting is copied and pasted from another document, the styles and 
formatting from the source document can become associated with the destination 
document as well as the content — even if the content is reformatted to appear in 
line with the new document.  
Microsoft® Word™ templates
As the discussion above shows, the ideal approach is to create your own Microsoft® 
Word™ templates that contain only the styles you need for your documents or the 
documents linked to them. Once this has been done, you can restrict yourself or 
other users to the specially created styles (accessed via the Styles gallery or the 
Styles task pane, as explained later in this chapter) with no muddle, confusion or 
inconsistency. A template can even appear as a blank document, with no inserted 
content but all the customised styles ready for use. 
Template trees
The best way to create a series of templates is to create a master template with 
all the styles that may be required in your documents (or your organisation’s 
documents), for example the styles for bullets, numbering and headings, to name 
a few. Once this has been done, the master template can be used to create a range 
of documents with additional layout, content or branding built in, and these in 
turn can be saved as templates. This means the same styles can flow through 
an organisation’s entire range of documents. Figure 2.2 gives an idea of the 
beginnings of a template tree descending from a single master template. 

Professional Communication
36
Blank master 
with all styles
Main 
letterhead
Reports & 
proposals
Summaries
Policies & 
procedures
Formal letters 
for ABC
Short reports
Executive 
summaries
Policy on XYZ
Regular letters 
for XYZ
Research 
reports
Research  
summaries
Procedure for 
XYZ
High-level 
letters
Regular 
reports
etc…
etc…
Proposal for 
XYZ
Ideally, each template would be either dated or 
numbered to ensure version control when amendments 
are made. This also implies the need for a custodian of 
the templates in any organisation/department.
Figure 2.2  A template tree
How to save a document as a template
To save a document as a template rather than as an ordinary document, use the 
Save As command. In the File tab, click on Save As to bring up the Save As dialog 
box. Give the document an appropriate name and select ‘Word Template’ from the 
Save as type dropdown box (at the bottom of the dialog box). Before clicking OK, 
select or check the location you want to save the template in, as it usually defaults 
to a hidden template folder and can be difficult to locate.
This approach to using templates to create consistency and branding across documentation 
is also useful in Microsoft® Excel™ and PowerPoint™. In the Save As dialog box in 
Microsoft® Excel™, select ‘Excel Template’ (*.xltx, not *.xlsx) and in PowerPoint™, select 
‘PowerPoint Template’ (*.potx, not *.pptx).

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
37
Check the page setup 
When you set up a template, you need to confirm the sizes of the page margins 
and the paper, as well as whether the document or any sections are to be landscape 
rather than portrait. It is worth setting this up in the template itself rather than 
document by document, so that you need not worry about it later. One of the most 
common errors made in this regard is due to people not being aware that in the 
USA, the default paper size is not A4 but ‘Letter’ size, which is broader and shorter 
than A4. While everything will look fine on the screen, when the document is 
printed it can be problematic, as the margins of the ‘Letter’ size do not suit A4 and 
the pages will look truncated. A second issue you have to be aware of is that page 
margins are often set at peculiar measurements in centimetres; this is because the 
USA uses imperial measurements and not metric ones.
The first step therefore is to check that your measurements are in centimetres. 
If they are not, change them in the Word Options dialog box (accessed from the 
File tab). In the dialog box, click on Advanced and scroll down to the Display 
segment and select centimetres from the list of options in the dropdown menu.
If your screen does not show the ruler along the top 
and the left-hand side of the document, navigate to the 
View tab and in the Show section, select Ruler. Also, if 
you check Navigation Pane (see Figure 2.3), a panel will 
open to the left of your document showing a list of all 
the headings and subheadings (if you have used styles), 
which is very useful for quickly moving around in your 
document.
Figure 2.3  Selecting Ruler 
and Navigation Pane in the 
Show section of the View tab
The second step is to open the Page Setup dialog box by selecting the mini-arrow 
at the bottom right-hand corner of the Page Setup section of the Layout tab. The 
dialog box has three tabs: Margins, Paper and Layout. Each tab has settings worth 
checking:
••
Margins: Check that the page margins are sensible numbers in centimetres. 
The default page margins are 2.54 cm, which is a direct conversion of 
one inch. However, 2 cm or 2.5 cm would be more sensible in a metric 
environment. This tab also allows you to add a gutter if your document will 
be printed and mirror margins if it will be printed back to back.
••
Paper: This tab allows you to select the paper size and set it to A4 if it is 
still in the default ‘Letter’ size.

Professional Communication
38
••
Layout: This tab allows you to change the settings for headers and footers, 
which by default are set 1.27 cm (0.5 inches) from the edge. It also has 
an option to set a different header and footer for the first page, which is 
important for letter templates with a logo, address and so on that need to 
appear on the first page only.
Figure 2.4  The three tabs of the Page Setup dialog box
Review the document properties
The final important aspect to consider when working with a template is the 
document properties information. This is accessed by selecting the File tab and 
looking at the information displayed (on the Info screen). Standard as well as 
advanced properties can be viewed here.
The standard document properties indicate how long has been spent editing 
the file (which is useful if you are calculating how much time you have spent on 
a document), who the author is, when it was last modified and by whom it was 
modified. Here you can also set document protection to restrict who can look at 
or edit the file, which is useful for confidential documents or ones where certain 
parts may not be changed.
The advanced document properties can be accessed by clicking on the dropdown 
arrow next to the Properties heading in the top right-hand section of the Info page 
and selecting Advanced Properties. All five tabs in the resultant dialog box can 
be useful to look at or complete, depending on company requirements. Figure 2.5 
shows the following three of those tabs:
1.	 The General tab provides information on where the file is stored, what type 
of file it is, when it was created and when it was last modified. If the Save As 
command has been used a number of times, it can be quite revealing to see 
when the document was first created. 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
39
2.	 The Summary tab should be completed, indicating in particular the author 
of the document and the company, if relevant. If you are unsure where a 
document first came from, it is important to check here, because it will retain 
the name of the original author and company. Ethical problems can arise if 
documents are used that are effectively the intellectual property of another 
company or person.
3.	 The Statistics tab provides more detailed information on how much time has 
been spent on the document and when it was printed and accessed, together 
with a summary of the content statistics. This tab is often used in forensic 
investigations when it needs to be established when the document was created, 
accessed or printed.
Figure 2.5  Three of the tabs in the Document Properties dialog box
Use styles rather than formatting
A style in Microsoft® Word™ is a set of formatting instructions attached to a 
character or a paragraph so that the text always presents in a particular way. As 
a style carries all the formatting, spacing and other features you require, you can 
concentrate on content rather than formatting. The advantage of using styles rather 
than formatting content manually is that you get exactly the same result every time 
because you (or your organisation) created the styles, thereby saving time and effort 
that can always be better spent than on formatting or layout. Microsoft® Word™ has 
numerous built-in styles, the default being the ‘Normal’ style.
How to access styles
Built-in or pre-set styles can be accessed either from the Styles gallery or from the 
Styles task pane (see Figure 2.6). The advantage of the Styles pane is that it remains 
fully open and therefore visible while working on a document for easy access to the 
styles. It is easy to forget to use the styles and revert to manual formatting when 
they are not so obviously available. The Styles pane can be opened via the arrow in 
the bottom right-hand corner of the Styles section on the Home tab, or by adding a 

Professional Communication
40
shortcut to the Quick Access Toolbar (see Figure 2.6). When opened for the first time, 
the Styles pane floats over your document. Double-click on the title bar to lock it at the 
right-hand side, and then tick Show Preview to see what the styles look like as well as 
their names. Next time the pane is opened, it will be locked and showing the preview.
The Styles section on the Home 
tab drops down when this 
arrow is clicked, allowing the 
required style to be chosen. 
The Styles pane can be opened 
by clicking on the corner arrow 
or selecting the button
The Styles pane shows the 
default built-in styles. The 
frame around ‘Normal’ indicates 
that it is the style currently 
in use.
New Style 
button
Manage Styles 
button
Figure 2.6  The Styles gallery and Styles pane
To use the Styles pane, you can work in either of the following ways:
••
Click on the required style in the pane (eg ‘Heading 1’) and start typing. 
••
Type the required text, highlight it and then click on the required style.
How to create and modify styles
You can create a new style rather than modify an existing one by selecting the 
appropriate button at the bottom of the Styles pane (see Figure 2.6). This brings 
up the Create New Style from Formatting dialog box. 
You can also use the Modify Style dialog box (see Figure 2.8) to create or 
modify a style. This dialog box is identical to the Create New Style from Formatting 
Style dialog box — only the title bar is different. To bring up the Modify Style 
dialog box, open the Styles task pane and move the mouse cursor across to the 
style you want to modify; a dropdown arrow will appear (see Figure 2.7). Click on 
the arrow and select the Modify option to bring up the Modify Style dialog box.

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
41
Figure 2.7  The Modify option in the Styles pane
If you modify a 
style, leave the 
name the same.
If you create a style, 
give it a name. 
You can use the 
company name or 
your personal initials 
in front of each 
of the styles you 
create so you can 
differentiate styles 
across different 
documents.  
If you create a 
new style, ensure 
the Style based on 
dropdown box is set 
to ‘Normal’.
Here you can select 
a style for the next 
new paragraph. 
For example, after 
a heading you 
are likely to want 
‘Normal’ or a body 
text you have 
created, not the 
heading style again. 
Now, via the Format 
button, work 
through the options 
one by one, only 
clicking OK once 
all the changes are 
done. The changes 
will be reflected 
in the Styles pane. 
If you created a 
new style, it will 
now appear in your 
Styles pane.
Figure 2.8  Modifying a style by using the Modify Style dialog box

Professional Communication
42
If you find you have to format text in a particular way more than once, it indicates you 
should create a new style or modify an existing one. Once you have created a style, if you 
need to modify it (for example by changing the colour of a heading) all the text in that style 
will be updated throughout the document, ensuring consistency. The easiest way to work 
with styles is to take the time to decide what styles you use regularly and then create those 
styles in a blank document, or as you work in the document. After you have created all your 
most regularly used styles, save the document as a template. This will make those same 
styles available every time you create a document based on that template.
The Format options in the Modify Style dialog box allow you to set the font option 
and line spacing as well as build in automatic paragraph spacing. Borders can 
be selected to be part of the style, and the Numbering option is where you select 
bullets or numbering formats to accompany your style.
Remember to select your required language, such as English (South Africa, UK or USA). This 
must be built into the style to ensure the spellcheck runs using the correct language.
If you set up a template with your own styles, start by modifying the style 
called ‘Normal’. Having done this, you can base all the other styles you create on 
‘Normal’, to ensure consistency. It also means that if you need to change the font 
of the template, all you need to do is modify the ‘Normal’ style and everything else 
will be changed automatically.
How to copy and paste from documents with different styles and 
formatting
The Clipboard
Microsoft® Word™ allows text to be copied or cut and pasted elsewhere, either in 
the same document or into another document or program. When the selected text 
is cut or copied, it sits in an area called the Office Clipboard until it is pasted into 
its destination. Normally, if you copy or cut information, it needs to be pasted 
into its destination before you can copy or cut another item, or you will lose the 
previously copied item. This can be annoying when you need to copy several items 
from a source, as it obliges you to go backwards and forwards between the source 
and the destination.
However, if you open the Clipboard (see Figure 2.9), a task pane appears to the 
left of your screen which allows you to copy up to 24 items, which then remain 
available for pasting once or more whenever you are ready. This allows you to 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
43
copy several items from a single source without having to paste after each copy. 
The Clipboard can be very useful when you have to repeatedly use names or terms 
that are long or difficult to spell — they can be kept on the Clipboard to be used 
as and when you need them. 
The Clipboard can be 
opened via the mini-arrow 
in the bottom right-hand 
corner of the Clipboard 
section on the Home tab, 
or by adding a command 
button to the Quick 
Access Toolbar.
Figure 2.9  Opening the Clipboard
To paste an item from the Clipboard, place the cursor in the correct place in the 
document and then click on the desired item on the Clipboard. You can paste 
Clipboard items repeatedly, even into another Microsoft® Office™ program.
The Paste Options button
Copying and pasting content from other documents can cause problems when 
styles or formatting clash. The Paste Options button (see Figure 2.10) appears each 
time something is pasted. By clicking on the dropdown arrow on this button, you 
can select options such as Keep Source Formatting, Merge Formatting or Keep Text 
Only. The options can differ; for example, when pasting numbered or bulleted 
items, you will be asked whether the list should be continued or not. The options 
are always quite logical; the important thing is to know that you have to guide 
Microsoft® Word™ as to what formatting and styles you require. 
The Paste Options button appears in 
the document when content is pasted. 
Clicking on the arrow provides various 
options, most commonly:
•	
Keep Source Formatting
•	
Merge Formatting
•	
Keep Text Only 
Figure 2.10  The Paste Options button and its dropdown menu

Professional Communication
44
If you do not pay attention to the paste options, styles from other documents 
can be brought in, as well as page setup parameters and different languages (US 
English, for example), which will affect the spellcheck feature. 
You can set the default paste option by choosing Set Default Paste in the Paste Options 
dropdown menu, as shown in Figure 2.10. You can also open the Word Options dialog box 
(from the File tab) and scroll down to the Cut, copy, and paste options in the Advanced 
section. Setting the default option to Merge Formatting helps you to avoid importing the 
styles and formatting from source documents. The pasted content will then match the style 
that you are in when you paste. This does not stop the Paste Options button appearing, so 
you can still select any of the options. 
If a foreign or unwanted style does appear in the Styles pane, you can delete it using the 
dropdown menu that appears beside the style. This helps keep the document clean and 
consistent.
Paste Special 
If pictures or diagrams are copied from elsewhere, they are by default pasted as 
‘objects’, and often cannot be edited. However, if you use the Paste Special dialog box 
(opened by clicking on the dropdown arrow beneath the Paste button on the Clipboard 
section of the Home tab), you can select options which allow you to paste differently 
(see figures 2.11 and 2.12). The same applies in all Microsoft® Office™ programs, 
although the options will vary. For example, you could use this method to prevent a 
Microsoft® Excel™ table, a bitmap or a picture from being altered when you paste it.
Figure 2.11  The Paste Special dialog box when pasting from  
a Microsoft® Word™ document

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
45
Figure 2.12  The Paste Special dialog box when pasting from  
a Microsoft® Excel™ document
If you select Microsoft Excel Worksheet Object (see Figure 2.12) when pasting a 
table, for example, and then double-click on the pasted table, Microsoft® Excel™ 
will open inside Word™, allowing you to access the spreadsheet functions. Once 
you click away, the table appears again as a normal table in Word™. 
Ensure the spellings in the source document are correct before you copy and paste, 
especially if you are pasting a Microsoft® Word™ or Excel™ object.
Paste Link
The Paste Link option in the Paste Special dialog box (see figures 2.11 and 2.12) 
allows an image or mirror to be copied, rather than embedding the external 
content into the document. This is particularly advantageous if you present regular 
reports or presentations containing tables or charts prepared in Microsoft® Excel™. 
You can set up a template containing a table or chart with a link to the relevant 
spreadsheet. Each time the document or presentation opens, a message appears 
asking if you would like the links updated. This will locate the source document, 
open it and automatically update the linked table or chart to the latest version. For 
this to work, however, you need to keep the files in the same places; otherwise the 
link to the source document will be lost and the table or chart will become static.

Professional Communication
46
2.4	 How to use Microsoft® Word™ to improve 
your output
Customise your Microsoft® Word™ environment
We all use a word processor differently, using different options, tools and styles. 
It is therefore time-efficient and convenient to modify how the program appears, 
to suit your needs. 
Microsoft® Word™ has been through many versions and doubtless will continue to change, 
but the essential features of the program have remained the same. Some of these features 
include styles; automated features such as tables of contents, cross-referencing, bookmarks, 
captions and hyperlinks; different viewing modes; headers and footers and page numbering. 
The more familiar you are with how Microsoft® Word™ is laid out and how it operates, the 
easier it will be to identify where the feature you want has moved to (if it has moved) or 
how it is accessed in a new version of the program.
The layout of Microsoft® Word™
As with all Microsoft® Office™ programs, everything you need to do can be 
accessed via the File tab and the ribbon (the successor to the toolbars). Rather than 
toolbars, command buttons are now grouped according to function and organised 
into tabs (the successors to the menu bar), as shown in Figure 2.13. 
Figure 2.13  The tab menus on the ribbon
Other tabs appear automatically when you select a particular item or option. For 
example: 
••
If you select a picture, a coloured tab appears called Picture Tools, with a 
Format section to allow picture-related actions.
••
If you insert or work in a table, two additional Table Tools tabs appear: the 
Design and the Layout tabs.
In addition, the context-sensitive right-click menus in Microsoft® Word™ 
automatically offer a selection of options on a small floating toolbar that appears 
as soon as text is highlighted.
Customise the Quick Access Toolbar
The Quick Access Toolbar, which appears by default above the File tab in the title 
bar, is designed to be customised to contain command buttons for repeatedly used 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
47
actions. This is where you can gather all the commands that you regularly use 
to avoid having to move between different tabs to find the commands you need. 
Ideally, the Quick Access Toolbar should be repositioned below the ribbon (see 
Figure 2.14) to make it more accessible, to give more space for buttons and to 
prevent the buttons being blocked by the document name. 
Right-click on 
an empty area 
of the ribbon 
and choose to 
show the toolbar 
below the ribbon. 
This is the 
default position 
and buttons 
of the Quick 
Access Toolbar.
Figure 2.14  The Quick Access Toolbar
To customise the Quick Access Toolbar with your personal selection of frequently 
used commands, do one of the following:
••
Right-click on a button on the ribbon that you want to add to the Quick 
Access Toolbar and select Add to Quick Access Toolbar. To remove a button 
from the Quick Access Toolbar, right-click on it and select Remove from 
Quick Access Toolbar.
••
Click on Options on the File tab menu to bring up the Word Options dialog 
box. From here you select the Customize Ribbon section. You can also bring 
up this dialog box by right-clicking on the ribbon and selecting Customize 
Quick Access Toolbar. 

Professional Communication
48
Use the Add button to add to the list of commands on 
your Quick Access Toolbar, and use Remove if you want to 
take a command off.
Use the up and down arrows to the right of the column to 
re-arrange the buttons displayed on the toolbar. 
If the option you want 
is not in the Popular 
Commands dropdown list, 
use the dropdown arrow 
to select All Commands 
and then scroll through 
the alphabetically 
organised options. 
This is the list of possible 
commands to add to the 
Quick Access Toolbar.
Figure 2.15  Customising the Quick Access Toolbar via the Word Options dialog box
Figure 2.16 shows some suggestions for useful everyday commands for the Quick 
Access Toolbar.
Styles
Thesaurus
Clipboard
Track Changes
Change Case
Insert a Comment
Paragraph Settings
Insert Hyperlink
Line and Paragraph Spacing
Insert Footnote
Page Setup
Insert Caption
Borders and Shading
Insert Cross-reference

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
49
Insert Picture From File
Restart at 1 (or a)
Insert a Symbol
Outline view
Insert Page and Section Breaks
Draft view
Draw Table
Repeat Header Rows
Figure 2.16  Useful options for the Quick Access Toolbar 
After customising the Quick Access Toolbar, you can right-click on the ribbon and choose 
Collapse the Ribbon to free up more space for content on the screen. This is especially useful 
if you are working on a small laptop, notebook or some other device with a small screen.
The Word Options dialog box
Microsoft® Word™ is an extremely powerful program. Most of us, however, use 
very little of what it can do, as our work context tends to dictate the types of 
documents produced. However, Microsoft® Word™ contains extremely useful 
features to help you produce professional documents more quickly and so it is 
worth getting to know them. Your professional image can easily be compromised 
by careless errors, or unattractively or inconsistently laid-out documents.
The Word Options dialog box (see Figure 2.17), which you can open by clicking 
on Options at the bottom of the File menu, allows you to customise or alter the 
program’s default settings. Some organisations set certain defaults when providing 
employees with a computer or laptop, but many others can be activated to suit 
you. 
The dialog box is divided into sections, and it is a good idea to work through 
each section to check that you have organised it correctly. The following are some 
useful options to check in the Word Options dialog box:
••
The General section allows you to insert your name and initials so that when 
you use Track Changes or add comments while you are reviewing or writing 
a document, your additions can be identified by your initials or name. This 
is important when multiple people collaborate on a document. If no name or 
initials are included in the General section, any changes you make are simply 
identified as ‘User’.

Professional Communication
50
••
If the Language section has not been set by an employer’s IT department, it 
is essential to check the language options to ensure, for example, that the 
version of English that you need to use (South Africa, UK or USA) has been 
enabled as an editing language.
••
The Proofing section contains various options – depending on your version 
of Microsoft® Word™ – to assist you with reviewing, editing and proofing 
your work.
In the section When 
correcting spelling 
in Microsoft Office 
programs, find out which 
options are checked or 
unchecked.
Remove the tick 
from Ignore words in 
UPPERCASE. This box is 
checked by default, which 
means words in uppercase 
are not spellchecked. 
It is also a good idea to 
remove the tick from the 
Ignore words that contain 
numbers box, so that the 
spellcheck will indicate 
any mistyping in this 
regard. 
In the section When correcting spelling and grammar in Word, 
check all the options, including Show readability statistics. 
Figure 2.17  The Proofing section of the Word Options dialog box
Readability statistics
The Readability Statistics dialog box (see Figure 2.18) only appears at the end of a 
spelling and grammar check. Readability statistics measure the readability of a text 
based on the length of words, sentences and paragraphs, how much of the passive 
voice is used, and so on. As an objective measure, it is unable to assess the value 
of your writing or how good it is, but you can learn a lot about how technically 
readable your writing is (for example in plain language terms), so it is useful to 
check these statistics.
In addition to the averages, two indices are offered in the statistics summary: 
Flesch Reading Ease and Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level. The easier score to understand 
is probably the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level. It gives a score based on a school or 
university grade, indicating that someone with that level of education should be 
comfortable reading the document.

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
51
Figure 2.18  Readability statistics 
While many professional documents are aimed at readers with many qualifications, 
in the workplace it is not appropriate to pitch your writing at too high or too 
academic a level, not just because you cannot always be sure of your entire 
readership profile, but also because in a multilingual society, English acts as a 
lingua franca and for many people it is not a first language. This places the onus 
on writers to ensure that their writing is sufficiently plain and appropriate so as not 
to force readers to work too hard. (See Chapter 1 for advice on effective writing.) 
How to check spelling and grammar
While it is tempting to correct spelling as you go, it is more efficient to wait until 
you are finished with a document or section and then perform a check. If you 
only want to check a section of your work, highlight the relevant section or pages 
before clicking on Spelling and Grammar in the Proofing section of the Review tab.
Before performing a spelling and grammar check on your work, select the entire document 
(press Ctrl + A) or the required section and then check what language is selected as the 
proofing language. You can do this by clicking on the correct section on the status bar or by 
using the Language command button on the Review tab. It is important to do this, as content 
pasted from other documents may be in a proofing language different to the one required for 
your document, such as US English, in which case the spelling and grammar check would not 
correctly identify all spellings that are classified as errors in your proofing language.

Professional Communication
52
AutoCorrect  
The AutoCorrect Options button is located in the top section of the Proofing section of 
the Word Options dialog box. This button opens the AutoCorrect dialog box (see Figure 
2.19). AutoCorrect is designed to recognise certain common misspellings of words and 
automatically correct them. For example, ‘teh’ is automatically corrected to ‘the’. The 
AutoCorrect feature is also responsible for aspects such as capitalising the first word 
in a sentence or capitalising bulleted lists (although you may want to turn this off). 
The major benefit of the AutoCorrect feature, however, is that you can add your own 
common misspellings or words of your choice to the list. In addition, if you regularly use 
long names, phrases or a word that is always capitalised, you can also add these to the 
list. You can even add full addresses, as AutoCorrect includes new lines and formatting.
For example, if you want the letter combination ‘uct’ to always appear as ‘UCT’, 
you can set this up in the AutoCorrect dialog box. It will then be automatically changed 
when you press the space bar or a full stop after typing ‘uct’, and you will not need 
to capitalise it each time. To add your own words to the list, enter the spelling to be 
changed in the Replace box (or highlight the misspelling before selecting AutoCorrect 
Options) and then add the word or phrase as you would like it to appear (including 
formatting or new lines) in the With box; then press Add. You can create your own 
code, for example ‘uct’ for ‘UCT’ and ‘uuct’ for the full form ‘University of Cape Town’. 
Insert the 
misspelt word 
or code word 
you will type in 
this box.
If you want 
to remove 
or modify 
an existing 
AutoCorrect 
entry, type it 
into the Replace 
box and either 
select the 
Delete button 
(which will 
then appear) or 
edit the entry 
by typing the 
correct entry in 
the With box 
and select the 
Replace button 
(which will then 
appear).
Insert the 
correct spelling 
of the word 
here, making 
sure any 
capitals or 
other particular 
features are 
correctly 
included, and 
then click Add.
This is the list 
of built-in 
AutoCorrect 
options.
Figure 2.19  Entering items in the AutoCorrect dialog box

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
53
You may also want to add regularly used sentences, addresses or stock phrases or 
short paragraphs of boiler plate content (any text that is written or pasted into new 
contexts or applications with no or little editing or change to the original). To do 
this, highlight the required content, formatted as you want it to appear, and then 
when you click on the AutoCorrect Options button in the Proofing section of the 
Word Options dialog box, your highlighted text will already appear in the With 
box. All you now have to do is insert (in the Replace box) the letters or code that 
will trigger the automatic correction for this option, and press Add. 
The built-in AutoCorrect options can be very frustrating in some cases. For example, if you 
regularly use letters enclosed in brackets for lists (such as in legal documents), you will find 
that when you type (c), the program corrects it to the copyright symbol: ©. To prevent this 
from happening, find (c) in the list of built-in AutoCorrect options and modify it, for example 
to ((c). In this way, you retain the option to have the copyright symbol appear when you 
need it.
AutoCorrect is also very useful in the case of names with a diacritic, such as an accent, 
on one of the letters, for example Irèna. Omitting the diacritic is equivalent to misspelling 
the name and can make a bad impression. Use the AutoCorrect feature as described in this 
section to avoid this.
Reviewing options
The Review tab contains useful features for when you are writing or editing your own 
or others’ documents. The most important thing about working on documentation 
that others will use is that you must keep all comments and changes in one place. 
How to track changes in a document
Microsoft® Word™ allows you to work on other people’s documents and track 
any changes you make. Professionally, it is unacceptable to just change others’ 
work without giving them a chance to see what has been changed. The Track 
Changes feature shows, among other things, insertions, deletions, moved text 
and formatting changes. It shows the changes in colours (a different one for each 
reviewer), accompanied by the reviewer’s name or initials. The author can look at 
the changed document and accept or reject each alteration by right-clicking and 
selecting from the shortcut menu or by using the Changes section on the Review 
tab (see Figure 2.20).
Figure 2.20  The Review tab 

Professional Communication
54
Track Changes can be activated by clicking the Track Changes button in the 
Tracking section of the Review tab. When activated, the button appears highlighted 
or shaded — the colour depends on the version. The dropdown arrow on the button 
allows you to access the default Track Changes Options dialog box, where you 
can change the default options. For example, normally by default all deletions 
and formatting changes appear in the form of balloons alongside the document. 
If this does not happen, and the deletions appear as crossed-out text within the 
document, change it by choosing to show deleted text in balloons to the right of 
the document, as shown in Figure 2.21. This allows the reviewed text to be more 
easily read.
Figure 2.21  Deletions and formatting changes indicated in balloons alongside the document
The comments feature
To add a comment to a document, highlight the relevant text and click on the 
New Comment button in the Comments section on the Review tab. Then type your 
comment in the balloon that appears to the right of the document (in the same 
place as deletions and formatting changes done using the Track Changes feature). 
All comments are numbered and marked with the author’s or the reviewer’s name. 
To delete a comment, right-click on it and choose Delete Comment or use the Delete 
button in the Comments section on the Review tab.
The Show Markup option in the Tracking section of the Review tab allows the 
user to choose to see only some of the changes made. For example, formatting 
changes can be hidden, leaving only text insertions, deletions and comments 
showing. A document with extensive changes and comments can look very busy. 
Selecting Simple Markup from the dropdown menu just above the Show Markup 
option allows you to read a ‘clean’ document, although the changes can still be 
revealed or hidden as necessary for reference.
Use the New Comment feature even when you are not reviewing or working on a document 
collaboratively. Rather than stopping to write notes about changes needed or to look things 
up, add a comment to yourself noting what needs to be done, and continue writing. This is 
less disruptive to your thought flow. Furthermore, it ensures that a record of your thought 
process stays with the document, in the same way as reviewers’ comments create a dialogue 
on the document itself. Each comment can then be deleted as it is dealt with.

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
55
Viewing options
How to view documents side by side
If you are reviewing different versions of a document and you do not want to use 
the Compare or the Combine (merge) option from the Review tab, the View Side 
by Side option (see Figure 2.22) on the View tab can be very useful. It shows both 
versions on the same screen, and the Synchronous Scrolling feature allows you to 
scroll through both documents at the same time. This command can be turned on 
or off, so you can work as suits your needs. 
Figure 2.22  The View Side by Side option on the View tab
As content can be dragged from one document to another, it can be useful to have two 
completely different documents open side by side. If you drag using the left mouse button, 
the content moves; if you use the right mouse button to drag, a shortcut menu appears that 
allows you to select whether to move or copy. If you do move content across and you still 
need it in the source document, when you close the source document, you can select not to 
save the changes to retain the original content.
Views in Microsoft® Word™
Word has five main viewing modes, namely Read Mode, Print Layout, Web Layout, 
Outline and Draft. To access these views, you can either use the View tab on the 
ribbon or the shortcut buttons on the status bar at the bottom of the document (as 
indicated in Figure 2.23).
Figure 2.23  Views in Microsoft® Word™

Professional Communication
56
Table 2.1 gives a synopsis of each of these views, after which Outline view is 
discussed in greater detail.
Table 2.1  A brief summary of the views in Microsoft® Word™
View
Description
Read Mode
Read Mode makes a document appear more like a book. It is important 
to note that the pages in full-screen reading view do not necessarily 
correspond to the page numbers of the document.
Print Layout
Print Layout is the default view, and it shows how the document will 
look when printed. However, it does not show where page and section 
breaks are unless the Show/Hide Formatting button (in the Paragraph 
section of the Home tab) is used.
Web Layout
Web Layout indicates how a document would appear as a webpage.
Draft view
Draft view shows the background setup of the document and is the best 
place to delete pages, page breaks and section breaks. To delete a break, 
click on it and press delete. Headers and footers, as well as certain 
pictures and diagrams, cannot be seen in Draft view.
Outline view
Outline view shows the document in the form of a hierarchy, like the 
Navigation pane, so you can review its organisation at a number of 
levels. However, unlike the Navigation pane, Outline view also allows 
whole sections and subsections to be moved around without copying 
and pasting.
Outline view
This feature is especially useful if the document contains complex numbering, as 
the numbering changes automatically.
Headings (or other styles you choose to create) are assigned a level by Microsoft® 
Word™, each of which can be expanded or collapsed:
••
Heading 1: Outline Level 1
••
Heading 2: Outline Level 2
••
Heading 3: Outline Level 3
••
Body text
You can plan a document in Outline view using your heading structure. You could 
write the whole document in this view, but it is not very appealing and it gives 
little idea of how the work will appear on the page. It is better to plan and then dip 
in and out of Outline view, to periodically check the logical flow of the sections. 
Once in Outline view, select how many levels of the document you want to review 
via the Outlining tab (see Figure 2.24), which appears automatically as a new tab 
on the ribbon when you select Outline from the Views section of the View tab.

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
57
The arrows move 
selected sections 
up and down.
The +/– buttons 
expand and 
collapse levels.
This option shows 
the first line of 
each paragraph 
under the heading.
Use this to show or 
hide formatting.
These buttons promote 
or demote headings and 
text to another level.
The Show Level dropdown 
box is used to select the 
number of heading levels 
to be shown.
This closes Outline 
view and returns to 
the previous view of 
document.
Figure 2.24  The Outlining tab
The document in Figure 2.25 is in Outline view, showing outline levels 1 and 2 
only.
The + signs 
preceding the 
levels indicate 
they contain 
subsections. 
Here Level 1 
headings have 
been expanded 
to show  
Level 2.
A heading 
preceded 
by a minus 
sign means 
it cannot be 
expanded 
further.
The Level 2 
headings are 
collapsed but 
the + sign 
indicates 
that they 
contain text or 
subsections. 
Figure 2.25  An example of a document seen in Outline view
Breaks, headers and footers as ways to organise documents 
Page and section breaks
Page breaks and section breaks have different functions, and both are useful. If 
specific information has to start on a new page, a page break should be used rather 
than pressing Enter until the top of a new page is reached. A page break ensures 
that the information always starts on a new page, regardless of what content is 

Professional Communication
58
added above it. To add a page break, choose Page Break from the Pages section 
of the Insert tab (see Figure 2.26). You can also go to the Layout tab, to the Page 
Setup section. Then click on the dropdown arrow next to Breaks and choose Page 
from the options (see Figure 2.27). 
Figure 2.26  Inserting a page break by using the Insert tab
Figure 2.27  Inserting a page break by using the Layout tab
A page break only ensures that a new page is started. It is insufficient, however, 
to effect a change in the margins, headers and footers or page numbering. Page 
setup changes cannot be made page by page — for that, the document has to be 
divided into sections. Once a document has been divided into sections, instructions 
can be given to format a section differently to the previous or following sections. 
To insert a section break, go to the Page Setup section of the Layout tab. Click 
on the arrow next to Breaks to open the dropdown menu (see Figure 2.28). There 
you will see various types of breaks. The most commonly used options are the 
following:
••
Next Page: This type of section break starts 
a new section at the top of a new page. 
This is the most common type of break in 
business and academic documents, as many 
of the page layout changes required relate 
to entire pages as opposed to only part of 
a page; for example changing the page 
orientation to landscape, or inserting or 
making changes in the headers or footers.
••
Continuous: This type of section break 
allows part of a page to have different 
margins, for example, or more than one 
column.
••
Column: This type of break starts a new 
column. By default, the columns snake on 
in newspaper format. A column break thus 
forces a new column to start.
Figure 2.28  The dropdown menu 
for page breaks and section 
breaks in the Layout tab

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
59
You can also use Ctrl + Enter to insert a page break.
Headers and footers
Headers and footers are protected areas at the top and bottom of a document, set 
aside for certain items that must appear on each page of a document or section. 
Such items include:
••
the date 
••
any fixed text (eg document name or chapter title, section of document, 
author, etc)
••
logos and designs
••
page numbers.
Headers and footers are linked to sections. Therefore, to change information in a 
header or footer, you need to create a new section. By default, headers or footers 
repeat what is in the previous header or footer, unless the link between the sections 
is broken. (See page 61 for information on how to break the links between sections.) 
To create a header or footer, select the Header or the 
Footer button from the Header & Footer section on the Insert 
tab (see Figure 2.29). A dropdown menu appears, offering 
a number of pre-set options. If you do not want a pre-set 
option, select the Edit Header or the Edit Footer option.
To access an existing header or footer, double-
click inside the header or footer area. Once you have 
clicked inside the header or footer, the remainder of the 
document will appear greyed out (as the header or footer 
normally appears). This means you can modify the contents of the header or footer. 
An additional tab will appear on the ribbon, called Header & Footer Tools: Design 
(see Figure 2.30). This offers a range of options. It disappears as soon as you exit 
the header or footer by clicking on the body of the document or by clicking on the 
Close header and Footer button.
Figure 2.30  The Header & Footer Tools: Design tab
Figure 2.29  The Header 
& Footer section on the 
Insert tab

Professional Communication
60
Page numbers
To insert page numbering, click on the Page Number button on the Headers & 
Footer Tools: Design tab or on the Insert tab. This will bring up a shortcut menu 
asking you where to insert the page number (see Figure 2.31). Each option reveals 
a further level of built-in options via the fly-out menu arrows. 
Figure 2.31  Page number formatting options
If you do not want a pre-set option, insert the page number via the Current 
Position option (see Figure 2.31) and align it as required. Page numbers appear best 
in the bottom right-hand corner of the page. 
Select the Format Page Numbers option from the shortcut menu to modify the 
alignment, font, size and style of the page number. If the page number inserted 
does not correspond to the correct page number for the document (for example 
because the title page has no page number and/or the preliminary pages have 
roman numerals), click the radio button for the Start at option in the Page Number 
Format dialog box (see Figure 2.31) and enter the correct page number. 
How to break the link to a previous section
To change page numbering within a document, a new section has to be created, 
because each footer or header is linked to the information in the previous section 
by default unless instructed otherwise. If the page numbering format needs to 
change, for example from Roman numerals to Arabic numerals, then the link to 
the previous section must be broken. 
To break the link, click on the Link to Previous button in the Navigation section 
of the Header & Footer Tools: Design tab. Immediately, the Same as Previous 
indicator disappears from the footer or header border to show the link no longer 
exists. If the link to the previous section is broken, changes to that header or the 
footer will not affect previous sections. 
Headers link to other headers, and footers link to other footers, but not to each 
other. If you break the link in the headers between two sections, the link between 
the corresponding footers is not automatically broken as well. 

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
61
Figure 2.32  Breaking the link to a previous header or footer
If a new section is inserted, the page numbering may restart at 1 without you noticing. Always 
check the page numbering, section by section, when editing or proofreading the document and 
use the Page Number Format dialog box (Figure 2.31) to reset the numbering.
Automated features in Word
Word has several automated features, designed for efficiency. For example, in a 
report, it would be time-consuming and frustrating to have to keep updating the 
table of contents or the list of figures or tables each time content is added or deleted, 
or to keep correcting page numbers or figure or table numbers. The References tab 
(see Figure 2.33) allows you to access several of these automated features.
Figure 2.33  The References tab
Table of contents
You can insert a table of contents by using the Table of Contents button in the Table 
of Contents section of the References tab on the ribbon. Microsoft® Word™ has a 
range of built-in formats, but if you prefer to have the table of contents match 
the formatting of your document, you can organise it yourself via the Table of 
Contents dialog box. To open this dialog box, click on the Table of Contents button 
on the References tab and select Custom Table of Contents from the dropdown 
menu. Click on the Options button, which brings up the Table of Contents Options 
dialog box (see Figure 2.34). You can then select which styles you want pulled 
through to the table of contents, for example Heading 1, Heading 2 and Heading 3.

Professional Communication
62
An automated table of contents updates automatically when you open a document 
or when you press F9 (or Function + F9) after making changes in the document. 
If a template has an automated table of contents set up, for example in a thesis or 
dissertation template, all you need to do is to right-click inside the table (or press 
F9, or Function + F9) at any time and select Update Field. The new headings and/
or page numbers will be picked up and added to the table of contents.
  
Figure 2.34  Working with a table of contents
Microsoft® Word™ uses styles and/or outline levels to build the table of contents. If you do 
not use styles consistently, it can affect the table of contents, as manually entered headings 
may be omitted.
Footnotes and endnotes
The Footnotes section on the References tab 
allows you to insert footnotes or endnotes 
in your document. The advantage of doing 
this is that the numbers automatically 
update if a new footnote or endnote is 
added earlier in the text. The number is 
inserted as a superscript number next to 
the selected entry and the footnote content 
appears at the bottom of the page, separated 
by a line from the normal content. If you 
need to switch from footnotes to endnotes, 
the mini-arrow at the bottom right-hand 
corner of the Footnotes section on the 
References tab opens the Footnote and 
Endnote dialog box (see Figure 2.35), which 
allows you to make the required changes 
and set preferences.
Figure 2.35  Working with footnotes and 
endnotes

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
63
Cross-references
Various fields can be cross-referenced, 
including headings, footnotes, captions, 
bookmarks and so on. To insert a cross-
reference, type in your document the 
word ‘section’, ‘paragraph’ or whatever 
the case may be, as you would normally 
when referring to a particular part of a 
document. Then, rather than typing in 
the relevant number, click on the Cross-
reference command in the Captions 
section of the References tab (or the 
Links section of the Insert tab) to bring 
up the Cross-reference dialog box (see Figure 2.36). 
This dialog box lists all the sections (numbered paragraphs, captions etc) in the 
document. Scroll down to find the number that corresponds to the required part of 
the document, for example 12 or 12.2. Select it and click on the Insert button in 
the dialog box. The number you select will be inserted into the document, next to 
its lead-in term. It will look like the surrounding text but when you select it, you 
will see that it has a grey background, indicating that the inserted number is a 
field rather than an absolute number. This allows it to be updated. From then on, 
if you move or add sections, the corresponding reference will be updated. If it does 
not update automatically, press Ctrl + A to select the whole document (or highlight 
a particular cross-reference), and press F9 (or Function + F9) to force the update.
Captions
Tables, figures, equations and so on are often given a number and a title or caption 
(descriptor), for easy reference. The caption feature adds the relevant number as a 
field, so that if another figure or table is added earlier in the document, the caption 
number will be updated automatically.
To insert a caption, launch 
the Caption dialog box (see 
Figure 2.37) via Insert Caption 
in the Captions section on the 
References tab. The default 
caption setting is Figure, but 
if you want to insert a table 
number and heading, click on 
the dropdown arrow by the 
Label option for alternatives. To 
add a new label (for example 
‘Plate’ or ‘Policy extract’ as is 
Figure 2.36  Inserting cross-references
Figure 2.37  Inserting captions

Professional Communication
64
shown in Figure 2.37), use the New Label button in the dialog box. The caption 
or heading can be added via the dialog box or later in the body of the document.
List of tables and figures
As with the table of contents, it would be a waste of time to insert a list of tables or 
figures manually. If all the tables, figures and so on have been correctly labelled using 
the automated caption feature (as described above), inserting the corresponding table 
is straightforward. Place your cursor where the table is to be and select Insert Table 
of Figures from the Captions section of the References tab. In the Table of Figures 
dialog box (see Figure 2.38), select the correct caption label to insert and click OK. 
You can insert more than one list, for example one for tables and one for figures. 
Figure 2.38  The Table of Figures dialog box
Referencing
Microsoft® Word™ has an in-built referencing tool which works very well for 
ordinary referencing activities in documents such as research reports, whether 
academic or professional. It allows you to add sources relevant to your document 
in a database, to add in-text 
citations in the correct format 
(for a wide range of standard 
referencing styles), and to insert 
an automated bibliography (list of 
references) in the correct format 
at the end of the document.
To use the referencing tool, 
go to the Citations & Bibliography 
Figure 2.39  The Citations & Bibliography section of 
the References tab

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
65
section of the References tab (see Figure 2.39). Use the dropdown selection to 
choose the relevant style, for example Harvard. If the style you want is not there, 
most styles can be easily sourced from the Internet and added to Microsoft® Word™ 
to make them available for this tool.
A number of sites provide information and tutorials on how to add additional reference 
styles to Microsoft® Word™ for Windows or Mac (including how to set up a custom style, 
for more technically experienced users). These sites allow you to download a zip file of the 
bundled reference styles together with instructions on how to extract or install them into 
the correct place to make them available through Microsoft® Word’s™ reference tool. For 
example, go to http://bibword.codeplex.com/wikipage?title=Styles&referringTitle=Home 
(Accessed 28 September 2016).
How to add a source
To add an in-text citation, click on the Insert Citation button in the Citations & 
Bibliography section of the References tab. If it is a new source, select Add New 
Source from the dropdown menu that appears, and it will take you to the Create 
Source dialogue box (see Figure 2.40). When you select the correct source type 
(book, journal article, etc) the dialog box presents the appropriate series of fields 
to be completed for the source type.
Choose the source 
type and complete 
the given fields. 
The minimum 
required fields are 
shown by default. 
Check the Show 
All Bibliography 
Fields button to 
show additional 
fields. 
Use the Edit button 
to enter authors and/
or editors in the 
correct fashion.
Figure 2.40  The Create Source dialog box
How to insert a citation
Once sources have been added, they become available in a list for selection when 
the Insert Citation button is clicked. Place the cursor where the in-text citation 
is required and click on Insert Citation. Select a source from the list, as shown in 
Figure 2.41. The citation field will appear in the text – for example (English, 2017) 
– and the corresponding entry will be made in the bibliography, for example: 
English, J (ed). 2017. Professional communication. 4th ed. Cape Town: Juta.

Professional Communication
66
Figure 2.41  Inserting citations
How to edit or manage sources
To edit a source or to manage your list of sources, click on the Manage Sources 
button in the Citations & Bibliography section of the References tab. This takes 
you to the Source Manager dialog box (see Figure 2.42), which displays the master 
list of all the sources you have added on the left and the current list of sources 
relevant to the document you are working on to the right. Here you can transfer 
sources directly from the Master List to the Current List as well as delete or edit 
existing sources.
Figure 2.42  The Source Manager dialog box

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
67
How to edit an in-text citation
You may want to edit a citation in the text — for example to suppress the author 
name and just show the year or to add page numbers. Insert the citation as normal 
and then click on it. Select the dropdown arrow that appears to the right of the 
citation to bring up the Edit Citation dialog box, as shown in Figure 2.43.
To add a page number 
or range, just add them 
in the Pages field. The 
citation will look like this: 
(English 2017:28)
To show just the date in 
brackets (for the Harvard 
method), tick both the 
Author and Title boxes. 
The citation will look like 
this: (2017)
To have just the year and 
the page number/s appear, 
add the page numbers 
in the field and tick the 
Author and Title boxes. 
The citation will look like 
this: (2017:28)
The grey background 
that appears when 
the citation is 
selected shows that 
it is a field. Note the 
dropdown arrow.
The citation options appear 
when the dropdown arrow 
is selected. Choose Edit 
Citation to modify the 
citation appearance to 
show, for example, just the 
year (2017).
Figure 2.43  Editing a citation
The list of references or bibliography
To add a list of references or a bibliography at the end of the document, simply click 
on the Bibliography button in the Citations & Bibliography section of the References 
tab. The dropdown arrow opens a list with a series of built-in format options. 
However, the most sensible thing to do is to choose the Insert Bibliography option 
at the bottom of the list and format your list to match your document, for example 
using the standard body text style in use in the document. If a hanging indent is 
required, you can create a style for the bibliography or just select the references and 
quickly use the ruler at the top of the screen to create the hanging indent.
There are various versions of the Harvard style. Experiment and choose the one that matches 
the style of Harvard you require, for example (English, 2017, p. 28) or (English, 2017: 28).
See Chapter 12 for information on further online referencing tools for academic 
research.

Professional Communication
68
Tables
While tables are often prepared in Microsoft® Excel™, formatting and working with 
the table can still be done after it is pasted into Microsoft® Word™. If it is a text 
table or a numeric table requiring only simple calculations, it is not necessary to use 
Microsoft® Excel™ first, as the formula function also operates in Microsoft® Word™. 
 Microsoft® Word™ tables are inserted by clicking the Table button in the Tables 
section of the Insert tab and then using either the grid or the Insert Table dialog 
box by choosing the Insert Table option. The Draw Table option (which changes 
the cursor to a ‘pencil’ or an ‘eraser’) can also be used, but it tends to be more 
useful for splitting columns and rows or cells. 
Figure 2.44  Inserting or drawing a table
To insert additional columns or rows, select an entire row or column, right-click 
and select Insert, either from the right-click menu or from the small context-
sensitive floating toolbar that appears. Then choose what you wish to insert from 
the fly-out menu, for example a row above or below, or a column to the right or 
left. Alternatively, use the Table Tools: Layout tab, which appears when you insert 
or work in a table (see Figure 2.45). You can specify whether to insert a row above 
or below other rows and whether to insert a column to the left or to the right of 
other columns. Additionally, by pressing Tab while in the final cell, you can add a 
row to the bottom of the table. 
To delete a table, use the Delete button on Table Tools: Layout tab. If you 
highlight or select the table and use the ordinary delete option, the contents of the 
table disappear, but the table remains.

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
69
Table Tools: Design and Layout tabs
These tabs (see Figure 2.45), which only appear when you are working in a table, 
allow you to determine the various table options and properties — most of which 
are fairly self-explanatory.
Microsoft® Word™ 
contains a range of 
default table styles, 
although you can create 
and save your own 
custom table styles.
The corner arrow opens 
the Borders and Shading 
dialog box.
The Rows & Columns and 
the Merge sections allow 
you to manipulate the 
table to fit your needs.
The Repeat Header Rows 
option allows you to 
select the top one or two 
rows of a table and have 
them automatically repeat 
should the table go over 
a page.
Various mathematical 
formulae and functions 
can be accessed via the 
Formula option.
Figure 2.45  The Table Tools: Design and Layout tabs
How to create a custom table style
The Borders and Shading options, which can also be accessed via a right-click 
shortcut menu, allow you to select line style, width and colour, with various 
shading options available from the third tab (the second tab contains the page 
border options). These options are necessary to create a professional look for 
your tables and, if necessary, to ensure that they match any corporate branding 
required. All tables within any one document should be formatted in a consistent 
style. The easiest way to ensure this is to create a custom table style.
Once you have a blank master template with all your paragraph or text styles 
set up – or any specific sub-templates such as a report template – create the table 
style to go with it. The custom table style does not appear in the Styles pane as 
your other created styles do. It appears as an option in the Table Styles section  
on the Table Tools: Design tab. The table styles are divided into Custom, Plain 
Tables and Grid Tables. Your new table style will appear in the Custom strip  
(see Figure 2.47). 

Professional Communication
70
To set up a table style, click on the Table Styles dropdown menu on the Table 
Tools: Design tab  and select the New Table Style option below all the built-in 
table styles. The Create New Style from Formatting dialog box (see Figure 2.46) 
that appears allows you to specify the various options as you would like them to 
appear in your table.
1. Name your custom 
table style.
3. Check the New 
documents based 
on this template 
option to save 
the custom table 
style in your 
template, or leave 
the default option 
(Only in this 
document) if the 
style is meant only 
for one document.
2. Select each aspect 
of the table in 
turn to apply 
formatting to. Use 
the formatting 
options to choose 
font, bold, italics, 
shading, colour 
and line options 
to create the look 
that you need.
Figure 2.46  Creating a custom table style
Alternatively, you can choose to modify an existing table style with your own 
colours and layout — it works in exactly the same way as modifying a paragraph 
style rather than creating one.

The digital footprint: social media, templates and Microsoft® Word™     Chapter 2
71
How to apply a custom table style
First, select the entire table. Next, click on the Table Tools: Design tab and select 
the Table Styles dropdown menu. Finally, click on the custom table style you need 
(see Figure 2.47). This will apply the style to the table you have selected.
When you move the cursor over each custom table, 
its name will appear, although usually you will 
recognise it as the thumbnail reflects the design 
you set up. 
Figure 2.47  Applying a custom table style
While you can specify many things when setting up a custom table style, it does not offer 
you the option to define the paragraph and line spacing. These are especially important for 
creating professional-looking tables. If you have set up your own paragraph or text styles, 
the text in the tables should be similar (but smaller) to reflect the overall look and feel of 
your styles. 
Create your own paragraph or text style in the Styles pane, specifying, for example, that 
the font size should be one or two points smaller than the body text, that the line spacing 
should be single to 1.1 point, and that the paragraph spacing should be reduced to 3 points 
before and 3 points after. Most importantly, the text should be left aligned, to avoid the odd 
spacing and gaps created by justifying text in too narrow a column. 
To apply the style, first select your table, and then click on your table text style in the Styles 
pane or Styles gallery. Only then go to the Table Styles section on the Table Tools: Design 
tab and select your custom style for the table.
Formulas in tables
Formulas in Microsoft® Word™ are not as sophisticated as in Microsoft® Excel™, 
but they can still be useful for straightforward calculations, as long as there is no 
manual formatting (manually inserted spaces, commas, etc) to prevent Microsoft® 
Word™ from recognising the digits as numbers.
To use the formula feature, enter numbers in the relevant table cells and then 
go to, for example, the ‘Totals’ cell. Click on the Formula button from the Table 
Tools: Layout tab to open the Formula dialog box, as shown in Figure 2.48.

Professional Communication
72
If you are adding a 
series of numbers 
placed in cells above 
the totals cell, click 
OK. However, if you 
want to change 
the function to the 
sum of numbers 
appearing to the left 
of the totals cell, for 
example, replace the 
word ABOVE in the 
brackets with LEFT.
Select a number 
format from the 
dropdown menu, for 
example with the 
space or the comma 
as a space separator.
To perform a different function, 
change the formula by selecting 
a new paste function from the 
dropdown box.
Figure 2.48  The Formula dialog box 
Repeat header rows 
Always use the Repeat Header Rows option from the Data section of the Table 
Tools: Layout tab (see Figure 2.45) in case your table runs over the page — it may 
not look as if it will at first, but should additional content be added above the 
table, it may cause the table to span more than one page. Select one or more rows 
at the top of the table. Click on the Repeat Header Rows button and the selected 
rows will be repeated at the top of each new page.
✔
Checklist for monitoring your online presence carefully and 
developing your skills
New communication platforms are being developed all the time. It is important therefore to 
be aware of which platforms you are active on and to learn to see yourself from the outside 
in — as a potential or even current employer would encounter you online. Use the following 
as a checklist to ensure you cultivate your online presence with care:
•	 Separate your personal and professional social media accounts and email.
•	 Keep your profiles on any online platform up to date.
•	 Be prudent and strategic about what you post and where.
•	 Be aware of new developments and features that will help you become more efficient 
and professional in your documentation and collaboration with others.
It is also important to keep up to date with new versions of software you use regularly such 
as Microsoft® Word™, Excel™ and PowerPoint™. Once you know the elements that you need 
to work with, for example the Styles pane or Outline view, even if the program features 
are moved or appear in a slightly different way, you will easily be able to navigate your way 
through new versions and take advantage of additional features.

3
73
Whatever your profession or job, and whether you are a self-employed entrepreneur 
or an employee, you will need to write letters and emails. This correspondence may 
be informal and addressed to your colleagues, or it may be formal and addressed 
to people you do not know. 
The purpose of an email, digital text or letter is usually to impart or request 
information. You need to choose the right format for your purpose. For example, 
you may write a text message if you need to get a message across in an informal 
way, but an email if your signature is needed. For many of us, an email is usually 
the first and most direct contact we have with others in the work environment, be 
they strangers or known to us. Faxes are still sent (mainly for business contracts), 
as they are legally binding documents. All of these messages create an audit trail 
which may be called up later. 
Your message must reflect the image you wish to convey of yourself or of 
the company that you work for. You therefore need to use an appropriate style to 
reflect this and the relationship you have with the receiver. The less you know the 
receiver, the higher the degree of formality in style that is required. A clear and 
clean layout is best created through the company email format, with its logo and 
official signature.
This chapter covers ways for you to achieve efficient, direct correspondence 
with your employer, staff, client or customer. It looks at various aspects of 
correspondence or mail in all its forms, namely:
••
levels of style and tone 
••
format, structure, planning and presentation
••
types of correspondence — hard copy and electronic 
••
etiquette for digital correspondence.
3.1	 Levels of style and tone 
In correspondence, you need to establish a rapport with the person you are 
addressing in order to achieve your purpose, and so there is a personal element not 
found in other documents. It is your choice of vocabulary that conveys the feelings 
you have concerning the subject or towards the person you are addressing. While 
Correspondence:  
mail to digital text

Professional Communication
74
a workplace email is more personal than a report (for example, first names may 
be used), it must never be emotional. The appropriate tone in emails and letters is 
conveyed by a consultative, conversational style which is natural, courteous and 
tactful. It can be difficult to write a message which conveys extreme feelings of 
delight or anger and is still appropriately courteous and formal in tone, but it is 
important to learn the skills to do this.
Formal and informal tone 
eg
Which of the following phrases comes across as being more informal in tone?
•	 The manager asked the staff for their reasons for arriving late at work.
•	 The manager questioned the staff about unpunctuality at the start of the day.
•	 The boss wants to nail anyone who comes late.
In this example, the verb ‘question’ has unpleasant connotations of officialdom 
and authority, whereas ‘ask’ is a neutral verb. The third sentence is too informal. 
Its use of slang also leads to an accusatory tone.
Unnecessarily formal language and clichés (overused, trite expressions) can come 
across to the reader as arrogant. It is outdated to use vocabulary in a letter that you 
would not use when speaking.  Use simple words and avoid unnecessary phrases. For 
example, one word can replace each of the phrases in the first column below:
eg
Avoid
Affix your signature
At a later date
At this point in time
Prefer
Sign
Later
Currently
A great deal of jargon and many stock phrases, which give a pompous tone to a 
message, still appear in letter writing. However, occasional use of stock phrases 
(for example ‘with our sincere apologies’) can be appropriate and useful when 
you cannot think how to word what you wish to say. The danger is the overuse 
of clichés. Consider more natural, spoken phrases instead of those you learnt as 
part of letter writing convention. Here are more natural alternatives to examples 
of stock phrases or letter-writing clichés:

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
75
eg
Avoid
We wish to acknowledge receipt of …
Please be advised that the parcel …
Your letter of 26 February refers.
Due to the fact that we require …
With reference to your request …
The above matter refers ….
Prefer
We have received …
The parcel …
As stated in your letter (26/02) …
We require …
Your request …
This matter … 
Consider the following two versions of the same letter to a client. The suggested 
version is still formal, but it has a more natural style than the original version.
eg
Original:
We refer to a letter received on 1 June 
informing us of your change of address. 
We are unable to make any amendments 
to your account, as the instruction was 
not signed. Kindly sign the enclosed 
document and return it to our offices.  
A reply-paid envelope is enclosed for  
your convenience.
Should you have any queries, please 
contact our Client Services Department on 
our toll-free number.
Suggestion:
We have received your letter dated 1 June 
asking us to change your address. We were 
unable to make the changes, as the request 
was not signed. Please sign the enclosed  
letter and return it to us in the reply-paid 
envelope provided.
You are welcome to contact our Client 
Services Department on our toll-free number 
if you have any queries.
The difference in degree of formality sets a different tone for each letter. A very 
formal style comes across as cold, and might create the impression that the writer is 
arrogant. A writer can unintentionally come across as uncaring through using long 
blocks of text, long paragraphs, long sentences and long words, as shown in the 
following passage from a letter refusing a request for a telephone line.

Professional Communication
76
eg
Original:
I regret, that the Survey Officer who 
is responsible for the preliminary 
investigation as to the technical possibility 
of installing a telephone at the address 
quoted by any applicant has reported that 
owing to a shortage of a spare set of wires 
to the underground cable (a pair of wires 
leading from a point near your house right 
back to the local exchange and thus a 
pair of wires essential for the provision of 
telephone services for you) it is a technical 
impossibility to install a telephone for you. 
(90 words; one sentence)
Suggestion:
Application for a telephone line to  
35 Wadloes Road
I regret to inform you that a telephone cannot 
be installed at your home. The security officer 
responsible for investigating the possibility of 
new telephone wires undertook a preliminary 
investigation. There is a shortage of 
underground cables between your house and 
the post office. We will work at improving  
this situation as soon as possible.  
(55 words; four sentences)
Note the following flaws in the original letter:
••
There is no subject line.
••
The opening sentence does not give the main points of the message.
••
The body of the message is poorly organised and is contained in  
one sentence. 
••
The message does not close with an expression of goodwill.
A courteous and tactful tone
Courtesy means being polite and respectful. A style that is too informal can come 
across as overfamiliar or disrespectful towards your reader. Writers of professional 
emails often have to be tactful. The danger of tactlessness is greatest in situations 
where the writer or the reader may be especially sensitive, for example in a:
••
matter where there is disagreement
••
matter requiring tact
••
claim for damages
••
refusal of a request.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
77
A tactless writer uses words or phrases expressing suspicion, obligation and 
compulsion, or refers to the reader’s inadequacies. To avoid being tactless, you 
should try to use words and phrases with neutral meanings. The following are 
neutral alternatives to replace phrases which have an accusatory tone:
eg
Avoid
You claim that ...
Your letter about the alleged loss of goods ...
You must have misunderstood our list of 
warnings.
Prefer
The suggestion is that ...
Your letter about the misplacement of goods ...
Our list of warnings stated that ...
Although using the active voice is preferable, the passive voice may be used, as in 
the next example, to avoid tactlessness.
eg
Avoid
You failed to sign the tear-off slip.
Prefer
The tear-off slip had not been signed.
3.2	 Readability and structure
Readability
Any correspondence containing grammatical errors and spelling mistakes will 
make a bad impression on the reader and can be understood to indicate a lack of 
respect. Use the spelling and grammar checking facilities offered by your digital 
software to help check the accuracy of your writing. However, be aware that 
predictive text may suggest the wrong word. 
Structure 
The subject line is a critical item in both emails and letters. In the case of an email, 
it is the first item the recipients will read, and in a letter it defines the content and 
focuses the reader’s attention on that content. In emails it also plays a role when 
you need to search for correspondence on certain topics.  It is therefore important 
to change the email subject line to reflect the topic if the original subject has been 
abandoned and the email chain is now dealing with a new topic.

Professional Communication
78
You need to structure the body of your message so that it is highly readable and 
accessible to the receiver. If a message is to be clear and readable, whether via 
email or hard copy, it needs to contain certain features, namely:
••
a greeting that includes the reader’s name, if known (eg Dear Ms Smith, not 
Dear Madam)
••
an opening paragraph that says what the correspondence covers — even if 
it is in the form of a numbered or bulleted list. For an email that will be 
read on a small screen (such as a tablet or mobile phone) this is particularly 
important, as readers must know they need to continue scrolling down
••
subheadings that emphasise the content of the paragraph
••
short sentences with simple vocabulary 
••
a final paragraph that creates goodwill and indicates the action or reaction 
you want to the correspondence
••
a closing salutation pitched at the correct level of formality, such as ‘Yours 
sincerely’, ‘With kind regards’, ‘Best wishes’ or ‘Regards’. Keep informal 
language such as ‘Ciao’, ‘Love’ and ‘xxx’ for personal messages.
Electronic signatures may also be specified for staff within an organisation 
and may include a logo and typeface similar to the company letterhead. This 
standardises the company’s image on all outgoing mail, conventional or 
electronic. Electronic signatures can be dropped into your emails manually or 
automatically. They usually include your full name, your title or position, the name 
of the company and your contact details, such as physical address, fax number 
and telephone number. Depending on your job, you may choose to give other 
information, such as your qualifications. Signatures may also reflect the activities 
of the organisation. 
Make sure your courtesy title is included in your signature if this is how you want people 
to address you. In addition, it is not always possible to know if a name belongs to a man 
or woman, and so the inclusion of the courtesy title can help your reader to know how to 
address you in return.
Style and purpose of message formats
Different formats are required for different types of messages (personal or 
less personal) and for the different contexts (within a company or beyond the 
company) in the workplace. Each of these formats has unique attributes and brings 
unique challenges.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
79
There are challenges in managing digital messages such as email which do not apply 
to hard copy letters, the most serious one being the tone created through the level 
of language used. As writers, we move frequently between platforms, for instance 
from WhatsApp to email, and from private to business messages. As a result, we risk 
writing work messages using too familiar a tone. Table 3.1 summarises the different 
correspondence formats and their styles for a professional context.
Table 3.1  Different correspondence formats and their styles 
Format
Readership and purpose
Style (vocabulary 
and grammar)
Risks
Digital 
messages:
•	 Email
•	 SMS
•	 WhatsApp
•	 Chat
•	 Facebook 
messages
•	 LinkedIn 
messages
Readership:
•	 External and internal 
to the company
•	 One-to-one or one-
to-many. All these 
systems can broadcast 
to many but have 
controls which can 
be set.
Purposes:
•	 To establish rapport 
between sender and 
receiver
•	 To have immediacy in 
sending the message 
and receiving a 
response
•	 To ensure that the 
receivers (staff or 
clients) are receiving 
identical information
•	 Formal or 
informal, 
depending on 
the nature of 
the message and 
the relationship 
between the 
sender and the 
receiver
•	 Allows for a 
conversational 
style, where 
appropriate, 
thanks to its 
immediacy and 
privacy (gained 
through the use 
of passwords)
•	 First person
Tone: 
Often these 
approaches allow 
the writer to be too 
informal for work 
purposes, because of 
their common use 
for sending private 
messages and the 
use of abbreviations 
and emoticons.
Privacy: 
You cannot control 
who sees your 
messages, as they 
may be forwarded 
without your 
knowledge.
Timing: 
Messages reach 
the recipient 
immediately and 
must therefore be 
sent at appropriate 
times.
Letter
Readership: 
External to the company 
Purposes: 
•	 To establish rapport 
between the sender 
and receiver
•	 To send and/or 
request information
•	 To claim or to offer an 
adjustment to a claim
Formal or informal, 
depending on 
the nature of 
the message and 
the relationship 
between the sender 
and receiver
Tone:
If unnecessary 
jargon is used, the 
tone will be too 
formal. Conversely, 
too informal a tone 
is a risk, as in the 
case of email as 
well.

Professional Communication
80
Format
Readership and purpose
Style (vocabulary 
and grammar)
Risks
Fax
(facsimile)
Readership: 
External to the company 
Purposes: 
•	 To provide material 
that is legally binding
•	 To send information 
immediately
Formal, as faxes 
are used mainly 
for legally binding 
reasons
Readability:
Poor scanning by 
a fax machine or 
printer will mean 
poor reproduction. 
Faxes must be 
typed. If a fax is 
hand-written, bold 
text and black ink 
must be used.
Privacy:
A fax often carries 
confidential 
material. As many 
printers are in 
shared offices, 
there is a risk of the 
fax being read by 
others.
Templates
Many companies and organisations have templates for regularly used company 
formats. Within the template, however, there may be variation in terms of items 
such as text size and heading style. Check if the company you are working for 
has requirements of this nature. Alternatively, you may download a template or 
create your own by using the document formatting options of your software. 
(Microsoft® Word™ provides a wide range of letter templates, which can be useful 
as a basis for your letter, adapting where appropriate. See Chapter 2 for more on 
templates and using Microsoft® Word™.)
The following example shows the block format used in professional letters 
where a letterhead is pre-printed. Such a letter is usually mailed as hard copy, 
but may also be scanned and sent as an attachment to an email.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
81
eg
SOUTH AFRICAN MEDICAL MANUFACTURERS  
(PTY) LTD
36 Vanguard Drive 	EPPING
Vanguardrylaan 36
PO Box 8 
Posbus 8
Ph: +27 21 531 2430
Faks: +27 21 530 0762
Ref/Verw: 2x703
30 October 20––
Mr T Jones
Old Oak Pharmacy
Bellville 7530
Dear Mr Jones
Receipt of Goods: Order Number J/1165
Thank you …………………………………………….........................……………………
....……………………………………………………………........................…………………
We ……………….……………………………………………........................……………..
Yours sincerely
M BROWN
M BROWN
SALES MANAGER
MB/tg
Encl
Letterhead
Reference
Receiver’s address 
Salutation (no full 
stops or commas in 
salutation or close) 
Subject line
Body
Complimentary close
Typed name 
Initials of sender 
and typist (when 
applicable)
Enclosures
Position in company 
3.3	 Types of emails and letters 
The types of emails or letters you might have to write can be classified according 
to their purpose. For example, there are messages intended to:
••
request or offer information
••
introduce and accompany documents, such as curricula vitae, proposals and 
reports
••
grant or refuse requests
••
convey unwelcome information.

Professional Communication
82
The following sections give examples and explanations of some common types of 
emails and letters.
Covering letter or email accompanying a document
If you are sending a report or proposal to a certain person, it should be 
accompanied by an introductory letter. This letter (or email) is also known as a 
letter of transmittal. (See Chapter 8 for more information on letters of transmittal.)
As with other letters, the subject line briefly introduces the subject and the 
first paragraph outlines the purpose of the document. The body paragraphs 
each usually contain one or two key points dealing with the preparation or 
content of the document: problems, resources, additional work, conclusions and 
recommendations. The final paragraph is a courtesy which encourages the reader 
to contact you about any queries.
Here is an example of a letter of transmittal which would accompany a report:
eg

Holsclaw and Moss Ltd

9669 Solomon Avenue

Pretoria 0002
16 June 20––
Ms Brooke DiNatale 
Division Director 
Holsclaw and Moss Ltd 
Manufacturing Division
415 Industrial Way
Umbogintwini 4126
KwaZulu-Natal
Dear Brooke
Report on cracking of MV800
Accompanying this letter is the analytical report on the cracking problem of the MV800 that 
you asked me to investigate. The report examines the parts involved in the assembly and 
installation of the front bezel.
Results of the study
After examining the results of the studies on the problem and talking to the manufacturer of 
the panel trim, I have concluded that there are two causes for the cracking problem. The first 
cause is the shrinkage of the panel trim which occurs at the vendor plant. The second cause 
is that the equipment mounting rails in the CPU cabinet are set too low.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
83
The report includes the illustrations and technical studies supporting the conclusions.
If you have any questions regarding this report, please feel free to discuss them with me at 
any time. I can be reached on 083 236 3345.
Yours sincerely 
KA Barton
KA Barton 
Process Engineering
KB:mm
Enclosure
The following is an example of a covering letter to accompany a proposal, sent 
by email:
eg
From: Jennifer Friedman jf@reimburse.co.za
To: jjs@jfs.co.za
Date sent: 1 November 20––
Subject: Proposal for JFS Benefits Programme
Priority: Urgent
Dear Mr Simpkins
PROPOSAL FOR JFS MANUFACTURING COMPANY
I appreciated our telephone conversation yesterday about the problems you are having with 
the benefits programme at JFS. Reimbursement Services proposes to design an employee 
benefits programme which fits the needs of JFS Manufacturing Company and costs less than 
the plan currently in use. The attached brief statement shows how Reimbursement Services 
can improve the package to benefit both you and your employees.
I have outlined below the specific services we offer and indicated our experience. I also 
provide a schedule of activities we would conduct for you.
Statement of problem
In today’s market, healthcare costs are continually on the rise. As a result, employee benefit 
programmes are becoming more important to an organisation’s efforts to retain the best 
employees.
Objective
By first understanding your needs in terms of a healthcare programme, we can develop one 
that will be most beneficial for JFS Manufacturing.

Professional Communication
84
Procedure
We will:
•	 meet with either you or your benefits coordinator to ...
•	 collect information about JFS Manufacturing, including ...
•	 visit your firm monthly ...
Record of service
Reimbursement Services has successfully designed effective benefits programmes for over 
100 South African firms. A list of names of clients will be provided on request.
Cost to JFS
Our suggestions for a more effective programme are free. You pay the normal cost of the 
plan to the insurance company, and we receive the usual agent’s commission from the 
carrier.
Schedule
Week 1: Initial interview, collection of data and survey of insurance firms for information
Week 2: Analysis of results
Week 3: Presentation to JFS
Future action
Please email or telephone me if you have questions about the proposal. I look forward to 
working with you.
Yours sincerely 
Jennifer Friedman 
Benefits Counsellor
REIMBURSEMENT SERVICES 
PO Box 74
Pietermaritzburg 3200
Tel: 033 167 1226
Cell: 083 554 4011
Attachment: Proposal

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
85
Letters of enquiry (request or complaint) and adjustment
One of the types of letters most frequently used is the kind asking for information 
– that is, a letter of enquiry – or requesting action, for example funding for study 
or a project. 
A properly composed enquiry will make the recipient want to reply to you, and 
will make the task of answering your queries easier. A poorly written request may 
go unanswered, prompt an answer of little value or lead to a chain of letters going 
back and forth asking for clarification and additional information. 
When you write to request something, whether it is to order an item or service, 
to invite someone to attend an event, to ask advice or to request information, 
consider the request from the reader’s point of view. For example:
••
How will your reader respond to your request?
••
Will the reader feel positive or negative about your request?
••
Will your reader be able to grant your request easily?
Anticipate questions that your reader may need to ask, and cover that information 
in your letter. The following sections are a guide as to what should go into a letter 
of enquiry or request.
First paragraph
Begin your opening paragraph with a clear statement of the purpose of the letter. 
Define the information wanted or the problem involved: what is wanted, who 
wants it and why it is wanted. Do not begin with an apology for writing the letter. 
This suggests to the reader a reason for refusing the request.
Body paragraphs
The opening paragraph should lead into a detailed explanation of the reason for 
the request. Your wording should be specific, and questions should be arranged so 
that they are easy to answer. A good technique is to use specific questions in the 
form of a list.
Final paragraph
Your final paragraph should contain an expression of appreciation, with a tactful 
suggestion for action.

Professional Communication
86
The following letter of request is clear and will probably elicit an informative response:
eg

12 Garden Court

Newcastle 2940

20 November 20––
Mr H Wolfe
General Manager
Johnson Foods Corporation
PO Box 814
Newcastle 2940
Dear Mr Wolfe
Queries regarding investments in Johnson School Trust 
I recently purchased shares of the common stock of your company for my retirement annuity 
investment portfolio. My purchase was based on the high evaluation of your shares in the 
journal Value Listings Investment Survey.
Please send me a copy of your 20–– Annual Report and your Third Quarter Report for 20––.
I would like to know what the duration of the Johnson School Trust is. In addition, could you 
tell me the number of shares outstanding in Class A and Class B, and how many of each the 
Trust owns?
I look forward to a successful investment venture through your business. 
Yours sincerely
D Rittenhouse
David Rittenhouse
Replies to requests
In replying to letters of enquiry, you may use the request to structure your 
response. If the request was a complaint, the reply is called a letter of adjustment. 
The following sections are guidelines for you to follow.
First paragraph
Begin by thanking the enquirer for the letter and restating the request. By restating 
the request, you are providing the enquirer with an opportunity to check that 
the message he or she sent was understood in the way it was intended. This is 
particularly important if the request was unclear or ambiguous.
Body paragraphs
Provide the complete and exact information requested, including whatever explanatory 
data may be helpful. Refer specifically to any sections within attachments that are pertinent.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
87
If you cannot provide any part of the information wanted or do what is requested, 
this should be stated next. It should be accompanied by an expression of regret 
and an explanation of the reasons why the complete information cannot be given. 
Include any additional information that may be of value.
Final paragraph
End your reply by inviting the enquirer to request any additional help or 
information needed.
Here is an example of a reply to the previous example; that is, to the letter of 
request from David Rittenhouse.
eg
JOHNSON FOODS 

Johnson Foods Corporation 

PO Box 814

Newcastle 2940
30 November 20––
Mr David Rittenhouse
12 Garden Court
Newcastle 2940
Dear Mr Rittenhouse
Queries regarding investments in Johnson School Trust 
Thank you for your recent letter and for your interest in  
Johnson Foods Corporation. We always appreciate receiving  
comments and inquiries from our stockholders. Mr Wolfe has asked me to reply. 
Enclosed are the 20–– Annual Report and the Third Quarter interim report as you requested. 
In response to your question regarding the duration of the Johnson  
School Trust, it is perpetual. There are currently 74 907 932 shares  
of Common Stock and 15 278 404 shares of the Class B Common  
Stock outstanding. Of these, the Johnson School Trust holds  
22 928 493 shares of the Common Stock and 15 153 003 shares of the  
Class B Common Stock. 
Thank you again for your interest in Johnson Foods. We hope to offer you the best service we 
can, so please continue to contact us with any query you may have. 
Yours sincerely 
James A Edris 
JAMES A EDRIS 
Director
Investor Relations
An informative 
subject line gives an  
overview of the letter.
Short paragraphs
The facts are clear 
and in a logical order.
The final paragraph 
generates goodwill.

Professional Communication
88
Refusals of requests
Sometimes you have to refuse requests, and it requires a great deal of skill and tact 
to say ‘no’ without losing the goodwill of the enquirer. The response letter must 
contain a neutral subject line and the first paragraph should be neutral and act as 
a buffer, so that the reader is not unpleasantly surprised on opening the email or 
letter. You should also try to end on a neutral or, at best, a positive note.
An effective letter of refusal could consist of: 
••
an opening statement that makes the enquirer feel their request was welcome
••
a review of the situation, with explanations of the circumstances or reasons
••
the refusal of the request
••
a suggestion of an alternative possible source where the enquirer may obtain 
the needed information or service
••
a friendly close.
Table 3.2 shows some examples of the tone and style required and how the 
different elements of a refusal letter can be put together.
eg
Table 3.2  Approaches to refusals
Example 1
Example 2 
Neutral subject line
Neutral subject line
Buffer paragraph: Thank you for your 
enquiry about … . We are pleased that 
you wish to transfer your account to our 
company.
Buffer paragraph: Thank you for your 
letter and your CV. We appreciate your 
interest in joining our company.
Reason: In order to keep our premiums as 
low as possible, we are able to accept only 
a small number of new accounts.
Regret: Unfortunately, we do not have 
a position open that would match your 
qualifications.
Regret: Even though we would like to 
accept your account, we are not able to 
do so … .
Reason: We have found that our most 
successful managers have had experience 
in other countries.
Thanks: We do appreciate your 
considering our company.
Thanks: We wish you every success in 
your efforts to find a post.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
89
Here is an example of a standard refusal of a request:
eg
SOUTHERN INFRARED SPECTROGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
15 IONA AVENUE
CARLETONVILLE 2499
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
12 November 20–– 
Mr AZ Roberts 
Technical Specialities 
Louis Trichardt 0920
Dear Mr Roberts
Request for infrared spectra
Thank you for your letter enquiring about our spectra that were 
described in the March 20–– issue of Spectrographic Analysis. 
The infrared spectra that you asked for are listed on our card system. Most of these cards are 
more than twelve years old, and are very outdated. We have a limited number of sets left. 
The Society has therefore decided to donate them to educational institutions on the basis of 
financial needs.
We regret that we cannot send you a set at the moment. However, if educational institutions 
do not want all the sets, we will gladly consider sending you one at a later date.
We have put your letter on file, and will contact you in six months’ time. 
Yours sincerely
AR SANDERS
AR SANDERS 
MANAGER
The writer refers to 
facts given by the 
sender, to clarify the 
subject.
Short sentences, 
friendly tone
Mail written to claim or complain
Claims and complaints are written about poor service and/or unsatisfactory 
products. Understandably, emails or letters with this purpose are often written 
in anger. Remember that your end purpose is not to admonish someone, but to 
straighten out the problem and obtain the satisfactory service or product that is 
due and that you need. State your case factually and objectively. Accusations 
and sarcasm will offend the reader and/or delay your obtaining an appropriate 
adjustment. It is in your interests to write courteously.
You can include the following elements in a claim letter:
••
Give a clear explanation of the situation or of what has gone wrong. Full 
details should be provided for the identification of the defective product or 

Professional Communication
90
service, together with any information that may help the recipient check the 
matter.
••
State the loss or inconvenience resulting from the mistake or defect.
••
Motivate the recipient to take the desired action by appealing to his or her 
sense of fair play, honesty or pride.
••
Indicate what you consider a fair adjustment to be.
The following is an example of a letter of complaint where the writer has let her 
anger cloud the message. The letter will make the recipient feel defensive and will 
therefore be less likely to achieve the outcome desired. Note the sarcastic tone 
created by quoting selected single words from the original (‘allege’), using pompous 
expressions (‘therefor’), including slang (‘dogsbodies’) and using punctuation for 
emphasis (exclamation marks and question marks). Later in the letter, the writer’s 
tone is insulting (‘Your … is completely absurd’). Finally, there is no attempt to 
guide the recipient to the next stage of a successful close to this business.
eg
Messrs C McKenzie, C&D Quantity Surveyors
Messrs C McKenzie
C&D Quantity Surveyors
PO Box 10
Epping Industria 7475
27.03.20–– 
Johnson Brothers Design
Overly Stadium
Claremont 7700
Dear Sirs
Re: Tinston Towers
We are in receipt of your letter of the 26th March. Your first paragraph states that we 
‘allege’ certain items are ‘unproved’. We do not ‘allege’ this. They are unproven in terms of 
the contract and it is your duty, not ours, to get written authority therefor.
We are, in terms of our appointment and in terms of the contract, only the quantity 
surveyors and not the architects, builder’s clerks or general dogsbodies!
We prepared your claims and have further also had to beg many times for receipt accounts, 
invoices and labour sheets. You now intimate that these are permanently mislaid (??) on the 
site, to wit: ‘proven by a physical check on the site’.
Your second paragraph is also completely absurd, as:
•	 you state that you ‘are unable to accept any account drawn up’
•	 you state that the items were ‘accepted by (you) in toto without close (??) examination’
•	 you would like ‘it back so as to re-examine it’. 

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
91
Which of these do you actually intend?
You further state that you have requested that ‘this contract be referred to arbitration’. 
This is something new to our experience and implies that no part of the contract is now in 
standing. If so, what is the standing of the quantity surveyors (ourselves) now?
Finally, the final account is available here for ‘scrutiny’, ‘re-examination’, etc as you may 
wish. Therefore, it is not necessary to write in this connection.
We also wish to point out that substantial errors were not found in the ‘rates’ but in the 
extensions which were not finally checked and of which we informed you before handing 
you the final account.
Yours faithfully
J Dunbar
Janine Dunbar for C McKenzie
Next follows a letter of complaint where the writer has followed the pointers for an 
effective request for the redress of an unhappy situation. The writer gives details 
about the product and service and explains what redress is required. The tone is 
courteous throughout, appeals to the recipient’s sense of fair play and refers to a 
continuing positive business relationship.
eg
Material Specialities (Pty) Ltd

36 St George’s Street

Cape Town 8000

www.matspec.co.za

20 September 20––
Mr C Luthuli
Manager
Jacque’s Leather Accessories
38 Twining Building 
Jeppe Street 
Johannesburg 2001
Dear Mr Luthuli
Incorrect quality of leather supplied: Order no 125
On 23 August we ordered 10 m of your FINE QUALITY leather at R158 per metre. However, 
when the order arrived, we found that you had sent us 10 m of your EXTRA FINE QUALITY 
leather at R204 per metre. We are writing to ask if you would credit our account for half the 
cost of the EXTRA FINE QUALITY leather.

Professional Communication
92
Our reasons are as follows:
•	 We received the leather from you one month after the order, instead of the usual  
10 days. We were wondering if there had been an error in the order.
•	 When the leather arrived, it was of the wrong quality.
•	 You charged us an amount not commensurate with our order.
We had a deadline to meet for one of our clients and so had no alternative but to use this 
leather for the chairs on order. Our quotations for this job were based on the cost of the 
FINE QUALITY leather at R158 per metre. We had no way of making up the R46 per metre 
difference and therefore lost money on the job.
We have had a long and favourable business association. We therefore believe that you 
will view the situation as we do, and will agree to credit our account with the amount in 
question: R460.
Yours sincerely
A Hassam
A Hassam
Company Accountant
Mail offering or refusing adjustment
Adjustment emails or letters are replies to claims or complaints. Whether the 
adjustment is to be granted in full, partially or not at all, the sender wants to keep 
the complainant as a customer. Creating the appropriate tone is thus essential.
Granting an adjustment
If the adjustment is granted, the letter could include the following elements:
••
Thank the reader for calling attention to the difficulty or problem.
••
Immediately tell the reader that steps have been taken or will be taken to 
remedy the problem, and that the loss or damage will be made good.
••
If necessary, review or explain the facts about the problem.
••
In some situations, there are certain steps the recipient needs to take to 
expedite the adjustment. Explain these and request that the recipient take the 
necessary steps.
••
Grant the adjustment ungrudgingly. Voice your desire to maintain good 
relations with the customer and express appreciation for their business.

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
93
Here is an example of an adjustment granted:
eg
Jacque’s Leather Accessories
	
Jacque’s Leather Accessories
	
38 Twining Building 
	
Jeppe Street 
	
Johannesburg 2001
	
www.jacquesleather.com
	
27 September 20––
Mr A Hassam
Company Accountant
Material Specialities (Pty) Ltd
36 St George’s Street
Cape Town 8000
Dear Mr Hassam
Order no 125: Adjustment of account for leather supplied
We are sorry about the inconvenience you describe in your letter of 20 September and are 
concerned about your loss of money on the job. We are, therefore, pleased to credit your 
account with R460.
We cannot understand the unusual delay in the delivery of the leather and are making 
internal enquiries. We fully appreciate the deadline that you had to meet and regret that you 
had to use the more expensive leather.
Jacque’s Leather Accessories looks forward to receiving further orders from you and we 
assure you that they will be executed efficiently. Please contact us immediately with any 
queries regarding orders. 
Yours sincerely, 
C Luthuli
Charlton Luthuli
Manager
Jacque’s Leather Accessories
Refusing an adjustment
When you must refuse an adjustment, you still want to keep the business 
relationship positive. Start on a positive note. The following elements could be 
included:
••
Thank the reader for calling attention to the problem or difficulty.
••
Review the facts surrounding the claim from the point of view of your 
decision.

Professional Communication
94
••
Partially grant or refuse the adjustment.
••
Explain the reason for your decision.
••
Close positively to rebuild the business relationship.
When replying to a request for an adjustment, avoid words or expressions that 
suggest that the person requesting the adjustment is behaving in any of these ways:
eg
Careless:
You failed to include the essential details. 
You overlooked the tear-off slip.
Lying:
You claim we did not …
You say we enclosed the account …
Ignorant:
We cannot see how you missed the instruction.
We are at a loss to know why you omitted payment.
3.4	 Etiquette for digital correspondence
Mobile technology has many advantages, and both professional and personal 
messaging can have many positive outcomes. Sending messages across digital 
platforms (eg SMS or WhatsApp) is convenient, but it poses a risk. It is a challenge 
to remember to use the right style for the message. The informal tone you use 
in personal emails, SMSs and on your Facebook page is not appropriate for a 
workplace email. It is easy to make the mistake of writing an inappropriately 
informal work-related SMS if you normally text for social reasons. 
It is also easy to become too informal, even overfamiliar, in an email. The 
trend to use first names, a colloquial style and a casual closing salutation can 
mean that the appropriate register for the business relationship is not created. 
No matter what kind of relationship you have with the recipient and/or subject 
matter, an email is still a written document that can be stored and read by other 
readers. Spelling errors, weak grammar, slang and careless writing will make a 
poor impression. Furthermore, your message may be exposed to others without 
your knowledge, as the recipient can forward the message or reply with others in 
the blind carbon copy (Bcc) field. For these reasons, it is best to separate your work 
email from your private email address, so that you do not confuse your approach 
to correspondence. Another reason to do this is that the company that holds the 
email server will always have access to all your email. 
Many people today receive and read correspondence on small screens. Emails 
and IMs are increasingly read in situations where the reader is short of time or is 
partially distracted by the environment (such as a site, meeting place, home, etc). 
This must be considered as a factor in making your digital message readable. If the 

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
95
message cannot be read in the space of one or two screens, the message requires 
an overview, subheadings and, if pertinent, numbering. 
The style most often used for digital communication is consultative, with 
the frequent use of first names instead of surnames, and a conversational tone. 
The trend in email is not to write in capital letters, since these are regarded as 
shouting at your readers. Use only lower case letters for passages of text. Write 
short sentences in short paragraphs separated by line spaces. If you have to impart 
information on a number of different topics, either use subheadings or, preferably, 
write separate emails with appropriate subject lines.
Here is an example of an informal email.
eg
From: Evan Morris <elegant@mweb.co.za> 
To: Nigel van der Pith <supervan@iafrica.com> 
Date: 12 December 20– – 10:19 
Subject: Items to discuss on Wednesday
Nigel
I agree with Sid’s ideas about steps to approach Juddson’s, and especially the 
matter of the labour report. 
Looking at the distribution of labour, I feel we need a consultant to advise 
us to make sure that we follow the best policy. You had some good ideas on 
this — could you put them forward for the agenda? The more comprehensive, 
the better. The items I have put together quickly for the meeting are: 
1.	
Labour report to Juddson’s
2.	
Briefing/summary from labour law consultant
3.	
Times of shifts of works section
4.	
Budget for the expanded canteen
5.	
Leave requests
Add yours and send the list back to me. June mentioned meeting a bit 
earlier. I am happy. Please let me know what you decide.
Thanks
Evan
(Nigel van der Pith) supervan@iafrica.com
Items to discuss on Wednesday 
The format of 
address and 
addresses is set by 
the software.
Lack of formal 
salutation ‘Dear’ 
makes the style 
abrupt. This is 
acceptable in regular  
correspondence, but 
not for less regular 
correspondence.
The speed of  
email means it 
can serve as a 
conversation. In 
this case the email 
implies that it is 
part of a number 
of emails passing 
between the writers.
Informal close 
acceptable for regular 
correspondents, but 
not for less familiar 
ones.

Professional Communication
96
Here is an example of an email that is so sloppily written as to be unclear:
eg
FROM: jjz@gurumail.com 
TO: hr.help@adviseu2.com 
DATE: 2 September 20– – 
SUBJECT: Hi
HI
IF A (PTY)LTD COMPANY DOES NOT PAY A EMPLOYEE FOR MAY 
SALARY , BUT PAYS JUNE SALARY ON JUNE 31( AS THE PAYMENT 
VALUE IS LESS THAN THE MAY REMUNERATION DUE )AND THEN 
DOES NOT PAY JULY, WHAT’S MORE. A LETTER HAS BEEN SENT TO 
ALL CLIENTS STATEING EFFECTIVE AUGUST 12, THE OWNER  HAS 
HANDED OVER THE DAY TO DAY FUNCTIONS OF THE COMPANY TO 
A CC COMPANY AND THAT ANY MONIES DUE TO  THE (PTY) LTD 
BE PAID TO THE CC COMPANY . NO LETTER OF EMPLOYMNENT 
HAS BEEN  ISSUED WITH EITHER OF THE COMPANY’S. WHAT 
RIGHTS DOES THE EMPLOYEE HAVE TO TRY AND EXTRACT THEIR 
PAYMENT OF SALARY AND ARE THEY COMPULSED TO GO TO 
WORK EVERYDAY EVEN THOUGH THEY DO NOT KNOW WHAT 
SALARY THEY ARE GOING TO BE RECEIVEING WITH THIS NEW cc 
COMPANY  OR EVEN WHETHER AUGUST PAYMENT WILL BE MAID. 
MEANWHILE THE COMPANY IS EXPECTTING THE EMPLOYEES TO 
CONTINUE SUPPLING THEIR VALUABLE KNOWLEDGE TO CONTINUE 
BUSINESS AS NORMAL. APPREACITE YOU’RE VALUABLE RESPONSE
hr.help@adviseu2.com
Hi
Impersonal tone
All upper case
Long  sentences
Spelling errors
Punctuation errors

Correspondence: mail to digital text      Chapter 3
97
3.5	 How to manage email
Email etiquette 
The following are some etiquette guidelines for working with email:
••
When you send an email, the recipient receives your name and email address 
automatically. However, you need to include all other useful information.
••
The first impression the reader has of your email is the subject line. The 
subject line should summarise the content of the email. It is helpful to 
maintain a thread on a single topic; avoid creating one thread containing 
emails on different topics. This means that if the content of the message 
changes, you need to create a new subject line for the email. 
••
When sending an email to more than one recipient, consider whether the 
secondary recipients should be in the Cc address line or the Bcc address line. 
Only include those who need to receive the mail. Needless copying in wastes 
recipients’ time, as they have to clear their inboxes of emails that are not 
relevant to them. The Bcc function prevents recipients’ addresses from being 
seen by the other recipients. Thus, it is a good option for a mass message 
where you do not want to publicise the addresses of the recipients, for example 
an invitation to an event. However, it can be used inappropriately to avoid 
transparency in communication. Also keep in mind that what you write in 
an email may not remain confidential if the recipient decides to forward your 
email or replies to you and includes others in the reply. Be mindful of others’ 
and your own confidentiality in your use of email.
••
Do not reply to email unless you need to. For example, do not reply ‘Great’ 
or ‘Agree’ if you were not asked for an opinion — you will simply be 
cluttering other people’s inboxes.
••
As most readers receive mail immediately on their mobile devices, it is 
courteous to send mail at appropriate times, eg in working hours. There is 
software available to help you manage the sending of emails, which is useful 
if you work after hours but only want your email to leave your outbox 
within working hours.
••
If you are writing in anger or on a difficult topic, take the precaution of 
sending the email to yourself first. Open the email as a reader and you will 
get a different impression of it than you had as a sender. You may then edit 
the email before forwarding it to the person to be addressed.
You also need to manage your emails carefully if you want to be as efficient as 
possible:
••
Manage your email inbox; do not let emails manage you and your time. Use 
the functions provided to have mail filed directly into folders or to have it 
colour-coded according to importance or subject. 
••
Delete all junk mail before opening it.

Professional Communication
98
••
Scan emails for viruses before opening them and only read emails that are 
applicable to you. 
••
Ask to be taken off lists if you are receiving mail that is either not relevant 
to you or is inappropriate for your working day. 
••
Deal with mail according to its importance.
Faxes
Faxes are still required in legal transactions for the transfer of original signatures. 
Faxes are usually documents scanned and sent as email attachments. In the 
transfer of an original faxed message, the print can become less legible. When 
presenting a message to be faxed, do the following:
••
Use a typeface with a minimum point size of 12.
••
If writing by hand, use a black pen, and print.
••
Place the addressee’s fax number and your own at the top of the first page. 
This is very important, lest the fax go to the wrong number. The receiver at 
the wrong number can resend it.
••
Include the recipient’s name and/or department in the address section. Many 
offices have a shared fax machine for a number of users, and the fax needs 
to reach the correct person/s.
••
Indicate on every page the number of pages the fax runs to (eg 1 of 5 pages, 
2 of 5 pages, etc).
Microsoft® Word™ also provides online access to a wide range of fax templates. 
✔
Checklist for well-organised and persuasive correspondence
In order for your message to lead to the outcome you desire, it must be readable. Use the 
following checklist when you prepare a message: 
•	 Follow the etiquette for the particular format.
•	 Make sure your message reflects the company’s or your professional image.
•	 Use a suitable, up-to-date format with a topical subject line.
•	 Use a heading system and/or a numbering system, if appropriate.
•	 Open the message with an appropriate salutation that contains the recipient’s name.
•	 In the body of the message, give the facts in a clear and logical order, with the main 
points properly organised and emphasised.
•	 Use the style and tone that suit the situation.
•	 Write the message coherently, so that the reader can follow the argument from sentence 
to sentence and from paragraph to paragraph.
•	 End the message with a closing paragraph that generates goodwill, regardless of the 
content of the message.
•	 If appropriate, include a clear call to action or an indication of the next steps to be 
taken.

4
99
Today employers expect an applicant to have the necessary knowledge and skills 
and for this knowledge to be reflected in the applicant’s curriculum vitae (CV), 
covering letter and in the interview, if granted. (The term résumé is also used to 
refer to a CV, but more often in the USA.) If you are applying for a job, you need 
to have researched the job and/or company and to have tailored your application 
accordingly. And, if you are given an interview, you need to have the knowledge to 
ask pertinent questions. You need to know that the prospective employer will also 
check on your digital footprint to find out about you — and they may find things 
which you are not including in your CV (see Chapter 2). Your application must be 
tailored to the recipient and not to yourself. Therefore, you should not have only 
a single CV or letter or approach to being interviewed; rather, you need to style 
each item according to the person or institution on the receiving end. 
This chapter addresses these areas and is divided into three main sections, namely:
••
types of CVs for employment and further study
••
letters of application for employment and study
••
interviews.
Once you have worked through this chapter, you will be able to:
••
choose the appropriate type of CV 
••
select pertinent material from your education and work experience to provide 
an informative CV tailored to a job or company
••
write a letter of application 
••
tailor a CV and letter of application for an academic position or funding
••
prepare for an interview for employment.
4.1 	Types of curricula vitae 
In an increasingly competitive job market, CVs have had to become not only a 
record of your experience, but also a selling document that will promote you 
ahead of other applicants. While you may have a general, brief CV attached to 
your LinkedIn profile, for example, the CV that you use to apply for a job needs 
to be edited with that position in mind. The recommended length of a concise CV 
Curricula vitae,  
application letters and  
interviews

Professional Communication
100
is two pages. Every full CV of more than two pages should be accompanied by a 
one-page summary. In the summary, you should provide:
••
your essential personal details
••
information about your qualifications
••
information about your experience
••
a personal profile that summarises your developed abilities, key selling 
points, future plans and career goals.
For your records, prepare and keep a full CV as a portmanteau which holds all 
the information about you and your career. From this, you can select and adapt 
information for each application, so that you highlight the skills you have that are 
pertinent to that particular job. This is also a more time-efficient approach if you 
are sending out many applications.
Traditionally, personal information was included in CVs, but it has become 
the practice more recently to include only critical information (ie your name and 
email address). It is not required that you disclose your age, race, gender, marital 
status or history of salary. 
A recent trend is to include a photograph of yourself with your CV and, if 
applicable, examples of your work. You may do this to personalise your CV, but 
only in a situation where you feel that it is appropriate. Some companies may not 
wish for a photograph to be included. If you choose to do so, include a photograph 
that is professional and of high resolution.
Microsoft® Word™ has a number of CV templates. Alternatively, you can 
download a CV template from the Internet or format your own. However, as with 
all templates, exercise caution before using a generic one, as the template may 
not be conducive to presenting information in the best way for that particular 
application. If you have an agency, compile your CV and work with them to 
ensure that they do not unnecessarily expand the layout of your CV. You do not 
want to devote a page to personal details which tell the reader nothing about your 
aptitudes. Details about your skills, knowledge and talents should appear on the 
first page. 
Traditional or chronological curriculum vitae
The traditional method of presenting a CV is to list your personal details (limited), 
education, experience, activities, interests and references. The trend today is to give 
your most recent education and experience first. If relevant, your family details, 
bursary commitments and travel experience may be mentioned. The chronological 
approach works well if your progress has been consistent, there are not too many 
gaps and the recruiter is in a more conservative field, such as a legal practice.
Your CV may be accompanied by scanned certified copies of documents (for 
example school and/or qualification certificates) and testimonials. If you decide 
not to mail these, have them at hand for the interview. 

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
101
Ensure that the first page of your CV is rich in information and opens with a 
personal statement or aim. However, if you describe a personal quality (eg hard-
working), substantiate this with evidence (eg ‘I simultaneously studied full time 
and worked part time’). Do not try to be everything, and do not claim skills that 
you do not possess. Furthermore, do not have introductory pages bearing only 
your name or personal details. It is a nuisance for the reader to have to scroll down 
the pages and is wasteful of paper should it be printed.
Here are some examples of chronologically presented CVs, with the most recent 
activities and qualifications given first. These examples are of a first-year student 
(Janelle Canham), a recent graduate (Christopher Molteno) and two experienced 
professionals (Joseph Axel and Tapiwa Tevera). Note the various options for 
presentation offered by the different formats. Note too that each CV opens with a 
personal statement which defines the applicant.
eg
Janelle Canham 
Email: canjaxxxx@myuct.ac.za
Phone:  012 XXX 2870 ● Cell: 071 XXX 3467 
CV
Personal profile 
I am currently a full-time chemical engineering student; however, I have a keen interest in 
the business and financial sectors. I am hard-working, ambitious and adaptive: these skills I 
exercise daily by balancing my studies and extra-curricular activities. My studies in chemical 
engineering have given me tools to prepare me well for the work environment. I have taken 
the initiative to develop my own skills in programming and computers. 
Experience
Sasol Chemical Engineer: Job shadow
2015, January
•	 Worked in a team on optimising plant efficiency. Various methods were formulated and 
tested. 
•	 Analysed process simulation with prior programming knowledge. Developed these skills 
further, while gaining a new skill, namely that of problem diagnosis. 
Telkom: Vacation work as a personal assistant
2014, June
•	 Greeted and served clients and guests of Telkom. Practised interpersonal skills. 
•	 Responsible person for organising meeting logistics (planning suitable date, time and 
venue) as well as recording meeting minutes. Honed valuable organisational skills in a 
professional environment. 

Professional Communication
102
Volunteer tutor: Bona Lesedi Secondary School
2013–2014
•	 Tutored Mathematics, Physical Science and English to matric learners from Bona Lesedi 
Secondary School. Teaching forced me to solidify my personal understanding of the 
concepts I taught. 
•	 Hosted workshops teaching students time management, stress management and study 
methods and skills. This trained me to communicate effectively in order to convey 
lessons to the students.  
Education
Chemical Engineering: University of Cape Town
2015–present 
I am currently studying toward a Bachelor of Science in the field of Chemical Engineering. I 
hope to use my qualification in the future to better society in South Africa. 
2015: 	
Recipient of Sasol bursary 
2015–2016: 	 Member of Engineers Without Borders society
Pretoria Girls’ High School: Pretoria, Gauteng
2010–2014
Completed my secondary education, achieving eight subject distinctions.  
2014: 	
IEB and NSC subject distinctions in Mathematics, Xhosa, English, Afrikaans, 
Information Technology, Physical Science and Life Orientation 
2012–2014:	
Achieved academic honours for three consecutive years
2014:	
Prefect, house prefect, and voted prefect of the year
2013–2014:	
Won the University of Pretoria’s programming challenge
Sport, culture and service
2013–2014:	
Provincial chess team for two consecutive years
2013–2014:	
Merit for choir
2010–2014:	
Provincial merit for water polo
2014: 	
Sporting honours in squash
2014: 	
Serviceman’s award for community service
Skills
Computing skills
•	 Programming languages: Delphi, Java, C++ and HTML (for web design)
•	 Proficient in Microsoft® Word™, Excel™ and PowerPoint™
•	 Skills gained in IT and extracurricular courses applied practically during part-time work 
at Telkom
Laboratory skills
•	 Practised working in laboratory environments through chemistry and chemical 
engineering lab work. 
•	 Further developed laboratory skills while job shadowing at a Sasol plant, as these were 
an essential tool. 

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
103
Oral communication
•	 Languages: Fluent in Xhosa and English; proficient in Afrikaans; conversational Shona 
•	 Experienced in communicating lessons through work as a volunteer tutor
•	 Public speaking (Xhosa and English) practised as a prefect during sporting and other 
school events
Leadership and teamwork
•	 Able to develop and further my leadership skills during my time as a prefect in 2014
•	 Teamwork was vital in playing provincial water polo, and singing in the Pretoria Girls’ 
High School choir
•	 Developed through school and chemical engineering; and practised during vacation 
work, determining solutions to operating problems and performance efficiency
Time management and organisational skills
•	 Developed through balancing academic, sporting, cultural and leadership roles during 
high school
•	 Further developed as a personal assistant at Telkom
Referees
Mr Kobus Smit 
Headmaster, Pretoria Girls’ High School
Email: kobuskxxx@xxx.com
Mrs Reshada Naidoo
Academic Head, Pretoria Girls’ High School
Email: reshada.naidoo@xxx.com
eg
Christopher Molteno
Email@gmail.com  |  (0)787 xxx xxxx
Personal statement
Having studied chemical engineering in South Africa, I have chosen to pursue a career 
path that will allow me to couple this technical background with my interest and ability in 
business. I have run both a private business and a charitable organisation, but am looking for 
a career opportunity that will allow me to continue learning and improving my skills. I come 
from a large family and consequently I have excellent negotiation skills and a diplomatic 
disposition, which I have put to very good effect in my current position. I seldom experience 
conflict with colleagues and work well in a team. During my extensive gap year travels and 
in my present job, which involves international travel, I have developed a high degree of 
independence, initiative and a strong work ethic. I have well-honed communication skills, 
have presented to large audiences and written well-received important reports for my 
employers, the public and government offices.

Professional Communication
104
Professional experience
Enviro Green Agencies: London, 2016 — Contracted from January 1st     
Innovation Engineer — Responsible for the project management of a funding process that 
included the preparation and submission of research grants and the launching of a financial 
mechanism. Successfully defended the company’s right to its concession in Namibia to the 
extent that it was offered a one-year extension on its licence. Completed technical projects, 
including mapping of oil deposits, preparation of technical public relations literature and 
research grant applications.  
Work based in the UK but included extensive travel to Namibia, South Africa and Botswana
Centre for Biological Engineering Research (Ceber): University of Cape Town, 2015
Researcher — Investigation of the behaviour of sulphate-reducing bacteria (intended for 
the remediation of acid rock drainage) on different physical growth supports for use in 
continuous reactors. 
Skills acquired: Academic research and paper writing, biological laboratory work with 
anaerobic cultures
Clariant: Heufeld, Bavaria, 2014–2015     
Research Intern, R&D department of Clariant Chemicals, Heufeld — Responsible for the 
commissioning of a drying test unit and initial drying tests on barium-based adsorbent. 
Successfully commissioned the test rig and provided recommendations for its future use.
Skills acquired: Business etiquette, project management and laboratory work protocol with 
hazardous materials
Education and achievements
University of Cape Town: Cape Town, 2012–2015      
Bachelor of Science degree (1st class Hon) in Chemical Engineering (for full academic 
results, see academic transcript)
2015 —  Winner of the Chevron Prize for the best chemical engineering design
2014 & 2015 —  Chairperson of Habitat for Humanity, UCT charter (a charitable society with 
approximately 250 members)
2013 — Awarded a six-month exchange at the University of Merced, California
2012 & 2014 — Two inclusions on the UCT Dean’s List for academic excellence
2012 — Invitation to the Golden Key society (top 15% of students) 
2012 — A university entrance scholarship 
Bishops Diocesan College: Cape Town, 2006–2010
National senior certificate matric pass (BD) with distinction
All eight subjects above 80%, including 96% for Mathematics
2010 — Member of the Ten Club for the top ten academics 
2010 — Awarded full colours during high school for leadership
2010 — Awarded a Golden President’s Award by the South African president and the British 
High Commissioner

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
105
2008 — Winner of the Royal Society of Science essay competition on possible sources of 
power in South Africa (Molteno, C. 2008. How best to meet South Africa’s future energy 
requirements. Transactions of the Royal Society of South Africa. 63(2): 189.)
2008 — Awarded a three-month exchange to Orchard College in Curico, Chile
SACS Junior School: Cape Town, 1999–2005
Prefect
Additional skills
Communication
Am a confident public speaker, having been requested to speak to large audiences on 
multiple occasions through school and university leadership positions.
Presented to the Technical Advisory Committee of NamCor, Namibia, and successfully 
defended my company’s right to its exploration concession.
Gave a training course on communication to underprivileged children for the University of 
Cape Town’s outreach programme.
Possess basic spoken and written Afrikaans and French.
IT/computer literacy
Proficient in all Microsoft® Office™ programs, including Visio™ and Project™.
Proficient in using process simulation programs, including COCO and Aspen Plus.
Talented at webpage design using WordPress, having designed websites for three private 
companies and a consultant. 
Teamwork and leadership
Was a member of and then head of the committee that led Habitat for Humanity, UCT.
Was the pastoral head of the Grade 8s during the final year of school.
Worked in the research team at Clariant (Heufeld, Germany).
Self-reliance
Travelled alone for a year after school across Western and Eastern Europe, Britain and South 
East Asia. Continue to travel at every opportunity and have now visited nearly 40 countries.
Sport and interests
Rowing: Member of Bishops 1st VIII (2010). Rowed for university during annual Boatrace 
event (2013 & 2014). Member of London Rowing Club (2016 & 2017).
Running: Enthusiastic runner, having competed in a number of half marathons. Personal best 
time of 90 minutes. 
Horse riding: Experienced rider.
Wave skiing, skiing and hiking: adept and enthusiastic.
Vocational work
Parking business: Cape Town, 2000–2015     
Head of a parking business which sells parking space on family property during Newlands 
Rugby Stadium rugby matches. Park and move the vehicles. Parking capacity of 32 cars. 
Ongoing business with regular and long-term customers.
Skills acquired: People skills, negotiation skills, driving and parking skills with any car

Professional Communication
106
Villa Renovations: Antibes, 2011
Team member — Worked in a team renovating a villa in Antibes. Work was cleaning, 
painting and small scale demolition.
Skills acquired: Ability to operate building tools such as a jackhammer
Riverford Organic Vegetable Farm: Normandy, 2011
Worked as a farm hand on a large vegetable farm. Worked involved picking, planting and 
packaging of vegetables. 
Yacht deckhand: Between Cannes, France and San Remo, Italy, 2011
Temporary deckhand for luxury yachts in harbour. Work involved cleaning and polishing. 
Worked on the yachts: Where Dreams Never End, Melina, Julia and Luna.
eg
JOSEPH AXEL
ID no: 820xxxxxx084
Address:
120 xxxxx xxxxx
1xx xxxx Road
Sea Point
Cape Town
8005
Email:
joseph.axel@xxxx.com
Phone:
(C) 082 xxx 99xx
(H) 0xx 433 xxxx
PERSONAL PROFILE
I am an energetic, ambitious individual, whose maturity and responsibility have developed 
over time. I have a passion for research and analysis, especially in South African current 
affairs. My communication and interpersonal skills are excellent.
KEY ACHIEVEMENTS
•	 Chaired Cape Town Rotary Conference (2014 and 2015)
•	 Elected onto the Board of the South African Media Society (2013)
•	 Presented with the Trinity Exhibition Award for the highest distinction mark for the 
Advanced Classical Music Certificate in South Africa (2012)
•	 Awarded the Ford Foundation Scholarship to study abroad for one semester in 
Washington, DC (2010) 
KEY SKILLS
•	 Excellent interpersonal and leadership skills
•	 Extensive experience in facilitating small-group work
•	 Strong written and verbal communication skills
•	 Supportive, positive team member
•	 Highly IT proficient, including Microsoft® Word™ and Excel™, Internet-based research 
and social networking

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
107
KEY SKILLS
•	 Excellent interpersonal and leadership skills
•	 Extensive experience in facilitating small-group work
•	 Strong written and verbal communication skills
•	 Supportive, positive team member
•	 Highly IT proficient, including Microsoft® Word™ and Excel™, Internet-based research 
and social networking
EDUCATION
2016–Present	
Financial Management; Business Research and Analysis Certificates
	
GetSmarter and University of Cape Town (UCT)
2013–2015	
Master’s in Justice and Transformation 
	
UCT
2010–2011	
Bachelor of Arts (Honours) in Political Studies
	
University of the Witwatersrand (Wits)
2006– 2009	
Bachelor of Arts 
	
Wits
•	 Major subjects: Politics and International Relations
•	 Undergraduate Law background
2005	
Crawford College, Sandton
PROFESSIONAL EXPERIENCE
2014–2016	
South African Media Awareness Organisation
•	 Head of Media and Public Affairs
•	 Lobbied national, regional and local government 
•	 Managed various social media platforms
•	 Created and maintained relationships with all forms of media
•	 Researched and created policies regarding key areas of concern
2013–2014	
Gold Communications
•	 Consultant for various companies requiring reputation management
2013	
University of Cape Town
•	 Tutor for second-year Public Policy and Administration (PPA) students
2010–2012	
MixitFM
•	 Radio presenter and producer for a daily talk show on current 
affairs, as well as a weekly talk show on environmental affairs
•	 Required to research interesting and current topics 
•	 Interviewed relevant leaders and professionals
2011	
Open Society Initiative of Southern Africa (OSISA)
•	 Education intern 
•	 Responsible for website development 
•	 Processed grants for partners 
•	 Developed database for programme partners, networks and contacts 
in the southern African region

Professional Communication
108
2010	
University of the Witwatersrand
•	 Tutor for first-year Political Studies students
VOLUNTEER EXPERIENCE
2012–Present (Cape Town)
•	 National Executive for South African Rotary 
Organisation. Chaired the 2014 and 2015 Cape Town 
Rotary Conferences, and created the programme for 
the 2012 Johannesburg Rotary Conference/2013 Cape 
Town Rotary Conference, an international event for 550 
delegates.
2010 (Washington DC, USA)
•	 Volunteered at Dreams for Kids (DC), engaged with at-
risk and disabled youth in the greater DC area.
2009 (Johannesburg)
•	 Observed South African National and Provincial 
Elections for the South African Media Society.
2006–2009
•	 Was a member of youth movement, Ace Kidz. Created 
informal educational material for children aged 11–17 
and young adults. Chaired the Johannesburg branch 
from 2008 to 2009. Ran successful summer camps for 
specific age groups in 2008 and 2009.
REFERENCES
Mike Clelland
Gold Communications
•	 mike@xxxxx.co.za 
xxx 632 xxxx
David Smithson
South African Media Society
•	 dxxx@gmail.com 
083 xxx 6050
eg
TAPIWA TEVERA
Flat xxx xxxx Court	
Cell: 079 xxx xxxxx
45 xxxxx Square	
Email: xxxx@xxx.com
xxxx Road	
Passport number: XXXXXX
Rondebosch, 7700	
Nationality: Zimbabwe
WORK EXPERIENCE
April 2015 – present: Lead Buyer, Johnson & Johnson 
•	 Support, build and execute B-BBEE Enterprise and Supplier Development & Diversity 
Strategy  
•	 Manage all the import/export activity of raw materials and packaging components
•	 Manage all purchasing activities within inbound supply chain
•	 Ensure payment of suppliers in accordance with agreed payment terms

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
109
January 2016 – March 2016: Interim Lead Buyer, Johnson & Johnson 
•	 Provision of procurement support to Cape Town plant and ownership of supplier 
relationship management initiatives
•	 Worked with sourcing managers to quickly resolve supply-related issues (eg delivery 
delays, pricing discrepancies) 
•	 Continuation and completion of projects led/managed by previous lead buyer 
January 2014 – March 2015: Sourcing Specialist, Johnson & Johnson
•	 Optimised chemicals supply to market strategy in order to achieve cost savings and to 
eliminate poor performing suppliers
•	 Worked with sourcing managers and local plants (Cape Town and East London) to 
establish 100% compliance with business awards (Quality, Price, Quantity, Lead times) 
PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS
May 2016 – present: Diploma in Procurement and Supply, Chartered Institute of 
Procurement & Supply (CIPS)
EDUCATION
2011–2014: Master of Science in Engineering (Materials Engineering) (by dissertation), 
UCT 
•	 Thesis topic: Assessment of Corrosion Behaviour of Zinc Coated Steel Using a Salt Spray 
Chamber
2010: Bachelor of Science (Honours) in Materials Science, UCT
2005–2009: Bachelor of Science in Chemical, Molecular and Cellular Sciences, UCT
•	 Majors: Biotechnology and Microbiology
•	 Sabbatical in 2008 due to ill health. Returned to complete.
2004: Advanced Level Certificate, St Georges College, Harare, Zimbabwe 
ACHIEVEMENTS AND AWARDS
2011–present: Guest Examiner for fourth-year Engineering Entrepreneurial Course, UCT
•	 Selected for role after obtaining top mark in Professional Communication Studies 
postgraduate course
2010: UCT Student Leadership Award
•	 Most Outstanding UCT Student Leader in a Postgraduate Faculty Council: Engineering 
and the Built Environment (EBE)
2010, 2007: Ackerman Family Foundation Leadership Award Recipient
•	 Award sponsored by the Ackerman Family to recognise and perpetuate excellence and 
achievement in student leadership at UCT
July 2007: 19th All African Student Leaders Conference, Windhoek, Namibia
•	 Selected as member of a five-person delegation that represented student leaders from 
UCT
2005: Clarinus Village Fresher of the Year Award Recipient
•	 Award recognises the significant contributions of a first-year student to the residence in 
the areas of service and leadership

Professional Communication
110
LEADERSHIP POSITIONS
2011: Chairperson of the EBE Postgraduate Students’ Council
•	 Led the development of a website project for the council, in order to better inform 
students of the activities of the council
•	 Introduced the Dean’s Postgraduate Students’ Forum to promote interaction between the 
students and management
2010: President of the Zimbabwe Students’ Society
•	 Raised approximately R10 000 in sponsorship
•	 Promoted awareness among students on the situation in Zimbabwe through a public 
lecture
2010: Chairperson of the Kolbe Catholic Society
•	 Increased membership through an effective advertising drive during orientation week 
•	 Organised successful events that addressed spiritual growth and development which saw 
increased student participation
2010: Student Representative of the Bachelor of Science (Honours) in Materials 
Science Programme
•	 Collaborated with professors and lectures about course work material
•	 Set test and exam dates through consultation with students and academic staff (there is 
greater flexibility for this at postgraduate level)
2007: Elected Head Student of the Woolsack Residence
2007: Secretary of the Undergraduate Science Students’ Council
2006: Head Student of Clarinus Village Residence
TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT
February 2011 – December 2012: Administrator Temporary Assistant (part-time):  
EBE Faculty Office, UCT
•	 Registered students for courses using Oracle’s PeopleSoft Enterprise application
•	 Performed filing duties on a regular basis to update student records
May 2011 – December 2012: Hospitality Waiter (part-time): Event Life Blend, Cape 
Town  
•	 Carried out waitron duties at corporate events
•	 Training included understanding the importance of being well groomed and the 
development of effective ways of communicating with guests in both crisis and non-
crisis situations
November 2007 – January 2008: Vacation Subwarden: The Woolsack Residence, UCT 
•	 Responsible for the daily running of the residence during the vacation period
•	 Ensured that the rules of the residence were adhered to, for example security procedures 
for students entering and leaving the residence
SKILLS
•	 Languages: Fluent in English and Shona, basic French
•	 Communication: Effective oral communication skills developed through delivering 
speeches, Microsoft® PowerPoint™ presentations and through Professional 
Communication Studies course

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
111
•	 Leadership and teamwork: Derive fulfilment from leadership roles, constantly 
embracing and promoting the ethos of achievement through teamwork 
•	 Stress and time management: Successful in managing academic, leadership and 
employment responsibilities
•	 Learning and teaching capacity: Ability to embrace new learning opportunities through 
exposure to positions of leadership and employment which are subsequently passed on 
to others
REFEREES
Ms Moira Smith: Executive Director, Student Affairs, UCT
Telephone: 021 650 xxxx
Email: xxx@uct.ac.za
Professor Gervaise Brown: Director, Centre for Engineering, UCT
Telephone: 021 650 xxxx
Email: gerxxx@uct.ac.za
Non-traditional or functional curricula vitae
A CV can also be arranged to highlight your best points, as opposed to giving 
information chronologically. This approach is useful if you have no conventional 
work experience – for example if you are a new school leaver – or if you wish to 
downplay long gaps in study or employment. Both theoretical (study) and practical 
(work experience) details are organised under headings which describe your talents 
and skills. This method also defines the fields in which you wish to continue 
developing. Furthermore, you will be describing qualities that are unique to you.
The following examples of non-traditional CVs show information presented 
according to functions. They open with a summary directed at the developed 
abilities of the person and their goals, followed by the full CV. For some positions, 
particularly those in the creative fields of arts and design, an infographic CV is 
appropriate. The additional advantage of the latter is that they may be loaded 
onto platforms such as Instagram or shared via Twitter and Facebook. The other 
platform for a digital CV is to have a website, such as one created through 
WordPress or Wix.com. These are discussed in Chapter 13.

Professional Communication
112
eg
Flora Burt
Cape Town, South Africa
Tel: 072 xxx xxxx 
Email: Fxxx@xx.co.za 
Nationality: South African
PERSONAL PROFILE
I am a hard-working and dependable 
person, skills I practised as deputy head 
of various portfolios at school. These 
positions have helped me develop my 
leadership skills. I am ambitious and 
outgoing; I enjoy travel, adventure and 
interacting with people of various cultural 
backgrounds. I consider myself a people 
person and hope to work with young 
people while travelling on a gap year. 
EXPERIENCE 
SRC — Deputy Head of Student Representative Council (SRC) at Springfield Convent
Purpose 
To facilitate engagement between students and management at 
Springfield
Summary 
The SRC is a body of students representing each class and grade in the 
high school. Weekly meetings with student representatives are chaired by 
the head and deputy head; in these meetings students air any complaints 
and ideas, which are then put forward to management in weekly meetings. 
Furthermore, the SRC supports staff in all major events and is involved with 
a charity, Dignity Dreams, and its initiatives. These meetings and events 
were opportunities to exercise and strengthen my leadership skills. 
Borneo Expedition — World Challenge Youth Leadership Expedition 
Purpose 
World Challenge expeditions allow students to develop leadership 
and teamwork skills, as well as confidence and self-esteem, and their 
capacities for building a global society.
Summary 
The 16-day expedition to Borneo included a two-day jungle trek, a hike 
up Mount Kinabalu (4095.2 m) and a community outreach project to build 
a small road in Long Pasia, a rural village in Borneo. I was responsible for 
personal budgeting, accommodation, transport and food. Additionally, 
each group member was responsible for certain areas and individuals took 
turns to lead the group.  
French Tour — School tour to France with several participating South African schools
Purpose 
To improve French language skills and experience the culture of France
Summary 
I attended classes at the International French language school, and 
experienced the cultural values of France. I learned the value of being 
immersed in a culture as a tool to understand people’s perspectives and 
learn new languages. 

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
113
LEADERSHIP 
Deputy Head: Swimming 
Deputy head of a major sport in the portfolio. 
Responsibilities included managing training sessions, 
organising weekly interschool galas and events. 
Sport Portfolio Committee This committee is for the heads and deputy heads of each 
sport. The Sport Portfolio Committee organises, manages 
and runs the various sports, as well as encouraging support 
of and involvement in all sports and at all events. 
ACADEMIC RECORD
2002–2015: Springfield Junior and High School, Cape Town
Matric subjects
English, Maths, Science (including physics & chemistry), 
History, French, Afrikaans, Life Orientation
Full academic colours 
2014: Cumulative average of over 85% every year 
Academic scroll 
2011–2014: Over 85% average in each year of high school 
Olympiads 
2013–2014: English Olympiad entrant; bronze award in 2014
2010–2013: Entrant in SAMO Junior and Senior Maths 
Olympiads
2012: Entrant in Senior Maths Olympiads
Award for Excellence
2011–2013: Excellence in Mathematics 
Silver award for Science 
Expo 
2012: Achieved between 80–85% in Grade 9 Science Expo 
Competition
Xhosa prize 
2011: Top achieving student in Xhosa third language in 
Grade 8  
SPORT 
2011–2015
Netball 
U14A/U15A/U16A (captain) & Springfield First Team 
•	 2013: Burger Trophy for Service to Netball in Grade 10 
•	 2011: U14 Netball Trophy in Grade 8 
Swimming 
2013: Team swimming — Roscoe Cup for Swimming in 
Grade 10
Water polo 
U14A/U15A/U16A/Second team 
SKILLS/EXTRA-CURRICULAR 
Juno study skills 
2014: A two-day course learning study skills and 
techniques 
Toastmasters 
Certificate of achievement: six-week course on public speaking 
Computer literacy 
Proficient in Microsoft® Word™, Excel™ and PowerPoint™ 
Scuba diving 
2013: PADI Basic Diving Course in KwaZulu-Natal, South 
Africa 

Professional Communication
114
REFERENCES
Name 
Ms F Ackermann 
Ms B Houghton 
Organisation 
Springfield High School 
Springfield High school 
Relationship 
Afrikaans teacher (2012–
2015) 
Head 
Contact: 
xxxxx@springfieldschool.
co.za 
xxxxx@springfieldschool.
co.za 
eg
Andile Vuyo Xola
Contact number: + 27 (0)79 xxx 32xx
Email: xolaandile@xxx.com
ID: xxxxxxxxxx
Since successfully completing my BA Honours in Brand Communications, graduating in 2010, 
I have added experience to theory and built on the skills I previously developed working in 
higher education. I have held various positions, ranging from student advisor to marketing 
and alumni relations. I am experienced at engaging and interacting with a broad range 
of stakeholders, including students, academics, alumni and service providers in both the 
private and public sectors. I have acquired a diverse range of skills and an understanding of 
etiquette in serving the various institutions.
I have excellent verbal and written communication skills. I take pride in serving my employer 
and building strong and successful brands for the organisations I have been associated with. 
I am a sociable and approachable person with the ability to self-motivate and to build and 
maintain strong relationships with internal and external stakeholders.
I look forward to new challenges and to applying my skills in new contexts.
EDUCATION
2010	
BA Honours in Brand Leadership, Brand Communications School
2008	
ND Marketing Management, Cape Peninsula University of Technology (CPUT)
Short courses
2012	
Certificate in Public Relations, CPUT (four months)
2011	
UCT Business Writing and Legal Documents, GetSmarter (10 weeks)
2011	
Applied Writing Skills and Processes Masters Course (one week)

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
115
SKILL SETS
Project management
•	 Managing and implementing new and existing projects for alumni 
•	 Ensuring time lines for projects, such as events, surveys and new project developments
•	 Managing and reporting on the annual budget
•	 Evaluating projects at regular intervals and milestones to assess impact
Client relationship management 
•	 Initiating, building, engaging and managing strong and meaningful relationships with 
alumni and students
•	 Managing alumni relationships (existing alumni affinity groups and chapters as well as 
establishing new ones), looking to add mutual value in line with good practice
•	 Researching and developing suitable benefits and programmes for both alumni and 
students (and any engaged stakeholders)
•	 Approaching successful alumni for planned talks or other events, and building strategic 
relations in line with strategic goals and brand
Marketing and communications 
•	 Working closely with the Communications Department to ensure timely, relevant and 
accurate communications to alumni via email, newsletters and other publications and 
media
•	 Planning and implementing a clear marketing strategy for both students and alumni, 
by reviewing different ways to engage students, alumni and businesses in line with the 
overall strategy
•	 Managing briefings with agencies, and negotiating and supervising strict time lines
•	 Contributing and overseeing the website, making sure it is updated with relevant 
information
•	 Contributing articles and ideas for the annual alumni magazine and the alumni and 
student newsletter
•	 Managing the development of marketing material with service providers
Brand management
•	 Building a unique brand for alumni and students within the global branding mandate 
•	 Re-branding the student association to clarify and make its offering more meaningful
•	 Supporting students in brand activation programmes through plans integrated via the 
brand strategy
•	 Managing the advertising for various programmes via print, radio and posters
•	 Understanding the value and reputation attached to a brand, and the consequent need 
to protect, nurture and develop it
Stakeholder relations 
•	 Identifying strategic partners and managing and engaging in collaborations with internal 
stakeholders — from working with Head Office to other departments and faculties
•	 Working and maintaining close relationships with external stakeholders —  sponsors, 
partners and service providers, which range from affluent alumni and business owners to 
retailers
•	 Working with various government departments on projects and policy
•	 Overseeing the development and execution of sponsorship budgets and agreements

Professional Communication
116
Data management 
•	 Managing and overseeing the continuous updating of the database with the ability 
to sort data intelligently when necessary — including segmenting the data into key 
constituency groups and other groups that may be relevant for a particular project
Reporting and writing 
•	 Writing quarterly and yearly reports on various projects
•	 Writing business letters, professional emails and minutes
•	 Analysing data and writing up research projects
Professionalism 
•	 Aptitude for working hard under pressure and to tight deadlines
•	 Working effectively, both independently and in a team
•	 Good communication, management and leadership skills
•	 Ability to foster good relations and trust
•	 Good presentation and public speaking skills
•	 Innovative, creative and solution-orientated thinker
•	 Capacity to take initiative and follow through
•	 Self-motivated to continue my professional education through study and acquiring new 
skills and broadening my experience base
EMPLOYMENT HISTORY
November 2010 to April 2015 — Development and Alumni Department
Alumni Relations Officer
Essentially, as Alumni Relations Officer, I was responsible for overseeing, researching, 
developing and managing all aspects relating to alumni and ongoing engagement. My role 
included planning, organising and managing events locally, nationally and internationally; 
communicating with alumni and other relevant stakeholders and service providers regarding 
events, general queries and other news; and developing our database, value-add services 
and engagement opportunities to ensure the organisation remains in line with relevant 
international practice in relation to alumni, mutually beneficial relations with stakeholders 
and philanthropic giving. I worked both independently and as part of a broader team in line 
with the Development and Alumni strategy and brand. My role also included servicing the 
Alumni Advisory Board and co-ordinating the Special Interest groups.
March 2010 to October 2010 — Brand Communications School
Assistant Marketing Manager (part-time school)
My role as Assistant Marketing Manager included managing and running the regional 
part-time school, conducting necessary market research to ensure world-class positioning, 
developing regional marketing and sales strategies in line with the national strategy, 
planning and organising events, and overseeing the general school administration.
January 2009 to February 2010 — Brand Communications School
Marketing Co-ordinator (Contact Navigator)
I worked closely with the National Marketing Manager in the roll-out of the national 
marketing strategy to market and promote full-time courses. This included managing the 
admissions process, delivering presentations to schools and universities and attending career 
fairs and exhibitions. It also meant presenting weekly reports, managing regional events and 
updating the database.

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
117
April 2008 to January 2009 — Brand Communications School
Admin Assistant (part-time photography)
This position was largely administrative and focused on co-ordinating applications, running 
the courses, assisting lecturers with general administration, and reporting on numbers.
October 2005 to March 2008 — Graduate School of Marketing
Student Advisor
As a Student Advisor, I was the first point of call to provide advisory services to students in 
line with the prospectus. I co-ordinated student applications and registration, maintained 
the library to ensure relevant learning material was available, updated the database and 
assisted with the co-ordination of training and graduation.
June 2005 to September 2005 — Ethical Leadership Project
Project co-ordinator
This project was run by an interim board which I was responsible for supporting through 
administration, co-ordinating travel, taking minutes, and general office administration and 
processes. 
Referees
Ms Maureen Erasmus
Individual Giving Manager 
Development and Alumni Department
Tel: xxx 347 xxxx; Cell: 076 xxx xx36
Email: maureen.erasmus@xxx.co.za 
Mr Marco van Niekerk 
Brand Strategy Manager
Brand Communications School
Tel: 011 xxx 8089; Cell: xxx 656 xxxx
Email: Marco@xxxx.com 
Ms Lianne Markam 
Communications Officer 
Development and Alumni Department  
Cell: 074 xxx xxxx 
Email: Lianne.xxx@xxxx.co.za
Infographic curricula vitae
The following is an example of an infographic CV which is appropriate for those 
working in design and arts. However, it would not be appropriate for someone 
working in a traditional profession such as an accountant or doctor. This graphic 
was created first with a hand drawn sketch and then drawn in Adobe Illustrator.

Professional Communication
118
eg

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
119
Academic curricula vitae
Applicants to university or research positions in all fields, for funding or for 
further study, need to include areas of information pertinent to academia. Essential 
to most applications will be research experience, conference presentations and 
publications, as shown in the example that follows. For lecturing positions, 
teaching experience is required. Just as LinkedIn profiles are influential for those 
working in commerce and industry, so having a profile on Academia.edu and 
ResearchGate.net is essential for those in academia. These sites track citations and 
significantly contribute to academics’ publications being more accessible and read 
more widely.
eg
Sinead English
Current address: Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, CB2 3EJ
Email: sineadenglish@xxx.net   Website: sineadenglish.xxxx.com
EDUCATION
2006–2010	
Clare College, University of Cambridge
	
PhD in Zoology (Behavioural Ecology)
	
Thesis: Individual variation in co-operative behaviour in meerkats
2004–2005	
New College, University of Oxford
	
MSc in Biology — Distinction
2001–2004	
Clare College, University of Cambridge
	
BA (Hons) Natural Sciences — First Class
EMPLOYMENT
2015–present	
Royal Society Dorothy Hodgkin Fellow
	
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge
	
Conflict in the womb: The evolutionary consequences of viviparity
2014–2015	
Visiting Research Fellow at the Department of Zoology, University of 
Cambridge
	
Research Associate at the Department of Zoology, University of Oxford
	
Freelance consultant on WHO/TDR project (part-time 60% from  
	
May 2015)  
	
Maternal investment and climate change in wild tsetse flies
2012–2015	
European Union FP7 Postdoctoral Research Associate
	
Edward Grey Institute, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford
	
(Parental leave: October 2013 – April 2014; part-time 80% from  
October 2014)
	
Developmental determinants of ageing and lifespan

Professional Communication
120
2009–2012	
NERC Postdoctoral Research Associate & Clare College Research 
Associate
	
Large Animal Research Group, Department of Zoology, University of 
Cambridge
	
Adaptive suppression of growth in co-operative meerkats
GRANTS & AWARDS
Oct 2015	
Royal Society Dorothy Hodgkin Fellowship, £460k inc £56k research 
expenses
July 2015	
Elizabeth Hannah Jenkinson Fund, £2 110
April 2015	
ASAB Research Grant, £5 790 
Dec 2014	
University of Oxford Returning Carers Fund & Lockey Award, £1 960 
April 2009	
ASAB Honourable mention for talk at Easter ASAB conference, Cardiff
2006–09 	
NERC Studentship for PhD at University of Cambridge 
2004–05 	
BBSRC Studentship for MSc in Biology, University of Oxford
June 2004	
Royal Society Summer Studentship, University of Cambridge
INVITED WORKSHOP PRESENTATIONS
Sep 2015	
International workshop: Early life developmental effects: unifying 
evolutionary and biomedical perspectives. Falmouth, UK
Jul 2015	
Capacity Building Workshop for the TDR/IDRC Initiative on Climate 
Change and Health. Geneva, Switzerland
Mar 2015	
Pre-conference Symposium: Evolutionary developmental biology: Current 
debates. European Human Behaviour and Evolution Association 2015. 
Helsinki, Finland
INVITED INSTITUTIONAL SEMINARS 
May 2016	
Institute of Evolutionary Biology and Environmental Studies, University  
of Zurich
Apr 2016	
Department of Evolution, Ecology and Behaviour, University of Liverpool
Mar 2016	
Department of Psychology, University of Exeter
Mar 2015	
Centre for Ecology and Conservation, University of Exeter
Feb 2015	
Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge
Mar 2012	
Clare College, University of Cambridge
June 2011	
Institute for Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh
May 2011	
Madingley Sub-department of Animal Behaviour, University of Cambridge 
May 2011	
Department of Behavioural Ecology, University of Bern
CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS
Aug 2013	
European Society for Evolutionary Biology, Lisbon, Portugal
Aug 2013	
International Ethology Congress, Newcastle, UK
Jan 2013 	
Edward Grey Institute annual conference, Oxford, UK

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
121
Nov 2012	
London Evolutionary Research Network annual meeting, London, UK 
Sept 2012	
Plasticity and non-genetic inheritance workshop, University of Oxford
Apr 2011	
Social Decision Making: Bridging Economics and Evolutionary Biology, 
Ascona, CH
Mar 2010	
Clare College Research Symposium, Cambridge, UK 
April 2009	
Easter ASAB Meeting, Cardiff, UK
Aug 2008 	
12th International Behavioral Ecology Congress, Ithaca, USA
TEACHING 
Research  	
Supervised 11 final-year Cambridge University undergraduate projects 
(2008–2012): analysing long-term meerkat data (seven students) and a 
dataset of wild tsetse flies (four students)
Tutorials	
Supervised 46 students for 15 colleges at Cambridge University (2008–
2012) in second- and third-year Natural Sciences (Zoology) courses 
(Behavioural Ecology, Ecological Genetics and Population Dynamics); 
and 15 students for six colleges at Oxford University (2012–2013) in 
Evolutionary Ecology of Animals course
Statistics	
Demonstrator for statistics practicals (final-year undergraduate and 
postgraduate students), organised statistics practicals for Part II Zoology 
field course (Cambridge) 
Outreach	
Presented lecture to the Cambridge Natural History Society; co-organised 
workshop for Young Zoologists Club at the University Museum of Zoology 
(Cambridge); wrote popular science article for online magazine The 
Conversation
OTHER PROFESSIONAL RESPONSIBILITIES 
Peer review	
Reviews editor for Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution
	
Reviewed grants for French National Research Agency (ANR)
	
Reviewed journal articles for Animal Behaviour, Behaviour, Behavioral 
Ecology, Ethology, Behavioural Processes, Biology Letters, Ecology, 
Ecology Letters, Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, Functional Ecology, 
Journal of Evolutionary Biology, Journal of Zoology, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B, PLoS Computational Biology, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B. 
Workshops	
Co-organising symposium: ‘From parents to peers: The consequences of 
information use for evolution, development and social behaviour’ (ISBE 
Conference, Exeter, August 2016) and ‘Origin and role of epigenetic 
information transmission in evolution’ at Mathematical Models in 
Ecology and Evolution (Paris, July 2015). Organised an international 
workshop for 40 participants on modelling plasticity and non-genetic 
inheritance (Oxford, September 2012). Co-organised annual meeting  
(‘Co-operation in mongooses’) at (Cambridge, 2009–2011)
Societies	
British Ecological Society, Association for the Study of  
Animal Behaviour

Professional Communication
122
SELECTED PUBLICATIONS
Total output: 27 peer-reviewed publications; total citations: 372; h-index: 11
1.	
Huchard, E., S. English, M.B.V. Bell, N. Thavarajah, T.H. Clutton-Brock. 2016. Competitive 
growth in a cooperative mammal. Nature 533, 532–534.
2.	
English, S., H. Cowen, E. Garnett, J.W. Hargrove. Maternal effects on offspring size in a 
natural population of the viviparous tsetse fly. Ecological Entomology, in press.
3.	
English, S., T.W. Fawcett, A.D. Higginson, P.C. Trimmer, T. Uller. Adaptive use of 
information during growth can explain long-term effects of early-life experiences. 
American Naturalist. 2016. 187, 620–632. 
4.	
English, S., L.E. Browning, N.J. Raihani. Developmental plasticity and social 
specialization in cooperative societies. Animal Behaviour. 2016. 106, 37–42.
5.	
English, S., I. Pen, N. Shea, T. Uller. Non-genetic inheritance in plants and animals. PLoS 
One. 2015. 10(1): e0116996. 
6.	
Uller, T., S. Nakagawa, S. English. Weak evidence for anticipatory parental effects in 
plants and animals. Journal of Evolutionary Biology. 2013. 26(10), 2161–2170.
7.	
English, S., A.W. Bateman and T.H. Clutton-Brock. Lifetime growth in wild meerkats: 
Incorporating life history and environmental factors into a standard growth model. 
Oecologia. 2012. 169(1): 143–153.
8.	
English, S., S. Nakagawa and T.H. Clutton-Brock. Consistent individual differences in co-
operative behaviour in meerkats (Suricata suricatta). Journal of Evolutionary Biology. 
2010. 23(8): 1597–1604.
4.2	 Letters or emails of application or covering 
letters
A letter of application accompanying your CV may be the most important letter 
you will ever write, as it is often the deciding factor in whether or not you are 
granted an interview for a job. While the CV will convey your details to your 
prospective employer, the personal emphasis, style and tone of the covering letter 
will persuade him or her to grant you an interview. This is your opportunity 
to state that what you bring is unique to you and to describe the benefit your 
employer would derive by hiring you and not another candidate. 
It is preferable to use the person’s name, if you have it — it can be well worth 
doing some research to find out the relevant name. It is increasingly common 
to include the first and surname in the salutation (eg Dear Evelyn Fiyo). This is 
convenient when the gender of the person being addressed is not recognisable 
from the name. If the title is known (eg Mr, Ms, Dr, Prof), then only the surname 
is required (eg Dear Rev Fiyo). 
Do not send supporting documents (eg transcriptions of academic results and 
reference letters) until they are requested — only mention that they are available 
on request. Should you be mailing hard copy, send certified copies of the originals, 
not the originals. 

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
123
Structure of a covering letter
The covering letter should contain:
••
your email address
••
your telephone and/or mobile phone number
••
date (the day on which you plan to post it)
••
addressee’s title, initials and name
••
addressee’s designation 
••
name of the department
••
name of the organisation
••
organisation’s full postal address, with postal code.
The followings sections discuss information which could be included in the body 
of the letter.
First paragraph
This paragraph gives the reason for contact (a bursary application, job application, 
request for information, etc). Make this as powerful an opening as possible:
••
State the position, job, bursary or programme you are applying for and how 
you heard about it. If you are responding to an advertisement, give details.
••
Give details of how you were referred to the organisation, for example name 
a personal contact.
••
Refer the reader to documents enclosed in support of your application (CV, 
application form, certificates, etc).
Body paragraphs
These motivate your application or requests and highlight what recommends you:
••
Explain how your skills, qualifications and experience would benefit the 
organisation or programme.
••
Describe the benefit to the employer, company or bursar of employing you 
(and not another candidate).
••
Describe the benefit to your future and career development to be derived 
from the bursary, vacation job or whatever the case may be. 
••
If you are answering an advertisement, identify the attributes and work 
experience the advertiser is looking for and give examples of how you meet 
each requirement.
Final paragraph
Write a positive conclusion and then a statement that encourages the reader to act:
••
Indicate, if relevant, that you would like a personal interview and that you 
are available at the reader’s convenience.
••
Finish with a positive statement that encourages the reader to act on your 
letter.

Professional Communication
124
Complimentary close
Start the complimentary close with ‘Yours sincerely’ if the letter is addressed to a 
person by name, or ‘Yours faithfully’ if the person’s name is not mentioned in the 
salutation (for example ‘Dear Sir/Madam’). Then add your signature, and type or 
print your name underneath the signature, whatever is appropriate.
The following is an example of an application letter to an engineering 
recruitment agency, requesting the agency to find a job for the writer.
eg
xx xxxx Street
Rondebosch 7700
Work: (021) xxx xx88
Home: (021) 689xxxxx
Email: xxxjborman@xxx.net
Date: 19 May 20––
Mr Jerry Dlamini
Manager
Dlamini Employment Enterprises
PO Box 22
Bellville 7532
Dear Mr Dlamini
APPLICATION FOR A JOB SEARCH
I wish to request your recruitment firm to accomplish an effective 
search for a position in environmental engineering. I heard 
about your company through the managing director of Mitteka 
Industries, Mr David Silovitek, who suggested I contact you. My 
objective is to join an engineering services firm specialising in 
remedial investigations and feasibility studies. 
Academic background and experience
My background, stemming from vacation work and research for my thesis, includes:
•	 experience in formation evaluations
•	 stratigraphic profiling
•	 borehole geophysical surveys
•	 groundwater analysis
•	 data acquisition and processing.
My environmental knowledge and experience include:
•	 storage, transportation and surveying of radioactive sources
•	 handling, storage and transportation of explosives and explosive materials
•	 familiarity with RCRA, CERCLA, SARS, TSCA, NRC, ATF, DOT and similar regulations and 
regulating agencies
An effective subject 
line
The opening 
paragraph gives the 
reason for contact 
and an overview of 
the letter. 
Bullet lists give 
the reader a short 
overview

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
125
•	 scientific analysis of borehole geophysical data and the application of interpretation to 
describe hydrogeologic conditions
•	 market development activities, including client studies and market assessments
•	 preparation and presentation to senior management.
Please review my background in the attached curriculum vitae.  
I would appreciate an interview with you. I can be reached at  
(021) xxx xx88 during working hours. Alternatively, I will contact 
you in two weeks’ time.
Yours sincerely
J  Borman
Joseph Borman
Attachment: Curriculum vitae
The last paragraph 
refers the reader 
to supporting 
documents. The 
concise closing 
paragraph indicates 
future action to be 
taken.
This is an example of a letter responding to an advertisement:
eg
Yusif Hassiem Jaffer
xxx xxxx Drive
Crawford 7764
9 February 20––
Mr John Eldon
Manager, Human Resources: HDI
19 South Road
Mowbray 7700
Dear Mr Eldon
Position of Trainer/Facilitator: Human 
Development Institute
Please accept this letter and curriculum vitae. I am sending them 
in response to your newspaper advertisement in the Argus of 
8/2/20–– for the position of trainer/facilitator with HDI. 
You require:
I offer:
•	 excellent interactive 
training skills
a well-used, excellent  
combination of counselling,  
education and business skills  
emphasising experiential participation
•	 highly developed 
group facilitation 
skills
over 15 years in counselling, training and 
teaching very effectively using diverse, 
potent facilitation or processing skills
Good analysis of 
recipient’s needs
This is an 
unconventional 
method of 
organising 
information. The 
effect is immediate 
and dynamic. 

Professional Communication
126
•	 a dynamic, expressive personality
an energetic, personable, articulate, good-
humoured, balanced professional character
•	 four to eight years’ experience in 
corporate training and facilitation
three years’ experience in training and 
facilitation at universities, and three years’ 
private practice
•	 BA, master’s preferred
two master’s degrees: Counselling and 
Education Administration (including 
MBA courses: organisational behaviour, 
management)
I believe that I am well qualified for the trainer/facilitator position, and would like to offer 
your company my skills. I will call you next week to see if you will be available to meet me 
to discuss my application.
Yours sincerely
Y Jaffer
Yusif Jaffer
Attachment
Here is an example of an application for an academic position: 
eg
Sinead English
Email: xx23x@xxx.ac.uk 
Large Animal Research Group
Tel: 01223 336xx
Department of Zoology
12 September 20––
Dear Dr Wei-Yu
I am writing in support of my application for the position of Postdoctoral Researcher in 
Evolutionary Biology (Vacancy ID xxx), as advertised on the Evoldir mailing list. I believe that 
my relevant research experience on related topics in meerkats, combined with an aptitude 
for applying statistical models and an enthusiasm to learn new theoretical approaches, 
makes me a highly eligible candidate for this position. 
I have extensive experience working on evolutionary theory and questions pertaining 
to the development of life-history strategies within species. In my current position as a 
postdoctoral research associate at the University of Cambridge, I have been afforded the 
flexibility to target my research toward my own primary interests, which involve exploring 
the link between early environment, developmental trajectories and life-history decisions. As 
a species where individuals either follow a strategy of remaining a subordinate or becoming 
a dominant breeder, with marked differences in lifespan and reproductive success, meerkats 
are an ideal system to explore such questions. These interests were formulated during 
my doctoral work on the same study system, in which I investigated the extent to which 
individual variation in helping is plastic or consistent over time. 

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
127
During my academic career thus far, I have acquired skills in mathematical modelling, 
particularly in the application of statistical models to vast, long-term data sets. I have 
recently developed a predictive model of growth in meerkats, incorporating life history and 
environmental parameters into a standard growth model. This model implemented novel 
techniques not previously used in growth research [….] an analytical model looking at the 
link between group size and reproductive skew, and an empirical test of this model on the 
Polistes wasp system. 
Having described my collaboration network, I hope I have demonstrated my teamwork and 
collaboration skills. Other aspects of my current job description give further insight into this: 
for the past two years, I have co-organised the annual ‘Co-operation in birds and mammals’ 
meeting in Cambridge, attended by about 40 researchers. Good time management has been 
essential to my job, which requires balancing research, teaching and project management, 
with regular interactions with the team at the field in South Africa. I have presented my 
research at several international conferences and invited seminars. 
In summary, I have a strong empirical background coupled with mathematical aptitude, 
and would bring my skills and sincere enthusiasm for the topics to be investigated to this 
position. I hope you consider my application in this light. Regardless of the outcome of my 
application, I shall certainly follow the work of this project with great interest, as I strongly 
feel that developmental plasticity is one of the most exciting topics in evolutionary biology 
today. 
Yours sincerely
S English
Sinead English
Presentation and formatting
Before submitting your covering letter, CV and supporting documents (if you 
choose to or are required to submit supporting documents), proofread them 
carefully and ensure that your formatting is consistent. 
It is preferable to email or submit your documents in PDF format so that the 
information cannot be changed and to ensure that the template appears on other 
screens and prints in a way that is true to your design. To convert a Microsoft® 
Word™ document to a PDF file, use the Save As command and, in the Save As 
dialog box, choose the file format for PFD in the Save as type dropdown box. 
4.3	 Interviews for job or funding applications
With a comprehensive CV and covering letter, you hope to be granted an interview. 
For a commercial position, employers look at interpersonal skills which cannot 
be conveyed in documents. So, they will seek analytical skills in logical answers, 
problem-solving skills in carefully considered solutions, and overall communication 
skills in the articulacy and clarity of your response. From the questions you pose, 
they will hear whether you have intent to lead and be involved, and whether you 
have a strong interest in their industry and business. 

Professional Communication
128
In your responses, you must take the opportunity to showcase the experience you 
refer to in your CV. For example, you may have headed a sports team. It is a one-
line mention in the CV, but in the interview, you can describe an incident which 
happened while you were in this role and which shows the leadership or teamwork 
skills you used. If you were involved in a critical project, prepare additional 
relevant material to quote, such as statistics of the project, with money spent or 
saved. If you cannot give the facts, do not fabricate them; rather say that you do 
not have them at hand but can send them on later.
The interview will involve some closed questions which are easy to answer, as 
they require little more than a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ (for example: ‘Would you be prepared to 
work in Alaska?’). Be prepared, however, for the interviewer to ask open questions, 
such as these:
••
Tell me about yourself.
••
What are the highlights in your CV?
••
What are your strengths and weaknesses?
••
Give an example of a situation that tested your leadership ability/tolerance/
analytical skills.
••
Tell me about a time you had to do something in the line of your work that 
you didn’t enjoy.
You may also be asked leading or multiple questions. These are harder to answer. 
The leading question is there to trip you up — to force you into a corner. Take 
time before you answer so that you give the answer you want to give. You may 
buy time in an interview by first commenting on the question (eg ‘Thank you for 
raising that. It was a difficult time in my job, but the experience proved useful’). 
Then bring your answer to focus on the areas you want to project. 
If the interviewer asks a few questions in one, rephrase and unpack the 
questions one by one before replying; this also buys you time for considering your 
responses. 
The underlying common factor in all these aspects of job search is sincerity. 
If you have prepared each item so that it truly reflects you and your skills, this 
will come across. A reader or listener can quickly discern when someone is not 
genuine. Thus, do not cover up areas you are asked about: be truthful and give 
full descriptions. 
In order to be successful at an interview, you need to go through three stages: 
your preparation, the interview and your follow-up. 
Before the interview
To prepare, research the organisation, person (if applicable) and subject matter. 
By asking questions that show evidence of this research, you will indicate your 
interest. Ensure you are wearing appropriate clothing and that you have worked 
out the travel time to the location so that you will be neither late nor too early. Do 

Curricula vitae, application letters and interviews      Chapter 4
129
not wear something which is new and to which you are unaccustomed, since you 
may not feel comfortable in the outfit. An uncomfortable outfit may also leave 
you feeling unsettled and awkward during your interview. For example, women 
should not wear very high heels unless they are accustomed to walking in them, 
as their body language could come across as uncertain should they be unsteady 
in their shoes.
Have a practice session, or a mock interview, with a family member or a friend 
and have that person ask you difficult questions. Start the mock interview from the 
moment you enter the room. Film this and observe how you come across.
During the interview
Body language and appearance are reputed to account for one-third of the impact 
one makes in an interview. While you convey facts through the content of your 
answers, your character and your attitude come across via your tone of voice 
and the level of confidence conveyed in your body language. It is conveying the 
appropriate attitude that will earn you credibility in the eyes of the interviewer. 
Make direct eye contact and have a firm handshake. 
Take time to answer fully — a short silence will show you to be a thinking 
person who values both the question and the interviewer. In answering a question, 
you may use the topic to include other positive points or concrete experience. For 
example, if asked about an experience in which you led a team, you may also 
include in the description how you managed conflict in the team and settled a 
difficult issue harmoniously.
Check yourself for mannerisms or gestures which reveal nervousness or 
insecurity. For example, do not gaze out of the window, fiddle with your ’phone 
(have it switched off — and if you have forgotten, turn it off should it ring), 
play with jewellery or touch your hair. Sit in a relaxed but composed way while 
waiting for the next question and use the time to check on interesting, additional 
contributions you can make. Appear confident but not overly relaxed: do not 
lean back in the chair or cross your legs, and do not use slang or inappropriate 
vocabulary. If asked about your former peers, colleagues or employers, never say 
anything negative. 
The STAR approach is an approach to conducting an interview in which you 
will be asked questions based on your competencies, as opposed to your past 
activities. This helps you explain in a fluent way something that may be quite 
vague. The STAR acronym stands for the following:
••
Situation: Briefly describe the situation you were in, in terms of the qualities 
the employer is seeking – such as problem solving or leadership – and give 
concrete examples.
••
Task: Explain the role you were in and the responsibilities you carried in 
relation to the performance of the team.

Professional Communication
130
••
Action: Outline what you did as an individual and how you did it. Include 
your reasons, if useful. 
••
Results: Wrap up the incident by accounting for the outcomes of your 
actions. Describe if your actions meant that the expectations of the project 
were met; be truthful about where outcomes were not achieved.
Closing the interview and folllow-up
Thank the interviewer and make it clear that, whatever the outcome, you have 
appreciated the opportunity to learn more about the position. If necessary, make 
notes of anything you may have to follow through with — this will give you an 
opportunity to ask for a business card. Leave the interview room with the same 
self-assured manner with which you entered it. Within the next two days, write 
a thank-you email. If you do not hear at all from the organisation or person (and 
you were not told that there would be no response), it is appropriate for you to 
call to ask about the status of your application.
✔
Checklist for a well-organised and persuasive CV, letter of 
application and interview
Before submitting your CV and letter of application and/or attending a job selection 
interview, confirm that you have paid attention to the items in this checklist:
•	 Use a current and readable format for the CV and letters of application.
•	 Use an appropriately formal tone and style that convey sincerity.
•	 Make sure your skills, knowledge and experience are relevant to the position reflected  
in the document. 
•	 Proofread the written documents. Remember that a small typographical error could 
cause your application to be discarded without consideration.
•	 Create PDF versions of the documents for submission.
•	 Advise your referees.
•	 Do research into the company and the logistics of attending an interview.
•	 Select clothing appropriate for the interview.
•	 Rehearse or have a practice run for the interview.

5
131
The aim of this chapter is to outline the interpersonal and spoken communication 
tools you need as a manager in order for you to participate in or lead effective 
meetings, be they face to face or virtual. As a manager you will need to manage 
groups and teams. Part of this involves knowing how to build a team, the stages a 
team goes through in its functioning and the roles its members play. This chapter 
will help you analyse the type of leader you are or need to be. It considers the 
impact different styles of leadership have on the team and the task — the latter 
often being one of problem solving.
Your leadership style defines how you negotiate to win. In negotiation, there are 
three main approaches: joint problem solving, pure bargaining or a combination of 
these. The timing of presenting information is critical in a negotiation — whether 
it is done before, during or after the negotiation process.
As a manager, you are responsible not only for your own decisions and 
actions; you also act on behalf of your company. Thus, you need to ensure that 
you appreciate and act within the ethical codes of your profession and of your 
society. It is not merely a case of thinking, ‘What is best for me or my company, 
right now or for the next ten years?’ It also means thinking, ‘What is best for my 
community, my country and my planet, right now and for the next two hundred 
years?’ Our present actions define our future lives, and while it is comfortable and 
easy to live for today and the profits of today, our consciences should guide us as 
to what is best for ourselves, the greater community and the greater world — not 
just today, but after tomorrow as well.
This chapter describes teams and team building, leadership and negotiation, 
and the role of ethics in the professional and corporate workplace, including the 
guides offered by professions and by government decrees. By the end of this 
chapter, you will know how to:
••
build effective teams
••
recognise the qualities of a good member of a team
••
understand process and task roles in a team
••
recognise styles of leadership
••
solve problems
••
negotiate and persuade
Managing teams,  
negotiating, working  
ethically

Professional Communication
132
••
use the stages in a negotiation
••
incorporate ethics in the workplace.
5.1	 Building effective teams
Groups and teams are not the same item. A group is a collection of people 
defined by a similar characteristic – such as a class of learners or a gathering of 
holidaymakers on a tour – but with no interdependency nor any need to work 
together. A group becomes a team when the members acquire a shared purpose; 
that is, when they have the aim of achieving a certain outcome and need each 
other to achieve it, such as a class working together to raise funds for their 
graduation ball or a tour group climbing Mount Kilimanjaro with the intention 
that every member manages it.
Characteristics and life cycles of teams
An effective team is one which has a shared purpose and a definable membership. 
This commitment to shared goals and membership means it is conscious of itself 
as a defined team or group. The individual members of a successful team will be:
••
involved with other team members 
••
willing to interact in a unified way
••
interdependent in the satisfaction of their needs 
••
willing to abide by the group’s decisions.
However, having strong commitment to the team overall does not mean the 
individuals are repressed. Successful team members have high morale and also:
••
contribute to the group without commands or pressure
••
discuss questions with lots of give and take
••
use disagreements to clear the air
••
keep their sense of humour.
With these attributes, a well-functioning team is able to move the required task 
forward in an organised way. The team’s functioning will also be influenced by 
what stage of its life cycle it is going through. A team is likely to go through a 
number of phases in its development, as shown in Table 5.1.
Table 5.1  Phases of development of a team and its members (adapted from Truckman, 
1965, in Tubbs and Moss, 2008)
Phase
Description
Phase 1: Form
Members break the ice and begin to establish a common basis for 
functioning. The initial tension is called ‘primary tension’.
Phase 2: Storm
Conflicts occur in the group as individuals assert their dominance.

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
133
Phase
Description
Phase 3: Norm
Members of the team resolve their conflicts for the good of the 
common task. They share information and work to achieve the 
team’s purpose.
Phase 4: Perform
The team members achieve consensus and maximum productivity.
Phase 5: Mourn
The task has been completed and the team no longer has a 
purpose. Members feel regret at the disbanding of the group.
Source: Adapted from Truckman 1965 – in Tubbs and Moss 2008
Process and task roles in groups
Individuals in a team usually develop different roles in that team according to their 
personalities, their knowledge and skills, and their commitment to the task. Most 
team members will attend to both the ways in which they perform their task (task 
roles) and to the ways in which they work together (process roles). Some members 
will be more inclined to play one role over the other; however, balance between 
roles is important. While task roles are needed to solve problems and achieve the 
task, process roles are essential in maintaining relationships and interpersonal 
functions between the members, as indicated in Table 5.2. 
Table 5.2  Roles played by individual members of a team
Task roles
Process roles
initiating new ideas or approaches
hearing people out
seeking information
drawing in quiet members of the group
giving information and opinions
acknowledging members’ viewpoints
clarifying to help others understand
encouraging members of the group
elaborating
mediating conflict
co-ordinating information
gate-keeping, ensuring everyone is heard
defining the progress of discussion
setting standards that are agreed on
testing if the group is ready for discussion
following the general viewpoint
summarising past discussion
relieving tension
Source: Adapted from Tubbs
As can be seen from the items in Table 5.2, activities which support the task, such 
as elaborating on a point and helping others to understand, require the support of 
process roles, such as hearing people out and encouraging members of the group. 
The team that inhibits its members may find it can never achieve a task if the key 
to it lies with the withdrawn member. Equally, task and process roles are better 
enabled if all members of a team adhere to core good behaviours, such as being 
punctual and not eating or using mobile ’phones during workshops or meetings.

Professional Communication
134
5.2 	Styles of leadership
A factor which makes an impact on the team and its character, purpose and life 
cycle, is its leadership. The inter-relationship between the leader and members of 
the group, or the leader member exchange (LMX), underlies the development of the 
roles each person plays in the team. Likewise, the nature of the team may influence 
the leadership style which it develops or accepts. Leadership falls into three main 
types: autocratic, laissez-faire and democratic.
Autocratic leadership
An autocratic leader dominates the team and pays little attention to the needs 
and suggestions of the team members in making decisions. The leader may tend 
to railroad; that is, push his or her own ideas over those of others. If the team 
elects such a leader, it is usually because of the person’s charismatic and driven 
personality. In cases where the appointment is by another party and has nothing 
to do with the team, the autocratic leader may be quiet and reserved.
If this type of leader has been given authority from a higher level, he or she may not 
be interested in the process or the people, but only in achieving the outcome stipulated 
by his or her superiors. In this situation discussion and, therefore, cohesiveness are 
limited, as the leader shows a lack of interest in colleagues. The working group can 
make suggestions, but these will be of little or no importance to the autocratic leader. 
The members of the team may become dispirited, which will affect the climate in the 
group. Its cohesiveness and participation may become minimal. This would create a 
chain reaction, in that the lack of cohesiveness would result in a lack of ideas, which 
would lessen the chances of the best solution being selected.
There are times, such as a crisis, when autocratic leadership has its place. 
In case of a fire, for example, most people would rather be led decisively and 
without discussion to the nearest exit. On the other hand, in instances where group 
involvement is needed to ensure buy-in for the decision, autocratic leadership 
is ineffectual, as the group is unable to contribute. In these cases, democratic 
leadership would be the preferred option.
Laissez-faire leadership
Laissez-faire means ‘to let go’ and describes a nominal and ineffectual leadership, 
where the members of the group are allowed to do as they wish and their decisions 
and actions are not necessarily channelled in accordance with the objectives. As 
the leader has little interest or makes no impact, there may be cohesiveness in the 
group, but there will be a lack of discipline. Thus, the process will likely suffer 
from protracted discussions, poor evaluation of decisions and the non-completion 
of tasks. These factors will negatively affect cohesiveness and outcomes.

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
135
Democratic leadership
Democratic leaders are the most productive, as they involve the team extensively 
and thus draw the most contributions from it. The democratic leader also shows 
enthusiasm for the task and tries to involve all the members in the execution of 
the task. This type of leader listens to the team members’ suggestions and takes 
their opinions into account, which bodes well for a cohesive, supportive and 
contributory climate in the group. Productivity is good and, although time may be 
lost in the process (for example in long discussions), these teams usually achieve 
their purpose and complete the task.
In order for a climate of support to be created, all team members must feel 
that their contributions are of value and that they are not at risk of personal 
criticism. In working on a task, the leader should manage the team and encourage 
active participation through listening and shared contribution until a satisfactory 
decision is made. In the case where some members of the team still do not agree 
with the decision, these members should also be encouraged to present their views 
and be acknowledged.
The following are some of the qualities that define a democratic leader:
Own behaviour
••
Does not dominate discussion; 
shares responsibility
••
Is open-minded, not defensive of 
own ideas
••
Listens attentively and 
empathically
••
Encourages a friendly, 
co-operative and democratic 
atmosphere
••
Shows respect to others
••
Shows appreciation and is 
responsive
••
Is natural, honest and sincere
Attitude to team
••
Does not control or manipulate
••
Allows as much interaction as 
possible
••
Can allow different points of view 
even if they offend some members
••
Allows members freedom to suggest 
‘wild’ ideas
••
Promotes mutual approach; avoids 
competitiveness
••
Avoids dogmatic attitudes; is 
flexible
••
Does not take sides
••
Maintains appropriate distance from 
team
5.3	 Techniques for solving problems
A common purpose of a team is to solve problems — either an existing problem or 
one that is predicted to occur. Thus the team members’ energies may be directed 
towards analysing current evidence or projecting possibilities. For both activities, 
the real problem, not the perceived one, needs to be defined and any criteria to be 
applied must be set.

Professional Communication
136
One plan or agenda that offers a universal problem-solving technique is a six-
stage plan that was first developed by John Dewey (Tubbs & Moss, 2008) and as 
shown in Table 5.3. The different skills and roles required of the team members are 
also evident in this plan. As individuals differ in their talents, it is obvious that a 
team using this method will cover more of these activities than an individual. This 
translates into the synergy that teamwork produces.
Table 5.3  Dewey’s six stages for problem solving
No
Stage
Activity
1.
Define the problem. The apparent problem may not be the real one. 
Drill down to the real problem and its scope. 
Analytical
2.
State your objectives to solve the problem. You may need to define the 
criteria which will govern the solution.
Analytical
3.
Formulate alternative strategies for achieving these objectives through 
one or more approaches: research, experimentation and brainstorming.
Creative
4.
Evaluate each strategy in terms of your objectives.
Evaluative
5.
Select the strategy that best meets your objectives or that solves the 
problem and meets the criteria, if any exist.
Evaluative
6.
Evaluate the success of the problem-solving exercise and/or consider 
the success of the solution once implemented.
Evaluative
Source: Adapted from Tubbs & Moss 2008
An effective exercise for taking the personalities out of a conflict situation in 
order to resolve problems is De Bono’s Six Thinking Hats. It can be found online 
at http://www.debonogroup.com/six_thinking_hats.php.
5.4	 Negotiation and persuasion 
The common denominator between persuasion and negotiation is influence. 
Persuasion is communication designed to influence others by modifying their 
beliefs, values or attitudes. Negotiation is communication with the intent to 
influence others to modify their decisions and actions.
Negotiation may be used to solve a problem, but it usually goes beyond 
the fact to the personalities involved. Many people shy away from negotiating 
because of the confrontational nature of facing conflict. However, with good 
negotiation skills you can resolve conflicting interests through a process that 
involves persuasion, perhaps compromise and, on occasion, hard bargaining with 
joint problem solving. Competition and co-operation are both necessary facets of 
negotiation, but they need to be kept in balance. To regard all disputes as possible 
to solve without negotiation is naïve, while concentrating on the competitive 
aspect of negotiation may also lead to no cohesive close.

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
137
Approaches to negotiation
The negotiation process includes a number of distinct sub-processes, the most 
common being joint problem solving and pure bargaining. These two processes 
are antithetical and lead to actions which can interfere with one another. Trade-
offs are inevitable. Those involved have to decide which sacrifices are necessary 
to reach their goals. For example, a threat to walk out may strengthen the pure 
bargaining position and improve the negotiator’s internal political situation, but 
such action will inhibit joint problem solving and create unfavourable attitudes 
among the other parties.
A core requirement for maintaining the appropriate climate for all successful 
negotiation is that interests and facts be under focus, not positions and 
personalities. Thus, the people involved must be separated from the problem.
Joint problem solving
Joint problem solving refers to common interests and is a co-operative activity. It 
is based on trust and open communication, which allow you to define and solve 
your mutual problems. However, while joint problem solving can be a win-win 
situation, it may have to be a variable-sum game. If you can solve joint problems, 
both sides gain. For example, if labour and management can find a better way to 
handle grievances, both sides gain. Price negotiations offer few opportunities for 
joint problem solving, but most negotiations include issues on which the parties’ 
interests are at least partially parallel.
Follow these steps prior to joint problem solving:
••
Identify issues with clearly co-operative elements.
••
Check for agreement on the definition of issues.
••
If possible, take co-operative issues out of the central negotiations.
••
Work first on the primarily co-operative issues.
••
Honestly communicate your goal.
••
Encourage the other party to do the same.
Do the following during joint problem-solving negotiations:
••
Clarify and honestly communicate the similarities and differences between 
both parties’ goals.
••
Honestly discuss differences in priorities.
••
Listen respectfully.
••
Make sure your openness is reciprocated.
••
Propose many alternatives.
••
Select the alternative that is the best combination of objective quality and 
acceptability to both parties.
••
Go slowly on mixed issues.

Professional Communication
138
Pure bargaining
Pure bargaining is a win-lose or zero-sum game. Each gain for one side is 
balanced by an equal loss for the other. Price negotiations are almost entirely pure 
bargaining, because losses for one party equal gains for another. For example, if 
you are to receive R10 000 more, your opponent has to receive R10 000 less. Since 
your interests directly conflict, pure bargaining is always competitive and based 
on power. You cannot convince most people to lose for your gain, but you may be 
able to force them to do so.
Pure bargaining versus joint problem solving
Joint problem solving and pure bargaining are the two most important sub-
processes in negotiations. They set the tone for the entire negotiation. Some 
negotiations consist entirely of pure bargaining, and in others, some issues should 
be approached as joint problems. In certain negotiations, the two sub-processes are 
mixed together. One of the most difficult tasks for a negotiator is to decide when 
to bargain competitively and when to co-operate on mutual problems.
Pure bargaining is based on power. Joint problem solving is based on 
trust, and without that trust neither party will communicate honestly, nor will 
they take action which might give away an advantage. Thus, pure bargaining 
requires manipulative communication while joint problem solving requires open 
communication. Unfortunately, even when both parties want to co-operate to 
solve joint problems, pure bargaining usually dominates the negotiations. Power 
is more tangible and less fragile than trust. Power creates a feeling of security, 
while trust always involves some risks. The other party may take advantage of the 
weakness you create when you try to problem-solve.
Since pure bargaining and joint problem solving require essentially incompatible 
tactics, you must be able to select the right approach. Sometimes you need only 
one approach for an entire negotiation. However, in many negotiations you need 
to use pure bargaining tactics on some issues, and joint problem-solving tactics 
on others. Of course, it is not an either/or matter. You rarely move all the way to 
either extreme. On some issues, emphasise problem solving; on others bargain as 
hard as you can, but only if you are in the more powerful position.
Stages in negotiation
Negotiation meetings have the same requirements as all other meetings: for the 
meeting to be successful, you need to:
••
plan carefully before the meeting
••
use good interpersonal skills to manage the process during the meeting
••
engage in effective post-meeting summary and analysis.

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
139
Before the negotiations
Set your priorities. In multiple-issue negotiations, decide which issues are most 
important to you. Then decide how much you will trade off on minor issues to 
achieve the outcome you want on the major issues. Plan your and your team’s 
strategy and establish whether all members are clear about the role they are to 
play.
Decide upon the arguments you will use to convince the other party of the 
logic of your argument. Plan the approach to presenting these arguments so that 
you can explore or take positive action on issues with joint problem solving 
without greatly weakening a pure bargaining position.
During the negotiations
Continuously revise your estimates of the other party. Follow your planned 
negotiation strategy unless the other party behaves contrary to your expectations. 
If this happens, analyse the change in behaviour and make new plans. The purpose 
of this analysis and planning is to get away from relying exclusively on intuition.
In interacting with the other party, it is more productive to offer as many 
alternatives to agreement as you can, so that the best option can be reached. 
Communicate clearly and clarify differences and agreements, but guard against 
exposing all your tactics. Good communication practice is important, such as:
••
listening respectfully
••
talking to and not at people
••
being responsive to non-verbal cues.
From time to time, stop and analyse what has happened. A useful strategy is 
to call a break for the team to caucus. This gives the team the opportunity to 
regroup, to discuss in private the stage the negotiation has reached and to plan the 
strategy from this point onwards. The leader can summarise the progress to date 
and propose forward action. The team members can share information, test their 
understanding and ask questions to confirm their knowledge. If there is conflict 
and emotions have been triggered in the discussion, it gives the participants time 
to calm down and to better manage the situation.
After the negotiations
The outcome of the negotiations will determine the process following the 
negotiation. Consult the minutes or notes taken during the discussion and analyse 
what occurred. Consider if there was agreement and resolution of all disagreements 
and what future action was decided on. Have a post mortem of your own team’s 
role. Consider whether your team followed the plan, presented logical arguments 
supported by fact and operated as a cohesive whole.
If the process followed an unexpected direction, consider the probable causes 
for the behaviour of the other party. Assess the strengths and weaknesses of your 

Professional Communication
140
team or organisation. From the conclusions you draw, decide how to negotiate 
with the other party in future.
Roles in the negotiating team
There are a number of roles in a negotiating team which different members may 
play. One person can fulfil more than one role. Some roles conflict with each other. 
For example, you cannot be both tough and friendly, and it is difficult to analyse 
either behavioural or objective data when, as spokesperson for the group, you must 
reply quickly to the other party’s comments.
The important roles in negotiating teams are the chief negotiator, spokesperson 
and social observer or analyst of information:
••
The chief negotiator holds the team together, assigns activities and has the 
ultimate authority on all issues. The chief negotiator is not necessarily the 
spokesperson.
••
The spokesperson does most of the talking, but may have relatively little 
authority. The choice of spokesperson should be based on the situation. For 
example, if joint problem-solving tactics seem appropriate, the spokesperson 
should be a friendly, rational problem solver. If most issues require pure 
bargaining and there appears to be a small bargaining range, a forceful 
spokesperson would be the better choice. If the issues require technical 
expertise, the team needs the credibility of a technically knowledgeable 
spokesperson.
••
Social observers are acute to verbal and non-verbal cues. They often have 
quiet and sensitive personalities.
Other roles are those played in all meetings by different members of the group, 
from those who are more task-orientated to those who are more maintenance-
orientated. Both types of roles have value, but both need to be kept in check.
5.5	 Ethics at work
This section is concerned with professional ethics, as required of those in the 
workplace. Professional or corporate ethics are those defined by one’s profession 
or the company one works for, and with which all involved must be compliant. 
Ethics is a set of guiding principles or values that supersede the formal rules and 
structures governing professional activity. These guiding principles are aimed at 
ensuring best practice within a profession. Best practice includes the best interests 
and safety of the profession and the public that the professional serves. 

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
141
Ethics: From the person to society
Human beings are fundamentally impelled to do what is best for themselves, when 
given the choice. It may be assumed that all people have an implicit knowledge 
of the difference between right and wrong, and good and evil. However, what is 
good or best for one person is often not best for others. Society, which is made 
up of separate individuals all contending for their own space and to satisfy their 
own needs, tends to degenerate rapidly towards a state of anarchy, no matter the 
context or the circumstance, when its central authority has been removed. This is 
the state of nature. Literature has attempted over the millennia to study and depict 
the discord that arises when human beings find themselves in the same location, 
fighting over the same land, food, water, air and potential partners. The solution 
that we have adopted over the millennia has been to institute laws and regulations, 
imposed by a higher authority, with the fear of punishment used as an enforcing 
tool.
Every community, or civil society, has developed its own sets of rules to avoid 
anarchy and discord. They govern themselves through various codes or sets of 
rules, including:
••
law: enforced through punishment, such as fines, jail or the death sentence
••
religion: enforced through excommunication or the fear of hell
••
morality: enforced through fear of social shame or alienation.
A civil society thus depends on its laws and its powers of authority in order to 
ensure peace, stability and harmony, which are necessary for the survival of all, 
not just of the fittest. 
But rules and laws only reach so far — not every situation can be foreseen 
or regulated. In the workplace, for instance, regulations governing the treatment 
of workers and trading partners have been slow to develop since the Industrial 
Revolution and the onset of capitalism. However, these regulations have gradually 
increased in strength over the past century and decades, to arrive at the current 
far-reaching legislation governing safety in the workplace, equity and fair or 
unfair dismissal, to name but a few. 
Law and ethics are separate concepts, but have the same or similar endpoints 
or aims: justice and fairness. Where laws have not been developed or promulgated, 
ethics tries to operate. It is not just the workplace that has shown a growing need 
for ethical conduct and regulation, but also all those affected by the actions and 
activities of businesses. Capitalism has long been perceived as grasping and ruthless 
in its drive to make profits — and this drive has long given rise to detrimental 
consequences for those affected directly or indirectly by its activities. The 
conscientious efforts of movements (such as Greenpeace, to name just one) working 
for healthier environments, and against the destruction caused by industries polluting 
rivers, land and the air, have led to greater legislation governing these actions. This 
is an example of ethics leading to the establishment of law. International bodies now 

Professional Communication
142
govern the activities of businesses, and while they may not always be able to punish 
these firms through the law, they can restrict trade with those that defy laid-down 
conventions and standards. Where societies would once excommunicate individuals 
who transgressed laws or norms, the business world now excludes companies that 
defy their regulations or norms, by barring trade with them.
It is clear that without codes of ethics and set procedures for enforcing them, it 
is difficult to regulate enterprises and the individuals that populate them. We can 
see ethics and regulations as pertaining to three levels within the sphere of work:
1.	 At the individual level, ethics are applied to day-to-day decisions on one’s 
own behaviour. 
2.	 At the professional level, professionals put power and materials to work 
for the benefit of humankind, providing ways to improve people’s quality 
of life. Professionals often enjoy high social status, respect and titles, high 
remuneration, self-regulation and the freedom to choose clients. Professionals 
therefore have a great responsibility towards society, as they hold its well-
being in their hands. And so, the relationship between professionals and 
society is one of trust. But as trust is not always enough, and self-regulation is 
not always sufficient, external regulations are required: codes of conduct that 
determine how professionals should behave within their particular contexts. 
3.	 At the corporate level, ethics are applied to corporate governance; balanced 
and integrated economic, social and environmental performance (referred to 
as triple bottom-line reporting); workers’ rights; the right to strike; the ethical 
status of comparable worth in the marketplace; and what constitutes bribery 
and whistleblowing, among other things. Recent decades have seen the ethical 
behaviour of companies come under the spotlight after numerous international 
disasters caused by unethical practices, particularly in the production of 
chemicals or the movement of oil. Through corporate governance, countries 
have sought to contain the behaviour of companies engaged in activities with 
risk. The good governance of a company is evident in the way it manages 
its relations towards its shareholders, the public, the environment and its 
employees, ensuring that these relations are always ethical and for the greater 
good (De George, 2015).
Theoretical views of ethics
An ethical person has a set of values by which they live and which are shared by 
the group they function in. An ethical person also lives by a set of values which is 
universally accepted by society. In essence, ethics is about right and wrong actions, 
and making decisions for the good of the majority. Ethics therefore refers to the 
issue of ‘how to act’. There are various schools of thought regarding ethics, and 
differing views of what is ethical:
••
Utilitarian theories promote the greatest amount of good for the greatest 
number. 

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
143
••
Negative utilitarianism (NU) promotes the least amount of evil or harm, 
or preventing the greatest amount of suffering for the greatest number. 
Proponents of NU argue that this is a more effective ethical formula, since, 
they contend, the greatest harms are more consequential than the greatest 
goods.
••
Deontological ethics or deontology (Greek: δέον [deon], meaning ‘obligation’ 
or ‘duty’) is an approach that focuses on the rightness or wrongness 
of actions themselves, as opposed to the rightness or wrongness of the 
consequences of those actions. 
••
The ethics of care is a normative ethical theory that emphasises the 
importance of relationships. 
There are many schools of thought besides these, and with all these differing and 
opposing theories and ideas, decisions on ethical behaviour can potentially be 
difficult to make. 
Ethics at work
There are varying levels of ethics in the professional sphere, namely (De George, 
2015):
••
governance: regulation, corporate governance committees, auditing, etc
••
global business ethics: cross-cultural issues that arise in countries such as 
China and India
••
ethical culture: loyalty, honesty, strategic planning, human resources, etc
••
leadership: executive compensation, the tone at the top, the role of the CEO 
in ethics, etc
••
corporate social responsibility: sustainability, stakeholder theory, the triple 
bottom line, etc
••
workplace issues: labour and employment practices, monitoring, work–life 
balance, etc
••
product and brand: consumer safety, reputation, intellectual property and 
strategic marketing
••
corporate wrongdoing: corruption, bribery, scandals, whistleblowing, etc.
Ethical theories have developed as people attempt to develop a satisfactory theory 
by which to regulate action at work. Ethics at work govern professional dealings 
— the relationship between the enterprise or the individual and/or the community 
or the public. Governments and professions often use codes of conduct or ethical 
principles to guide them, such as the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, 
(1996) and the code of conduct of the Engineering Council of South Africa (ECSA) 
for the engineering profession. ECSA, for example, legislates and enforces the 
standards of practice and the code of conduct for engineers registered as members. 

Professional Communication
144
It covers nine spheres of engineering: electrical, mechanical, metallurgical, civil, 
aeronautical, agricultural, chemical, industrial and mining. Other professions have 
similar codes by which their members are bound.
While the above codes may not be sufficient to ensure justice and fairness 
in all situations, a lack of codes of ethics or codes of conduct has led to serious 
miscarriages of justice and corrupt practices in the past. Ethics therefore moves 
between the individual level and the corporate level.
The important point is that ethics is not an after-thought in a profession — it 
is integral to it, as Figure 5.1 shows. For example, in the Emerging Technologies 
and Ethical Issues in Engineering workshop in Washington, DC, it was said that 
‘ethics is not peripheral to, or an add-on to, engineering. It is integral to the 
practice of engineering, part of engineering problem solving. Safety and guarding 
against avoidable harm are built into engineering; they are the principles that 
underlie engineering codes and standards’ (Weil, 2003).
•	 Environmental 
necessities/
demands
•	 Preserving nature
•	 Preserving living 
organisms
•	 Technical 
knowledge and 
training
•	 Manuals and 
keeping up to 
date
•	 Professional 
interests
•	 Making a living/
maintaining 
standards
Public interests, eg 
health/safety factors
MORALITY
GUIDING 
PRINCIPLES 
AND VALUES
ETHICS
CODE OF 
CONDUCT
PROFESSIONAL 
JUDGEMENT
BEHAVIOUR
Figure 5.1  A flow chart showing integration of ethics in professions

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
145
Corporate governance in South Africa
In 1994, the King Report on Corporate Governance (King I) was published by the 
King Committee on Corporate Governance, headed by former High Court judge 
Mervyn King. The first of its kind in South Africa, it incorporated a Code of 
Corporate Practices and Conduct. It was aimed at promoting the highest standards 
of corporate governance in South Africa. With time, the code has been developed 
to meet the current needs: King II (2002), King III (2009) and King IV (2017) have 
gone beyond the focus on companies to those they deal with and those who 
govern them to include the greater fiscal and social environment. 
Ethics therefore apply to many levels. It moves between the public and the 
private domain, the corporate and the community, as well as the employee and the 
company. It has origins in law, religion and morality but is specific to groups and 
communities. It is concerned with rights and duties: predominantly, the rights of 
the public, and the duties of the enterprise towards the public it serves, and which 
supports it.
In the South African context, corporate ethical practice has various nuances, 
namely:
••
legal factors: the Constitution, the Bill of Rights
••
corporate social responsibility: since the King III Report
••
cultural factors: African social values, eg ubuntu
••
historical factors: the need to redress the inequities of the past through the 
development of human capital. 
This brief summary in Figure 5.2 of the regulatory and legislative framework 
affecting South African companies charts how legislation attempts to ensure a fair 
and just environment for business to operate in. Nevertheless, however good the 
legislative framework, issues of professional and corporate ethics will continue to 
challenge us. 

Professional Communication
146
King III Report
Relationship between enterprise 
and community it serves: Social 
responsibility
Law
Investment
Reputation
Code of conduct/ 
code of ethics
Ethics in 
Engineering
Duties
Rights
Community
Enterprise
BEE, women in 
workplace — diversity
Whistleblowing
Transparency and 
reliability in reporting
Triple bottom line reporting: 
safety, health, environment 
Corporate governance
Uphold and advance 
integrity, honour and 
dignity of engineering 
profession by using their 
skill for the enhancement 
of human welfare
Development of 
human capital
HIV/AIDS strategy for workers
Do no harm
Hold paramount the 
safety, health and 
welfare of the public 
in the performance 
of their professional 
duties 
Human rights 
Constitution 
Bill of Rights
African value system in 
SA context, eg ubuntu
Religion
Morality
Figure 5.2  Flow chart describing ethics in the engineering profession
Conflicts of interest
Competing interests make an impact on decisions. These competing claims give 
rise to a conflict of interest, where the requirement to act ethically is challenged 
by competing priorities and conflicting choices. For example, a professional’s 
undertaking to conduct a safety inspection on site at a particular time may conflict 
with his or her personal obligation as a parent to care for a sick child.
Conflicts of interest can be identified in various spheres, namely:
••
professional or corporate
••
personal, family or gender-related
••
religious or cultural
••
environmental
••
financial.

Managing teams, negotiating, working ethically      Chapter 5
147
Within a professional environment, it is generally accepted that professional 
interests take precedence over other interests. There are, however, situations where 
the conflict may appear irreconcilable.
Furthermore, an action that is legally permissible is not necessarily morally 
or ethically permissible. Suppose an engineer discovers that the company he or 
she works for is emitting a substance into the atmosphere which is not regulated 
by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Suppose further that the engineer 
reads scientific literature that indicates that the substance causes respiratory 
and potentially more serious health problems. Should the engineer reveal this 
information to the EPA? An ethical code is likely to answer this dilemma by 
insisting that the professional has an obligation to ensure that people are not 
harmed. Not reporting it may be unethical. Whatever your views on this matter, 
the fact that emitting the substance is legally permissible does not necessarily 
mean it is morally permissible to do so. This does not settle the question as to what 
the engineer should do; however, most ethical codes require that the professional’s 
actions comply with accepted moral standards.
✔
Checklist for effective managers
As a committed manager, you will be seen to be credible if you are able to manage and 
develop teams, solve problems and negotiate towards a satisfactory outcome. An effective 
manager will: 
•	 develop the skills of team members 
•	 develop their own leadership skills
•	 guide a team through problem solving 
•	 manage the negotiation process through its different stages
•	 work according to an ethical code which is informed by the law, morality, culture and 
professional knowledge 
•	 assess what is right and wrong in professional behaviour. 

6
148
Meetings, agendas and 
minutes
Meetings are a critical part of doing business. While meetings may have varied 
formats and purposes, the essential principles and etiquette remain the same. At 
the end of this chapter you will be familiar with the processes and practices that 
surround well-planned, well-run and well-recorded meetings. 
Whether you are leading, participating in or servicing a meeting (taking minutes), 
you need good written and spoken communication skills in various areas, namely:
••
the justification for meetings
••
negotiating the various stages of meetings
••
initiating meetings, with clear agendas
••
processing meetings efficiently according to their agendas
••
ensuring efficient outcomes based on comprehensive minutes and tables of 
action.
In this chapter, you will learn about: 
••
the value and purpose of holding meetings
••
the different stages of meetings and the preparation required for each stage
••
the purpose, organisation and style of successful agendas
••
the purpose, organisation and style of professional and efficient minutes, 
including the benefits of preparing a table of action.
6.1	 Reasons to hold meetings and take minutes
Meetings are primarily required to make decisions, such as decisions required 
to move business or projects forward or decisions required by official bodies 
and committees in fulfilment of their mandates. Minutes record the discussion 
and the decisions made at a meeting and provide a convenient review for those 
who attended as well as for those who did not. Minutes also give continuity to a 
process, as the minutes of the previous meeting are referred to and approved, and 
a plan for a subsequent meeting or any particular action required is considered. 
As soon as an organisation, body or grouping has to account for its finances 
and how it operates, it is likely to have a committee or a meeting group defined 
by its set of rules, sometimes referred to as its constitution or terms of reference, 
to ensure business is carried out and recorded properly and with transparency. 

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
149
A constitution should clearly describe the purpose and operation of a committee 
— essentially how it is to function, which includes its membership, the chair, 
all decision-making and communication lines, its terms of office, its quorum (a 
minimum number of members who must be present to conduct business or make 
legitimate decisions) and the general conduct in meetings, among other things. 
Standing or permanent committees tend to be governed by a constitution, whereas 
limited-term groups that have a specific task, particularly one to be completed 
within a finite timeframe such as working parties or project teams, tend to be 
governed by terms of reference, which include some but not all of the elements 
required in a formal constitution. For example, a terms of reference may well not 
prescribe a quorum or meeting frequency, as these will be determined by the group.
Different professions and businesses record minutes or take notes at meetings 
in their own way. However, there is a common core to minutes. In certain cases, 
minutes are the legally binding official records of a meeting and carry weight. If 
they are to be only notes, it is important to call them an aide memoire, or notes.
6.2 	Different stages of meetings
While there is a well-understood process for getting through the business of a 
meeting, it is usually up to the chair or the person running the meeting to outline 
the conduct of the meeting; for example who may speak and when, as well as 
how decisions will be made. Standard meeting procedure is ultimately based on 
parliamentary procedure — a set of rules for conduct at meetings that allows 
everyone to be heard and to make decisions. Any divergence from standard 
meeting protocol needs to be made clear before starting the meeting. 
Many organisations, clubs and other groups use or refer to Robert’s Rules of 
Order (newly revised) (available at http://www.robertsrules.org) as their guideline 
for conducting meetings and making decisions as a group to ensure everyone 
understands how business will be done. Many use these guidelines, essentially 
based on parliamentary procedure, as the basis for their constitutions or terms of 
reference. Indeed, some define specific rules for the committees in question and 
defer to Roberts’s Rules for all other procedural issues.
Excepting board meetings or annual general meetings, which need to adhere 
to the relevant governance requirements and where minutes are legally binding, 
many business and project meetings are less formal in their procedures. However, 
to be efficient, all meetings need to follow a process to ensure they are productive, 
purposeful and done within the allocated time. Efficient meetings are distinguished 
by good preparation, efficient execution and comprehensive recording and follow-
up: before, during and after. The two key roles in the process are the chair and the 
minute taker, or secretary to the meeting. While the same person may on occasion 
fulfil both roles, it is generally advisable to separate the roles to allow them to be 
an effective double act, especially during the meeting itself. 

Professional Communication
150
Figure 6.1 outlines the core features of the three phases. While emphasis is often 
placed on the minutes and the difficulties associated with recording the discussion 
and outcomes accurately, this stress can be considerably alleviated by shifting the 
emphasis more heavily towards the preparation phase, in particular the drawing 
up of the agenda.
Agenda
Agenda items: 
Responsible 
person 
Time  
Required 
outcome per 
item: noting, 
decision, 
ratification
Book venue and refreshments  
Book required equipment 
Send out minutes in advance
Meet with chair to decide on 
meeting plan/strategy 
Prepare briefing notes
Print agendas, minutes, reports 
etc (unless paperless) 
Check equipment
Meet with chair 
Discuss agenda items
Finalise agenda items 
Send out agenda with meeting 
reminder
Follow up on table of action, 
reports and required 
documentation
Before
During
Manage seating arrangement with name cards if required 
Provide refreshments 
Explain meeting protocol 
Highlight time-keeping requirement 
Chair summarises each item before moving on 
Minute taker records discussion, decisions and action required
Minutes
Agenda items: 
Record of 
discussion 
Decision taken/ 
ratification 
Action 
required  
by whom and 
by when
Prepare and circulate table  
of action
Follow up on action items
Send out minutes well in 
advance of next meeting – 
requiring corrections to be 
forwarded prior to the 
following meeting
Draft minutes 
Send for comment and review 
Finalise: 
•	 Numbering to match agenda
•	 Past tense
•	 Factual narrative
•	 Record of decisions/ 
ratification
•	 Outline of action required 
by whom and by when
After
Figure 6.1  Activities involved in the three phases of meetings
Before the meeting
The planning in advance of the meeting can be divided into three categories, namely:
1.	 confirming the agenda and supporting documents
2.	 housekeeping
3.	 administration.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
151
Confirming the agenda
The chair or person convening the meeting may set up the agenda without outside 
input, but more usually the chair will consult with those who are to attend the 
meeting, either at the previous meeting or through a call for items to be included. 
Many departmental or official committees will have standing items that appear on 
each agenda, with everything else being classified as new business. 
If agenda items are called for, the process must be managed carefully and 
as strictly as possible, with non-negotiable deadlines for matters to be included. 
Items should not be raised unexpectedly on the day or brought up under umbrella 
terms such as ‘Any Other Business’ (AOB) or ‘General’ — these tend to be placed 
at the end of the agenda and operate as black holes in relation to time taken 
up. From time to time, urgent matters may well arise within too short a time to 
be officially included on the agenda; these can be managed under the heading 
‘Matters of Urgency’. This should, however, be used as sparingly as possible, 
because it is impossible to plan a meeting properly if there is no clarity about the 
extent of the business needing to be covered. Poor agenda discipline can lead to 
meetings running grossly over time, which is frustrating for everyone attending — 
in these cases people frequently resort to checking emails and so on, thereby not 
giving their full attention to the business under discussion. Furthermore, as many 
meetings have a fixed time limit – determined, for example, by room availability 
or subsequent appointments – items towards the end of the agenda tend to end up 
being rolled over to the next meeting time and again.
Once the agenda outline has been agreed upon, it needs to be turned into 
a working agenda for maximum efficiency before it is circulated. (For more on 
working agendas, see the discussion on pages 165–170.)
Housekeeping
Part of the planning for a meeting includes setting or confirming the date and 
time. In the case of regular meetings, the date is often scheduled at the previous 
meeting or even at the beginning of a year or business cycle. It is, however, usually 
necessary to confirm the meeting time in advance, which can often be done in 
conjunction with sending out the agenda or the minutes of the previous meeting. 
Other housekeeping issues include checking and arranging the venue and 
seating, setting up minute taking and ensuring that the appropriate equipment 
(for example a recorder, laptop or data projector) is in place and working. Data 
projectors or equivalent can be useful for projecting agendas or minutes during 
meetings to enable live updates or to create a paperless environment for the 
meeting.
If the meeting is a virtual meeting or involves some members attending via 
video- or teleconference, Skype or other group platform, all communication 
media need to be verified well in advance and sufficient time must be allowed for 
everybody to log into the meeting.

Professional Communication
152
Administration
As meetings usually take place to enable decision making, all documentation relating 
to meetings should be filed and stored in a set location and eventually archived. 
In non-digital environments, agendas, minutes and associated documentation are 
often printed and pasted into a meeting book or placed in a physical file. In a 
digital environment, documentation storage needs to be carefully managed. It is 
all too easy for a minute taker to simply store the documents on a local hard drive. 
There are several potential issues here: the hard drive could be damaged or even 
lost, and the files themselves could be misplaced or spread across several locations, 
particularly with a change of minute taker — at worst, confidential material could 
fall into the wrong hands. 
A meeting protocol should be set up that outlines how and where committee or 
meeting documentation is stored in order to create an accessible and transparent 
audit trail, particularly if the minutes contain legally binding decisions. Such a 
protocol should include guidelines such as the ones listed in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1  Guidelines on documentation for meeting protocol
Aspect
Guideline
File naming 
conventions
The convention must identify the type of document, the meeting or 
committee it relates to and the date, for example HRComAgenda_210716, 
HRComMinutes_210716 or HRComTOA_210716.
File storage 
location
A designated folder should ideally be set up in a location accessible to 
any relevant individuals, either on a network drive or via a cloud storage 
facility.
Access control
Minutes often contain sensitive or confidential information and therefore 
access needs to be carefully controlled by:
•	 limiting access to the folder itself, for example via SharePoint or an 
equivalent role-based access platform
•	 using password-protected documents.
Back-up and 
archiving 
procedures
Even if the documents are stored in the cloud, if the organisation’s 
documents are not regularly backed up as a matter of course, they should 
be manually backed up, preferably to an off-site facility or location, 
or via hard copy print-outs. Some documentation needs to be kept for 
specified amounts of time according to whether it is governance-related 
or has legal, financial or other specific status. After this period of time, it 
is still advisable to make sure the records are archived properly.
The minutes of the previous meeting need to be sent out in advance of the 
meeting. As with the agenda, this process needs to be managed strictly so as 
not to waste time during the meeting. When the minutes are sent out, they need 
to be accompanied by a deadline for queries or corrections so that these can be 
resolved prior to the meeting. This job is usually handled by the person taking the 
minutes or whomever is responsible for the administration of the meeting. Further 

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
153
to sending out the minutes electronically, they sometimes need to be printed prior 
to the meeting. 
In addition to the document protocols, preparation for a meeting involves 
ensuring that any reports or annexures are attached to the agenda and are 
circulated in advance of the meeting to allow people to prepare properly. If 
documents are only introduced at the meeting, valuable time is taken up by 
people reading and processing the documents. This job is usually done by the 
person taking the minutes or servicing the committee or meeting as the secretary. 
If the meeting has revolving minute takers, the administration role will need to be 
allocated to a designated person to ensure continuity and follow-up. 
Furthermore, if you are taking the minutes, it is extremely helpful to have been 
able to review documentation in advance, as it helps you predict and understand 
the potential discussion and outcomes of the meeting. It can also be useful to 
contact the person responsible for a report or other document due to be reviewed 
at the meeting to ascertain the key points to be put forward. You can then use this 
information to begin to prepopulate the minutes, which will make the taking down 
of what is put forward at the actual meeting less onerous and stressful. 
If a table of action (see pages 180–181)) has been circulated following the 
previous meeting, it is important to follow up in advance of the meeting to check 
on progress in relation to the action items. This can also help you prepopulate the 
minutes, as you will be more aware of what is likely to be reported in advance on 
the various agenda items.
Paperless meetings
More and more meetings are becoming – or aiming to become – paperless. If this 
is the case, it needs to be clear that everyone attending is responsible for bringing 
a device on which the agenda, minutes and associated meeting documentation 
can be read and noted on, or that they are responsible for printing and bringing 
their own hard copies. Many meetings still require the previous set of minutes 
to be printed for each member, but will allow reports and so on to be viewed 
electronically in advance, especially if they are long, with perhaps only a summary 
available at the meeting. (Note that if a summary needs to be prepared, this must 
be organised in advance.) At the very least, a hard copy of the previous meeting’s 
minutes should be printed for the chair to sign and date, to formalise (or legalise) 
the record of that meeting. 
The only downside of paperless meetings is the temptation for people to be 
distracted by emails or messages during the meeting. 
During the meeting
In creating an agenda, the chairperson formalises the procedure for the meeting as 
well as providing the framework for the minutes. (The role and management of the 

Professional Communication
154
agenda and minutes are discussed later in this chapter, from page 157 onwards). 
The following sections discuss the processes that need to be engaged in during the 
meeting itself.
Opening the meeting
The following steps should be followed at the beginning of the meeting:
1.	 The chair opens the meeting, which involves outlining the reason for the 
meeting and defining any limitations (such as time and protocols) that need 
to be set. 
2.	 If the meeting is to be recorded by the official minute taker, this is usually 
mentioned. In some cases – for example bid evaluation and adjudication 
committees in formal tender procedures – it is a legal requirement that a 
meeting be recorded as well as minutes be taken. Should anyone else wish to 
record the meeting, for example at a board meeting, that person would usually 
need to get permission from the board.
3.	 If there are guests who are not part of the meeting membership, they must 
be welcomed and introduced. Absentee apologies are acknowledged and in 
certain cases proxies are acknowledged and recognised. In some cases, people 
who are absent but who have not sent apologies also need to be noted, to 
ensure that a quorum is present should any official decisions or votes need 
to be taken. (Every committee should have a set of rules outlining its purpose 
and function, its required membership and any special rules, including what 
constitutes a quorum. Should decisions be made without a quorum present, 
any such decisions would not be legally binding and could thus be challenged.) 
4.	 In many cases, an attendance register will need to be signed to confirm 
those present, particularly for official or board meetings to legitimise any 
decisions taken — a record of who attends board meetings usually appears in 
a company’s annual report.
5.	 Before the meeting gets going, it is useful for the chair to confirm the agenda. 
If any matters of urgency arise, the chair can then decide whether it is 
appropriate to deal with them at the current meeting or whether they need 
to be deferred to a later or specially convened meeting. Most meetings have 
tight programmes, and new items cannot always be accommodated given the 
urgency of other agenda items. 
6.	 Once the agenda has been confirmed, the minutes of the previous meeting are 
approved. This should be a formality, as any queries or corrections relating 
to the minutes should already have been forwarded and dealt with when the 
minutes were sent out for comment. Once these preliminary matters have been 
dealt with, the meeting gets underway with the business of the day.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
155
Controlling the process during the meeting
Having initiated the meeting, the chair must ensure that those involved make 
suggestions and/or comments and do not sit silently. This requires that the 
chair create a positive climate where everyone feels sufficiently confident to 
contribute. A chair who creates a positive climate will convey enthusiasm without 
dominating the discussion, and will facilitate discussion and the exchange of ideas 
without critical evaluation of whoever is presenting the ideas. As dominating the 
discussion and early critical evaluation may inhibit quieter members of the group 
from presenting their ideas, it is essential for the chair to control discussion. 
The most important controlling function of the chair is to ensure that the 
agenda is followed. While free speech may be encouraged, if a member dominates 
and labours a point, the chair must move the discussion on to avoid time being 
wasted and the agenda not being covered. 
A two-tier technique that can be used to assist with timekeeping involves 
allocating time slots to each item on the agenda. Not only does time allocation 
make the person presenting the report or point for discussion aware of how much 
time is available, it also allows the minute taker to monitor the time and bring 
it to the chair’s attention. The chair can then bring the discussion to a close and 
enable the meeting to move on. Should an item not be completed, the chair must 
decide whether to allocate additional time or to reschedule the discussion for a 
later meeting or forum.
Summarising and evaluating during the meeting
All meetings – even informal ones – should have a secretary or a member 
responsible for taking notes or minutes. All decisions need to be noted and kept on 
record as part of the audit trail. The formality of the notes or minutes may vary, 
but the record must be clearly referable and decisions actionable. Should anything 
be raised at the meeting that should not be minuted, this should be brought to 
everyone’s attention during the meeting. It may be helpful for the minute taker, 
particularly if he or she is unfamiliar with everyone attending the meeting, to have 
a plan of the meeting table with the names of people indicated at the places where 
they are sitting.
The discussion in a meeting rarely takes place in chronological order or even 
according to a logical flow. To ensure that an accurate record can be taken of a 
discussion, the chair should therefore pause the meeting at appropriate moments 
(for example at the end of each agenda item or important decision) to summarise 
and restate key points. This ensures clarity for all, not least the minute taker. Such 
a summary helps the group review the matter under discussion and assists the 
participants to understand the facts and any action expected of them. This in turn 
promotes co-operation in future meetings. 
At the end of the meeting, the chair should confirm the conclusion and – if not 
already predetermined – confirm a date for the next meeting.

Professional Communication
156
After the meeting
The secretary or minute taker needs to ensure that all relevant and necessary 
information is included in the minutes, for example:
••
the relevant department
••
the name of the working group
••
the names and details of attendees and of those who sent apologies
••
the type of meeting (daily, weekly, monthly or special)
••
the purpose of the meeting 
••
the times the meeting began and ended. 
Notes or minutes should be emailed or sent as hard copy to participants within a 
week of the meeting if possible, although in most cases the chair will review the 
minutes before they are sent out for comment. It is important that the participants 
read how the meeting was recorded while they still have good recall of the 
discussion.
Although the minutes contain a record of the action required, it is useful to pull 
out a separate table of action to be circulated as soon as possible – even directly 
via email – to ensure that everyone has a record of what is required, by whom 
and by when. This is particularly relevant for people who were unable to attend 
the meeting, as they should be alerted as soon as possible of any action required — 
perhaps sooner than when the minutes can be sent out. This is important, even if 
participants take their own notes, as it confirms what was decided in the meeting 
should there be any confusion as to responsibilities. (See pages 180–181 for more 
on an action table.)
The accepted minutes of the previous meeting must be signed and filed 
appropriately as soon as possible so that they are easily locatable. Anything 
confidential should be marked as access restricted to designated people.
A flow chart of the activities that fall within a meeting is given in Figure 6.2.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
157
Read/check meeting rule and purpose
Follow up on table of 
action from previous 
meeting.
Confirm and circulate 
agenda.
Prepare room and 
check equipment.
Circulate any 
documentation to be 
discussed at the meeting.
Formulate a meeting 
strategy/plan (chair and 
minute taker) to include 
timing and required 
outcomes.
Arrange refreshments
Request confirmation 
of attendance.
Open the meeting 
formally and deal with 
preliminary matters.
Check printing 
requirements for the 
meeting or remind 
members to bring  
own copies.
Explain any procedure 
to be followed during 
the meeting (who 
can speak, proposing 
motions, voting and 
so on).
Confirm and accept 
minutes of previous 
meeting.
Make a note of the 
seating plan if required.
Remind everyone to 
take their own notes 
during the meeting to 
remain current until 
minutes are circulated.
Review matters arising 
and work through 
agenda items.
Manage time according 
to agenda allocation or 
meeting strategy.
Take minutes – where 
possible directly onto 
a laptop, notebook, 
tablet or equivalent.
Summarise regularly 
to bring matters to a 
clear conclusion in line 
with required outcome 
(decision, action, 
noting ratification).
Set or confirm date of 
next meeting or series 
of meetings.
Send out the table of 
action arising from the 
meeting as soon as 
possible.
Prepare and circulate 
minutes for comment.
Amend minutes ready 
for confirmation at 
next meeting.
File/archive signed 
minutes of previous 
meeting.
Before
During
After
Figure 6.2  Flowchart of meeting activities

Professional Communication
158
6.3	 Agendas: Purpose, organisation and style
A good agenda ensures that a meeting is productive and that the attendees’ time 
is positively spent. As mentioned earlier, agendas should be circulated prior to 
the meeting to inform those attending of the meeting’s purpose, the topics under 
discussion, the attendants’ role and whether any preparation is required in order 
to make a useful and well-informed contribution. 
Agendas come in many formats, but the most useful is what is known as a 
working agenda. This contains useful guidance for attendees on:
••
the purpose and the required outcome for each agenda item (for example for 
noting, for decision, for ratification and so on)
••
the person responsible for each item
••
the proposed time allocations.
The agenda is usually sent via email with a request for confirmation of attendance 
of the meeting. As a general rule, it needs to be sent out at least two days ahead 
of the meeting to give participants time to prepare. However, in many cases, 
committees will have specified time requirements for the circulation of documents 
built into their terms of reference.
Agendas: what to do and what not to do 
The less information given on an agenda, the less well prepared attendees will be, 
resulting more often than not in less productive outcomes. For the allocated time 
to be sufficient, the chair must make a realistic prediction and not try to cram an 
unreasonable number of items onto an agenda or allocate too little time for items 
requiring thought and discussion.
Agendas should follow a template, designed according to the needs of the 
company or group. Furthermore, each set of meeting minutes and agenda should 
be consistent and follow the same format and pattern of numbering. A clear, 
professional and consistent layout helps participants know where to look for 
important items. If the organisation or group holding the meeting has a logo, 
it should be included on the agenda. In addition, if the organisation has a style 
guide, all meeting documentation should follow the same format in terms of font 
size, style, layout and so on. Not all fonts are the same size or have the same 
characteristics, so if there are no guidelines, choose a professional font and stick 
to it. (See Chapter 1 for information on readability and different fonts, and see 
Chapter 2 for information on setting up templates and using styles.)
The example below demonstrates a skeleton agenda, with an indication of the 
potential pitfalls that accompany such an agenda.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
159
eg
Witbooi & Khangala Civils
H&S Division
AGENDA
Date: 4 April 20––	
Time: 14:00
Location: Meeting room 4
1	
Welcome and apologies
2	
Matters of importance
3	
Training
4	
Feedback
•	 Project W&K64008
•	 Project W&K39014
•	 Project W&K 66203
5	
Quarterly reports from  
projects
6	
Other H&S matters
7	
AOB
8	
Way forward
9	
Date of next meeting
10	 Closure
Please confirm your attendance
‘Importance’ is a relative term 
and gives no indication of 
what will be discussed.
No end time is 
provided, making it 
difficult for attendees 
to plan their time.
The names of those attending 
(together with job roles/titles) 
should have been included.
The purpose of the meeting has been omitted. The 
purpose of the meeting should always be included, 
not just to focus the meeting but also for providing 
an audit trail of meetings held.
‘Training’, ‘Feedback’ and 
‘Other H&S matters’ are 
generic terms. They are vague 
and give attendees little idea 
of what will be covered.
‘AOB’ or other catch-all 
headings (eg ‘General’, 
‘Miscellaneous’) should not 
be included, as all agenda 
items should be planned. 
Allowing members to bring 
up unplanned items can lead 
to a lack of discipline during 
the meeting and a lack of 
control over the length of the 
meeting.
No date is given by 
when attendance 
must be confirmed. It 
also does not specify 
to whom notification 
of attendance should 
be given.
This item is not required, as 
the date of the next meeting 
signals closure.
The minutes will 
include the way 
forward for each item 
under discussion, 
making this agenda 
line redundant.
These subheadings 
identify the projects 
to be covered, but 
give little indication 
of what will be 
covered or who will 
be presenting.
The next item does 
not clarify if the same 
projects are to be 
covered as in point 4.

Professional Communication
160
Standard agenda items
There is no such thing as a correct or incorrect agenda. Ultimately, an agenda 
needs to serve the purpose of the type of meeting it is prepared for. However, 
certain agenda items are useful, as they contribute to creating a regular and easily 
recognisable format for the meeting to follow. It is important that all agenda 
item headings indicate the content to be covered, even in the case of standard 
items. As shown in the example above, generic or formulaic headings do not help 
participants prepare adequately for the meeting. Table 6.2 give details of standard 
items that should be included in an agenda.
Table 6.2  Standard agenda items
Category
Agenda items
Description 
Organisational 
items
Meeting title, time, 
date and location
•	 The agenda must clearly specify the type 
of meeting, which usually also identifies 
the purpose of that meeting, for example a 
quarterly board meeting or a weekly project 
update meeting.
•	 The date and location should be clearly 
marked on the agenda.
•	 The time of the meeting should include an 
end time as well as a start time, to indicate to 
participants how much time they will have to 
set aside for the meeting. 
List of participants 
•	 The participants should be listed individually, 
either with or without courtesy titles. An 
abbreviation of the initials and surname 
should be given after each name to indicate 
how that person will be referred to as the 
responsible person in the agenda or later in 
the minutes.
•	 The chair of the meeting needs to be 
identified clearly, as well as the minute taker. 
If the minute taker or secretary is not also 
a member of the committee, it is usual to 
identify him or her as ‘In attendance’ or as the 
‘Servicing officer’.
•	 Any guests attending the meeting who are 
not part of the committee or who do not 
regularly attend meetings should be identified 
as ‘In attendance’ or ‘Guest’. 
•	 Any proxies attending the meeting should 
also be indicated as such.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
161
Category
Agenda items
Description 
Housekeeping 
arrangements
•	 The agenda should clearly indicate by when 
and to whom confirmation of attendance 
should be sent.
•	 Information relating to whether refreshments 
will be provided should be included, especially 
if the meeting is long or taking place over a 
lunch period.
•	 It is useful for the agenda to include a 
note on whether printed agendas, minutes, 
reports and so on will be provided or whether 
participants should print their own or bring 
a device on which they can view required 
information.
Preliminary 
matters
Welcome and 
apologies
Members are welcomed, apologies are noted and 
any guests are introduced and given context.
Confirmation of 
agenda
This is optional and can be used as an alternative 
to ‘Matters of Urgency’. If a matter has arisen 
too late to be included on the agenda, the chair 
can decide whether it is important enough and 
whether sufficient time is available to cover it 
without compromising the rest of the meeting’s 
business.
Minutes of previous 
meeting 
This item is an important legality and binds 
members of the meeting, committee or board to 
what has been recorded.
Matters 
arising
Matter arising
•	 Matters arising are matters that need to be 
followed up from the previous meeting, for 
example any action items or feedback on 
progress requiring further decisions. 
•	 This should not become a catch-up session 
on all action items from the previous meeting 
— these should have been followed up on 
independently. If too much is covered here, it 
prevents the meeting moving on to matters 
on the agenda proper.
•	 It is important that the items are separated, 
each with its own heading, so that matters 
can be tracked through meetings if necessary. 
It can be useful, therefore, to include 
reference to the agenda item being referred 
to in the item heading.
Matter arising …

Professional Communication
162
Category
Agenda items
Description 
Standing items
Standing item
•	 Standing items are matters that come up and 
need to be discussed or reported on at every 
meeting. For some meetings, almost all items 
will effectively be standing items, for example 
board meetings where various subcommittees 
or business areas table regular reports. In 
such cases, there may be only one or two new 
items of business, which means that standing 
items do not need to be marked out.
•	 As these are recurrent items, the attendees 
should be able to deal with them efficiently 
and quickly. 
•	 Again, each item should have its own title.
•	 As with matters arising, care needs to be 
taken not to take up too much time with 
standing items if the agenda contains 
significant new items. 
Standing item …
New items
New item
•	 Each item for the agenda needs a separate 
heading and, if required, clear subheadings to 
clarify exactly what is to be discussed under 
that item. 
•	 It may happen that there are no new items 
for a particular meeting, in which case this 
section can be omitted.
New item …
Closing 
matters
Items for next 
meeting
•	 In some cases, part of the meeting closure 
contains a brief discussion about items to 
be included on the agenda for the following 
meeting. This does not prevent items being 
called for at a later date.
•	 This is a useful mechanism, especially if there 
has not been time to deal with any matter in 
sufficient depth or if it has been ascertained 
that further information is required to 
progress the matter.
Date and location of 
next meeting
Even if the date of the next meeting has already 
been set, it is a good idea to close the meeting 
by confirming the date and time with members 
present, as a formality.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
163
Agenda numbering
While numbering on an agenda is not essential, it can be helpful, especially for 
extensive agendas with various subheadings. The most important issue is that an 
agenda and its corresponding set of minutes have matching numbering. Occasions 
arise when a new item is included in the agenda at the meeting itself. If this occurs, 
when the agenda is confirmed the numbering of the new item must be established 
either as an additional subsection or an item at the end of the agenda, so as not 
to disrupt the existing numbering system. 
The exact format of the numbering system is unimportant as long as it matches 
in the agenda and the minutes. It could be a multilevel decimal numbering system, 
as in the examples that follow. Alternatively, letters and small Roman numerals 
could be used: (a), (i) and so on. If numbering and bullets are used in combination, 
each bulleted item must still be a clear subheading. If no numbering is used at all 
– just headings and potentially bullets – each main heading must be used in the 
minutes to ensure easy reference. It is not necessary to number the paragraphs in 
the minutes if the agenda items have clear headings and subheadings. 
The following example shows how different variations of a numbering system 
can be used effectively in an agenda.

Professional Communication
164
eg
AGENDA
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
1	
Welcome and apologies
2	
Confirmation of agenda
3	
Minutes of previous meeting dated 
xxxx
MATTERS ARISING
4	
Matter arising
4.1	 Subheading 
if required 
(example)
4.2	 Subheading 
if required 
(example)
5	
Matter arising
6	
Matter arising
STANDING ITEMS 
7	
Standing item
7.1	 Subheading if required (example)
7.2	 Subheading if required (example)
8	
Standing item
NEW ITEMS
9	
New item
9.1	 Subheading if required (example)
9.2	 Subheading 
if required 
(example)
10	 New item
CLOSING MATTERS
11	 Items for next 
meeting
12	 Date & location of next meeting
AGENDA
1	
PRELIMINARY MATTERS
1.1	 Welcome and  
apologies
1.2	 Confirmation 
of agenda
1.3	 Minutes of 
previous 
meeting 
dated xxxx
2	
MATTERS ARISING
2.1	 Matter arising
2.1.1	 Subheading 
if required 
(example)
2.1.2	 Subheading 
if required 
(example)
2.2	 Matter 
arising
2.3	 Matter 
arising
3	
STANDING ITEMS 
3.1	 Standing item
3.1.1	 Subheading if required (example)
3.1.2	 Subheading if required (example)
3.2	 Standing item
4	
NEW ITEMS	
4.1	 New item
4.1.1	 Subheading if required (example)
4.1.2	 Subheading if required (example)
4.2	 New item
5	
CLOSING MATTERS
5.1	 Items for next meeting
5.2	 Date and location of next 
meeting
The advantage 
is that the 
numbering 
system only 
has to go to the 
second level. 
Each heading 
becomes a  
subheading, so  
a third level of  
numbering 
is required,  
which can get  
a bit busy and 
overcomplicated.
In this example, 
unnumbered 
organiser 
headings have 
been used to 
separate the 
different sections 
of the agenda. 
In this example, 
the organiser 
headings 
separating the 
different agenda 
sections are 
numbered.
Some organisations find it useful to include a number for the meeting together 
with the agenda item number in order to track how often an item has been rolled 
over from a previous meeting or to identify when an item was first raised. This is 
particularly useful for project meetings, as there are likely to be a limited number 
of meetings over the life of the project. For example, in the numbering system 

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
165
shown below, item 1.3.2 would deal with point 2 of section 3, first raised at 
meeting no 1.
eg
DESCRIPTION
ACTION
DEADLINE
9.
2
MATTERS ARISING
6.
2.1
Drawings issued
Revised drawings 
were issued and the 
drawing register will 
be updated accordingly 
and attached to these 
minutes.
BN
3.
2.2
Environmental 
management plan
No further progress on 
acceptance.
GG
11  06/08/20––
MEASUREMENT
12	 The next 
measurement date 
is 25 November 
20––. Following 
this payment 
certificate, a 
complete re-
measurement of 
the project will be 
carried out.
BN
13  12/12/20––
In meeting 
no 9, under 2. 
Matters Arising.
Drawings 
issued relates 
back to an item 
arising from 
meeting no 6.
Environmental 
management 
plan relates 
back to a 
matter arising 
from meeting 
no 3.
Working agendas
An agenda is essentially a framework for running a meeting and, at its most basic, 
a list of items to be covered. However, for a meeting where a lot of business has 
to be discussed, best practice would be to develop a working agenda. A working 
agenda has two main advantages:
1.	 It allows meeting attendees to prepare properly.
2.	 It allows the minute taker to be well prepared for the meeting, which alleviates 
much of the burden of taking the minutes during the meeting.
Most working agendas involve a brief description of why each agenda item has 
been included and what outcome will be required; for example whether the item is 

Professional Communication
166
for noting, for decision, for ratification or for action. These agendas also usually 
include a column indicating the responsible participant, a column indicating 
the time allocated for the agenda item and, if required, a column indicating any 
relevant annexes and reports to be consulted during the meeting. 
What follows is an example of a simple, working agenda with just the responsible 
person and time included. It is clearly a regularly held operational meeting.
eg
HSG Health & Safety Group
Agenda: Monthly meeting
Chair: Thomas Phums Mzizi (TPM)
Participants: Jacques Dyer (JD), Jaco du Toit (JDT), Lisa George (LG), Lilly  
Kelvin (LK), Rashid Ally (RA), Simphiwe Marnus (SM) 
Secretary/minute taker: Matafita Khoza (MK)
Date: 14 August 20–– 	
 Time: 9h30–11h00 	
 Place: Staff Centre 3
Item
RP
Time
1.	
Welcome and apologies
TPM
2 mins
2.	
Minutes of last meeting
TPM
3 mins 
3.	
Incomplete projects
•	 Workplace inspections
•	 Site-specific training
TPM, LG
15 mins
4.	
Past inspections
•	 Factory floors
•	 Recreational block
JDT, MK
15 mins 
5.	
Employee feedback on training
MK
10 mins
6.	
Equipment budget
•	 Current
•	 Projected
LG, RA 
15 mins
7.	
Planned projects 
JD 
20 mins
8.	
Year-end function 
TPM 
5 mins 
9.	
Next meeting: 28 August 20––
TPM 
5 mins
The difference in type 
gives definition to the 
page.
Details of who is to 
participate, with 
abbreviated initials.
This column indicates 
the person or 
persons responsible 
for preparing and 
presenting the 
agenda item.
The minutes of the 
previous meeting 
need to be approved 
by the chair and 
confirmed as such 
to the committee/
meeting.
This indicates the 
approximate time 
allocated to the item.
Every section is 
specific, with no 
opportunity for 
random items under 
generic headings 
such as ‘Other’ or 
‘AOB’.
While visible gridlines may be useful 
while preparing a document, it is 
cleaner for the reader if the grid is 
hidden before it is sent out.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
167
More extensive working agendas may also include extracts of reports to be 
presented or key information based on which a decision may need to be made. 
The previous example shows a basic working agenda, while the following example 
illustrates a more extensive working agenda including specific information 
required for decision making during the meeting.
eg
JC Hospital Trust Investment Committee
Date: Tuesday, 21 May 20––	Time: 14h00 to 16h00	
Location: Ashanti boardroom 
Committee members
In attendance
Ms N Hassen (NH) — Chair
Dr JD Griffin (JG)
Mr T Kaira (TK)
Mr A Skatulla (AS)
Ms B Petersen (BP)
Mr G Bartzen (GB) — Executive 
Director – Pride Investments
Dr C Nelson (CN) — Hospital 
Administrator
Mr D Steele (DS) — Committee 
Secretary 
AGENDA
RP
Time
Attachment
1.	
Welcome and apologies
NH
14h00
2.	
Confirmation of the 
minutes of the meeting 
held on 23 November 
20––
NH
14h05
Attachment A
3.	
Performance of the Cash 
Term Deposit Portfolio
	
Mr G Bartzen from 
Pride Investments will 
present to the meeting 
on the Cash Term Deposit 
portfolio over the past 
quarter, with the key 
figures included below.
	
For noting 
14h15
	
Income has been distributed to the Term Deposit Portfolio for the first quarter as follows:
Month
Average call rate 
% (provided by 
SBSA)
Return 
on funds 
invested %
Income distributed 
%
January 20––
5.00
5.84
5.75
February 20––
5.00
5.84
5.75
March 20––
5.00
5.87
5.75
Average for half year
5.00
5.85
5.75
A clear outline of 
meeting details and 
who is due to attend 
the meeting
The line draws 
attention to the start 
of the agenda proper. 
The highlighting 
indicates the columns 
for the responsible 
person (RP), the time 
each item will begin, 
and any relevant 
attachments per 
item.
Extract of key figures 
for the committee’s 
attention. The change 
in font indicates it as 
information.

Professional Communication
168
	
The committee is reminded that returns achieved are calculated on a rolling six-
monthly basis and the distributions are rounded down to the quarter percentile below 
this figure.
4.	
Distribution of income to hospital funds
	
Based on the performance of the JC Hospital 
No 2 Portfolio for 20––, the Committee agrees 
to distribute realised profits of R2.79 million 
or 3.45% (2015 – 3.93%) and income earned 
of R1.82 million or 5.3% (2015 – 6.64%) to 
the individual funds.
	
For ratification
JG
14h45
Attachment B
5.	
Investment strategy for the year ahead
	
Mr G Bartzen from Pride Investments will 
present the JC Hospital investment strategy 
for the year ahead.
	
Questions will be taken
	
Decision required
15h00
Attachment C
6.	
Meeting dates for 20––
	
The proposed Tuesday meeting dates are as 
follows:
	
23 August 20––; 22 November 20––; 27 
February 20––; 22 May 20––
	
Decision required
NH
15h55
Please confirm attendance by no later than 15 May 20––, to Dan Steele at  
dan.steele@JCHT.org.za
Clearly indicated 
parameters 
for confirming 
attendance 
On occasion, if a committee has a terms of reference, it may also be included on 
the agenda as a reminder of the parameters of the committee’s or working group’s 
function. 
In order to avoid having to send an email with a number of attachments to be read 
alongside the agenda (for example related reports, accounts, contracts and so on) it is useful 
to embed the associated documents within the agenda itself. The document can be any type 
of Microsoft® Office™ file or another similar document, or a PDF. When the recipients open 
the agenda, they can double-click on the icons and the related documents will open. See the 
example that follows.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
169
eg
5.	
Investment strategy for the year ahead
	
Mr G Bartzen from Pride Investments will present the 
JC Hospital investment strategy for the year ahead.
	
Questions will be taken
	
Decision required
Do the following to embed a document or file into Microsoft® Word™:
1.	
In the document, click where you want the file to be inserted.
2.	
Go to the Insert tab on the ribbon.
3.	
In the Text section, click the dropdown arrow next to Object and select Object to open 
the Object dialog box.
4.	
Go to the Create from File tab and click on Browse.
5.	
Select the required file. The file location will appear in the Object dialog box.
6.	
Check the box Display as icon.
7.	
Click OK. 
Figure 6.3  Embedding a file as an object in an agenda

Professional Communication
170
6.4	 Minutes: purpose, organisation and style
The minutes are a record of the discussions and any decisions made at a meeting, 
and provide a convenient review for those who attended as well as for those 
who did not. Minutes also give continuity to a process, since the minutes of the 
previous meeting are referred to and approved and a plan for a subsequent meeting 
or any particular action required is considered.
Different professions and businesses record minutes or take notes at meetings 
in their own way. However, there is a common core to minutes. In certain cases, 
minutes are the legally binding official records of a meeting and carry weight. As 
mentioned before, if they are to be only notes, it is important to call them an aide 
memoire or meeting notes.
Minutes: what to do and what not to do
When you take minutes, remember that it is a formal document. You therefore 
need to adhere to the following guidelines:
••
Follow the agenda, which should have been circulated before the meeting. 
The agenda is the agreed plan for the meeting. Even if an item is added into 
the agenda at the start of the meeting, it cannot disturb the initial numbering 
system. The numbering of the agenda and minutes must match.
••
Use a template with columns for the different items, designed according to 
the needs of the company, group or organisation. 
••
Note down the date, time, place, organisation, type of meeting, attendants, 
apologies and chairperson. Be sure to note whether a quorum is present for 
meetings that will require that level of decision making.
••
Include the start and finish times as well as the date of the next meeting.
••
Summarise information rather than taking it down verbatim. 
••
Write down all decisions made (also known as ‘motions’ in more formal 
meetings) and the names of those who proposed them, if appropriate.
••
Record the names of the proposer and the seconder, where a decision has 
required them.
••
Record any action required following the decision and the person who will 
be responsible for the action.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
171
Below is an example of a set of minutes for a meeting recording the progress on 
a contract project:
eg
Minutes of Hand-over of Khami Site 1
Contract No. 22
Regravel of Sisulu Drive
Meeting held on 17 January 20– –, at Johan Kobus 
Consultants, Johannesburg
NOTE: These minutes serve as a legal record of decisions and events 
at the meeting.
SUMMARY OF CONTRACT DETAILS
EMPLOYER 
CONSULTING 
ENGINEER
CONTRACTOR
Department of 
Transport and 
Public Works 
Contracts Engineer: 
Sidney Chobe
Johan Kobus 
Consultants
Engineer: 
Samantha Howard
Lion Construction 
Contracts Manager: 
Felix Pienaar
Braamfontein 
Regional Office
Private Bag X2
Braamfontein
Cell: 083 3928567
Tel: 011 239 0556
Email: schobe@
pgwc.gov.za
Johan Kobus 
Consultants (Pty) 
Ltd
PO Box 4589
Durban
Cell: 071 9900456
Tel: 031 237 7880
Email: samh@
kobuskonsult.co.za
Lion Construction
PO Box 7689
Humansdorp, 6300
Cell: 073 3345644
Tel: 041 372 1850
Email: felix.
pienaar@lion.co.za
File Ref no: 
13/5/1/2/2-833
File Ref no: 14945/
WR/400/…
File Ref no: …
The template uses 
even spacing and 
uniform headings 
and patterns of 
information.
These minutes are structured 
according to the specific professional 
requirements of the company. 
The contract details 
are placed up front, 
as they inform the 
entire meeting the 
minutes are from.

Professional Communication
172
Original Tender Amount
R56 889
Estimated Final Contract Amount
Contract Commencement Date
8 August 20––
Contract Period (Months)
14 (including special non-working days)
Original Contract Completion Date
8 October 20––
Extension of Time Awarded (days)
0
Extended Contract Completion Date
0
Current Status (days ahead/behind)
4 days ahead
Current Anticipated Completion Date
8 October 20––
Contract Participation Goals (Target value/
Achieved)
Civil Subcontractors
R1 917 992.96 / R 0.00
Suppliers & Manufacturers
R1 573 745.60 / R 0.00
Local Labour
R1 917 992.96 / R 0.00
Next site meeting: 30 April 20–– at 9:30 at the Site Office in Khami
Action
1.	
WELCOME
The chairperson and acting Engineer on the contract, Ms Samantha 
Howard, introduced herself and welcomed all present.
2.	
ATTENDANCE AND APOLOGIES
Representing
Name
Initial
Present
Employer:
Sidney Chobe
SC
Consulting Engineer:
Samantha Howard
SH
Employer:
Felix Pienaar
FP
H&S Representative:
Len Waqu
LW
Apologies
Consulting Engineer 
Assistant:
Anita Peters
AP
The highlighting of 
the ‘Action’ column 
makes for easy 
differentiation from 
the minutes proper.
The use of terms such 
as ‘employer’ and 
‘engineer’ make the 
minutes objective 
and keep the focus 
on the task, not the 
individual.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
173
Action
3.	
ACCEPTANCE OF PREVIOUS MINUTES 
3.1	 Acceptance
The minutes of the previous meeting were approved, with all 
corrections having been noted and amendments made prior 
to the meeting. The chairperson duly signed the minutes.
3.2	 Distribution
The minutes of all site meetings are distributed electronically 
in PDF format according to the attached distribution list.
SC/SH/FP
4.	
SITE AND ENVIRONMENT
4.1	 Access to site
The Engineer said that although Khami Site was accessible, 
the Site would only be handed to the Contractor on the date 
of commencement of development.
4.2 Offices and laboratory
Offices
The Engineer confirmed that she would require an office for 
the Engineer’s Representative (ER) and her assistant (AER), as 
well as a conference facility large enough to accommodate 
up to eight personnel for Site Meetings. The Contractor 
is expected to provide services for the Engineer’s Site 
personnel, as agreed with the ER and as allowed in the Bill 
of Quantities. 
Laboratory
No laboratory building will be required, because the Engineer 
and the Contractor, should they agree to opt for a combined 
or shared laboratory, will use an existing site laboratory in 
Khami.
4.3	 Signage relating to Employer and Consultant
The Engineer said three Contract Name Boards (in English, 
Xhosa and Afrikaans) would be erected at the main entrance 
to the site by 01 October 20––.
SH/AP  
01/10/20––
5.	
HEALTH AND SAFETY REPORT 
5.1	 H&S representative
The Engineer confirmed that Safe Working Practice cc, 
represented by Len Waqu, had been approved in principle to 
be appointed as H&S Agent/Representative on behalf of the 
Employer.
LW
The section headings 
in capitals and the 
minor headings 
printed in bold text 
make the minutes 
easily skimmable and 
readable.
Signpost headings 
highlight the 
different aspects of 
the agenda item.
The style is formal: 
full sentences 
and appropriate 
vocabulary, with no 
slang or unnecessary 
jargon.

Professional Communication
174
Action
The Engineer said that the H&S Representative’s 
responsibility was to ensure the Contractor complied with 
the Act and Regulations on behalf of the Employer. She 
would not interfere with the H&S Representative’s actions.
AP
5.2 	Traffic safety
N/A at this stage.
6.  	 FUTURE MEETINGS 
The next meeting will be held on 30 April, 20–– at 9h30, 
at Khami Site Office.
Subsequent meetings have been provisionally scheduled for 
the following dates: 
30 June; 30 August; 30 October.
Employer: __________________
Engineer: ___________________
Contractor: __________________
Date: ______
Date: ______
Date: ______
Numbering allows 
for easy reference 
to different agenda 
items.
For meetings where decisions, proposals and so forth have to be recorded – for 
example board or committee meetings – it is useful for the proposal to be clearly 
stated in the minutes together with a record of the relevant discussion. Any 
decision or action required is then clearly outlined at the bottom of each item for 
easy reference. 
The following example shows an agenda item with a clear outline of what will 
be discussed. This allows all participants to prepare in advance.
eg
3. 	 Management structure and protocols for GHG unit
	
The committee will discuss the following items for agreement and/or action:
•	 Documentation sign-off
•	 Minute taking and recording
•	 Staff meetings.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
175
The following example shows the corresponding minutes, which include a record 
of the discussion:
eg
3. 	 Management structure and protocols for GHG unit
BM (Chair) led the committee in a discussion on the 
necessary protocols required both in terms of authority and 
practicality in relation to documentation sign-off, minute 
taking and recording, and staff meetings. The committee 
agreed to the following, with no questions or objections being raised: 
•	 If the unit head is unavailable, LD will sign off documentation as unit deputy director. 
•	 Minutes will be taken for all meetings; audio recording will not be mandatory but at the 
discretion of the minute taker.
•	 Full staff meetings will take place on the first Tuesday of every month, with a rotating 
minute taker. MM will draw up a rota before the next 
meeting for agreement.
•	 Staff meetings will take place as scheduled even if the 
chair (BM) is unavailable. LG or someone else will be 
appointed to chair the relevant meeting. 
Decision: All the above points were agreed to.
Action: MM to draw up a rota of minute takers before the next meeting.
Each item under discussion is 
dealt with separately after a 
brief summary.
Clear outline of decisions 
made and any action required 
(including by whom and by 
when)
The minutes shown in the following example lack structure, essential information 
and an indication of responsibility. The text is dense and lacks readability. These 
minutes would not serve the company well, and would not be clear to anyone who 
had not attended the meeting or who was reading them after a time lag.
eg
Minutes: Meeting 23 JULY 20––, 10am
Welcome
1.1 	HM welcomed all to the preliminary strategy 
planning meeting for the health and safety 
initiative. 
1.2 	Attendance: HM (chair), NR, EAG, MS & LE  
(H&R committee), SN (minutes)
1.3 	Apologies: VY
Response from H&S visit
HM gave an overview of the Health and Safety 
officer’s comments on the building. His comments were discussed and noted. 
The company needs to be more mindful of H&S and put systems in place.
Inadequate information: No 
full names or contact details 
are given, only initials.
There is no separate summary 
of actions/decisions, or action 
column for initials of those 
responsible for undertaking 
tasks. 

Professional Communication
176
Personnel
Participants were given spreadsheets giving venues and times of H&S 
lectures. More to come.
Overview of 2 different courses (1 x week; 2 x week) 
The timetables of the ‘short’ and ‘long’ courses 
were discussed and noted by all. Note attendees 
need to come in suitable clothing.
How to manage H&S course for accreditation
A 	 Written assignments will not be marked by the 
trainer, but looked over. The session attendees 
will mark the assignments during the session. The assignments will then 
be taken in and the marks recorded.
B 	 The strategy’s submission date for improved H&S is 12 August 20––.
C 	 A mock emergency situation will be organised, 
which will be staged while staff are on the 
course to see how they handle things. 
MS repeated what he said last year: that he has 
been concerned for some time about the fact 
that attendees can pass the course even though in practice at work, the 
fundamentals are shaky — especially CPR. With a pass mark of 50%, those 
who scrape through inevitably have significant gaps in their knowledge. (A 
known problem in training is that many people are 
not good at transferring knowledge from courses 
to reality.) He has thus developed a basic skills 
test that focuses on basics, such as emergency 
treatment following an accident. 
Future meetings
Future staff meetings will start promptly at 9.15.
Admin issues:
•	
Staff are requested to acknowledge emails if 
prompted to in the subject line. 
•	
Staff have been issued with boots and hard 
hats.
•	
Telephone lists have been emailed for posting 
on office noticeboards.
•	
Those requesting a special menu for office fun night must tell Sue.
•	
The stores section is looking for more office space for equipment.
Any other business
There being no other business, the meeting closed at 11h46.
There is a lack of definition 
or detail. For example, the 
difference between a long 
and a short course is not 
given.
The passive voice is vague, 
as it provides no reference as 
to who will ensure the mock 
emergency takes place.
The comments of one person 
(MS) are described in detail, 
but there is no reflection 
of other discussion at the 
meeting.
The illogical ordering of items 
under ‘Admin issues’ make 
for difficult comprehension 
(menus for fun night and 
office space are not part of 
this meeting’s content).
The date of the next meeting 
is not given.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
177
The following points indicate further weaknesses with the minutes above:
••
No discernible template or ordered layout has been used:
◗◗
The numbering is inconsistent (decimal numbers, letters and bullets are 
used at random).
◗◗
Inadequate spaces between sections makes it harder to read, with a lack 
of white space overall.
◗◗
The Comic Sans typeface is too casual. It is more suited to a social 
invitation than a formal document.
••
The discourse structure and style are weak:
◗◗
Clarity is lacking because of poor discourse structure and casual style. 
◗◗
Vague expressions are used, such as ‘more mindful’ and ‘more to come’. 
What is meant by these terms?
••
The minutes are short on detail: For example, while those who attended may 
be fully aware of what is meant by ‘suitable clothing’, it would not be clear 
to an outsider or someone not present at the original discussion.
••
There is no clear indication of who will do what and by when.
Action minutes and tables of action
Action minutes
As minutes are required for a wide range of meetings, it is not surprising that 
minute styles can also vary. Some meetings may only require action minutes, as 
more of an operational and running record of decisions and of who is doing what 
than a legal requirement. Below is a template of a table that can be used to draw 
up action minutes. This can then either inform a full set of minutes or be used as 
is as a set of minutes. 

Professional Communication
178
eg
Minutes of xxx Committee
10 April 20––  Location: xx  Time: 14h30
MINUTES OF XXXX COMMITTEE
10 April 20––  Location: xx  Time: 14h30–16h00
Attendees: [Have complete list written here and drag or cut and 
paste those sending apologies to adjacent column]
Apologies:
Absent:
In attendance:
Agenda item
Decisions	
Action to be taken
Date
RP
1	
Agenda item and number (eg 
Welcome & apologies)
A record of the discussion/key comments 
can be entered here, with a framework if 
necessary added in advance.
•
•
•
•
2
•
•
•
•
3
•
•
•
•
4
•
•
•
•
Date & time of next meeting:
Location:
Company 
logo
If all regular or required 
members are included on 
the template, it is easy just 
to drag across those sending 
apologies in advance of the 
meeting, or in the meeting if 
required.
Some meetings, for example 
board meetings, officially 
record those who are absent 
(ie those who have not sent 
apologies). It allows an audit 
to be easily done on which 
board members are fulfilling 
their obligations.
The shading allows agenda 
items to be clearly visible in 
the table.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
179
The table in this example is designed to be used in the meeting (using a device 
such as a laptop, notepad or similar) and is most successful if prepopulated as 
far as possible, as with other minutes drawn from meetings guided by working 
agendas. If proper preparation is done, very little that happens in a meeting will 
be a complete surprise. Furthermore, using a structure such as this aids the minute 
taker to extract and categorise what is being discussed and decided as the meeting 
progresses, which in turn makes it easier to construct a clear narrative around the 
discussion.
Input to the table may be done in point form during the meeting, and it should 
take very little to edit these points into clear, plain and professional minutes that 
are readily actionable and referable. In addition, the right-hand columns act as a 
table of action to clearly show what has been decided and who needs to do what 
and by when. It is critical that everyone is clear about who needs to do what. 
It is surprisingly easy to make a decision about what needs to be done without 
assigning a responsible person or deciding on a deadline. 
A table of action
Since minutes can take some time to prepare and approve before being distributed 
for comment, it is helpful to those attending the meeting – and even more so to 
those who were unable to – if a summary or table of action can be distributed by 
email as soon as possible after the meeting. It can either be an attachment or pasted 
directly into the email. The table of action should simply document any decisions 
made and any actions required, preferably in table form for easy reference. While 
members attending meetings are usually advised to take their own notes and act 
accordingly, it is preferable to still send out a table of action to ensure there are 
no gaps relating to what is required and by whom.

Professional Communication
180
eg
Table of action
Meeting of: ___________________   Held on: ___________________
Agenda item
Action required
RP
Date
Comment
4.3	 Refurbishment 
of kitchen at 
GDS Secondary 
School
•	 Site visit to review 
existing equipment 
for possible re-use
•	 Draw up draft 
specifications for 
approval at next 
meeting prior to 
obtaining quotes 
from service 
providers
NM
14/06/20__
The ‘Comment’ column may be used by the minute taker 
or person tracking the table of action. It allows a dialogue 
to be created around the action table, either when the 
action items are followed up in between meetings or for the 
responsible person to communicate regarding progress or 
problems that have arisen.
The shaded column highlights 
the responsible person, for 
easy reference.
Style for minutes
Minutes should be written in plain language, using clear short sentences and 
accessible language. If extensive jargon or technical language is required, it is 
useful to include a brief glossary in both the agenda and the minutes.
Minutes are written in the past tense and in reported speech. They are written 
in the third person and often refer to a position rather than a name. Never record 
verbatim direct speech. 
eg
The Contractor confirmed a finish time …
The Engineer requested more plant …
Many people believe the passive voice is more formal and therefore more suitable 
for a formal set of minutes. This is not the case. Where possible, write in the active 
voice; only use the passive voice where necessary. For example, the following 
passive sentence does not indicate who is responsible for submission of the 
programme, nor on whose instruction. As a result, the sentence is vague and weak:

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
181
eg
A revised programme must be submitted to the Employer before the next meeting, as 
instructed.
The same sentence written in the active voice provides a concise record of who 
gave the instruction and who is responsible for carrying it out: 
eg
The Engineer instructed the Contractor to submit a revised programme to the Employer 
before the next meeting.
In meetings where decisions are made by a committee or by vote, it is important 
not to assign individual responsibility for the decision: it is a committee decision. 
It is still not appropriate, however, to use the passive voice to hide the agent of the 
decision, as in the example below, because it in fact fails to assign responsibility at 
all, even to the committee. The questions remain: Who was it decided by? Where 
was it found?
eg
It was decided that …
It was found that …
It is better to indicate the subject of the sentence:
eg
The committee decided that …
The report revealed that …
The list below gives examples of useful vocabulary to use when moving from 
direct to reported speech:

Professional Communication
182
Direct/verbatim speech
Now
This
These
Here
Today
Tomorrow
Yesterday
Last night
Last week
Next week
Thus
Indirect/reported speech
Then/at the time
That
Those
There
That day
The next day/the following day
The previous day
The previous night
The previous week
The following week
So
English has many forms of the past tense. The following are examples of how 
tenses can be used in different situations in a meeting and how they should be 
recorded in the minutes.
eg
Scenario 1: At the fourth meeting, the Contractor asks for a copy of Drawing A.
Wording in minutes: The Contractor asked for a copy of Drawing A.
Comment: Note the use of the simple past tense to minute an action that occurred at a 
meeting in progress.
eg
Scenario 2: At the fourth meeting, the Contractor asked for a copy of Drawing A. It is now 
the fifth meeting and he still does not have the drawing.
Wording in minutes: The Contractor said that the copy of Drawing A, which he had 
requested at the fourth meeting, had not yet been produced.
Comment: Note the use of two tenses for actions occurring at different times: the simple 
past tense to minute what the Contractor said at the fifth (current) meeting, and the past 
perfect tense to minute an action that had occurred, or not, at some time before the fifth 
(current) meeting.
In minutes, the past perfect tense does not occur in isolation: it is always accompanied by 
the simple past tense. In other words, the past perfect tense always refers to the earlier of 
two (or more) actions in the past.

Meetings, agendas and minutes      Chapter 6
183
eg
Scenario 3: The Contractor, during the sixth meeting, asks to receive a new set of drawings 
in two months’ time.
Wording in minutes: The Contractor said that he would need a new set of drawings in two 
months’ time.
Comment: ‘Would’ replaces ‘will’ to indicate an action that is to be completed at some 
time in the future.
See Chapter 1 for more information on an effective writing style.
✔
Checklist for effective meetings
Be proactive in your approach to meetings. Whether you are part of the planning or 
responsible for running meetings, taking a proactive approach helps dramatically. The 
more you are aware of what people need in order to be able to contribute meaningfully at 
meetings, the more smoothly and productively the meetings will run. Putting the work in 
before the meeting reduces the load during and after the meeting. 
Use the following checklist before, during and after meetings:
•	 Make sure you know the rules and purpose relating to all meetings you attend.
•	 Check what needs to be done before, during and after the meeting and, if necessary, 
prepare a meeting timetable and strategy.
•	 Develop templates for agendas, minutes and tables of action related to your meetings.
•	 Use a working agenda to ensure everyone attending the meeting is aware of what will be 
covered and what outcomes are required.
•	 Write your minutes as soon after the meeting as possible.
•	 Use clear, short sentences and accessible language when writing minutes. Write in the 
past tense, in reported speech and, where possible, in the active voice.
•	 Extract a table of action to send out after the meeting to remind everyone of what needs 
to be done and to help monitor progress.

7
184
Business proposals and 
business plans
For anyone planning a new venture or starting a business, a good proposal and 
an effective business plan are essential. You may have a good idea for a product 
or service, but you need to look at it from the perspective of a future market or 
a funder, as most businesses – traditional and start-ups – need support at the 
beginning. Alternatively, you or your company may be putting in a bid in response 
to an advertised request to tender, commonly known as a request for a proposal 
(RfP). Both ventures require a proposal or business plan. You can create your own 
or you may be given a template as part of the RfP process. 
A proposal is a persuasive message used in business and industry to generate 
work. A proposal writer tries to persuade his or her readers (potential funders, 
contractors or procurers) to take action or to accept the action that the writer has 
proposed. For all proposals, you must consider the extent of detailed factual data 
needed for your projections to be feasible. In the case of applying to a potential 
funder, you need to provide information to persuade the funder to make a donation 
(should your organisation be a non-profit organisation) or to provide equity for a 
commercial venture.
When you respond to an RfP, you will see that the sections for completion 
are indicated and points are awarded for each section. It is the points system that 
enables the agency or company procuring the work to compare the tenders and 
award the contract to the most suitable bidder. If no indication is given by the 
client of what the business plan must incorporate, you need to decide on a format. 
Proposals have a wider application than business plans. Proposals do not 
necessarily deal with the starting up of a company. Instead, they focus on a wide 
variety of future actions. Business plans, on the other hand, are used for start-ups 
or expansions. A business plan may also be used to support a change in direction 
for which financial forecasts are required. All types of business plans include a 
detailed budget.
This chapter covers:
••
business proposals as persuasive documents
••
different types of business proposals: requested and non-requested
••
the sections of a business proposal (with examples)
••
business plans as a form of raising finance

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
185
••
how to do develop a business plan 
••
how to write the sections of a business plan (with examples).
After reading this chapter, you will be able to:
••
write a persuasive proposal for a new funder 
••
prepare a detailed business plan for a new venture or an expanding business. 
7.1	 Business proposals as persuasive documents 
The persuasive power of a proposal rests strongly on facts, proposed actions and 
justification. Justification is necessary to persuade the reader that the proposed 
actions are feasible. The likelihood of success is stressed and the feasibility of the 
proposed actions can be used to persuade the reader that the costs of the proposed 
actions are valid. 
When you write a proposal, you need to stress what the reader will gain from 
accepting it. First, you need to define your objectives and research the necessary 
facts. (See Figure 7.1 for suggested areas to be defined and researched before 
the proposal can be written.) Facts on their own, however, are not necessarily 
sufficiently persuasive. You will need to emphasise what makes your proposal 
unique: justify it in terms of what it may offer society, business and, most of all, 
the client. Persuade the reader that your skills and the skill set of your team are 
exceptional. 
Objectives:
•	 short term
•	 medium term
•	 long term
Finance
Strategy
•	 Staffing
•	 Salaries
•	 Corporate Social 
Investment (CSI)
•	 Equipment
•	 Rental
•	 Supplies
•	 Insurance
•	 Operations
•	 Marketing
Figure 7.1  Suggestions for brainstorming business proposals

Professional Communication
186
7.2	 Different types of proposals
There are two kinds of proposals: requested and non-requested.
Requested proposals
A requested proposal is prepared in response to instructions from a client. These 
instructions are the client’s terms of reference (also called a brief or RfP), and they 
tell you exactly what is wanted. Not all clients phrase their requests well, so it is 
in your interests to present a full proposal in response, even if the request is vague.
The two examples of advertisements for proposals that follow indicate the 
variety in RfPs. The first example gives little indication of what is wanted in the 
proposal, while the second example gives precise guidelines. However, a good 
proposal will do as much to influence the authority tendering the work in the first 
example as the authority in the second example.
eg
BREDASDORP MUNICIPALITY
CONTRACT NO: 1T-231
CALL FOR PROPOSALS
TO HOST A DRAG RACING EVENT IN BREDASDORP
The Overberg District Municipality hereby calls for proposals to host a drag racing event in 
Monk Road between Queen Street and Garden Road. Proposals will only be considered for 
acceptance if they conform in all respects with the requirements of Sport-Motor-South 
Africa (SMSA) and if the applicant bears all costs associated with the event, including 
the labour costs of the City such as law enforcement, fire services, etc. Of these, the most 
favourable offer to Council will then be chosen.
Proposals must be marked ‘Racing Proposal’, and delivered to the 2nd Floor, Council Building, 
Main Street, Bredasdorp, on or before 11:00 on 2003-02-20––.
For any enquiries, please contact Josie Smith on 072 435 7668. 
J Smith
J Smith,
Manager
City Council

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
187
eg
TRANSPORT EDUCATION AND TRAINING AUTHORITY
The Transport Education and Training authority (TETA) was established in terms of the 
Skills Development Act, 97 of 1998. The purpose of TETA is, inter alia, the development 
and implementation of a sector skills plan within the framework of the National Skills 
Development Strategy; it aims to promote learnerships, check the quality assurance of 
training providers and programmes, and to manage levy income and disbursements within 
the transport sector.
CALL FOR PROPOSALS TO CONDUCT PROFESSIONAL DRIVER AND DEFENSIVE 
DRIVING SKILLS TRAINING — NSF STRATEGIC PROJECT
Proposals are invited from interested training provider companies to conduct professional 
and defensive driving skills training for the taxi industry.
The TETA is embarking on a national programme to enhance sustainability and increase 
growth prospects and competitiveness of small businesses in the taxi industry. Through 
integration with the National Road Safety Strategy, the impact will result in a decrease in 
the rate of road accidents. 
It has become clear that a great number of our drivers require professional defensive driving 
skills. The industry has attested to a need to carry out the transportation skills development 
exercise around specific SAQA-registered unit standards. In line with collaborative 
arrangements, 20 drivers from each province (180 in total) will be trained through this 
project.
Upon completion of the project, the participants will:
•	 be able to observe and adhere to road signs, safety rules and regulations
•	 be in a position to react to incidents in a responsible manner
•	 be able to handle customers with care
•	 be able to interact with other road users
•	 understand their roles as drivers charged with the lives of commuters and society at 
large.
The provider must ensure that, upon completion, participants earn credits in line with 
the NQF standards and TETA requirements towards an Advanced Professional Driving 
qualification.
The programme will be provincially based. The actual delivery of the project will run for not 
more than six weeks after the conclusion of the contract (final certification or granting of 
credits may fall outside this timeframe).
The following must be submitted:
•	 Proposal (outlining the process, costs, milestones, etc)
•	 Proof of accreditation or proof that an application for accreditation has been made with 
an etqa
•	 Résumés of project staff
•	 Authorised copy of company registration
•	 References
•	 Tax clearance certificate.

Professional Communication
188
Terms of reference documents and further information can be obtained by contacting 
Ms Refilwe Ndaba, TETA NSF Project Management Unit, TETA, 1st floor, Transport 
Towers, Main Road, Johannesburg. Tel: (011) 751 6780
Proposals must be handed in by 24 January 20––. Pending assessment of your proposal, 
you may be invited to make a presentation to the Selection Committee between 10 and 14 
February 20––. Exact times and venues will be communicated by 28 January 20––.
NB: If you have not heard from us by 28 February 20––, please consider your submission as 
unsuccessful.
Non-requested proposals
You might, perhaps as a member of a group of experts, decide to draw up your 
own proposal. In this case you would not have any terms of reference and would 
not know your potential client’s objectives. You would therefore have to do your 
own research. There are various analytical tools to assist you in defining what is 
to go into your proposal and to use for brainstorming the topics. For example, 
you could use:
••
a SWOT analysis (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats) to 
brainstorm what your position is in relation to your competitors 
••
a PESTLE analysis (Political, Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental 
and Legal) to brainstorm the norms and rules within which you will 
be functioning (this is sometimes abbreviated to PEST, omitting the 
environmental and legal elements)
••
Porter’s five forces to focus on the industry you will be entering and the 
forces that will place pressure on your proposed business.
Porter’s model determines competition level in an industry using five forces. 
These competitive forces concentrate on: 
••
rivalry within the industry
••
threat of new entrants
••
threat of substitutes 
••
bargaining power of suppliers
••
bargaining power of buyers.
The collective strength of these five forces determines the nature of the 
competitiveness in an industry. It varies from intense to moderate and affects 
profitability. An industry is often dominated by one of these forces. 
A change in any of these variables can create an opportunity or pose a 
threat to an organisation. The organisation can prepare itself for changes in 
the environment by scanning that environment; changing its strategy; and/or 
restructuring to become more flexible and adaptable.

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
189
7.3	 Write the sections of a business proposal
Before writing up the sections of a proposal, it is important to have a clear 
overview of the proposal. Dewey’s six stages of problem solving will assist you 
in conceptualising your project and defining ways of presenting it to a potential 
funder or client. Dewey’s six stages of problem solving are the following (Barkley, 
Cross & Major, 2005):
1. 	 Identify and define the real problem, not the apparent problem.
2. 	 Consider all objectives and criteria.
3. 	 Identify solutions.
4. 	 Test feasible solutions and estimate the resources needed.
5. 	 Select the best option, reassess and measure the outcomes.
6. 	 Implement the chosen solution to the problem. 
As fixed-format documents, proposals have clearly defined sections, each with a 
specific role to play. The recommended sections of a proposal are explained in the 
sections that follow, with examples where applicable. 
Note that this is like a menu, and you must select the relevant sections to suit your 
specific needs. Additional sections for a non-requested proposal are set out on page 198.
The title page
This should create a good first impression. It should contain:
••
a full title, stating the proposed action
••
a line stating who the proposal was prepared for (if possible, give names and 
job titles)
••
a line stating who the proposal was prepared by (give names and job titles)
••
the dates (give the date when the proposal was requested and the date when 
it is due)
••
index words (to enable a person to find this proposal in an electronic storage 
system).
The terms of reference (if no RfP template provided)
These are the instructions that the client gives you. If there is a formal RfP, a 
template will be provided. If not, you will need to formalise the terms of reference. 
To do this, you need to state:
••
who instructed you
••
when you were instructed
••
why you were instructed
••
exactly what you have been asked to do (ie the client’s objectives)
••
when you have to submit your proposal.

Professional Communication
190
Always ask for your terms of reference in writing. If you are not sure about the 
instructions, always negotiate with your client until all parties are satisfied with 
them. In some cases, it is appropriate for the terms of reference to be signed.
The client’s objectives (requested proposals only)
These record what the client would like to achieve as a result of the proposed 
action. If you know the client’s objectives, state them in full in this section of your 
proposal. If the clients have not yet given you their objectives, negotiate with them 
until you are able to record their objectives. In the following example – an extract 
from a proposal – the client’s objectives are stated in full.
eg
ii 
BHP SOUTH AFRICA 
Client’s objectives
The client, namely the Department of Mineral and Energy Affairs, intends to justify the 
exploitation of the Hondeklipbaai natural gas field in terms of its benefit to the South 
African economy and the possible impact on the environment. The department plans to 
assess the manufacturing of an alternative, clean fuel from the natural gas. There are three 
reasons why this has become a priority:
•	 South Africa’s reliance on coal and oil can no longer be justified due to the increasing 
fuel price and the long-term shortage of these fossil fuels.
•	 The West Coast of South Africa is an underdeveloped area and would benefit, in terms of 
job creation, from industrial development. Furthermore, it is in South Africa’s interests 
to keep pace with internationally emerging technology in the field of alternative fuel 
production.
•	 Increasing pollution in urban areas has made the search for a cleaner  
fuel necessary.
Summary
Make sure that you place your summary after the terms of reference and client’s 
objectives. This section summarises the full proposal. It may contain illustrations 
such as tables, line graphs, pie charts and bar graphs. It may also include details 
about the cost of the proposed action.
Note that opinions differ as to whether you should include the costs in your summary. Some 
experts argue that the proposal should psychologically prepare the reader for the costs. 
Others argue that costs are so important that they should be placed in the summary. You will 
have to decide on this important point yourself.

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
191
Make your summary highly readable. Use subheadings, bullet lists, short sentences 
and a variety of paragraph lengths. The summary should be good enough to 
replace the whole proposal for the busy reader. It should be 5–10% of the word 
count of the entire proposal. The following example shows an abridged form of 
the summary of a business proposal.
eg
iii 
BHP SOUTH AFRICA 
Summary
This proposal is a response to the request from the 
Department of Mineral and Energy Affairs for tenders to 
exploit the vast resource of natural gas at Hondeklipbaai. 
South Africa’s increasing dependence on rapidly depleting 
coal and oil reserves, coupled with the need to seek more environmentally friendly fuel 
sources, has made the government reconsider its earlier decision not to exploit the gas field. 
Any proposed project would need to benefit both the local communities and the country at 
large on both an environmental and sociological scale.
The proposal
Broken Hill Proprietary Limited (BHP) aims to exploit this natural resource by constructing 
a plant at Hondeklipbaai to produce methanol from natural gas. This detailed proposal 
describes the work already performed, and provides a comprehensive schedule of proposed 
activities necessary to complete this project. BHP is a world leader in the field of methanol 
synthesis, with many years’ experience in this field. In addition, in 20–– BHP constructed 
a plant in Melbourne, Australia, that is very similar to the proposed Hondeklipbaai plant. 
Throughout this proposal, the Melbourne plant will be used as a basis for technical, 
economic and environmental reviews.
Methanol production
Although there are other possible uses for natural gas, as a result of global experience in this 
field BHP has concluded that methanol production is the most viable usage. Importantly, 
methanol is more environmentally friendly than other hydrocarbons such as petrol and 
diesel.
Benefits to be gained from the proposal
BHP believes this proposed plant would be beneficial to 
South Africa for the following reasons:
•	 The production of methanol will decrease South Africa’s 
reliance on depleting fossil fuels such as coal and oil.
•	 Methanol is a cleaner alternative to conventional fuel sources and therefore has 
environmental advantages.
•	 BHP is ideally suited to construct such a plant. The experience gained in building  
and running the similar, successful Melbourne operation is invaluable …
The first sentence should state 
what the proposal covers. 
It is important to summarise 
the justification for the 
proposal. The writers have 
done this well.

Professional Communication
192
Table of contents
This section lists the headings in the proposal up to the second level. It gives the 
page number for each heading and subheading.
Note that the table of contents shown in the following example does not 
include all the sections which are recommended for a proposal.
eg
BHP SOUTH AFRICA 
Table of contents
Terms of reference
i 
Client’s objectives 
ii 
Summary 
iii 
Table of contents 
v
Glossary 
viii 
List of tables and figures 
ix
1. 	 Introduction 
1
	
1.1 	 Background 
1
	
1.2 	 BHP International 
1
	
1.3 	 The BHP South Africa Group
1
	
1.4 	 Layout of proposal
2
2. 	 Scope of the proposal 
4
3. 	 Tasks already completed 
5
	
3.1 	 Conceptual engineering 
5
	
3.2 	 Profitability analysis 
5
	
3.3 	 Environmental impact assessment 
6
4. 	 Proposed schedule for project
8
	
4.1 	 Detailed engineering 
8
	
4.2 	 Procurement and construction 
8
	
4.3 	 Commissioning 
9
	
4.4 	 Full production 
9
5. 	 Environmental impact assessment (EIA)
11
	
5.1 	 Background 
11
	
5.2 	 Involvement of interested and affected parties 
12
	
5.3 	 Minimisation of environmental impact 
14
6. 	 Project costing and economic viability 
15
	
6.1 	 Capital cost 
15
	
6.2 	 Operating costs 
15

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
193
	
6.3 	 Economic viability
16
	
6.4 	 Financing the project 
16
7. 	 Justification 
17
	
7.1 	 BHP’s experience 
17
	
7.2 	 Methanol as a product 
18
	
7.3 	 Economic viability 
18
	
7.4 	 Development of a historically poor area 
19
	
7.5 	 International recognition 
19
8. 	 Appendices 
20
	
Appendix A: Technical project description 
20
	
Appendix B: Operating cost estimation methods 
21
The justification is a very 
important section of the 
proposal. It is used to 
persuade the reader to accept 
the proposal. 
Tables and figures
Tables and figures are listed separately. If both are contained in the proposal, the 
section is headed ‘List of illustrations’.
Glossary
The glossary is like a special dictionary for the proposal. Define all technical words, 
as well as difficult words if necessary. Use alphabetical order.
List of symbols and acronyms
If you use any special symbols or acronyms (groups of first letters of words), you 
must define them. Use alphabetical order if possible. If not, use an order that will 
be clear to the reader.
The body of the proposal
The main sections of the body of a standard proposal are as follows:
1. 	 Introduction
	
1.1 	 The need for the proposed action
	
1.2 	 Background to the proposal
	
1.3 	 Description of the problem(s) to be solved
	
1.4 	 Purposes of the proposal
	
1.5 	 Procedure used to gather information 
	
1.6 	 Description of the layout of the proposal
2. 	 Procedure used to gather information
This section should contain some 
or all of the listed subsections, with 
numbered headings.
If this is a long description, make it 
Section 2, as shown below.
This is very important if the proposal 
is complex.

Professional Communication
194
3. 	 Detailed proposal
	
3.1 	 Detailed proposed action
	
3.2 	 Boundaries of the proposed action
	
3.3 	 Scope of the proposed action
	
3.4 	 Limitations of the proposed action
	
3.5 	 Breakdown of tasks to be performed
	
3.6 	 Environmental impact assessment (EIA)
	
3.7 	 Detailed costs
	
3.8 	 Method of payment
4. 	 Justification
5. 	 Urge to action
This section sets out the 
proposed action in detail. 
Include some, or all, of the 
subsections shown, with 
numbered headings. 
The example that follows is a short series of extracts from the body of a proposal 
concerning BHP South Africa. Note that not all the sections are reflected (sections 
1, 2, 3 and 6 are omitted), so the numbering does not appear consecutive.
eg
8
BHP SOUTH AFRICA
4.	
Proposed schedule for project
4.1	 Detailed engineering
Detailing the proposed project involves finalising all relevant 
drawings (piping and instrumentation diagrams, process flow 
diagrams). The layout and exact locations of the plant must 
also be decided, along with the specifications of the process 
units. For example, the type of methanol converter technology must be specified, as well as 
its size and duties.
The detailed engineering stage also includes building and commissioning a pilot plant of the 
process. Pilot plants are very useful in quantifying the effect that various process conditions 
have on the plant. For example, the effect that a different natural gas grade would have on the 
process could quickly be determined using a pilot plant. The pilot plant of the BHP process will 
be designed, built and commissioned by the end of the detailed engineering phase.
[Sections 4.2 and 4.3 are not reproduced here.]
9
4.4	 Full production
This stage involves the steady increase in production rate of the plant. During this increase, 
the behaviour and performance of the plant will be studied for future reference. The staff 
and operators will receive final training in anticipation of maximum production rates.
Note how the writers have 
effectively stressed future 
action.

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
195
Table 4.1 gives the detailed schedule of BHP’s proposed 
actions. The table refers to what has already been done and 
to what the group proposes to do.
Table 4.1  Schedule of BHP’s proposed actions
Time
Process
Completed
See page xx.
Conceptual engineering:
•	 Preliminary economic evaluation
•	 Product research and development
•	 Human resource studies
•	 Preliminary process flow diagram (PFD)
•	 Preliminary mass balance
•	 Initial location options
•	 Initial stages of environmental impact assessment (EIA)
•	 Discussions with the interested and affected parties 
(I&APs)
✓
Completed
Basic engineering:
•	 Final PFDs
•	 Specifications for units
•	 Mass and energy balances
•	 Control philosophy defined
•	 Waste treatment process defined
✓
1st to 6th 
month
Detailed engineering:
•	 Complete EIA
•	 Final piping and instrumentation diagrams (P&IDs)
•	 Detailed plant layout
•	 Full equipment specifications
•	 Exact location decided
•	 Pilot plant construction begins
7th to 12th 
month
Detailed engineering continues:
•	 Pilot plant start-up
•	 Recruitment and training of key staff
Procurement:
•	 Receive and evaluate tenders
•	 Place orders
•	 Receive and store materials and equipment
13th to 36th 
month
Construction:
•	 Natural gas pipeline construction begins
•	 Earthworks and roads built
•	 Buildings and structures completed
•	 Equipment fabrication and installation
•	 Recruitment and training of operators and other staff
•	 Electronics and instrumentation completed
•	 Insulation and painting
Note the reference to the 
table. This reference prepares 
the reader for the table.
Note the ticks (✓) in the 
right-hand column to show 
what has already been 
done. This is an effective 
summary table.
Note the effective time scale 
proposed.

Professional Communication
196
37th to 40th 
month
Commissioning:
•	 Check compliance and design
•	 Final testing of the natural gas pipeline
•	 Detailed training of operators and staff
•	 Start-up to 50% of full production capacity
41st to 42nd 
month
Full production:
•	 Final training ends
•	 Ramp plant to 100% production capacity
11
5. 	 Environmental impact assessment (EIA)
5.1	 Background
As part of the primary design activity, it was necessary to establish whether the proposed 
development is not only technically realisable, but also socially and environmentally 
acceptable. The Environmental Conservation Act, 73 of 1989, 
which has been further developed under the Environmental 
Impact Assessment Regulations 2010 (Government Gazette 
544, 2010), requires that any proposed development 
must prevent pollution, promote conservation and secure 
ecologically sustainable development. These requirements 
are evaluated in an EIA.
Note the reference to the 
relevant environmental 
legislation. This establishes 
the group’s credibility. 
Justification
Your justification is the persuasive part of your proposal. Use this section to 
persuade your readers of:
••
the feasibility of your proposed solutions to their problems
••
the benefits of accepting your proposed actions.
This is an important section if you have prepared a long and detailed proposal. 
Use this section to create a positive last impression. Remember to keep this section 
short, to the point and persuasively worded. The following example shows the 
justification section from the same report used earlier.

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
197
eg
17
7. 	 Justification
This proposal has the following advantages:
7.1 	BHP’s experience
BHP’s role in the field of methanol synthesis gives the company access to the necessary 
technical expertise to produce methanol efficiently from natural gas.
In addition, BHP has achieved great success with its Melbourne-based methanol plant. The 
Hondeklipbaai plant will be based on this successful venture.
7.2 	Methanol as a product
Methanol is environmentally clean and, as internal combustion technology develops, it 
is likely to be the successor to gasoline. Amongst all possible products from natural gas, 
methanol is the most viable and useful in the 21st century. Methanol will help South Africa 
to become less reliant on shrinking petroleum reserves.
7.3 	Economic viability
By virtue of having performed a complete cost estimate for the process, BHP is certain the 
project will be profitable and financially beneficial for the people of South Africa. The project 
has an expected rate of return of 20.4%, which is higher than all standard investments.
7.4 	Development of a historically poor area
BHP acknowledges its social responsibility by working closely with communities and 
committing a percentage of profits to local development. BHP intends to stimulate growth 
in the area and to provide equal opportunity employment. BHP has demonstrated this 
commitment by preparing to invest expertise and capital in this project.
7.5 	International recognition
A successful venture, such as is proposed here, will lead to further international recognition 
of South Africa as an emerging industrial nation. This will have positive economic and social 
benefits for the country as a whole.
The above-mentioned benefits demonstrate beyond doubt 
that government approval of the proposed BHP methanol 
plant at Hondeklipbaai would be the most appropriate 
course of action.
Note the use of persuasive 
language. 
References
List all the sources that you have used. These could include books, encyclopaedias, 
reports, theses, journal articles, opinions from interviews, online references and other 
research sources. See Chapter 12 for instructions on managing citations and referencing.
Appendices
In this section, include your results from detailed research, including computer 
printouts, detailed calculations and tables, examples of research questionnaires 
and typed versions of interviews.

Professional Communication
198
Extra information for non-requested proposals 
When you write a non-requested proposal, include some, or all, of the following 
descriptive and supporting material to help persuade your reader(s) to accept your 
proposal. You will need to prepare:
••
references from previous clients
••
references to an earlier association with the reader(s)
••
a description of previous experience with projects
••
short CVs of staff, as well as their qualifications
••
the company’s organisation chart
••
a statement of the financial condition of the company
••
a description of employment practices, including employment equity, Black 
Economic Empowerment (BEE) and corporate governance
••
a general description of company policies
••
a description of where the company is located
••
descriptive, promotional and advertising literature.
7.4	 Business plans as a form of raising finance
Proposals and business plans are related. Both are used to generate work or raise 
finances for a new project. Business plans, however, are directed more at raising 
finance for new businesses or expanding current businesses. Proposals and 
business plans are both persuasive messages. They use facts, or projections based 
on facts, as the basis for persuasion. Both may include justification sections that 
seek to persuade the reader to accept the proposed action or to arrange to provide 
finance. However, a business plan always includes a detailed budget. 
Your final business plan will need to contain the following sections:
••
A list of goals
••
Steps to be taken to reach those goals
••
Planned completion dates
••
Priorities
••
Finances required (budget).
As mentioned previously, a business plan is an essential tool for raising money. It 
stresses the functional planning that gives the applicant the credibility needed to 
get financial support. The plan outlines the goals of the proposed company and 
analyses potential markets as well as customers. It describes a course of action 
to be taken, highlights business opportunities and points out the potential of the 
business from a prospective investor’s point of view. Money can be raised in the 
form of equity or a loan, or a combination of equity and a loan.
An exit strategy is essential for raising equity. It is not a sign of defeat but of 
pragmatism and foresight, and adds credibility to your plan. Consider when and 

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
199
how the potential investor could exit or when or how all of the initial stakeholders 
could exit (eg listing the company as a public company).
7.5 	How to develop a business plan
Planning a potential business is a process that consists of various stages:
1.	 Brainstorm to pin down your business objectives in detail. At the same time 
you should prepare your vision or mission statement, in which you describe 
the purpose of your business and what you plan to achieve.
2.	 Consider your short-, medium- and long-term goals. Most importantly, 
decide on your intended market and determine its size. You must thoroughly 
research your proposed market so that you understand any opportunities and 
threats. Make sure you know who the competition is. Find out as much as you 
can about your target market, your customers and their priorities, as this will 
inform your planning process. Many people at this stage make use of business 
planning tools such as a SWOT analysis, where they analyse the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats facing their business. This allows them 
to anticipate the challenges ahead more effectively while also identifying the 
key strengths of their business.
3.	 Draw up a strategic plan establishing your goals and objectives. When 
you set out your business objectives, you must be very clear as to what your 
business is about and what you plan to achieve over a specific time span. 
Critical here is to plan the budget: cash needed in and expenditure. There are 
various financial modelling tools to assist with this. It is also vital to have a 
clear timeline in your head, even at this early stage of your planning. 
4.	 Then work out an operational plan, describing in detail how you intend to 
ensure the success of the strategic plan.
5.	 Finally, you should draw up a detailed business plan, describing exactly how 
you intend to ensure the success of the strategic plan and covering every aspect 
of the business. This is discussed in greater detail in the following section.
Your business plan should not just explain what your intended business proposes 
to do; it should also explain what is special or unique about your product or 
service. It should establish your credibility by giving reasons why you are well 
qualified to make the most of the business opportunity.
As part of your planning, do the following:
••
Establish your priorities and identify problems that could get in your way. 
••
Anticipate any future technological advances and draw up proposals to 
exploit them.
••
Analyse the competition: their strengths and how you will better them. 
••
List all the benefits as well as any disadvantages of your proposed product 

Professional Communication
200
or service. Stress unique features and competitive strengths and how these 
should make market penetration easier. For this you may want to explore the 
SWOT analytical tool.
••
Define your level of performance and the quality you expect. Set standards 
by which to measure your progress.
••
Set goals to manage uncertainties and reduce your risks. However, ensure 
that your goals are specific, measurable, time-related and attainable. 
••
Having set the goals, describe the action necessary to realise each goal (as 
described in Figure 7.2) and plan target dates for accomplishing each goal.
••
It is also important to develop detailed marketing, sales and financial plans. 
This will be discussed in the next sections.
1. 	 Make sure you fully understand the 
problem or need.
2. 	 Brainstorm solutions and tasks to 
accomplish these solutions.
3. 	 Determine what resources you will 
need, such as equipment and personnel.
4. 	 Indicate the expected results and 
benefits.
1. 	 Reassess the solutions.
2. 	 Reassess the results or benefits.
3. 	 Measure the projected outcomes.
STAGE 1
STAGE 2
Figure 7.2  Goal setting for a business plan

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
201
When using any of the analytical tools, such as SWOT or PESTLE analyses, do not merely 
identify the issues and leave them in your plan; identify what you can do to, for example, 
overcome any weaknesses or threats identified. This will show readers that you have not 
only identified issues but proposed action to mitigate or manage them. It is also worth 
considering omitting the analysis tools from your plans and proposals and just including the 
outcomes or your responses to the analyses. The analytical grids can be reserved for internal 
purposes. 
You will also need to plan:
••
the registration of your company
••
the dates when your staff need to be in place
••
where you will source your materials.
Marketing and sales plan
Your marketing plan should be based on your research into the market and 
the competition; and the sales programme must support and complement your 
marketing plan. Once you have a marketing and sales plan, you must plan 
a production programme that will ensure delivery on your stated plans and 
objectives. A basis for this is the four Ps: price, place, promotion and product. By 
studying the market according to each of these aspects, you may be sure you have 
considered all exigencies, as detailed in Figure 7.3.
Product
Design
Quality
Functionality
Technology
Branding
Packaging
Services
Availability
Warranty
Price
Strategy
List price
Discounts
Allowances
Payment period
Credit terms
Payment methods
Place
Trade channels
Coverage
Assortments
Locations
Inventory
Transportation
Logistics
E-commerce
Promotion
Advertising
Personal selling
Sales promotion
Public relations
Direct marketing
Corporate identity
Form of promotion
The marketing mix
Figure 7.3  Marketing considered in terms of the four Ps
Source: Von Brocke 2012

Professional Communication
202
Financial plan
Your financial statement should include details regarding:
••
cashflow
••
the cost of acquiring equipment, if relevant
••
rental costs
••
salaries and wages
••
the costs of obtaining supplies
••
travel expenses and contingency funds.
There are many financial modelling programs available for planning finances. 
Microsoft® Excel™ also has many tools that will assist you. 
7.6 	Write the sections of a business plan
When you assemble your final document, keep in mind that a business plan must 
forcefully persuade prospective investors to take a risk.
Each section of a business plan is described in detail here. For some sections, 
extracts from a real business plan are given as examples. Some of these sections 
have been abridged. 
The title page
This page should include:
••
a clear title, giving the plan a focus
••
a line stating whom the plan was prepared for (names and job titles)
••
a line stating whom the plan was prepared by (names and job titles)
••
the date
••
key words or index words.
eg
Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling
A business plan 
Prepared for: 	
ABC Bank
	
Risk Finance Division
Prepared by: 	
Michelle Dyers, MBA 
	
Nancy Ncomo, MBA
15 January 20––
CONFIDENTIAL 
Key words: handset, mobile, recycling, second-hand, foreign sales, investment
The authors make 
it clear from the 
beginning that 
this is a business 
plan. 
Note the use of key words. 
These are also called index 
words or search words. 

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
203
A summary
This should include content regarding the:
••
subject or purpose of the proposed business activities (one or two brief 
sentences)
••
function or product description (about half a page or one-third of the length 
of the content on this topic in the proposal) 
••
innovation and credibility of the venture and the reasons why your business 
or you and your team are unique and thus financially attractive (about half a 
page or one third of the length of the content on this topic in the proposal) 
••
justification, including further selling points, such as corporate social 
investment (CSI), exceptional staff or meeting government drives for 
inclusion of personnel (about half a page or one third of the proposal) 
••
what an investor or authorising company can expect to gain for its support 
and legal requirements (brief references, if appropriate).
eg
Summary
Trading as Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling, we 
propose to set up a business to recycle handsets/mobiles that 
householders and businesses no longer want. Our business 
plan describes how we propose to do this.
Background to the business plan
We estimate that South Africans will buy 1 000 000 new 
’phones in 20––. As a result, there will be about 750 000 old, 
unwanted handsets/mobiles, 90% of which will be in good 
working order. These handsets/mobiles will either be stored 
in back rooms or be thrown away.
We expect this trend to continue as advances in technology and styling cause increasing 
numbers of South Africans to replace their handsets/mobiles.
Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling will be aimed at foreign buyers
Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling will be a highly profitable channel for selling old 
’phones to markets in Africa, Asia and South America for domestic and industrial uses.
We believe that our plan will persuade South Africans to trade in their unwanted handsets/
mobiles rather than throw them away.
Note the use of the personal 
pronoun ‘we’. This direct, 
personal style is acceptable in 
a business plan or a proposal. 
The authors could also have 
used an impersonal style to 
make their plan more formal. 
The authors have placed this 
important statement in a 
frame to attract attention 
to it. 

Professional Communication
204
Proposed method of operating 
We propose the following simple method:
1. 	 Representatives from Telephone Handset and Mobile 
Recycling will contact Telkom, as well as all offices  
and shops selling new ‘phones. 
2. 	 Customers who buy new handsets/mobiles will be 
told that they will receive R50 off their new ’phones 
if they hand in an old one in any condition. Telephone Telephone Handset and Mobile 
Recycling will pay the agent the trade-in price (ie R50) for every second-hand 
telephone collected.
Our extensive market research has shown us that telephone suppliers are very willing to 
absorb a R50 per sale expense, as they are able to recoup the R50 by collecting second-hand 
handsets/mobiles from their clients.
Telephone recycling procedure
•	 Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling will clean and 
repair all handsets/mobiles received. These will then be 
sold to foreign markets in lots of 50.
•	 All ’phones beyond repair will be dismantled for spares.
•	 Our market research (see Appendix 1) has shown us that 
there is a large and expanding market for handsets/
mobiles in the price range of R150 to R300 per unit. 
Finance requested: R600 000
As a result of our market research, we propose to start our business with a starting capital  
of R900 000. We have already raised R300 000 of our own. Therefore we are requesting 
R600 000.
We seek twelve investment units of R50 000 each to make 
up the R600 000. Each unit will earn 6% of the company’s 
net profit per year. A loan of R600 000 would give a 
total investment interest in the company of 67%. We, as 
principals, propose to keep a 33% share in the profits. 
Note the use of full headings 
to guide the reader. 
Note the numbered steps to 
explain the procedure.
The writers have carefully 
explained their procedure. 
This attention to detail is 
important for persuading the 
readers of their ability.
This gives the writers 
credibility.
Note the use of figures and 
percentages here. 

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
205
The following example shows a summary that uses a graphic.
eg
INTELLIPLUGT M
MAKING HOME AUTOMATION EASY
Smart home automation devices are fairly expensive and therefore inaccessible to many 
consumers. With this in mind, IntelliPlug (Pty) Ltd introduces the IntelliPlug. A simple, 
affordable home automation solution which enables a user to control multiple power plug 
outlets through the use of a smartphone application. The business plan for the IntelliPlug as 
proposed by IntelliPlug (Pty) Ltd is summarised below.
Product Description
The IntelliPlug is a wireless automation device which is made up of a customised multi-plug 
outlet and an Arduino microcontroller. Appliances can be plugged into the IntelliPlug and 
be wirelessly controlled via a computer or smartphone application. The Arduino serves as 
the control unit providing smart wireless functionality to allow users to connect to their 
IntelliPlug and control appliances from any location via the Internet.
The Arduino will be pre-loaded with default IntelliPlug software to provide basic appliance 
control functionality to schedule appliances to turn on and off as well as monitor energy 
consumption of appliances. However, since Arduinos are compatible with open source 
software, more ambitious users can modify the software to enable more advanced IntelliPlug 
automation functionality.
Marketing Plan
The IntelliPlug is a versatile device that can double as a home automation device and an 
educational tool in the field of software and electronics. Thus there is a market for the 
IntelliPlug amongst home owners, electronics hobbyists and university students. There is  
also a market for future partnerships with energy utilities such as Eskom with regard to 
domestic energy saving initiatives.
Marketing strategies will be put in place to establish and grow a customer base. These 
strategies will include official product launches, multimedia advertising (social media, 
technology magazines, radio and newspapers), promotions, free software upgrades, 
dedicated customer services and product quality and safety guarantees.
Business Operations
IntelliPlug (Pty) Ltd will be headed by an executive board of qualified engineers of various 
specialisations. An additional seat on the board will be available should an external investor 
want a place on the executive board.
Over the course of the first five years of operation, six additional staff members will be 
employed to facilitate the running of the business.
The business will operate out of a warehouse located in Epping, Cape Town. A technical 
workshop will be set up in the warehouse wherein the assembly, performance testing and 
packaging of the IntelliPlugs will take place.

Professional Communication
206
IntelliPlugs will be sold to customers via an online webstore and through selected retail 
stores. Courier delivery options will be available on the webstore for customers who want 
the product delivered to them.
Financial Overview
IntelliPlug (Pty) Ltd will require a total of R900 000 as start-up capital funds. R600 000 of 
this total is going to be funded through investment from the IntelliPlug founders and a bank 
loan. This leaves a R300 000 deficit which will be required from an external investor, who 
will receive a 40% share of ownership in return.
Figure 1 shows the 
projected annual net 
profit over the initial 
five-year period of 
operations based on 
an initial selling price 
of R1 150 for the 
IntelliPlug.
It can be seen in 
Figure 1 that the 
business is projected 
to become profitable 
within three years of 
operation. Dividends 
will be paid out as of year 3, with a total of R1 100 000 in dividends being paid out to the 
external investor by the end of year 5. This total will further increase over subsequent years 
of operation.
Justification
The IntelliPlug is an affordable South African product which will provide many people with 
access to modern wireless home automation technology. The versatility of the IntelliPlug’s 
features, along with the flexibility to expand the product concept in the future, will give it 
a firm edge over its competitors. IntelliPlug (Pty) Ltd.’s executive board consists of a strong 
team of qualified engineers who are dedicated to ensuring that the IntelliPlug is a high-
quality, cutting-edge product. Therefore, the IntelliPlug will be a highly successful and 
rewarding endeavour.
A description of the basic business idea
In this section, make sure you do the following:
••
Present your vision and mission statement, objectives and goals.
••
Explain your concept and justify why it is worth supporting.
••
Describe each part of the process or describe the processes involved in the 
concept.
••
Describe how your product or concept compares with that of your 
competitors.

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
207
••
Show why your product will be more profitable: cash forecast and equity 
and/or financial needs
••
Include an exit plan for the long term or earlier, in case the venture is not 
successful.
The following example is an abridged extract from a business plan.
eg
1. 	 Description of the business concept
Recycling is a growing industry in South Africa. It will 
continue to grow in the future, as South Africans become 
more sensitive to the environment. For example, glass 
recycling has grown into a multimillion-rand business, with 
average profits of between 12% and 14%. Paper and cardboard 
recycling is also increasing in importance, with a turnover of 
R45 million in 20––.
The concept of telephone recycling offers South Africans an 
exciting challenge. Rather than throwing away their unwanted 
’phones, they could take them in for a R50 discount.
A consumer report of 20–– estimates that South Africans are storing up to 750 000 old 
’phones. Most of these will be thrown away because there is no market for them.
South Africans are now buying new handsets/mobiles in record numbers. Sales of new 
handsets/mobiles are expected to increase by 25% over the next ten years.
This background to the 
business plan prepares the 
reader for the plan.
 Note the use of preparatory 
detail to get the reader 
thinking about the business 
opportunity. 
Proposed products or services
In this section, describe the products and services that your business concept will 
generate. Use illustrations to sell your product or services.
eg
2. 	 Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling products and services
Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling will sign contracts 
with all major outlets to pay R50 per ’phone handed in. 
We will pick up all used handsets/mobiles from the outlets’ 
distribution points. We will also pay the transport for lots of 
100 used handsets/mobiles sent to us.
Major sections of the plan are 
introduced with first-level 
numbers. Each new section 
should start on a new page.
Management team
Describe the personnel, skill sets and experience required and how this team 
matches the requirements. Give their qualifications and work history (CVs) and, if 
relevant, photographs of the members of the team.

Professional Communication
208
The marketing and sales plan
Cover the following points in the section discussing your marketing and sales plan:
••
Describe your potential market (how many potential customers there are, 
where you will find them, why they buy, how much they spend and what 
they like). State specifically who is likely to buy your products or services, 
and why.
••
Give a detailed account of your marketing strategies. Back up your assertions 
with specific marketing and demographic information.
••
Give a forecast of sales by unit.
••
Stress your competitive edge in the market. Describe competitors in the 
market and their strategies, and stress what benefits your business will offer 
over the competition.
eg
3. 	 Marketing plan
Telephone Recycling proposes to market its services in five ways:
3.1 	Prospectuses for decision makers 
We will approach all decision makers in telephone service 
centres and shops selling telephones. In addition, each 
centre and shop will receive a professionally prepared 
prospectus and proposal.
3.2 	Contracted partners
All telephone service centres and shops will receive follow-up visits. We will sign a contract 
with each one.
3.3 	Advertising in foreign trade journals
We will advertise in foreign trade journals and magazines to alert foreign buyers to our 
new source of used handsets/mobiles. We will use any interest shown by foreign buyers to 
encourage South African sources to sign contracts with us.
3.4 	Nationwide advertising
As soon as we have signed contracts with a number of service centres and shops, we will 
begin a nationwide publicity campaign. We propose to do this through a digital strategy: 
website, SEO, social media and broadcast and print media advertisements. This campaign  
will encourage South Africans to trade in their used ’phones.
3.5 	The use of salespeople in foreign countries
As soon as we have signed enough contracts and have a stock of 700 000 ’phones, we will 
pay a group of commissioned sales staff in selected foreign countries. Their job will be to 
find buyers of second-hand handsets/mobiles.
Note the use of subheadings 
to guide the reader through 
each stage of the plan. 

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
209
The proposed organisation
In this section, describe what kind of organisation you propose to establish to 
produce your products or services:
••
Define how you propose to manage and run your company.
••
Describe your staff, their qualifications and experience.
••
Describe your administrative and record-keeping systems.
••
Show that the efficient and intelligent management of your company will 
maximise your profits.
Legal requirements
Describe any legal requirements for setting up your business.
Proposed company location
State where you wish to locate your company and supply the necessary maps.
Company’s finances
In this section, include details about your financial plan:
••
Set out the reasons why you need the specific amount of money.
••
Describe how profits and potential losses will be treated with regard to investors.
••
Forecast your cash flow and project your likely profits.
••
Provide a break-even analysis.
••
Forecast your return on sales, return on assets and return on investments.
••
State your start-up costs and at what stages you will need the money. Stress 
what you are seeking from investors.
••
State your legal costs.
••
State your costs, for example for staff, premises, insurance, office equipment 
and supplies.
••
Describe the investors’ degree of liability for your company operations and 
the terms of their financial participation in company profits.
eg
4. 	 Financial plan
4.1 	Capital outlay — start-up costs
We plan to use R900 000 in the first year. This will be used as follows:
•	 R200 000: Staff salaries for two technicians and one 
secretary. (As principals, we have undertaken not to draw 
salaries for the first year.)
•	 R200 000: Rent for warehouse and office, payments for 
office furniture, leasing of two vans, other overheads, 
printing and advertising.
•	 R250 000: Paying for second-hand handsets/mobiles.
•	 R250 000: Running the company, including travelling.
Note the breakdown of costs 
to show the level of financial 
planning.

Professional Communication
210
4.2 	Projected income and profit
The following projected income and profit for the next three years are based on an estimated 
60% profit on each ’phone after repairs and transport.
The prices below are based on an average price of R200 per ’phone.
Table 1:  Projected income and profit for first three years
Year
Units sold
Gross income
Gross profit
Expected net 
profit after 
costs of 40%
First year
10 000
R2 000 000
R1 500 000
R900 000
Second year
22 000
R4 400 000
R3 300 000
R1 980 000
Third year
30 000
R6 000 000
R4 500 000
R2 700 000
These projections show that an investor holding a 6% share of the net profit could expect 
the following from the R50 000 investment unit:
•	 R54 000 in the first year
•	 R118 800 in the second year
•	 R162 000 in the third year.
Note the continual use 
of detailed planning and 
estimates. The writers have 
continued their persuasive 
arguments.
Justification and statement of requirement
At the end of the document, refocus on exactly what you want:
••
Once again, stress the specifics of what you are offering, how much it will 
cost and what return investors are likely to get.
••
Stress your mission.
••
Emphasise your likely competitive edge.
••
Emphasise your key to success.
••
Explain why your business is likely to be financially attractive.
eg
5. 	 Details of our request
We are seeking R600 000 divided into units of R50 000. We will be happy to send copies of 
our contractual Limited Partnership Agreement to anyone interested in investing in one or 
more units.
For anyone who decides to invest, we request payment by bank-guaranteed cheque payable 
to Telephone Handset and Mobile Recycling (Pty) Ltd. Individual investors may own up to 
four units. The company seeks to place a total value of twelve units with investors.

Business proposals and business plans      Chapter 7
211
✔
Checklist for persuasive business proposals and business plans
For your message to lead to the desired outcome, it must be both persuasive and readable. 
Review the points below to confirm that your proposal or plan achieves what it sets out to 
do. While there is a considerable overlap between proposals and plans, the points have been 
listed separately. 
Business proposals:
•	 Consider whether your proposal is requested or non-requested and whether you have 
addressed the necessary aspects. 
•	 Review the key features of the proposal: the basic idea, the market, any relevant social 
or legal requirements, and your pricing, costs and potential profit. 
•	 Critically assess your analysis and check you have followed a sound process.
•	 Review the structure of your proposal, ensuring that all the appropriate sections are 
not only included but also presented clearly to give the client or potential client a clear 
understanding of the concept and its unique factor.
•	 Finally, take a step back and assess whether the idea is well justified and its presentation 
persuasive. 
Business plans:
•	 Identify the critical information that needs to be presented in your plan to show you 
have thought it through comprehensively. This includes: 
◗◗
the core business idea, product or service
◗◗
the intended management or leadership team and required personnel
◗◗
a rigorous assessment of the competition
◗◗
the target market with the proposed marketing and sales plan
◗◗
the projected financial plan
◗◗
an outline any of legal requirements.
•	 Assess whether you have provided sufficient evidence to support any of the claims you 
make.
•	 Organise the plan to make sure that different levels of readers can find what is relevant 
to them.
•	 Finally, encapsulate your aims and approach in a well-considered vision and mission 
statement. 

8
212
Report writing
Report writing is a part of every professional job, even jobs that are practical in 
nature, as various types of reports serve many different functions. For numerous 
professions, such as accounting, business or engineering, reports are a core activity. 
For example, an accountant may write month-end reports, a businessperson 
feasibility reports, and an engineer may write design and progress or interim 
reports. There are many programs used for report writing, for example Google 
Docs, DropBox, InSync and Microsoft® OneDrive™, as it is often a collaborative 
activity. 
For detailed advice on the style for reports, see Chapter 1; for using and 
creating templates, see Chapter 2; and for researching material, see Chapter 13. 
When you need to write a report, you will have to think about the following 
questions:
••
What is the best length for a summary in relation to the whole report?
••
What is a clear and readable format and layout in which to present your 
information?
••
What are the names of the sections of a standard report?
••
Do the headings, subheadings and table of contents tell the story of your 
report?
••
What information should be put into graphic form?
••
What is the best style for report writing: point form or full sentences? Should 
you use the active or the passive voice?
••
When is it appropriate to write in the first person (eg ‘I/we found ...’) and 
when should you write in the third person (eg ‘The findings showed ...’)?
Read through this chapter to find the answers to the above questions. After you 
have done this, you will understand:
••
the nature of reports
••
types of reports
••
writing techniques to aid readability: the language and style of reports
••
the sections of a fixed-format evaluative report (illustrated with examples 
taken from a formal, professional report).

Report writing      Chapter 8
213
8.1	 Nature of reports
Reports are fixed-format messages that give the results of investigations or record 
the facts that have been established. A report also records the conclusions a 
writer has drawn from the facts and sets out recommended actions based on these 
conclusions.
Any writer who recommends actions has to ensure that these actions are 
feasible and can be put into practice. You have to show that your conclusions 
have been logically and carefully drawn from the detailed factual record. You do 
this by including a discussion section in which you interpret the facts, show their 
significance in terms of your purposes and prepare the reader for your conclusions. 
Furthermore, the facts, conclusions and recommendations should speak to and 
address the aims set up at the beginning of the report. Recommendations must 
be based on the conclusions you have drawn. Figure 8.1 shows the continuity 
between parts of the report.
Aims
Facts and findings 
(results)
Conclusions
Recommendations
Figure 8.1  Flow of ideas and facts in a report
Relationship of reports to other documents 
Reports are related to many other kinds of written messages — at college, university 
and in business and industry. In terms of format, style and approach, reports are 
related to theses, business proposals, business plans, minutes, instructions and 
technical descriptions. 
All these messages are also classified as fixed-format documents. These 
texts have to be highly readable, even though many of them include technical 
information and mathematical calculations. The technical information can be 
conveyed through tables, graphs, annotated photographs and diagrams. Readers 
expect these messages to be written in a clear, formal, impersonal style. Readers 
expect to find specific sections in these documents, with numbered headings and 
subheadings. Companies are increasingly devising templates to aid writers with the 
layout of documents such as reports, plans and minutes.
Readers of reports
You may have no control over who reads your reports. Many reports are circulated 
in companies; they may be sent with the blind carbon copy (Bcc) function selected 
and filed for future readers. While for the most part you write for a defined 
readership, your reports may be read years later by strangers who know little 
about the conditions prevailing at the time the report was written. This means that 
reports may have to be written with various different readers in mind, some of 
whom may not be experts in that field. 

Professional Communication
214
Furthermore, reports are often written for a range of readers, all of whom have 
different needs. These readers are not of equal importance in terms of power, status 
and the need to read the report. Write your report with the following three levels 
of reader in mind:
1.	 Main reader: Your main reader is the decision maker. This person has to 
approve the report and is likely to pay a great deal of attention to the summary 
(containing the objectives), conclusions and recommendations. By creating a 
clear thread of information that leads the reader through these sections, you 
will emphasise the relevance of your recommendations.
2.	 Second-level readers: Your report may cover more than one subject or section 
of an organisation. The main reader may need to consult subject experts or 
department heads before deciding on your recommendations. These people are 
the second-level readers. For these readers you should emphasise specific parts 
within the results section that are relevant to them. You may, for example, 
cover the specific needs of the human resources, finance, information systems 
and marketing departments in a company.
3.	 Third-level readers: Once your main reader has decided on a course of 
action based on your report, other readers will have to implement your 
recommendations. They are the third-level readers. They will need to read 
the detailed sections of your report in which you specify exactly what has 
to be done. For these readers you need to emphasise your detailed findings, 
conclusions, recommendations and appendices.
You should also be able to classify your readers as follows:
••
Expert readers have detailed knowledge of your field.
••
Mixed readers are a group of which some are experts and some are not.
••
Non-specialist readers are intelligent and experienced readers who are not 
experts in your field. They will generally be in a management position. They 
may have to use your report for making a decision.
••
Technical readers are experienced technicians who have to implement your 
recommendations. They are experts in the practical aspects of the work, but 
may not be familiar with your theoretical approaches.
Reports as permanent records
Your report will become part of the company’s permanent records. Make your 
report easily accessible by doing the following:
••
Include key words on your title page to enable your readers to search for 
your work.
••
Give the report a relevant title that covers the key points in the report.
••
Write a very clear summary that is easy to read. This summary should be 
sufficiently comprehensive that it could replace the original report for busy 
readers.

Report writing      Chapter 8
215
••
Use comprehensive, accurate headings and subheadings to help your reader 
gain a quick overview of the report within the table of contents.
8.2	 Writing techniques for reports
Techniques to improve readability
Use all or some of the following techniques to improve readability (also see 
Chapter 1):
••
Make sure your text is organised well, with an effective numbering system.
••
Use pertinent headings that reflect the content. Avoid one-word headings 
which do not allow for meaning. For example, the heading ‘Techniques to 
improve readability’ describes the content of this section precisely, whereas a 
heading such as ‘Readability’ would not. 
••
Vary the font sizes within a font for headings to attract attention and define 
the hierarchy of the content. But remember: be consistent! 
••
Write in clear, simple language that is easy to understand.
••
Define all technical terms, either in a glossary at the beginning or in 
footnotes at the bottom of each page.
••
Use bullet lists for lists of items.
••
Write short paragraphs and sentences.
••
Use a line spacing of 1.15.
••
Make sure you use white space generously.
••
Put diverse or comparative information in tables with bold print or frames 
for emphasis.
You can achieve clarity of presentation through using a document template which 
has set styles. For each type of regular report you write, it is worth setting up a 
template. Most computer programs contain a range of pre-set templates and many 
others can be downloaded off the Internet. Be aware, however, that the majority 
of downloadable templates were set up with a specific purpose in mind and may 
not, on closer examination, be appropriate for the content and context of your 
report. You may find it more useful to define and format your own template to suit 
your needs. Furthermore, a downloaded template is unlikely to conform to your 
organisation’s house style or brand, or your personal style of documentation. When 
readers can recognise a well-presented and organised style of documentation they 
associate with a credible writer, they tend to give it more attention. See Chapter 2 
for more information on templates.

Professional Communication
216
Plan for a logical sequence of ideas (discourse structure)
Plan your report carefully. Use the following steps to arrange your facts and 
arguments in a logical order that your reader can follow:
1.	 Record all your research. This step could be mind-mapped.
2.	 Organise the material under the appropriate major sections of a report. At 
this stage your information is not yet in a logical order within sections. It is 
arranged in broad categories. For example, your methodology would be in one 
section, your findings in another.
3.	 Arrange the information in each section in a logical order. You can do this 
by creating a topic outline, which is a numbered outline with headings. (See 
Chapter 1 for more on a topic outline.)
By reading your headings, a reader should be able to understand the contents of 
your report and follow the logical development of your thoughts. An effective 
topic outline will ensure that your report has unity, coherence and the right 
emphasis, which creates a structured argument or discourse structure. (Also read 
Chapter 1 for more information on unity, coherence and emphasis.)
Unity
When you organise your report, ensure that one main theme flows through your 
work. If you are covering a number of topics in a report, ensure that each topic 
also has one unifying theme.
If you write a number of paragraphs in your findings, make sure that each one 
is unified. Each paragraph should have a topic sentence. This sentence expresses 
the main idea in the paragraph, and the rest of the paragraph expands on this idea. 
The topic sentence is usually the first sentence in a paragraph. However, sometimes 
an introductory sentence precedes the topic sentence.
Coherence
Coherence refers to the linking of one paragraph to another. Coherence is 
achieved by the use of a well-organised multiple-decimal numbering system, apt 
headings, sign-posting, cross-referencing and conjunctions — all of which link one 
sentence to the next. When you are writing paragraphs, make sure you use words 
that show continuity. Words such as ‘however’, ‘consequently’ and ‘therefore’ 
maintain the thread of your argument and help the reader to follow it. Phrases 
such as ‘the first point’ or ‘for example’ also act as signposts for the reader. 
Consider the following techniques to achieve coherence:
••
Arrange the items in lists in order of importance.
••
Repeat key nouns.
••
Repeat key verbs.
••
Use the pronouns ‘it’, ‘this’, ‘those’, ‘these’ and ‘they’ as reference words.

Report writing      Chapter 8
217
••
Use co-ordinating conjunctions, such as ‘and’, ‘but’, ‘or’ and ‘nor’. These join 
sentences, phrases or words of equal value in order to help the reader follow 
the idea. 
••
Use subordinating conjunctions, such as ‘although’, ‘since’, ‘as’, ‘if’, ‘when’, 
‘where’ and ‘while’. These words join parts of sentences of unequal value. For 
example, they join a subordinate clause to a main clause, as in: ‘We will be 
successful (main clause) if we analyse the process step by step (subordinate 
clause).’ (See Table 1.2 in Chapter 1 for a comprehensive list of these linking 
words and their functions.)
Achieving the right emphasis
The reader of a report needs to find out immediately what the most important parts 
are. Emphasis can be achieved in a report in the same way as it has been achieved 
in the short passages in this chapter; that is, by:
••
using a fitting title that contains the key points in your report
••
including a precise summary at the beginning
••
placing the most important points at the beginning of the sections, in bold 
or contained in tables
••
using key sentences and terms at the beginning of paragraphs.
Language and style of reports
The level of language (formal but not too formal), tone (impersonal), voice (active 
rather than passive) and vocabulary (concrete rather than abstract) are important 
for the readability and credibility of your report. 
Readers of reports and other messages in business and industry are often 
multicultural and multilingual and may have limited proficiency in English. 
Write clearly and simply, and define all technical terminology. To judge whether 
your writing will be clearly understood by your intended reader, use your word 
processor’s tools to check the spelling and grammar and the readability index of 
your writing. 
Using readability statistics in Microsoft® Word™
The readability index is a measure of the vocabulary used and length of sentences; it 
describes how easy or difficult it is to read a piece of text. Follow these steps to use the 
readability statistics feature in Microsoft® Word™:
1. 	 In the Word Options dialogue box (accessible by clicking on the File tab on the ribbon 
and then clicking on Options), select the Proofing section. 
2. 	 In the When correcting spelling in Microsoft Office programs section, review which 
options are checked or unchecked: 

Professional Communication
218
a. 	 Remove the tick from Ignore words in UPPERCASE. This box is checked by default, 
which means that words in all upper case are not spellchecked. If you remove the 
tick, Microsoft® Word™ performs a spellcheck on all words, even those in upper 
case.
b.	
Remove the tick from Ignore words that contain numbers. If you have accidentally 
typed a number in a word, it will not show as an error unless this box is unchecked.
3. 	 In the section When correcting spelling and grammar in Word, add a tick to the box 
Show readability statistics. If this readability statistics box is checked, a summary 
box will appear after you have performed a full spellcheck, either on a section of your 
writing or on the entire document.
The readability statistics only measure readability based on the length of words, sentences 
and paragraphs, and how much passive voice is used. Nevertheless, it is a useful guide 
against which to measure your writing. 
Two indices are offered in the statistics summary (see Figure 8.2): the Flesch Reading Ease 
score and the Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level. The easiest score to use is the Flesch-Kincaid 
Grade Level; it gives a score based on a notional school or university grade, meaning 
that someone with that level of education should be comfortable reading the document. 
However, the fact that in South Africa English is not a first language for many readers 
should be taken into account when you consider a reasonable Flesch Reading Ease score. 
A writer should not force a reader to work unnecessarily hard — especially in a second (or 
third, fourth etc) language, even if the reader is highly qualified.
Figure 8.2  Using readability statistics in Microsoft® Word™
You can also set your computer to automatically correct language use. It is recommended 
you set the language option to ‘English (South Africa)’. This will influence the spellcheck and 
grammar options. South Africa follows UK spelling (eg ‘colour’), not US spelling (eg ‘color’) 
which is the default of Microsoft®.

Report writing      Chapter 8
219
Writing in a formal style, but not too formal
Depending on your audience, a clear, formal style is best. However, this does not 
imply that your style should be so formal that it becomes unreadable and too 
technical. For examples of formal and informal writing, refer to chapters 1 and 3.
Writing in an impersonal, active style
In some professions, such as engineering, a formal report or thesis must be written 
in an impersonal style. This means that you would not use the pronouns ‘I’, ‘we’ 
or ‘you’. Rather, stress the facts, conclusions and recommendations. You have two 
choices, namely:
1. 	 an impersonal active style:
eg
The writer 	
prepared 	
the report. 
(actor) 	
(action) 	
(acted on) 
The writer hypothesises that ...
2. 	 an impersonal passive style:
eg
The report 	
was prepared 	
by the writer.
(acted on) 	
(action) 	
(actor)
It was hypothesised that ...
However, in fields such as social science and many businesses, it is becoming 
more and more common to use the pronoun ‘we’ in reports and dissertations when 
referring to the company or organisation. It is seen as part of taking responsibility 
for the actions and views expressed and locating yourself within the research 
process.
Writing in a concrete style
Give facts and figures in your reports and theses. Avoid vague words such as 
‘frequently’, ‘regularly’, ‘often’ or ‘many’ when exact details are called for. Instead, 
give exact figures or percentages. Stress precise action in your recommendations, 
and use specific words. Look at the following examples:

Professional Communication
220
eg
✗ Instead of writing
Frequently
Often
Many
The bridge is very high.
Sufficient data was collected. 
A minimum error
✓ Write
Every day at 10h00
90% of the time
10 out of 12 people
The bridge is 200 m above the river.
Data from three surveys of 100 data points 
each was collected.
An error of 2%
eg
Generic
Four-door sedan motorcar
Less generic
Petrol-driven four-door 
sedan
More specific
Mazda 626 four-door 
manual sedan with  
front-wheel drive
8.3	 Types of reports
As the purpose of writing a report varies, your approach to writing your specific 
type of report should be tailored to its purpose. The different types of reports you 
may be required to write can be divided into two categories:
1.	 Informative reports: Some reports, for example interim reports or reports on 
visits to factories, may be purely informative. They simply give the facts of 
the situation. Informative reports include scientific research reports, technical 
reports and progress or interim reports. 
2.	 Evaluative reports: Other reports include facts and evaluation of these facts, 
with recommendations for action. Evaluative reports include investigation, 
feasibility and summary reports.
Write the sections of informative reports
Informative reports, such as scientific reports on experimental work, stress facts. 
They are written in a neutral style with the aim of informing a reader. For example, 
if you report monthly on the progress of a project, this progress or interim report 
will give the facts, backed up with tables and figures such as line graphs, to show 
how the project has progressed. In this type of report, you would use some or most 
of the features listed below. Subsequent reports would only detail new or modified 
information, reporting on new or changed methodologies, experimental results 
and any conclusions. 

Report writing      Chapter 8
221
An informative report consists of the following sections:
••
Preliminary pages (with page numbers indicated by Roman numerals:  
i, ii, iii, ix, etc):
◗◗
Title page
◗◗
Terms of reference (the instructions or brief given by your manager or 
client)
◗◗
Summary (one page or up to 10% of the full page count)
◗◗
Table of contents
◗◗
List of illustrations (tables and figures that occur in the body of the 
report)
◗◗
Glossary (terms your reader might not know)
◗◗
List of symbols (also known as ‘Nomenclature’)
◗◗
List of abbreviations
••
Main body (with page numbering indicated by Arabic numerals:  
1, 2, 3, etc):
◗◗
Introduction (covering the motivation for the scientific pursuit, its 
purpose and the definition of the problem)
◗◗
Theory relevant to the topic (the scientific basis or established fact of 
the subject matter as well as the background information necessary to 
understand the research or report)
◗◗
Literature review (previous work done by other scholars on the subject 
matter)
◗◗
Methodology (a description of the approach that was used)
◗◗
Findings/Results (an objective delivery of facts and figures)
◗◗
Discussion of findings
◗◗
Conclusions (drawn from the findings and the discussion)
◗◗
Recommendations for further research
••
Additional sections (but carrying importance):
◗◗
Glossary (if not given within the preliminary section)
◗◗
List of references
◗◗
Bibliography
◗◗
Appendices
Technical reports
A technical report is one type of informative report. If you were asked to visit a 
site or a factory, you would concentrate on describing exactly what you saw. You 
could back up your descriptions and statements with photographs. You could also 
use diagrams and sketches.

Professional Communication
222
Your technical report would include all the normal sections of a report, as described 
above, as well as various additional features, namely:
••
the use of technical terms that lay readers would not understand
••
detailed mathematical calculations
••
technical diagrams
••
a variety of tables and figures
••
technical descriptions
••
a reference list
••
detailed appendices.
Write the sections of evaluative reports
While informative reports stress the facts, evaluative reports stress the implications 
to be drawn from the facts. Evaluative reports therefore include facts and an 
evaluation of these facts, with recommendations for action. In these reports you 
rely much more on a set of criteria to help you draw appropriate conclusions from 
the results you have gathered. As mentioned before, evaluative reports include 
investigation, feasibility and summary reports.
The sections for most evaluative reports are as follows:
••
Title page
••
Terms of reference (instructions or brief given by your manager or client; 
this may also fall within the introduction)
••
Summary (one page or up to 10% of the full page count)
••
Table of contents
••
List of illustrations (tables and figures that occur in the body of the report)
••
Glossary (terms your reader may not know)
••
List of symbols (also known as ‘Nomenclature’)
••
Introduction (covering the motivation for the investigation, purposes of the 
project, definition of the problem and, in feasibility reports, criteria)
••
Procedure used to gather information (method of investigation; this may also 
fall within the introduction)
••
Findings (an objective delivery of facts and figures)
••
Discussion of findings (optional)
••
Conclusions (drawn from the findings and the discussion; and, for feasibility 
reports, from the criteria)
••
Recommendations (suggested future actions arising from the conclusions)
••
Reference list
••
Appendices

Report writing      Chapter 8
223
Investigation reports
In investigation reports, your terms of reference instruct you to investigate a problem 
and report back on your findings. The terms of reference also define for whom and 
for what reason the report is written; this information defines the shape of the report. 
Feasibility reports
For a feasibility report, you are expected to report on whether or not a project is 
possible. You could also be asked to examine a range of options, conclude which 
option is the best according to a set of criteria and then recommend which option 
should be selected. You may be asked to apply a set of criteria when weighing up 
the findings and drawing conclusions. Examples of such criteria may be:
••
the time scale needed for each option
••
the cost of each option
••
the effectiveness of each option in meeting the client’s needs
••
the availability of spare parts and services.
8.4	 Letters of transmittal
Many reports have a letter or email of transmittal attached at the beginning. Its 
purpose is to introduce the report to the reader and establish goodwill. As it is 
correspondence, it is written in a more personal style, which helps the writer to 
establish the right tone before presenting the formal and factual report. Often 
reports are sent online, via email. In this case an email can serve as the letter of 
transmittal to introduce the attached document (which is normally in PDF format). 
It is advisable to send finalised attached documents in PDF format rather than Microsoft® 
Word™ format, as it means that no one is able to change or edit anything in the report.
Apart from generating goodwill, your letter or email of transmission could include 
details regarding:
••
how your report fulfils the expectations of your reader, as expressed in the 
terms of reference
••
your main conclusions and recommendations 
••
the problems you found during your investigation
••
the limitations that were imposed on you, for example budgetary or time 
constraints
••
how helpful any organisation, groups or individuals were
••
the personal insights you gained from your investigation
••
how successful or unsuccessful you think the study was
••
any further action that you think is necessary.

Professional Communication
224
8.5	 Example of an evaluative report
What follows here are the sections of an actual report. Some of the findings have 
been abridged for convenience. Each section is discussed in detail, with notes 
pointing out relevant features or characteristics.
Preliminary pages
Title and title page
Your title should attract attention. A good title is like a short summary. It should 
cover the main ideas in the report and use key words that help the reader to 
concentrate on what the report contains. It should be printed in bold in a large 
font size.
eg
Report on communication issues that impact on  
foremen in Excalibur Construction (Pty) Ltd
Prepared for: 
Mr Geoff Naidoo 
Managing Director
Excalibur Construction (Pty) Ltd
Prepared by: 
Ms Lyn Dewar
Consultant in Change and Development
Key words: foremen, construction, contract managers, communication 
April 20–– 
Give the name and title of 
the recipient. Give his or her 
position in the company.
State the name and title 
of the writer and his or her 
position. 
Use key words to help your 
reader find your report in an 
electronic database.
Submission date of report
Acknowledgements
Some reports include a short acknowledgement section at the beginning to thank 
people who have helped the writer. Some writers prefer to put this at the end of 
the preliminary section, or at the end of the report.

Report writing      Chapter 8
225
eg
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The writer wishes to thank the following people for their encouragement and support during 
this research project:
Prof H Bosch
Mr J Ndube
The writer also owes a debt of gratitude to Excalibur Construction (Pty) Ltd for its financial 
support and for allowing her to conduct research there for two months.
The terms of reference or brief
The terms of reference are the instructions or brief given to the writer. They tell 
you what you are expected to do. Terms of reference should contain information 
regarding:
••
who issued the instructions
••
when these instructions were given
••
why these instructions were given
••
exactly what the writer is expected to do
••
when the report has to be finished and handed in.
The instructions should be listed in point form, following a concise introduction. 
These instructions give you the essential guidelines for doing your research and 
then presenting your report. Vague or badly worded instructions will certainly lead 
to a poor report; generally, however, those briefing you will blame you for their 
incompetence. Ensure, therefore, that you negotiate your terms of reference until 
they are clear. Make sure that they are in writing, so that you can check them 
carefully. If you are instructed to do a feasibility report, make sure that you are 
given criteria to enable you to draw conclusions.
Sometimes you may wish to write a report without being instructed. If you do 
this, make sure that you identify clearly the purposes of your investigation and the 
purposes of your report in your introduction.

Professional Communication
226
eg
i 
TERMS OF REFERENCE
In March 20––, Geoff Naidoo, Managing Director of 
Excalibur Construction (Pty) Ltd, initiated this intervention. 
The need for it arose as a result of outcomes from the team-
building exercise held at Kromrivier in 20––, which was 
attended by directors and managers from all the branches. 
Mr Naidoo’s specific instructions were the following:
1. 	 Interview contracts managers and foremen in all 
branches of Excalibur Construction. 
2. 	 Establish, by means of these interviews, what the main 
communication issues and problems are among the 
foremen in Excalibur.
3. 	 Compile a report detailing these problems.
4. 	 Draw conclusions on the causes of any communication breakdowns reported.
5. 	 Make recommendations for appropriate courses of action.
6. 	 Submit the report in time for the directors to have read it before their board  
meeting in Cape Town on 15 April 20––.
Note that Roman numbering is 
used for the preliminary pages. 
Give the date when the report 
was requested. State who 
requested the report. Give a 
brief reason why the report 
was requested.
List the instructions given 
to you. These should be as 
complete as possible. Give the 
hand-in date for the report. 
The summary 
The ability to summarise messages is a key ability in professional writing. The 
summary is the most widely read item in a report. Every report longer than eight 
typed pages should start with a summary, which should be so concise and clear 
that it can replace the original report for the busy reader. 
A summary may include key illustrations and references may be cited in the 
summary. As it is often read as a single item independent of the full document 
or report, it must include sources and references as footnotes and not refer to the 
reference list in the full report.
Your summary should include:
••
what the report is about (purpose and objectives taken from the terms of 
reference)
••
the background to the investigation 
••
the main purpose of report
••
a brief outline of the procedure
••
the main findings (very briefly, as the emphasis is on the next two sections)
••
the main conclusions
••
the main recommendations.

Report writing      Chapter 8
227
Remember that a summary has flexibility, and you can change the order relative 
to the full-length report to suit the purpose and proposed readership. You can 
emphasise certain sections, such as conclusions and recommendations, and leave 
out others.
For different documents, different terms can be used to refer to a summary. For 
example, these terms include:
••
abstract: used in academic documents such as conference papers; an abstract 
is often limited to 100–300 words
••
summary: the most common expression
••
synopsis: used for academic theses
••
executive summary: commonly used in commerce.
The length of a summary
If you are summarising a long report, aim to reduce it to 5–10% of the length 
of the original. For example, a company submitting a tender document of 60 or 
more pages would submit a summary of four to six pages. Many companies and 
organisations, however, prefer one typed page, which is about 400 words. Always 
ask your readers what length they require.
The readability of a summary
Summaries must be highly readable. Use some, or all, of the following features to 
help your readers:
••
Layout: 
◗◗
Subheadings
◗◗
Bullet lists
◗◗
Bold print for important statements 
••
Style:
◗◗
Clear and simple language, as for the report
◗◗
Short paragraphs
◗◗
Average sentence length of 15–25 words
••
Additional information:
◗◗
Summary illustrations
◗◗
Photographs
◗◗
Exact figures
The procedure for writing a summary
The summary is written last, after completion of the report. It is a summary of 
the document; it is not an article on the topic of the report. Include some content 
for each section of the report in the summary. However, note that the summary 
will give different weighting to the sections from the full report. For example, 
50% of the length of the summary may be dedicated to the conclusions and 
recommendations, as they are critical items. A summary may or may not include 
subheadings, graphics and tables.

Professional Communication
228
eg
ii
SUMMARY
This report concerns communication issues that have emerged as areas for concern, as far as 
they specifically affect foremen in Excalibur.
Background to the investigation
The need for this intervention arose out of decisions taken at the team-building  
exercise at Kromrivier, held in 20––.
iii
At this event, directors and managers felt that, because the foremen are a powerful link in 
the Excalibur system, attention should be given to issues that seem to cause difficulty in 
delivering quality work on time. Communication was identified as the main problem.
Procedure used
The information for this report was gathered by means of private interviews with foremen 
and small-group interviews with contract managers in the Western and Eastern Cape offices 
of Excalibur.
Please note that the main purpose of this report is to examine communication issues that 
impact on foremen. Other areas for concern in the company arose during the interviews, but 
these were not recorded and have not been included in the report. The omission of other 
issues is in keeping with the specific brief given by Geoff Naidoo.
Results of the investigation
The findings revealed systems and structures that operate on sites, and between sites and 
offices. In addition, the variety of styles, backgrounds and experience among foremen and 
contract managers which are part of the systems were analysed.
Conclusions
From the results the following conclusions were reached. Flexibility within the systems and 
structures of Excalibur was found to be essential. However, the findings showed that there 
is inadequate orientation to work and events, and a lack of well-formulated systems for 
site management. In addition, foremen’s meetings are not held frequently enough, which 
contributes to the inadequate flow of information.
Thus, the report concludes that technical and managerial skills are lacking in the company. 
This is the reason why Excalibur is not able to maintain its competitive edge.

Report writing      Chapter 8
229
Recommendations
The recommendations for action to be taken to upgrade the systems and communication 
structures in Excalibur Construction are that the company should:
•	 ensure that the experience of foremen and contract managers is used to full advantage 
in the company
•	 set up appropriate decision-making systems and support structures to ensure good 
communication
•	 run courses to train staff to be creative and flexible in their approach to their work
•	 run courses in technical and managerial skills.
Table of contents
A table of contents (also abbreviated as ToC) is a list of the main headings and 
subheadings in your report, as well as the page numbers on which these sections start.
Do not create a table of contents yourself; rather have your word-processing 
software create it automatically from the headings, subheadings and page numbers 
in your report. Here it is important to use a template and built-in headings so that 
the table of contents can be automatically created and updated (see Chapter 2 for 
details on how to do this in Microsoft® Word™). Remember to set up your template 
– or choose one from your word processor or off the Internet – so that it gives 
you the right sequence of headings and numbering. When you need to change a 
heading or page number, do so in the report and then update the table of contents 
field accordingly. All changes will be made instantly.
In the table of contents, each heading will carry the corresponding decimal 
number and give the page number it falls on. Record the headings in your text 
down to the third level. Different establishments choose the number of levels of 
headings to be used in their documents and reflected in the table of contents. A 
common choice for long documents is three or four levels in the text but only two 
levels in the table of contents. Short documents may reflect all levels in the table 
of contents. The headings should use the same wording as in your report, and be in 
the same font as in the report. For page numbers, set up your template to number 
the preliminary pages with Roman numerals (i, ii, iii, iv etc) and the balance of the 
document with Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3, 4 etc). It will then appear like this in your 
table of contents as well. There are many options for different heading levels, such 
as the style used in the example of the ToC on the next page.

Professional Communication
230
eg
Table of contents
TERMS OF REFERENCE
i
SUMMARY 
ii
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
vi
GLOSSARY
vii
1.	
INTRODUCTION
1
	
1.1 	 Subject of and Motivation for Report 
1
	
1.2 	 Background to Investigation
1
	
1.3 	 Objectives of Report
1
	
1.4 	 Limitations and Scope of Investigation
2
	
1.5 	 Plan of Development
2
2. 	 METHOD OF INVESTIGATION
3
	
2.1 	 Interviews with Foremen
3
	
2.2	
Interviews with Contracts Managers
3
3. 	 LITERATURE REVIEW
4
4. 	 CURRENT CONTEXTUAL FACTORS THAT IMPACT  
ON BUILDING IN SOUTH AFRICA
7
	
4.1 	 The National Climate
7
	
4.2 	 Declining Professional and Noble Work Ethic
7
	
4.3 	 Outsourcing
8
	
4.4 	 The Nature of Building
8
5. 	 SYSTEMIC FACTORS WITHIN EXCALIBUR 
9
	
5.1 	 The Life Cycle of Excalibur
9
	
5.2 	 Marked Differences between the Western and Eastern Cape
9
	
5.3 	 Individual Styles of Contracts Managers and Foremen
10
	
5.4 	 Perceptions of Foremen’s Role by Contracts Managers
10
	
5.5 	 Perceptions of the Foremen’s Role by Foremen
11
	
5.6 	 Attitudes of Foremen towards their Work
11
	
5.7 	 The Absence of a Designated Personnel Function in Excalibur
12
6. 	 COMMUNICATION ISSUES AND EVENTS THAT AFFECT FOREMEN IN EXCALIBUR 
13
	
6.1	
Induction into the Company	
13
	
6.1.1	
Induction as an employee
13
	
6.1.2 	
Induction to site
14
	
6.2 	 Contact between Contracts Managers and Foremen
15
	
6.2.1 	
Verbal and face-to-face contact
15
	
6.2.2 	
Written communication
15
Include this section if 
appropriate. 
The subsections are indented.
Main headings should be 
written in capitals. 
The subsections in this 
example are indented, but 
this is not a requirement. The 
template can be set to not 
indent any subsections

Report writing      Chapter 8
231
	
6.3 	 Pre-start Meetings
16
	
6.4 	 Post-completion Meetings
16
	
6.5 	 Site Management
17
	
6.5.1 	
Subcontractors and their labour
17
	
6.5.3 	
Site office management
17
	
6.6 	 Foremen’s Meetings
18
	
6.7 	 Information Flow
18
	
6.8	
Training of Foremen
18
	
6.9 	 Performance Appraisals
18
7. 	 CONCLUSIONS
19
	
7.1 	 Flexibility within Systems and Structures Essential
19
	
7.6 	 Orientation to Work and Events Lacking
21
	
7.7	
Inadequate Systems for Site Management
21
	
7.8 	 Insufficient Foremen’s Meetings
22
	
7.9 	 Poor Flow of Information
22
8. 	 RECOMMENDATIONS 
23
	
8.1 	 Establish Basic Systems
23
	
8.2 	 Start Uniform Induction Process
23
	
	
…
	
8.6 	 Clarify Foremen’s Function and Role
25
	
8.7 	 Provide Training Workshops
25
	
8.8 	 Ensure Uniform Performance Appraisals
25
9. 	 LIST OF REFERENCES 
26
10. 	 BIBLIOGRAPHY 
27
APPENDIX A: GUIDELINES FOR INTERVIEWS WITH EXCALIBUR FOREMEN
APPENDIX B: GUIDELINES FOR DISCUSSIONS WITH CONTRACTS MANAGERS
List of illustrations
A combination of tables and figures is called a list of illustrations. This serves as 
a list of all the illustrations in your report, with their titles and page numbers. It 
is not necessary to list illustrations if there are fewer than three. Divide your list 
of illustrations into figures and tables, and a list of equations, if applicable. If you 
have tables only, this section would be called a ‘list of tables’; likewise, if you only 
have figures, the heading is ‘list of figures’, etc. Ensure the titles and captions are 
descriptive, as shown in the example. 
The list of illustrations should be created by using a template, so that it can be 
automated. For detail as to how to do this, see Chapter 2.

Professional Communication
232
eg
vi
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Tables 	 
Page
1. 	 Attitudes of foremen to their work 
14
Figures
1. 	 Induction procedures for foremen 
17
2. 	 Summary of levels of satisfaction experienced by 
foremen at four types of meeting 
20
List your tables separately 
from your figures.
The term ‘figure’ covers all 
illustrations except tables. 
The glossary
This is a special dictionary for your report. It will include technical terms but 
also regular terms which are used to convey a certain meaning in your report. 
Glossaries are becoming essential, as more documents are read globally and by 
readers for whom English is not a first language or who do not have knowledge of 
the technical language of the subject matter or company. Words should be listed in 
alphabetical order, as shown in the example below. Write simple definitions for the 
terms — use language that the readers will understand. If necessary, give examples. 
eg
vii 
GLOSSARY 
Autocratic leadership: 	
This type of leadership does not allow subordinates any say in how 
a company is run.
Benign paternalism: 	
This approach to leadership implies that the leader directs others, 
acting as if he or she were a caring parent.
BIFSA: 	
Building Industries Federation of South Africa
List of Symbols or acronyms
If you have used any symbols in your report that have specific meanings, list and 
define them. If necessary, give examples. List all your acronyms (groups of initial 
letters of words, for example CEO) and show what they stand for. Note that the 
plural of an acronym takes only an ‘s’, not an apostrophe and an ‘s’. For example, 
BMWs is the correct form of the plural, while BMW’s is incorrect.

Report writing      Chapter 8
233
Body of the report 
The introduction
The introduction prepares your reader for the rest of the report. It sets the scene 
so that your reader:
••
knows why the report was written
••
understands the problems investigated
••
knows the purposes of your report
••
understands how you have organised your report.
Note that the summary and the introduction are not the same. A summary is 
a reduced version of the whole report. Your introduction, on the other hand, 
gives background information that leads into the main report. Your background 
information tells the reader why the report is necessary.
Follow these guidelines for structuring an effective introduction:
••
Use numbered subheadings. These help your reader to follow the flow of 
information quickly.
••
You may include a subsection Purposes of the investigation (for example to 
describe, analyse, compare). When you word this section, remember that it is 
not the report that has undertaken the investigation — you have! 
eg
Do not write: 
This report investigates … X
This report analyses … X
Instead, write:
This report concerns an investigation … 
This report records an experiment …
••
You may include a subsection Procedure used to gather information in your 
introduction. Describe your procedure in broad terms in the introduction and 
then expand on it in a separate section.
••
It is not mandatory to include literature review and/or theory sections in the 
introduction, but this may be required for scientific reports.

Professional Communication
234
eg
1 
1. 	 INTRODUCTION
1.1 	Subject of and Motivation for Report
This report describes the communication issues that 
have emerged as areas for concern as far as they 
specifically affect the foremen in Excalibur. It is believed 
that communication problems are the reason Excalibur 
Construction is not able to maintain a competitive edge.
1.2 	Background to Investigation
In 20–– a team-building exercise was held at Kromrivier, 
Eastern Cape, attended by directors and managers ...
1.3 	Objectives of Report
The objectives of this report are therefore to:
•	 describe communication issues ...
•	 draw conclusions on the extent to which the 
communication issues that surfaced ...
•	 recommend strategies for further action.
2
1.4 	Limitations and Scope of Investigation
Although other issues emerged during the interviews, the 
focus of this investigation is limited to matters that affect 
the role and functions of the foremen only. For the most 
part, the issues that emerged are common to all branches of 
the company. Where there are marked differences between 
the regions, these have been noted.
1.5 	Plan of Development
The report begins with a brief description of the methods 
of investigation before describing the current contextual 
factors for the building industry in South Africa. It then 
focuses on the systematic factors within Excalibur that have 
a bearing on the investigation. Attention is then paid to 
specific communication events and issues that influence the 
role and functions of foremen. Conclusions are then drawn 
on the basis of these findings and, finally, recommendations 
are made based on these conclusions.
Remember to use Arabic 
numerals for the pages from 
here onwards. 
The first sentence states what 
the report is about.
The background to the report 
sets the scene for the reader. 
The objectives deal with the 
reasons for writing the report. 
Limitations tell the reader 
what factors influenced the 
report, eg time, cost, etc. The 
scope of the report gives the 
boundaries of the report: 
what it covers and does not 
cover. 
The plan of development tells 
the reader how you have 
organised your report. It is an 
important section, especially 
if you have a complex 
structure in your report. It is 
also important if you have 
organised your report in an 
unusual way.
Page numbers are given as 
from the original document 
but are not sequential as the 
pages of the document are 
not all printed.
Method of investigation
The introduction usually has a paragraph describing the method followed in the 
investigation. However, if the content on the method of investigation is lengthy, it 
might warrant a separate section, as illustrated in the following example. This section 
can also be called Methodology, materials and methods or Research approach.

Report writing      Chapter 8
235
Divide this section into numbered subheadings. Describe in detail how you 
gathered your information or set up experimental apparatus, where relevant. Take 
care to record exactly how you gathered your information. This section is very 
useful to future researchers. 
Describing how the material in the findings was accessed gives credibility to 
the work; however, the sources must not dictate the presentation of the findings. 
You may interview a number of people and describe them in the methodology (it 
may or may not be appropriate to give their details) but, thereafter, you should not 
focus on them, but rather on the information they gave. 
For some work concerning people, ethical approval according to the professional code 
of ethics of the field of study must be obtained before the research can be undertaken.  
Confidentiality of sources is required by many organisations.
eg
3
2. 	 METHOD OF INVESTIGATION
2.1 	Interviews with Foremen
Hour-long private interviews were held with 12 foremen in 
Cape Town and 8 foremen in Port Elizabeth and East London. 
These interviews were semi-structured. A copy of the focus 
questions appears in Appendix A.
2.2 	Interviews with Contracts Managers
Contracts managers in Cape Town (three) and Port Elizabeth 
(five) were interviewed as two separate focus groups. A copy of the questions addressed 
appears in Appendix B. The interviewees were invited to use English or their home  
language, whichever they felt more comfortable using.
The numbers one to nine are 
written as words in text, and 
from 10 up the numbers are 
written as digits. However, 
where more than one number 
– some under 10 and some 
above 10 – occur close to 
each other, as in this case, all 
are written as digits. 
Findings 
This section covers the factual section of your report. It records the results of 
your investigation or describes your factual progress if you are writing an interim 
report. While the facts or findings may come from different sources, such as 
questionnaires or interviews, journals, books and/or websites, this section is not 
organised according to these sources. Sources are acknowledged through citation 
and referencing, but are unimportant to the arrangement of the data. The data is 
arranged according to the objectives of the report and topics of factual material.

Professional Communication
236
Findings or results sections must be highly readable. To ensure that your findings 
are easy to read, use features such as:
••
a multiple-decimal numbering system
••
clear, specific headings to prepare your reader for what follows — use 
headings of more than one word that give useful information about the facts 
to follow, and avoid headings that contain the word ‘findings’ or ‘results’
••
bulleted lists to attract attention — preferably with not more than six items
••
well-integrated illustrations such as tables, line graphs, bar graphs and pie 
charts.
Achieving coherence in your findings
Make sure that you present your facts in a clear and logical order. Help your 
reader by having an opening paragraph that explains how you have organised 
your facts. Each section of factual information should lead logically to the next. 
Use a numbering system that emphasises the coherent relationship of headings to 
one another. 
If necessary, write a one-sentence link between one section and another. 
For example: ‘This section has covered the principles of strategic environmental 
assessment (SEA) in South Africa. Section 4 covers the key elements of an SEA 
process.’
Integrating illustrations
Make sure that you integrate your illustrations into your findings. Introduce each 
illustration before you present it to the reader for examination. Tell the reader what 
to expect, and then present the illustration. Use highlighting and arrows to show 
the reader where to look. Do not assume that your reader will understand your 
illustration at first glance. Once your reader has seen the illustration, analyse it. 
Explain to the reader how to interpret it. 
Make sure that every illustration has a very clear title. The title of a table may 
be placed above the table, but increasingly the trend is to place it below the table. 
Figure titles are given below figures. Provide a descriptive caption, particularly if 
a source needs to be referenced. Write the caption separately from the title you 
insert — in this way it will not be automatically drawn into the list of illustrations. 
For more information on templates for illustrations and graphics, see Chapter 10.
Discussion of findings/results (optional)
In this optional section, you analyse the significance of your findings. It may be 
combined with the results section or given separately. For example, the findings 
section may principally consist of tables and diagrams with brief textual references. 
This discussion section would then expand on the tables and diagrams. This 
section should lead your reader into the conclusion, where you will express your 
views on the facts that you have given, interpret them and show their significance. 

Report writing      Chapter 8
237
The example that follows is the findings section from the sample report. The 
findings, conclusions and recommendations have been abridged for practical 
reasons. Thus the sections do not reflect the full table of contents — sections 4 and 
5 are not included here. 
eg
13
6. 	
COMMUNICATION ISSUES AND EVENTS THAT AFFECT FOREMEN IN EXCALIBUR
6.1 	
Induction into the Company
Induction of new foremen into the company is reported to 
be inconsistent. Foremen who have recently been appointed 
report very different experiences. These experiences relate to 
being inducted to the company as an employee, as well as 
being inducted to the daily work on site both through  
theoretical input and practical tuition.
6.1.1	 Induction as an employee
Induction to the company by Mr Geoff Naidoo – in the form 
of extensive theoretical and historical background, and 
formal introduction to colleagues in the office – was given 
to 30% of the sample (six foremen). The theoretical input 
did not include receiving the company foremen’s manual. Of 
the sample, 10% (two foremen) described being given only 
practical time to be on site before being given a site of their 
own, in addition to the company induction. This group was 
in Cape Town. 
14
6.1.2	 Induction to site
Findings in the Eastern Cape were that no guided experience 
in practical work is given and that there is no clear, 
collective system for completion of tasks (60% of the 
sample, or 12 foremen). 
Further findings in this region were that no new recruits (40% of the full sample) were given 
any form of induction. 
Figure 1 below sums up the foremen’s experience of induction into the company. The pie 
chart shows three categories:
1.	
Formal induction only (30%)
2.	
Mentoring by another foreman in addition to induction (10%)
3.	
No induction (60%)
Note the clear, specific 
heading. Headings used in the 
findings section of a report 
should be neutral and factual. 
Numbering systems can go to 
4 places (eg 1.2.5.4) but it is 
not recommended. Preferably 
number your headings to the 
third level, as shown here. If 
you wish to subdivide further, 
use (a), (b), (c), etc. Fifth-level 
subdivisions should have 
Roman numerals: (i), (ii), 
(iii), etc. 
 The numbered subheadings 
help to guide the reader down 
the page. 

Professional Communication
238
no induction 
60%
formal 
induction 
30%
mentoring 
10%
        Figure 1  Procedures for induction of foremen into the company
This figure illustrates that 60% of newly appointed foremen were ...
15
6.2  
Contact between Contracts Managers and Foremen
6.2.1  Verbal and face-to-face contact
Daily contact is maintained by telephone ...
Site visits by the contracts manager are not always daily ...
Often matters discussed at these times are immediate and specific. Descriptions of these 
topics were as ...
6.2.2  Written communication
Site diaries, requisition books and site whiteboards are to be updated on a daily basis. 
Findings for these items were that updating happens at random: after a few days or weekly. 
Much depends on ...
Minutes taken at site meetings are given to foremen. Minutes were recorded as coming no 
earlier than 10 days after the meeting and up to a month late.
16
6.3  
Pre-start Meetings
Meetings prior to the start of a new contract vary in content and purpose. At these meetings 
the contracts manager hands over the plans and gives the location of the site ...
In 5% of these meetings an opportunity is used to carefully 
orientate the foremen to the possible idiosyncrasies of the 
job: ... what the boundaries of their authority are.
Without exception, foremen saw this omission as a critical cause of stress. Those who do ...
Of the foremen, 75% stated that this contributes to a feeling of safety, personal self-esteem 
and a sense of being part of a meaningful professional relationship.
6.4  
Post-completion Meetings
Of the sample, 100% stated that these meetings do not take place. Comments described the 
need for meetings to provide valuable learning opportunities and to turn meetings into a 
way of avoiding mistakes in the future.
When you prepare a pie 
chart, start at 12 o’clock. 
Move clockwise, starting with 
the largest slice. Note that 
the percentages have been 
included. 
Use a range of illustrations 
such as tables, pie charts, bar 
graphs and diagrams. Always 
integrate your illustrations 
into your text, as described. 
Note the use of factual 
language here. 

Report writing      Chapter 8
239
Figure 2 shows the level of foremen’s satisfaction with four types of meetings. Their level of 
satisfaction is expressed as a percentage of total satisfaction.
Pre-start 
meetings
Post- 
completion 
meetings
Site 
meetings
Foremen’s 
meetings
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Figure 2  Summary of levels of satisfaction expressed at four types of meeting
Note that the level of satisfaction at site meetings is low. Only 22% ...
17
6.5  
Site Management
6.5.1  Subcontractors and their labour
Some subcontractors fail to appoint a supervisor of their labour on site. When this happens, 
a foreman finds himself ...
6.5.2  Excalibur labour and contract labour
The way foremen described their interactions with site labour varied widely. Some have daily 
pre-start meetings and/or a pre-start meeting at the start of the contract to give them a 
broad overview of the duration of the work ...
Some nominate a charge hand. Others allow their labour to choose their own. Some appoint 
a charge hand for the duration of that contract, after which ...
Descriptions (see Appendix A) indicated that having a charge hand on site is arbitrary.
6.5.3  Site office management
It has already been mentioned in 6.2.2 above that there are 
inconsistencies in the documentation systems used on site.
18
6.6  
Foremen’s Meetings
Despite the fact that meetings have been scheduled over  
time in the Cape Town office, they are not held regularly ...
When they were held, the following facts were evident:
•	 The meetings do not have a pre-meeting, circulated agenda. As a result, the purpose of 
the meeting ...
In order to ensure that the 
section is highly readable, use 
a range of reading aids, such 
as numbered headings and 
subheadings, white space and 
bullet lists where necessary. 

Professional Communication
240
Of the sample, 25% have only had experience on small sites 
and all these foremen revealed anxiety about not being able 
to cope if they were suddenly transferred to a bigger site.
It also emerged that it was not only foremen who needed 
training, but charge hands too. These also needed to have a clearer definition of their role on 
site.
With the growing demands on them, foremen also need to have skills training in leadership. 
Examples are participation in meetings, being part of a team and understanding the full 
meaning of being a critical link in the Excalibur chain.
…
6.9 	
Performance Appraisals
There are noteworthy and critical skills for appraising staff so that the exercise  
becomes not only a mutual opportunity for assessing performance ...
 Short paragraphs and 
continued use of white space 
result in easy readability. 
Conclusions
Conclusions are the implications drawn from the facts. They are the insights gained 
from the investigations. Most of all, they are the interpretation or evaluation of the 
findings according to the objectives. Therefore, conclusions do not end a report. 
The general use of the word ‘conclusion’ to mean ‘ending’ does not apply here. 
Rather, the interpretation of results, leading to conclusions, prepares the reader 
for your recommendations. You might, for example, conclude that one course of 
action is more likely to be effective than another. At this stage no new information 
must be added. Also note that the style here is more emotive; it is more related to 
opinion writing than to factual writing.
Criteria as a means to draw conclusions
If you are weighing up the effectiveness of a range of equipment for a particular 
job, for example, you could weigh up each item against a set of criteria. You then 
conclude which item of equipment best meets your needs.
Logical reasoning
Make sure that you take your reader through clear, logical steps. Stress the 
implications for your reader at every stage. Make sure that you show your reader 
how each line of argument is related to and follows from another. Use connecting 
words such as ‘but’, ‘however’, ‘although’ and ‘nevertheless’ to guide your 
arguments. Make sure that you do not introduce any new ideas at this stage — all 
conclusions must be drawn from facts in the report. 
Arrange your conclusions
Use numbered subheadings for your conclusions. Head each conclusion with a 
subheading that describes that conclusion. Where possible, list your conclusions 
in order of importance, or according to your set of criteria. 

Report writing      Chapter 8
241
eg
19
7. 	 CONCLUSIONS
Based on the foregoing information, the following 
conclusions have been drawn.
7.1 	Flexibility within Systems and Structures Essential
Flexibility is a virtue in any organisation, particularly when the context keeps changing. 
However, this needs to be present in direct and overt proportion to the quantity and quality 
of communication that occurs. In the absence of information and clear systems and 
structures, freedom quickly translates into isolation and fragmentation and an absence of 
total meaning in the work people do.
Because slavish attention to systems can crush initiative 
and creativity, it is critical to combine clear, meaningful 
boundaries within which people can work, while 
simultaneously making flexibility not only possible but 
desirable.
…
21
7.6 	Orientation to Work and Events Lacking
In the absence of clear orientation and boundaries relating to authority and work 
expectations, such as induction into the company ...
23
Given that work associations constantly change, there is a 
need to constantly adapt to individual idiosyncrasies and 
styles. This can result in miscommunication, which increases 
stress and can lead to costly mismanagement of time and 
labour.
The obvious anxiety surrounding the interviews for this 
report bears testimony to the importance of informing staff 
not only of the fact that events are to take place, but also 
the reason for them.
7.7 	Inadequate Systems for Site Management
Given that much depends on the style of the foreman, his training and the nature and 
complexity of the site, it is clear that systems for managing the site tend to be ad hoc and 
not overtly linked to agreed best practices.
The interviews revealed a wide range of ideas and systems, not only between branches, but 
within branches.
Lack of time is a constraint. Therefore, to increase effectiveness and efficiency on site and 
between site and office ... basic structures need to be agreed upon ... useful information is 
likely to fall through the cracks.
Note the use of a linking 
phrase at the beginning of 
this sentence.
Note the use of numbered 
subheadings. Each 
subheading should state the 
main conclusion for that 
subsection. 
Connecting words such as 
‘because’, ‘therefore’, ‘given’, 
‘moreover’, etc help to build 
your argument. On the other 
hand, connecting words 
such as ‘but’, ‘however’ and 
‘although’ indicate changes 
in the flow of your argument. 

Professional Communication
242
22
7.8 	Insufficient Foremen’s Meetings
A valuable opportunity is lost for building relationships, celebrating wins, learning from 
mistakes ... because meetings are held so infrequently.
Individually, foremen have a wealth of experience. Without a forum for pooling that, their 
expertise lives and dies with them.
It may well be that the perceived lack of participation may be due to a lack of experience in 
being in meetings, a lack of maturity and a sense of wanting to continue to ‘do things my 
own way'...
7.9 	Poor Flow of Information
No one has control over the meaning that individuals ascribe to the information they 
receive; therefore it is essential that information be as unambiguous and timely as possible. 
Moreover, in the absence of information, people make up their own. It becomes their ‘truth’ 
and is often unshakable ... Furthermore, in the absence of trustworthy and regular official 
information, the grapevine flourishes.
Therefore, it cannot be stressed enough that attention needs to be given to ... with  
the same purpose: to support and sustain life functions.
Recommendations
Your recommendations follow the terms of reference. They show how the purposes 
of the investigation can be met. They stress the exact action to be taken as a result 
of your findings and conclusions.
eg
23
8. 	 RECOMMENDATIONS
On the basis of the above conclusions, the following recommendations are made:
8.1 	Establish Basic Systems
Determine basic systems and structures for Excalibur in 
respect of:
•	 site management
•	 orientation to work — inductions, pre-site meetings
•	 information flow — office notice boards, whiteboard on 
site
•	 appointment of a personnel officer.
Appoint task teams to explore each of these and then present them to the rest of the 
decision makers ...
8.2 	Start Uniform Induction Process
Institute a formal and uniform induction process into the company for new recruits.
…
Note the use of action 
headings with an imperative 
at the beginning of each 
heading. These headings are 
used to attract the reader’s 
attention. The imperative 
should focus on the action.

Report writing      Chapter 8
243
25
8.6 	Clarify Foremen’s Function and Role
Establish clear boundaries and expectations governing the foremen’s function and role. Hold 
regular and structured foremen’s meetings.
8.7 	Provide Training Workshops
Consider separate two-day training workshops for foremen and contracts managers, at 
which there will be an opportunity to explore general and specific issues surrounding work, 
while also building effective professional relationships.
8.8 	Ensure Uniform Performance Appraisals
Ensure that performance appraisals are conducted uniformly with purpose, structure  
and regularity.
End matter
References and/or bibliography
For details on how to manage referencing, see Chapter 12.
Appendices
Your appendices contain extra, detailed information that is too complex to be 
placed in your report. Make sure that you refer in your report to the material in the 
appendices. However, very few readers are likely to read appendices. Make sure, 
therefore, that you place your important items in the main sections of the report. 
Use letters, for example Appendix A, B and C, to distinguish your appendices from 
the rest of your report.
Examples of material which would be included in the appendices are:
••
computer printouts that would make your report too bulky
••
complex and detailed tables
••
detailed mathematical calculations, especially intermediate calculations
••
examples of questionnaires
••
illustrations such as full-page photographs and diagrams
••
examples of contract letters, letters of appointment and other correspondence
••
transcriptions of recorded dialogue
••
detailed plans.

Professional Communication
244
eg
APPENDIX A: GUIDELINES FOR INTERVIEWS WITH EXCALIBUR 
FOREMEN
1. 	 Orientation: My role (as the interviewer), the context of these interviews and the link 
with Excalibur’s five-year plan
2. 	 Perception concerning Excalibur’s culture and value system
3. 	 Perceptions about the foremen’s work function:
◗◗
servicing internal and external ‘clients’
◗◗
being a link in the Excalibur chain
◗◗
projecting the Excalibur image
◗◗
administering people, the site and plant
4. 	 Perceptions about how the foremen are perceived by management
5. 	 Perceptions about big-picture issues or consequences:
◗◗
productivity cycles
◗◗
cash flow
◗◗
waste and inefficiency
6. 	 Perceived barriers to effective/efficient performance:
◗◗
flow of information
◗◗
discipline
◗◗
cross-cultural issues
◗◗
contextual factors: social, political
◗◗
subcontractors
7. 	 Suggestions for improvement in interpersonal skills needed by foremen
Besides for the appendices themselves, make sure you do the following:
••
Summarise detailed tables and other detailed results that you have placed in 
your appendices. Place these summaries in your report where they are more 
likely to be read.
••
Refer to your appendices in your report. Explain their significance to 
your readers and tell your readers where to look in the appendices to find 
important information.

Report writing      Chapter 8
245
✔
Checklist for a well-organised report
When you write a report, use the following checklist to ensure that your report is organised 
as suggested in this chapter:
•	 Keep to the facts in the findings.
•	 Remain impartial in the presentation of the facts.
•	 Give enough facts that can be confirmed and are therefore convincing.
•	 Show the difference between fact and opinion, keeping in mind that other people’s 
opinions will be presented as facts if you place them in the findings.
•	 Use a formal, referential style.
•	 Eliminate subjective wording from the findings.
•	 Draw conclusions that meet the objectives and are based on the facts given in the 
results.
•	 Link the sentences with appropriate connectors to conclude the argument clearly.
•	 Use imperative (action) language in the recommendations.
•	 Reference all sources cited.
•	 Include supporting documentation in the appendices.

9
246
Presentation skills
There are many options for disseminating information — from email to cloud 
sharing, from Skype conference calls to creating video clips. And yet, most 
professionals, businesspeople and academic practitioners still prefer to interact 
with a presenter in person, in real time. 
Giving presentations is an activity which is at the core of most professional 
jobs, and it can be critical to advancing your career. Yet, many of us are nervous 
about speaking to colleagues and clients or to the public. In trying to overcome 
their nerves, some presenters use incorrect methods, such as writing out the entire 
speech and reading it to the audience or learning it by heart.
This chapter will cover the skills and methods required in order to give an effective 
presentation: 
••
In preparation for the presentation, you need to be able to:
◗◗
analyse the audience 
◗◗
select and organise information
◗◗
support the speech by writing out key phrases only
◗◗
plan paired and group presentations 
◗◗
practise, practise, practise.
••
During the presentation, you need to be able to:
◗◗
maintain a positive attitude 
◗◗
establish a rapport with the audience and gain credibility as a speaker
◗◗
speak with expression and projection
◗◗
display appropriate non-verbal cues such as posture and gestures
◗◗
handle visual aids and presentation software and hardware
◗◗
dress appropriately.
••
At the end of the presentation, you need to be able to: 
◗◗
handle the question-and-answer (Q&A) session 
◗◗
close within the time allocated 
◗◗
troubleshoot to overcome barriers to giving effective presentations.

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
247
9.1	 Before the presentation
Analyse the audience
Think about your audience. Find out everything you can about them. Attempt to 
identify with the audience and consider what needs to be covered in order for them to 
understand your objectives. Having this knowledge will enable you to select the correct 
vocabulary, the correct examples and the appropriate approach to meet the audience’s 
needs and expectations. To do this, consider the following about your audience:
••
What is the extent of their knowledge of the topic?
••
What is their attitude towards the topic?
••
What are their needs? Why will they be listening?
••
What are their backgrounds (eg education, norms and values)?
Select and organise information
Having analysed your audience and their needs carefully, you can select and 
organise the information and so plan the talk to meet those needs. 
There are four steps you must go through when planning your talk:
1.	 Consider your topic and the reason for covering it.
2.	 Jot down ideas or themes from your topic.
3.	 Select information carefully and plan the body of the talk.
4.	 Once you have done a mind map of the body of the talk, plan the introduction 
and conclusion.
Step 1: Consider your topic and the reason for covering it
If you do not know enough about the subject, first read about the topic to broaden 
your knowledge. Every talk should have some objective as its outcome. There are 
always definite, tangible outcomes in a successful presentation, even if only to 
inform people in order to add to or change their point of view. Given your topic 
and audience, ask yourself, ‘What do I want my audience to think or do?’ By 
answering this question you will arrive at the reason for your talk. At the end of 
your talk, the audience must know why they were listening to you and what they 
should do with the information you have given them. This purpose statement is 
the only sentence you should write out in full for your talk. The rest of the content 
must be planned through mind maps and visuals.
Step 2: Jot down ideas or themes from your topic
Brainstorm and jot down all the ideas you have about the topic — perhaps your 
knowledge, perhaps research you have undertaken. Do not restrict your ideas at 
this stage. You might be tempted to censor an idea by thinking that it is on the 
fringes of your topic or not relevant, but write it down nevertheless. It could turn 
out to be a major point when you start planning your talk.

Professional Communication
248
Step 3: Select information carefully and plan the body of the talk
If you have a clear purpose and a definite audience in mind, it will be simple to 
select all the information (from your brainstormed list of ideas) that the audience 
will need to hear in order to persuade them of your point of view; that is, to 
achieve your purpose. If you are giving a five-minute presentation, for example, 
you will only be able to discuss about three major ideas from your brainstormed 
list. 
Once you have selected the main ideas, do the following:
1.	 Under each of these main topics, write down supporting examples and points.
2.	 Choose a major point or two that you wish to illustrate with a visual. 
3.	 Plan the body of the presentation, taking into account unity, coherence and 
emphasis, as discussed below. 
As explained in Chapter 1, there are three major principles you must bear in 
mind when delivering any message, whether it is oral or written. They are unity, 
coherence and emphasis.
Unity 
Unity means that the whole message deals with a single topic and there are no 
unrelated ideas in your talk. Check this by making sure that your major points 
relate to your objective. Your topic will then be unified. Next, check that the 
supporting ideas under each major point correctly expand that point and relate 
specifically to it. If they do, the ideas and major points will be unified.
Coherence
Coherence refers to the logical development of ideas. When you practise your talk 
out loud, practise using transition words and phrases to help the audience follow 
your ideas and your thinking. Transitions are words or phrases that connect one 
major section to the next. For example, you might say, ‘Two major ideas are 
associated with this concept. The first one I have mentioned is the most important. 
On the other hand ...’ or ‘Consequently ...’ or ‘As a result of this ...’ See the list of 
transitional words and phrases on page 12 in Chapter 1 — this list also applies to 
a spoken delivery.
The three squares in Figure 9.1 represent the main 
points in the body of a talk. The arrows in the figure 
point both ways. This illustrates that the transition 
should indicate what has gone before and suggest 
what comes next. 
1
2
3
Figure 9.1  The structure of a 
coherent presentation

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
249
Emphasis 
This is the principle most often misused. Emphasis means that the most important 
points are stressed in various ways. You could mention them first, and you would 
certainly emphasise them in your conclusion and by means of the transitions that 
you use; for example, ‘The major point I wish to make is ...’
However, the most important form of emphasis is achieved by the careful use 
of visual aids. Your whole talk should be planned around how you would use 
visual aids to enhance your points. Sections you want to emphasise and that you 
want your audience to remember should be illustrated with a suitable graphic or 
image.
Step 4: Plan the introduction and conclusion
The introduction and conclusion are the sections of the talk where you make the 
most impact, so they need to be planned and prepared thoroughly.
Your introduction should include:
••
a clear statement of purpose
••
some background information on your topic
••
an overview of your topic.
Do not begin with a joke. Unless you are a master of ceremonies in a situation 
where jokes are acceptable, they are nearly always out of place. Jokes do not 
necessarily relax an audience, as they usually create the wrong atmosphere, and 
you might alienate your audience. However, if you open with a story, image or 
quotation which is pertinent, interesting and funny, then at least those who do not 
find it amusing will still find it relevant.
Your conclusion should include:
••
a clear link to your objectives
••
a reinforcement of your major points.
End on a note of finality. There must be no new facts in the conclusion. Consider 
rounding off with a quotation or image that carries your message, but do not 
introduce a new theme. Do not end weakly by saying, ‘Are there any questions?’ 
That question does not have anything to do with your topic. Stop speaking. If you 
remain silent and wait for members of the audience to ask questions, you create far 
more impact. (See page xx for ways to deal with questions after your presentation.)
Support your speech with key phrases
Note cards with key phrases can be reassuring and may increase your self-
confidence. Use them while they are of help; once you are more experienced as a 
presenter you will probably no longer need note cards. Guard against using slides 
with a lot of text as cue cards. These are not effective as visuals for your audience. 

Professional Communication
250
Many people are afraid that if they do not write out their whole talk they will 
forget what they have to say. This is a needless fear. You might be tempted to write 
out your whole talk and memorise it, but this is problematic, as written language 
differs from spoken language in various ways:
••
Written and spoken sentences are different in many aspects. Written 
sentences are constructed in the passive voice more often than spoken 
sentences are and have a higher level of formality. For example, we often 
write ‘... and thus’, but we never say it.
••
Written sentences are often long and we often need to read the whole 
sentence before we can make sense of it. Sometimes we even need to re-read 
it. For example, a written sentence of more than 25 words is difficult to read 
— we often have to start rereading the sentence from the beginning before 
we have read to the end, as we cannot immediately grasp the meaning of 
the sentence. On the other hand, we are taught to speak in short phrases and 
therefore people battle to understand long spoken sentences.
If you work from a full written text and read it out loud, it will have a negative 
effect on your delivery. Table 9.1 lists the advantages of using key phrases rather 
than a full text.
Table 9.1  The advantages of using notes with key phrases only
Disadvantages of writing out the speech 
in full
Advantages of using key phrases
Your speech will be laboured, tedious 
and lacking in emphasis. This will make it 
difficult to listen to and understand, and the 
audience will become bored.
Your speech will be easy to listen to and 
follow. The audience will remain involved.
You will try to memorise your talk, or you will 
inevitably memorise some phrases or sentences. 
This will rob your speech of spontaneity.
Your speech will always sound spontaneous. 
You can moderate your delivery, vocabulary 
and pace.
If you forget what you need to say during 
your presentation, you will have to search 
through masses of text to find your place. It 
will be difficult to re-establish fluency and 
coherence, causing you to lose credibility 
with your audience — let alone losing 
confidence in yourself.
If you forget something, it will be easy to 
find your place by glancing at a few notes 
if you need to. It will also be easy to add 
a transition phrase and continue talking, 
without anyone realising you have forgotten 
anything.
Your concentration will be directed inward, 
on the paper and not on the ideas you are 
trying to convey. This means your pace will 
become quicker and your voice monotonous.
Your concentration will be directed outward. 
You will be focusing on ideas, not on trying 
to remember text. Variety, correct stress and 
enthusiasm will result. You will make an 
impact on your audience. 

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
251
It is clearly much better to write out key phrases to assist you while you deliver 
your talk. Preparing your speech by writing out key phrases requires as much 
preparation time as writing out a speech in full, but it prevents the order and 
coherence of the presentation from being compromised and it enables you to retain 
flexibility in your responses to the audience. 
For conference presentations, the same requirements apply as for other 
presentations: the presenter should select material appropriate to the time allocated 
and speak naturally. It is tempting for an academic to read the script of an 
academic paper, as it has been crafted with such precision. The result is that the 
presenter reads as fast as possible and renders the research even more difficult to 
follow. 
Paired and group presentations 
Teamwork, and thus paired and group presentations, are much more evident in the 
workplace these days. Collaboration on projects requires that the presentation be 
unified and coherent. 
There are no rules about how to share a presentation between two or more 
speakers. However, each speaker should speak for approximately the same amount 
of time and the change-over of speakers should happen at points where there are 
logical breaks in your talk, to ensure the correct emphasis. A master of ceremonies 
(MC) speaker is one who introduces and closes the presentation, and they may 
function as the link between speakers.
Do not divide the presentation into many small sections, because the overall 
impression you create will be a jerky, poorly emphasised one. All the speakers must 
plan the sharing of the content to ensure that the audience’s overall impression is 
of a coherent, well-linked, well-emphasised presentation. 
Each section of your presentation must stand on its own as a complete unit. 
It should therefore have a sentence or two as an introduction, where you give an 
overview of what you are going to talk about. 
Make sure that when you hand over to your partner or the next team speaker, 
you link your section coherently to what your partner will be saying. Your partner 
should follow the same procedure. For example, the second speaker, presenting 
the first major finding of the group report, might start his or her talk as follows:
eg
‘You have heard [name of speaker] describe the methods 
we used to obtain our results. They led to our first major 
finding. I will deal with that. I will tell you how this result 
was inconclusive.’
This transition phrase links to 
the previous speaker, thereby 
maintaining coherency.

Professional Communication
252
In the above example, the speaker states the purpose of the talk and gives an 
overview leading into the body of the talk. At the end of the section, the speaker 
might say:
eg
‘So, as you have heard, we had major problems getting 
conclusive evidence for our market research. And now [name 
of next presenter] will tell you what the consequences of 
this were for our clients.’
Summary of the main point 
Coherent link to next speaker
The final speaker should conclude the group’s presentation by summarising the 
contributions and linking them to the major objectives given in the first speaker’s 
introduction. This ensures overall unity. If it is a report you are presenting, you end 
with the recommendations. Check that they develop from the major conclusions 
preceding the recommendations and that they achieve the objectives which were 
discussed at the beginning of your presentation. If it is a proposal, it will end with 
a strong justification for the proposal and a call to action.
Timing is of the essence in a paired or group presentation. Make sure that 
when you practise out loud, you present your ideas within the time allotted to you. 
Table 9.2 gives a plan as well as the suggested timing for a group of six speakers 
presenting a business proposal within 25–30 minutes. 
Table 9.2  Possible plan for a group presentation for six speakers
Order of 
speakers
Section of presentation 
covered 
Transition to the 
next speaker
Timing
Master of 
ceremonies 
(MC) or 
Speaker 1
The first speaker:
•	 introduces him- or herself 
and the partner or team
•	 gives the objectives of the 
talk, report or proposal
•	 explains how the talk will 
be unpacked — who will 
cover what and why
•	 gives any relevant 
information, eg limitations 
or housekeeping.
Hands over to the 
next speaker
Approximately 
three minutes

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
253
Order of 
speakers
Section of presentation 
covered 
Transition to the 
next speaker
Timing
Speakers 2, 3 
and 4 
Each of these speakers:
•	 delivers an introduction, 
stating the purpose or 
objective of his or her 
section
•	 delivers his or her section 
of the talk, with pertinent 
visuals. Visuals and 
models must be used in 
application, not for the 
sake of theory.
•	 Makes 
reference to 
the previous 
speaker 
•	 Creates a 
coherent link 
to the next 
speaker 
•	 Hands over 
to the next 
speaker
Approximately 
five minutes per 
speaker
Speaker 5
This speaker delivers the:
•	 main conclusions
•	 recommendations,  
if applicable
•	 justification, if applicable.
•	 Makes 
references to 
the previous 
speakers
•	 Hands over 
to the next 
speaker
Approximately five 
minutes
Speaker 6 or 
MC
The final speaker:
•	 refocuses on key issues
•	 opens the question period.
•	 thanks the audience 
and invites them to 
refreshments if applicable.
Makes references 
to previous 
speakers
Approximately two 
minutes
Practise, practise, practise
Using a few key phrases as support, you now need to practise your speech out 
loud. Practising your speech is very important, especially if you are nervous and 
if the outcome of your presentation is critical (eg a presentation of research at a 
conference as opposed to an informal speech telling your peers or colleagues about 
your research).
In order for a talk to be fluent, coherent and correctly timed, it needs to be 
verbalised prior to being presented to an audience. The reason for this is that we 
think about four or five times faster than we talk, and therefore it will always take 
longer to verbalise our ideas than to just run through them mentally. Practising 
out loud thus ensures that your timing will be correct. The first time you rehearse 
your talk out loud, you might take two or three times as long as the allotted time 
for your talk. Furthermore, by rehearsing the talk out loud, you will become more 
fluent and the correct vocabulary will come to mind more easily. You will also 
hear whether the points you are making are sequential. If not, you can easily 
adjust your talk to ensure that what you are saying is coherent — it is no problem 

Professional Communication
254
to change the order of a few phrases or words on your note cards or on your 
computer.
Practise with your visual aids, as handling the hardware and software makes 
demands on time. Finally, use a smartphone or camera to film yourself. Play back 
the footage and observe how you come across, making allowances for the fact you 
are rehearsing a presentation to be given in person, not as a trained presenter on 
screen. However, it is likely you will find yourself presenting or being interviewed 
digitally at some point, for example via Skype, so it is advisable to have a sense 
of how you come across on this platform.
9.2 	During the presentation
Maintain a positive attitude 
Our thoughts and feelings influence our behaviour. If you are nervous about giving 
a presentation, what are you saying to yourself as you think about it? If you think 
to yourself, ‘This is going to be awful, I hate standing up and giving a talk in front 
of people I don’t know,’ you are likely to present poorly. However, you can change 
those negative thoughts into positive ones and appear relaxed and confident. 
By working on using the body language of confidence, as described later in this 
chapter, you will gain confidence, as you will detect that your audience finds you 
credible.
Use positive self-talk, such as ‘I have prepared my talk well. I have practised 
out loud and timed it, and I have put into effect all the skills discussed in this 
chapter. I may not be the world’s best speaker at my first presentation, but my talk 
will be more than adequate.’ With this realistic self-affirmation, you will increase 
your confidence and you will be able to talk about your subject convincingly. You 
will receive feedback, such as nods and smiles from the members of the audience, 
and you can then respond to that feedback. If you do not look at anyone, the only 
feedback will be from your inner dialogue, which will probably be negative and 
result in withdrawn behaviour.
Table 9.3 lists some common anxieties and the behaviour you need to adopt to 
overcome nervous tension and lack of confidence.
Table 9.3  Essential skills to develop self-confidence in presenting
Symptom of anxiety
Skills that you can use to deal with anxiety
A feeling of overall anxiety 
and a general lack of 
confidence; fear of appearing 
foolish; mentally undermining 
yourself
•	 Develop a positive attitude about the presentation. 
Our attitudes dictate our behaviour. We can change 
negative perceptions or thoughts into positive ones, and 
consequently our behaviour will appear confident.

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
255
Symptom of anxiety
Skills that you can use to deal with anxiety
Physical manifestations of 
nervousness, such as fidgeting, 
shaking knees, dry mouth, a 
hollow feeling in the stomach 
and not being able to make 
eye contact
•	 Relax areas of tension and breathe deeply.
•	 Use the correct body language and non-verbal cues, 
such as direct eye contact, a composed stance and 
steady gestures.
•	 Practise using your visual aids and handling equipment 
such as the clicker.
Fear of forgetting the content
•	 Use note cards with key phrases on them or informative 
visual aids to jog your memory. Do not write out full 
sentences and then read or try to memorise them.
•	 Practise your speech several times before the 
presentation.
Fear of being ineffective or 
alienating the audience; fear 
that the audience might be 
bored or not understand what 
you are saying
•	 Analyse your audience and their needs carefully in 
order to plan and select your information to meet those 
needs.
•	 Establish a rapport with your audience (as described in 
the next section).
Establish a rapport with the audience 
There are several ways to establish a rapport with your audience. The most 
important approach is by doing a careful analysis of your audience. Carl Rogers, 
a noted psychologist, said that one of the major attributes of an excellent 
communicator is empathy; that is, the ability to put yourself in the shoes of your 
audience (Rogers, 1951). When they are listening to you, they should feel that you 
have really understood their problems or their point of view. If you can achieve 
this, they will be thinking things such as ‘Yes, what I am hearing makes sense and 
could certainly convince me’ or ‘Hm, I don’t agree with what is being said, but the 
speaker certainly understands why we think like that.’
The language you use — for example pronouns such as ‘we’ and ‘you’ — will 
underline your link with your audience. Your explanation of technical terms, 
if your audience is non-specialist, also shows your empathy and establishes a 
rapport, as does the amount of information you give them.
Another method of indicating your rapport with your audience is through the 
non-verbal cues you use. Non-verbal cues convey your feelings and emotions, so 
it is easy for your audience to pick up whether you are interested in them or not. 
Is it important to get rid of your nervousness altogether? No. Remaining 
slightly nervous throughout  your talk can be helpful, as adrenalin will contribute 
to your being lively and dynamic. An audience would far rather be addressed 
by an energised, albeit rather nervous, speaker than by a bored or tired one. 
(Remember: the members of the audience are all on your side; they are there to 

Professional Communication
256
hear what you have to say.) If you can channel your nervous energy positively, 
it will enable you to:
••
concentrate — think clearly and quickly about what you are saying and 
easily handle any mishaps that might occur. Remember that your audience 
does not mind if you make errors (because they are on your side), as long as 
you recover and carry on
••
engage with your audience
••
inject vitality and a sense of enjoyment and spontaneity into your 
presentation
••
achieve credibility — the ability to make people believe in you and the role 
you are in and to make them trust you when you speak to them.
The Greek teacher of rhetoric, Aristotle, and modern teachers of communication 
such as Berlo and Hovland, have analysed the characteristics and dimensions of 
credibility. They have all agreed on three main attributes which you must possess 
if you wish to be a credible, trustworthy speaker:
1.	 Your expertise, authority or knowledge of your subject
2.	 Your character as per Aristotle or trustworthiness (Hovland, 1957) from the 
audience’s point of view:
a.	 How safe does the audience feel with you? (Berlo, 1960).
b.	 Do you have any hidden agendas? 
c.	 Have you really thought about your audience and feel empathy for them?
3.	 Your goodwill, towards your audience, according to Aristotle, your 
dynamism (Berlo, 1960) or, as Carl Rogers put it, your genuineness as 
a communicator: are you a spontaneous and authentic communicator?  
(Rogers, 1951).
Table 9.4 shows how you can demonstrate your expertise, trustworthiness and 
dynamism in the content and delivery of your talk. In doing so, you will become 
a credible speaker.
Table 9.4  Demonstrating your credibility as a speaker
Credibility cue
Evidence in the content
Evidence in the delivery
Expertise
•	 A clear introduction, body and 
conclusion
•	 Logical and coherent content, with 
good transitions
•	 Concise content
•	 Accurate, well-supported facts
•	 Quoting evidence of own expertise and 
sources of others’ expertise
•	 Appropriate dress
•	 Correct timing
•	 Belief in self
•	 Confidence,  
self-assuredness
•	 A relaxed posture
•	 Variety in the use of 
gestures and voice

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
257
Credibility cue
Evidence in the content
Evidence in the delivery
Trustworthiness
•	 Identifying with the audience
•	 Delivering what is promised — meeting 
objectives
•	 Showing common sense 
•	 Labelling assumptions
•	 Showing evidence of shared values
•	 Presenting a unified message
•	 Eye contact
•	 Calm, open gestures
•	 An attitude of 
involvement conveyed to 
the audience
•	 Authoritative non-verbal 
cues
Dynamism
•	 Active, vigorous language
•	 Examples applicable to audience
•	 A variety of approaches (visual or 
verbal) presented with the correct 
emphasis
•	 An interactive facial 
expression and gestures
•	 A rapport with the 
audience
•	 A variety in tone of 
voice; pauses
•	 Vitality and enthusiasm
Speak with expression and projection
Many people tense their upper bodies — from the chest to the jaw — when they feel 
nervous. A tense chest means shallow breathing and poor volume, and a tense jaw 
makes the voice sound strained. It makes it difficult to make fully rounded sounds; 
in fact, the words will sound thin.
The moments before you start your talk
Do the following to make sure you are as relaxed as possible when you start 
speaking:
••
While you are walking to the front of the room to give your talk, consciously 
relax the tense areas of your body, such as your shoulders, neck and jaw 
(and hands). 
••
Once at the front of the room, ensure you stand fully facing the audience, 
with your body weight on both feet. This assertive stance will make you 
appear confident, even if you do not feel so. 
••
Smile at your audience — it will relax both you and them. The non-verbal 
signals of confidence will be picked up by your audience, who will find you 
credible. They will communicate this trust to you through their eye contact 
and interest.
••
Before you start your talk, breathe deeply two or three times, drawing breath 
down to your diaphragm. This deep, quiet breathing helps to relax the body 
and allows you to start your talk in a natural yet alert manner. Furthermore, 
filling your lungs to capacity enables you to project your voice strongly.

Professional Communication
258
During your talk
The six most important aspects of the voice, discussed in detail in Table 9.5, to 
keep in mind during your presentation are:
1.	 clarity
2.	 fluency
3.	 careful use of pauses
4.	 correct pronunciation
5.	 variety in pitch, pace and tone
6.	 volume.
Table 9.5  The six aspects of the voice for a successful delivery
Aspect of the voice
Importance or value
Tips for development
Clarity: Enunciating 
words correctly; this is 
done by opening the 
mouth enough so that 
the speech muscles 
can move into the 
correct positions
Clarity prevents 
mumbling and 
indistinct speech, 
thereby helping the 
speaker to appear 
confident and 
assertive.
If you know your articulation is not 
sharp, you can do exercises for the 
tongue and lips (for example repeating 
‘red lorry, yellow lorry’ numerous 
times). These help you become a clearer 
speaker. There are many websites with 
such exercises.
Fluency: Being able 
to express yourself 
smoothly, easily and 
articulately
The non-verbal 
message that a fluent 
speaker conveys to the 
audience is confidence.
Fluency comes with practising a talk out 
loud so that the vocabulary you wish to 
use is near the surface of your mind. Do 
not speak fast. Fluency does not mean 
making continuous sound — do not fill 
breaks between sections of the content 
with ‘um’ or ‘er’ when a pause is what 
is required.
Pauses: Short 
interruptions or 
silences in between 
sentences or sections
Pausing for a 
thoughtful silence is 
a powerful way to 
attract the listeners’ 
attention. It also gives 
the speaker and the 
audience time to think 
about what has just 
been said. It is a useful 
technique to ensure 
that information is 
given at the correct 
pace and it makes the 
talk more accessible.
If you are a fast speaker, the chances 
are that you will deliver your speech 
too fast, particularly if you are nervous. 
You cannot change habits learnt over 
a lifetime, but by being aware of them, 
you can counteract them. You may 
make conscious efforts to pause after 
delivering a block of information or 
showing a slide. You may note places 
where you change your position. These 
moments of silence give the audience 
a moment to digest what you delivered 
rapidly.

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
259
Aspect of the voice
Importance or value
Tips for development
Pronunciation: 
English words are 
often not pronounced 
as they are spelt (for 
example ‘wait’ and 
‘weight’). This makes it 
difficult to pronounce 
unfamiliar words or 
technical terms which 
you have only read and 
not heard.
It is important for your 
credibility that you 
pronounce and accent 
words correctly, both 
general words and 
technical terminology.
If your talk includes technical terms 
which are difficult to pronounce, ensure 
these words appear on visual aids, such 
as slides. 
There are websites on which you may 
listen to soundbites of words. During 
your preparation, listen to the correct 
pronunciation of all difficult or technical 
words.
Ensure you know which syllable 
of words to accent (for example 
‘determine’ is pronounced determine 
— the accented syllable is in bold). The 
accenting of a word may also change 
according to the part of speech it is 
functioning as (for example decrease = 
a noun, whereas decrease = a verb). 
Variety: This is shown 
by the way words 
are stressed and how 
pauses are used. 
Variety creates interest 
in your delivery and 
shows the audience 
that you have an 
enthusiasm for and 
interest in the topic.
Complete sentences have their own 
stress pattern, or melody. You want your 
talk to sound natural, not as if you are 
a machine reading. The variety in your 
speech should be an outcome of the 
enthusiasm you have for your subject 
and the audience, and it starts with 
your positive inner dialogue.
This is an unconscious skill. Do not 
deliberately decide to stress a particular 
word in a particular way. Rather speak 
naturally.
Volume: The quality or 
power of the sound of 
your voice. To project 
your voice fully, deep 
breathing from the 
diaphragm is essential.
 
Volume is critical. If 
the audience cannot 
hear you, your speech 
is lost.
There are numerous projection exercises 
on the Internet. For example, hum until 
your lips tingle and then intone long 
vowel sounds: Mmmm moo, mmmm 
mah, mmmm may, mmmm mee, 
mmmm moh.
If you have a very light voice, consider 
using a microphone. You will need 
to practise microphone etiquette. At 
international conferences, microphones 
are standard, as simultaneous 
interpretation is provided. In this 
case, never tap the mike to see if it is 
working, as it is unpleasantly loud for 
those wearing headphones.

Professional Communication
260
Appropriate non-verbal cues: posture and gestures 
Research has shown that non-verbal cues represent about 80% of the message that 
listeners receive. ‘It’s not what you say, but how you say it’ is very true, because 
we convey our feelings and emotions through our non-verbal behaviour.
Our non-verbal cues are grounded in our roots; they are a grammar we learn 
from our parents and other significant people in our lives as we grow up. Some 
of us use non-verbal cues poorly, since the examples we have followed have been 
poor. However, because non-verbal communication is a language we learn, we can 
improve that language, if we choose to.
The major non-verbal cues of which you must be aware when talking to an 
audience are eye contact, facial expression, gestures and posture.
Eye contact and facial expression
Looking directly at the faces of your audience will portray you as a confident 
speaker. Members of an audience respond to the speaker as individuals, not as a 
group, and you can make them feel as if you are addressing them individually. If 
your audience is a large one, momentarily rest your gaze on a particular face — 
this will make the people around that person feel that you are speaking to each 
of them. Also alter the focus of your eye contact to avoid staring continuously at 
one member of the audience. Try to vary your head and eye movements so that 
they appear to be natural and spontaneous.
Coupled with direct eye contact, you need to keep your face animated. An 
audience can become alienated when listening to a speaker with a deadpan face. 
Your facial expression shows your feelings about your subject and the audience. 
If you show your enthusiasm non-verbally, your audience can relate to you more 
easily. Enthusiasm is contagious. A speaker who is involved with and passionate 
about their material will easily communicate this to the audience.
Gestures and posture
At the start of your talk, concentrate on your introduction and look at your 
audience – never the slides. Ensure that your opening lines are easy to remember. 
Even if you are nervous, you can remember the subject of your talk, its purpose 
and your own name.
Stand in an alert yet relaxed position. Keep your weight balanced on both feet 
and do not fidget or pace. The correct type of body language will send a message 
of confidence, competence and credibility, even if you do not feel it!
When you are talking, make good use of space by using natural, spontaneous 
gestures. Allow your gestures to develop spontaneously so that they emphasise 
what you are saying: use your hands naturally. If you are holding note cards, try 
to look down as infrequently as possible so that you maintain eye contact and 
keep the rapport with your audience. As you move through your talk and interact 

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
261
with visual aids and your audience, you will forget about your hands and start 
gesturing naturally and spontaneously to reinforce what you are saying.
Any gesture that becomes repetitive, such as fiddling with a pointer or pen 
or pacing up and down, becomes a barrier to presenting your ideas effectively. 
Your audience’s focus shifts from what you are saying to what you are doing. 
Nervousness may cause you to gesture meaninglessly; for example waving your 
hands about or fiddling with a pen, your watch, etc. In this case, it is better to keep 
your arms loosely at your sides or even to hold your hands behind your back at the 
start. (If you know that fiddling with items is a problem for you, do not wear items 
such as a watch or necklace that day and do not carry a pen or other item in your 
pocket.) However, you want to avoid being completely static, with your hands in 
your pockets or locked behind your back all the time, as this also presents a barrier.
If you use visual aids to illustrate your major points, you will be able to remain 
alert and upright because you can glance at your aid while facing the audience. 
You may have a remote pointer to move through your slides, which will occupy 
one hand. If you are using a clicker to work slides, only use the red pointer if your 
hand is steady. 
The closer you stand to your audience the warmer and more authoritative you 
will appear (do not stand too close, though). Confident, assertive people use space 
well. Do not pace up and down while you talk. Stand still and face the audience 
squarely until it is appropriate for you to move deliberately to the screen or 
towards the audience.
If possible, during a presentation, avoid standing behind a laptop, an overhead 
projector or a desk or podium, as this has the effect of separating you and your 
audience. However, sometimes a venue is set up in such a way that this may be 
unavoidable; for example, where a microphone is fixed to a lectern.  Preferably 
have a remote microphone attached to your garment and have a remote pointer so 
that you are not constrained by having to be near the computer.
Visual aids and presentation software and hardware
Handling visual aids with poise and control is part of your non-verbal technique 
— your gestures. Move with deliberate, relaxed movements, to ensure that you are 
always in control and that the visual aids do not overwhelm you. (For a detailed 
analysis of the effective use of Microsoft® PowerPoint™, as well as details on how 
to create visuals, see Chapter 11.) 
The visual presentation of data
Visual aids themselves provide a powerful non-verbal message about you as 
a presenter. If the images on your screen are overcomplicated and difficult to 
decipher, or if there is inadequate labelling or incorrect spelling, the audience will 
assume that you have rushed your preparation and that you are indifferent to both 
them and the subject.

Professional Communication
262
If, on the other hand, your visual aids are pertinent, neat, legible and immediately 
convey a message, your audience will assume that you have taken great care to 
make your presentation a professional one. Some visual aids are not very suitable 
to a presentation. A table or detailed line graph, for example, has to be studied, 
read and re-read carefully. This cannot be done in a presentation. Extract only 
the pertinent points you wish to mention from your table or graph and put them 
across visually in a different way, such as a pie chart, a bar graph or a simple line 
graph. Figures 9.2 to 9.4 show various examples of the visual presentation of data.
R
300
7,500
8,300
9,550
12,000
15,300
17,250
%
1.35
3.75
7.28
8.35
9.45
12.25
15.12
dep.
6031
14.000
16.000
21.000
26.000
32.000
43.000
int
300
800
900
1000
1260
1890
2200
✗
Figure 9.2  Data that is too dense 
✗
Growth of income in 
rands over 6 months
500
5 000
Figure 9.3  Data that is too simple
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
2006
–
7,630
2007
2,819
12,201
2008
4,980
9.799
2009
8,359
10,816
2010
9,170
13,101
SSB
Oasis
Figure 9.4  Appropriate display of data

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
263
Do not use your visuals as a written summary or cue card for every point. Visual 
aids are used to emphasise and reinforce only those major points you wish your 
audience to remember. 
Integrate your visuals into your presentation by the effective use of transitions. 
For example: ‘This bar chart shows the average winter rainfall of the Western 
Cape compared with that of the Eastern Cape.’ Introduce each visual before you 
discuss it in detail. For example: ‘Next, I will show you an animation of the spider 
robot.’ Do not assume your audience will decipher the visual while you go on 
talking. Whatever you have on your visual aid should convey the message almost 
immediately or else you must explain it. For example: ‘The gearing of the back 
legs enables the robot …’
The positioning of your laptop 
If you are using Microsoft® PowerPoint™ as a visual aid, make sure that you face 
the audience and not the screen. Position the laptop in front of you so that you 
do not need to turn back to see the screen, thereby losing essential eye contact 
with the audience. Maintain eye contact with your audience even though their 
attention might be mainly on the screen. A remote mouse allows you to move, 
change position and look at the audience while working with slides.
Hold the remote mouse or laser pointer in the hand that is closest to the 
screen so that you avoid pointing across your body or turning your back on the 
audience when indicating detail on the screen. You will need to stand on the side 
of the screen that allows you to place the remote mouse or laser pointer in your 
dominant hand.
Projecting images onto a screen
Do not read off the projector for the entire presentation, or expect the audience 
to read text off the screen while you are verbalising different words. First, most 
audiences prefer to look at and listen to the speaker and, secondly, it is difficult to 
concentrate on both listening and reading. Indeed, dissonance in comprehension 
will occur, as an aural message and a passage of text require sequential decoding. 
Screen only those points you are talking about. If other points are shown that you 
are not dealing with, the principle of unity is disturbed, because you appear to have 
irrelevant information on the screen. The principle of coherence will also be violated 
because what appears on the screen and what you are saying do not coincide.
If you are using Microsoft® PowerPoint™, limit your use of complicated 
techniques. Your audience might end up waiting to see what technique you 
are going to use to illustrate the next point, rather than showing an interest in 
the point itself. If your slides have a uniform theme throughout — created by a 
template bearing the same background, font, etc — it will appear as if only the text 
or picture on each slide is changing, and your audience will not be distracted by 
too many special effects. 

Professional Communication
264
When you do not need information on the screen, show a blank slide (that is, the 
template background with no text or graphics). Alternatively, you can create a 
slide and fill it with black to give the impression that the screen has been turned 
off. The same blank look can be created by pressing the ‘B’ button on the keyboard 
for a black screen, the ‘W’ button for a white screen (which is best depends on the 
presentation environment) or the ‘blank screen’ button on the remote presentation 
mouse. A blank screen rests the audience’s eyes and draws their attention back 
towards you as the speaker, especially if you step forward and into the centre of 
the screen space. These techniques allow you to be in control of your audience’s 
attention all the time.
Whiteboards, smartboards or flipcharts
The immediacy of text and drawings being created in front of the audience will 
always have appeal. Manual disclosure is useful if you want the audience to travel 
with you through an explanation, for example of a calculation algorithm. The time 
it takes you to write gives the audience time to process. 
Write firmly and clearly: preferably in print and not cursive. Use the minimum 
number of words, so that the message can be immediately understood. Write phrases 
and not full sentences. There should be no full stops and little punctuation on visuals. 
For drawings and text, use space generously and use different colours for emphasis.
For a large venue, write on a smartboard or use a stylus on a tablet and then 
project this. Some projectors can project from paper and so allow the presenter to 
draw and write during a presentation or show a physical item such as map. For 
a small venue, a flipchart is appropriate. Flipcharts allow for some preparation as 
you can write key numbers or brief facts in light pencil on the flipchart paper; 
your audience will not be able to see these notes, but you will when you need to 
write over them in bold.
Physical models, maps, charts and handouts 
Physical items take the pressure off the speaker and add interest. However, if you 
are not projecting them as described above, ensure they are large enough to be 
seen. Consider passing a model around, but be aware that this comes with a trade-
off in the form of reduced concentration from your audience. 
Maps and charts tend to be detailed, so explain them fully and give the 
audience time to absorb what you are showing them. Intricate parts that cannot 
be viewed easily and are essential to know about can be enlarged on a slide. Use 
the ‘W’ button on the computer to create a spotlight if it increases the visibility of 
a chart on the wall.
Be wary of distributing a handout during your talk. The audience’s attention 
is likely to be distracted from what you are saying as they follow the progress of 
the handout around the room. If possible, distribute handouts at the end of the 
presentation.

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
265
Dress appropriately 
Dress to suit the audience’s expectations and the situation. Appropriate dress 
shows that you have analysed your audience carefully. It acknowledges that you 
have considered the circumstances seriously and conveys a feeling of respect for 
your listeners. It will also increase your self-confidence. Err on the side of being 
too smart rather than too informally dressed. 
9.3	 At the end of the presentation
Question-and-answer (Q&A) session 
You need to prepare for questions at the end of your presentation, as it is often the 
most integral and influential part of the presentation. Maintain your professional 
image and remain in control right to the end.
Planning for the Q&A session
Anticipate the questions you might be asked and have some extra visuals handy 
that you did not use in your presentation. That always creates an extremely 
professional image and shows that you have both thought about and prepared 
your subject in depth.
Starting the Q&A session
If you are expecting questions and none are forthcoming at first, try offering an 
open-ended comment, such as ‘What do you think about ...?’
Running the Q&A session
••
If you can, acknowledge the question asked. Say something like, ‘I am glad 
you raised that point. [Mention your partner’s name if they are to answer it] 
will answer your question, as they did the most work on that aspect.’
••
Repeat the question if you think that not everyone heard it. Paraphrase it to 
clarify the meaning for yourselves and others. This also helps you to gather 
your thoughts as you think of a reply.
••
Allow whoever worked on that particular aspect to answer the question.
••
Do not speak to the questioner exclusively. Use eye contact to include 
everyone.
Ways of answering questions
••
If you are asked two or three questions in one, separate them and answer 
each in turn. Write them down if necessary, so you do not forget them.
••
Do not rush your answers. A thoughtful silence while you gather your 
thoughts creates a professional image.

Professional Communication
266
••
If you do not know the answer, say so. If it is appropriate and you are to 
meet the audience again, say you will find out the answer. Otherwise, ask if 
anyone in the audience would like to make a comment.
••
Maintain your sense of humour, as some questions may be deliberately 
disconcerting.
••
Answer inappropriate questions later, privately. Or, if time is limited, suggest 
a more detailed discussion after the presentation. 
Closing the Q&A session
••
Be sensitive to your audience’s non-verbal behaviour in order to judge when 
to end the Q&A session. 
••
If the Q&A session runs for an extended period, pause it and invite those 
who wish to leave to do so. Then no one need feel rude at disrupting a 
seated row to leave.
••
Thank your audience and, if pertinent, give a few words of summary. 
••
Remain in control until the end.
Close the presentation within the time allocated 
Timing is an important, often neglected, non-verbal message. Taking care 
to present your talk in the allotted time shows respect for the audience and 
an intelligent approach to selecting the correct information on your subject. 
Conferences monitor allotted time strictly. If your talk is too long, you will be cut 
off and may not be able to give the most important information or make a final, 
persuasive point.
Even if there is no timekeeper, members of an audience have a sense of how 
long they should be listening. They will cease to listen and possibly attend to other 
demands and distractions (such as text messages on mobile phones) if a speaker 
runs over the allotted time.
9.4	 Overcome barriers to effective presentations
When we listen to presentations, we can often identify in the speaker certain 
‘faults’ that prevent us from clearly understanding the message. However, it is 
not always easy to know how to rectify those barriers to good communication. It 
follows, therefore, that by identifying a problem and learning a skill to overcome 
it, we can make our own presentations more effective.

Presentation skills      Chapter 9
267
Table 9.6  Troubleshooting to overcome barriers to giving effective presentations
Problem/barrier
Solution
Skill
Lack of audibility, due to:
•	 ambient sound
•	 the speaker’s voice being 
too soft.
Project the voice further.
Breathe deeply, lower the 
head slightly to avoid 
straining or shouting and 
aim for a ‘vocal goal’ (make 
eye contact with a focal 
point and imagine reaching 
that point with your voice).
The audience cannot see 
the speaker, because:
•	 the lights have been 
dimmed
•	 the podium is too high.
•	 Use a spotlight or 
reading light on the 
speaker.
•	 Move away from the 
lectern or podium.
Although slides appear 
sharper in a darkened 
room, it is essential that 
the speaker be seen. A 
disembodied voice induces 
a lack of concentration and 
sleepiness.
Pronunciation problems, 
due to: 
•	 differing regional accents
•	 the speaker and/or 
audience having English 
as a second language.
•	 Speak slowly.
•	 Make use of visuals.
•	 Enunciate carefully and 
give the audience time 
to adjust to your accent.
Write out difficult and 
crucial words, such as titles, 
to read off notes rather than 
read off the screen.
The use of jargon, for 
example using technical 
terms when speaking to a 
general audience
•	 Explain technical words.
•	 Use different vocabulary.
•	 Have the words written 
on the slide.
Use metaphors and make 
comparisons with everyday 
objects, processes and 
mechanisms.
A patronising attitude, 
communicated by cues such 
as a lack of eye contact, and 
little engagement with the 
audience, by a speaker who 
feels superior or who is shy
•	 Always speak to an 
audience with respect 
and avoid sounding 
arrogant.
•	 Force yourself to make 
eye contact and try to 
engage.
•	 Ensure you have a 
thorough knowledge of 
your audience.
•	 Anticipate as far as 
possible how they will 
respond to you and 
try to make them feel 
comfortable.
A speaker blocking the 
screen by:
•	 obstructing the visual
•	 standing in the 
projector’s light
•	 using the laser pointer.
•	 Place the overhead 
projector or laptop to 
the side of the screen.
•	 Check that you are not 
obstructing the screen 
before you begin your 
presentation.
It is easier to stand on the 
left side of the screen (if 
you are right-handed) and 
use your open arm to point 
rather than standing to the 
right of the screen, using 
your right arm across your 
body to point to the screen.

Professional Communication
268
✔
Checklist for well-organised and persuasive presentations
As a speaker, you can convey poise, vitality, enthusiasm and confidence through an alert yet 
relaxed posture, spontaneous gestures, direct eye contact, an animated facial expression, 
vocal expression and the way you handle your visual aids (which must be relevant and 
appropriate).
All these behavioural, non-verbal signals are directly linked to and based on your positive 
inner dialogue. This inner dialogue is the cornerstone of all effective communication. 
Use the checklists below to confirm you have considered all the factors that make up an 
effective presentation. 
Evaluate the structure of the presentation according to the following criteria:
•	 The introduction should contain:
◗◗
the objectives of your presentation
◗◗
the reason for speaking to your audience
◗◗
any relevant background information, if necessary 
◗◗
an overview of your full talk.
•	 Clearly link the main points in the body of the talk to your objectives.
•	 Give factual information to support your main points.
•	 Use clear transitions between the main points and within each point to ensure the 
logical, coherent development of your ideas.
•	 Integrate your visual aids by using clear explanations and good transitions.
•	 Construct your visual aids in a clear, simple way, taking into account size and colour use.
•	 Make sure your visual aids emphasise only the key points.
•	 Ensure you are able to handle the visual aids with ease.
•	 Establish a rapport with your audience by: 
◗◗
explaining technical terms
◗◗
using personal pronouns such as ‘you’, ‘us’ and ‘we’
◗◗
unloading information and ideas at the right pace.
•	 Link your conclusions to your objectives — the audience should know why they have 
listened to you and what to do with your information.
•	 In your closing, reinforce the major points concisely and add a note of finality.
•	 Consider the Q&A session.
•	 If you are doing a presentation as part of a pair or team, create balance, cohesion and 
links between the speakers and their content.
When you prepare your delivery, practise it using the following criteria: 
•	 direct eye contact, to show your poise and confidence
•	 good use of space, such as moving around if you are not standing at a lectern
•	 an alert, relaxed posture, facing the audience and showing confidence
•	 natural, spontaneous gestures
•	 animated facial expressions, showing your enthusiasm
•	 vocal clarity, fluency, variety and pauses
•	 appropriate dress for the occasion
•	 correct timing.

10
269
Graphics, visual  
aids and posters
We live in a visual age; our readers and listeners spend increasing amounts of time 
viewing information presented visually on a screen. As a result, we have become 
more adept at retaining data learned in this manner than data obtained through 
reading. 
Apart from formal presentations, such as pitching a proposal or presenting a 
paper at a conference, there are many informal presentations you will have to take 
part in, such as webinars, Skype meetings and presentations. 
Presenters who want an audience to remember their presentations need to use 
visual aids. Well-researched, well-prepared and competently managed slides – or 
alternative visuals, such as spontaneously created flipcharts – that support the 
verbal delivery are the mark of a professional presenter.
This chapter covers the use of visuals in two contexts: in written text and on 
posters, which may stand alone (such as at a trade fair) or be accompanied by the 
company representative or academic author. This chapter covers:
••
the reasons for using illustrations in written documents
••
conventions for using illustrations
••
integrating illustrations and text
••
generating illustrations
••
types of tables and figures: design considerations
••
guidelines for text sizes in visuals and posters
••
posters as graphic representations.
After studying this chapter you will understand:
••
the different types of graphics and their functions
••
which type to select to display different information and for different readers.
10.1	 Advantages of using illustrations
Some people understand words more easily and other people prefer illustrations. 
As you plan your message, ask yourself the following:
••
Will this information be easier to understand if it is presented pictorially or 
graphically as opposed to in words?

Professional Communication
270
••
Will this illustration clarify and/or enhance the point I am making?
••
Is it appropriate to describe the information in both text and graphics to 
cater for all readers’ preferences?
Good illustrations can take the place of many pages of text. They can convey 
important information visually and they make it easy to concentrate on the key 
issues. They can be used to show trends and relationships quickly, accurately and 
clearly. Also, busy readers may read your summary and only page through the 
main report. Visuals can catch the eye of busy readers and make them attend to a 
graphically conveyed finding. 
10.2	 Conventions for using illustrations
The general term ‘graphic’ is used to refer to both figures and tables. Different 
types of tables and figures (as explained in detail later in this chapter) are suitable 
for different purposes:
••
The term ‘table’ refers to tables only. Tables are used when you need to show 
an exact set of data or results for your research. A detailed table can be used 
as a basis for a number of figures. Ensure you show an appropriate number 
of significant figures, eg ‘76% of people agree that …’ instead of 76.235891% 
of people … .’ 
••
The term ‘figure’ is used to refer to any of the full range of illustrations: 
line graphs, bar graphs, pie charts, annotated pictures, line drawings and 
photographs and so on. Graphs are effective for showing trends, relationships 
and approximations that would not be obvious in a table.
Graphics must conform to conventions that govern their readability and layout if 
all readers are to understand them. There are certain conventions to be taken into 
account when using illustrations in business or academic writing.
Captions and titles
Every figure and table should have a title and/or caption, which must be numbered 
for reference. Numbering can be done in different ways, for example:
••
from the beginning of the report or thesis consecutively all the way through 
(Figure 1, Figure 2, etc)
••
chapter by chapter, for example Figure 1.1 etc in Chapter 1 and then Figure 
2.1 etc in Chapter 2.
As different spreadsheet programs (eg Microsoft® Excel™) automatically place the 
captions for tables and figures, ensure that they are placed where your institution 
requires. If a traditional layout is followed, you will need table titles to appear 
above the table and figure titles to appear below the figure.

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
271
In some academic fields, the title also serves as a caption and thus gives the full 
descriptor for the illustration. It must be complete, so that the reader does not have 
to search through the main text to understand the illustration. It usually runs over 
one line, which may in turn make the list of illustrations (or tables or figures) 
cumbersome if the full descriptor is carried through. In the case of long descriptors, 
only the first, main phrase must be inserted by using styles (see Chapter 2) for 
inclusion in an automated list of illustrations (or graphs or figures). 
Captions for equations are generally shown next to the equation, with the 
equation being left-aligned, and the caption or equation number being right-aligned. 
If you use the Insert Caption feature on the References tab, Microsoft® Word™ uses a built-
in style called ‘Caption’ to enable it to automatically pull through information into the list of 
figures or tables. If you have a long descriptor as part of the caption, leave the main phrase 
in the ‘Caption’ style, and then start a new paragraph in a different style for the remainder. 
If this is the case with the majority of your graphics, then consider setting up a specific 
style for the caption text that you do not want to appear in the list of figures or tables. For 
example, you could call it ‘Caption descriptor’ and set it up with formatting that matches 
the main caption.  
Placement of graphics
Treat your graphics as part of your message. Place them in the relevant part of 
your text. It is too distracting to have to turn pages to look for tables or figures 
in other places. If you cannot find space on a particular page, you can place the 
graphic on the opposite page or try to shift the text to make space for it.
As described in Chapter 8, you have to integrate your graphics within your text. 
You can do this by:
••
having a descriptive title for your illustration and a caption if more 
information is required
••
introducing the table or figure briefly in the text just preceding the graphic, 
eg ‘Table 1 below illustrates ...’
••
ensuring the x- and y-axes are clearly labelled, with the label on the y-axis 
written vertically, and units shown on the axes if applicable 
••
using shading, arrows and bold type to show key information
••
analysing the information directly below the table or figure
••
citing your source if the table or figure is not yours originally, or if you have 
adapted the graphic from a source
••
pointing out key information and the interpretation of the table or figure in 
the accompanying text (unless the subject requires a full descriptor in the 
title).

Professional Communication
272
If your document contains very detailed or technical illustrations, consider placing 
them in the appendices. You can then have a summary illustration in your text.
10.3	 How to generate illustrations 
Today’s spreadsheet software allows you great flexibility to generate and edit 
professionally formatted graphics. Charts created in Microsoft® Excel™ or other 
spreadsheet or database programs, photographic images or other illustrations can 
all be copied and pasted into Microsoft® Word™ or a presentation package, for 
example Microsoft® PowerPoint™. 
For information on how to create graphics and other types of illustrations, 
consult the Internet, where numerous tutorials can be found to assist you, whether 
for Microsoft® Excel™, PowerPoint™ or another graphics program. 
If you are working in Microsoft® Word™ or PowerPoint™, you can use the options 
under SmartArt. However, it is usually preferable to create your own graphics — or 
at least modify the colours. The SmartArt options have often been used in other 
contexts and will not make your graphics stand out, especially if the default colours 
are used. Furthermore, it can be frustrating and time-consuming to try to adapt one 
of the pre-set options to your requirements, as their adaptability is limited. 
While it is possible to insert shapes and create diagrams in Microsoft® Word™, essentially 
it is a text program, and so the drawing facility is not as easy to use as in Microsoft® 
PowerPoint™ or other graphic and mind-mapping software. It is usually more efficient to 
create the graphic in a visual program and copy it as a picture into Microsoft® Word™ (see 
the discussion of the Paste Special options on page 44–45 in Chapter 2).
Microsoft® Office™ provides a number of standard templates for figures and 
tables. These designs (particularly the basic and less extravagant ones) are useful 
for quickly making your tables and figures attractive. They are especially useful 
in large documents where it is important to use a uniform design for tables and 
figures. Once you have chosen a template, each design can be changed further to 
suit your needs. The formatting of the design is done on the table or figure. It is 
easiest to change the number of decimal points displayed in a figure by changing 
the source data in Microsoft® Excel™. 
When choosing or constructing graphics in a program, consider the design 
options available. This is particularly relevant for bar graphs and pie charts that 
will be printed in black and white. For example, two or more grey bars or slices 
of pie next to each other can lack differentiation, and can be clarified by the use 
of outlining, contrast between light and dark, cross-hatching and labels. The 
examples shown in Figure 10.1 are all bar graphs, but many of these principles 

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
273
apply to other types of graphics as well. (Later in this chapter, the characteristics 
of different types of tables and figures will be discussed in detail.)
eg
Don’t use 
poorly 
differentiated 
shades of grey 
Do use 
outlined bars. 
Do use a black 
column to 
separate two 
grey columns
Do use 
horizontal 
reference lines 
to underscore 
numerical 
values. 
Do label data points with their exact value. It 
can also be effective to highlight one series by 
including its data point label — even a single 
data point. 
Figure 10.1  What to do and what not to do when generating graphs
10.4	 Tables
A table is made up of rows and columns of cells that you can fill with text and 
graphics. Tables are often used to organise and present information, but they have 
other uses as well. The major function of tables is to impart specific information 
to the reader. You can use tables to align numbers in columns and then sort and 
perform calculations on them. You can also use tables in Microsoft® Word™ to 
arrange text and graphics in such a way that the information is conveyed more 
effectively than in a paragraph. This aids the readability of the message. For 
example, consider the information given in the paragraph below:

Professional Communication
274
eg
In 2018, Floral Kingdom showed an increase in sales of flower seedlings. For clivias in three 
colours – red, yellow and orange – 15 435, 17 896 and 16 493 trays were sold respectively, 
while sales in 2017 were 14 327, 15 677 and 12 393 trays respectively for the three colours. 
In 2018, 4 692, 3 987 and 2 165 trays of hibiscus in the same three colours were sold, while 
2 178, 1 982 and 2 075 trays were sold in 2017, respectively.
Now try to find out how many trays containing yellow clivias were sold in 2017. 
It is rather confusing. However, if we put this information into a table, it becomes 
far clearer.
eg
Table 1:  Sales of seedlings in 2017 and 2018
Clivia
Hibiscus
2017
2017
Red 
14 327
2 178
Yellow
15 677
1 982
Orange
12 393
2 075
2018
2018
Red 
15 435
4 692
Yellow
17 896
3 987
Orange
16 493
2 165
This information can also be ordered as shown in the following example.
eg
Table 2:  Sales of seedlings in 2017 and 2018 
Clivia 
Hibiscus 
2017
2018
2017
2018
Red
14 327
15 435
2 178
4 692
Yellow
15 677
17 896
1 982
3 987
Orange
12 393
16 493
2 075
2 165

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
275
The spaces between the two seedlings columns and between the two years ensure 
easy visual discrimination. Clear row and column headings tell your reader exactly 
what specific data is there.
Note that a sans serif font is used in tables even if a serif font is used for the 
main text. A little formatting or shading can sometimes make a table easier to 
read. Compare Table 1 with Table 3 in the following example. You will note that 
the shading gives added emphasis to certain data and makes the table easier to 
read.
eg
Table 3:  Sales of flower seedlings in 2017 and 2018, emphasising  
sales of red and orange seedlings
Clivia seedlings
Hibiscus seedlings
2017
2017
Red
14 327
2 178
Yellow
15 677
1 982
Orange
12 393
2 075
2018
2018
Red
15 435
4 692
Yellow
17 896
3 987
Orange
16 493
2 165
It is important to note the integral function of tables. All illustrations and text 
are closely related, but while some illustrations are additional to the text (eg a 
photograph), tables supplement and support written content without replacing 
it. A written explanation of the material in the table is required to ensure that it 
is understood. Without this accompanying explanation, readers may skim over a 
table in their reading of the paper and so miss important information.
Readers are not expected to absorb the information within a table as if they 
were simply continuing to read the text. Instead, tables such as the example below 
require that readers stop and reflect on the arrangement of facts. 

Professional Communication
276
eg
Table 4  Results of an English language competency test given to students in three types 
of tertiary institutions
Total score
Classes of 
students
Types of institution
Type 1 
Professional
Type 2 
Arts
Type 3 
Teacher training college
No
Mean
Std 
deviation
No
Mean
Std 
deviation
No
Mean
Std 
deviation
Entering 
students
1 800
60.3
9.2
9 000
55.6
9.3
2 200
58.1
9.4
1st-years
1 400
62.4
9.2
7 500
57.4
9.3
2 000
51.3
9.4
2nd-years
5 500
64.0
9.3
27 000
59.3
9.4
8 000
54.2
9.5
3rd-years
700
65.2
9.4
4 000
60.5
9.5
1 200
65.3
9.5
4th-years
600
66.2
9.4
2 500
61.6
9.5
600
59.5
9.6
Totals
10 000
50 000
14 000
Tables may be placed at the end of a document, but it is preferable to place them 
within the text. In this case the table must be clearly distinguished from the text 
by, for example, an outline. There are various table layouts, which can all be 
accessed via the ribbon in Microsoft® Excel™ and Word™. (See Chapter 2 for more 
on creating and working with tables in Microsoft® Word™.)
Parts of a table
Every table has five essential parts, as shown in Figure 10.2, namely: 
1.	 the table number
2.	 the title of the table, above the table 
3.	 row headings
4.	 column headings
5.	 the body of the table, containing the data.

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
277
Note the referencing.
Note the use of an attractive 
given table design.
Figure 10.2  Parts of a table
Unlabelled tables in text
Information may be tabulated and placed in the text as an integral part of a 
written statement. In this case it needs no number, title or caption, because it is a 
continuous part of the text and not an illustration.
The example below includes portions of the surrounding text to show how the 
sense of the table ties in with that of the preceding and following text.
eg
The relative effectiveness of these four nematocides (a type of chemical pesticide) can be 
seen in a study done at Gardens University where the nematode population was studied in 
treated Oregon pine seedling beds.
The percentage reduction in the nematode population reduced in each case was as follows:
	
Methyl Bromide 	
= 99.2% 
	
D-D 	
= 85%
	
Mylone 	
= 68% 
	
Vapam 	
= 64%
Methyl Bromide was thus the most effective material for controlling plant parasitic 
nematodes in the Oregon pine seedbeds.
Using unlabelled tabulated information has many advantages over standard text:
••
The information uses a minimum number of words and therefore saves 
space.
••
It assists readability by breaking up pages of solid text.
••
It signals that something different or special is being said.

Professional Communication
278
However, this type of tabulated information should be restricted to small amounts 
of relatively straightforward data.
10.5	 Figures
All types of graphs and charts are referred to as figures. Line and scatter graphs 
convey accurate information and are effective in a written document. However, in 
a presentation they should only be used to show a trend, as they are too detailed 
to be read on a screen during a presentation.
The terms ‘graph’ or ‘chart’ are used when numeric data is presented in graphic 
form. The ability to generate graphs and charts is always included in spreadsheet 
programs and presentation programs. Graphs and charts are used as a means of 
providing a spatial, pictorial perspective on numerical data in order to:
••
explain, summarise and simplify
••
synthesise or deduce relationships
••
add interest by introducing an extra perspective.
The type of figure you choose depends on:
••
the target audience: non-specialist, mixed or technical, taking into account 
their particular background and needs
••
contact: whether the message will be written or spoken and how much 
spoken time or written space will be available
••
the nature of the raw data: the amount and complexity of the data.
This section covers, in particular, those figures used to communicate business or 
technical information for non-technical or mixed audiences.
Parts of a chart
Figure 10.3 illustrates the various parts of a chart. The type of chart illustrated is a 
bar graph, but many of these features are common to other types of figures as well.

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
279
Smart phone ownership by age group in different continents
Legend
X-axis title
Y-axis title
Chart title
Figure 10.3  Parts of a bar graph
Line graphs
Line graphs are specific and factual. They are therefore suitable for representing 
continuous information and for showing technical and specific data to 
knowledgeable, professional audiences. The term ‘curves’ applies to line graphs 
even if the lines are broken. You can use a line graph to show the behaviour of 
two variables, namely:
1.	 the independent variable on the horizontal axis
2.	 the dependent variable on the vertical axis.
As shown in the examples in this section, a complete graph will include axis titles 
and, if necessary, a legend for explaining what each of the data series represents. 
Make sure the measures on the y-axis (the vertical axis) are major values, such 
as R0, R10m, R20m, R30m, etc for a graph that shows data from R0 to R50m. Do 
not clutter the axis with unnecessary detail; for example, for a graph that shows 
data up to R50m, do not use values such as, R0m, R2m, R4m, R6m, etc. For 
accuracy, you can include the gridlines; or, to show trends, you can leave them 
out (especially in a screened presentation).
Different types of line graphs are used for different purposes:
••
Simple line graphs show trends. They can include gridlines or not.
••
Multiple line graphs show comparative trends. These need a well-planned 
key to distinguish each line.
••
Cumulative line graphs are not good for accurate detailed information.
For data that is appropriate as a line graph, plot a scatter graph and then fit a 

Professional Communication
280
trend line to the data. It is also important to indicate errors associated with each 
data point, if this was measured or is a factor. Note that for some information, a 
line graph is not appropriate. In these cases, avoid plotting line graphs, as it can be 
misleading. For example, if you want to show values between 0 and 100% along 
the x-axis, but you only measured 1%, 2%, 5%, 10%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100%, 
plotting a line graph implies that you made measurements at each percentage 
point.
Simple line graphs
Note in the example below how gridlines have been included to assist the reader.
eg
Figure 1:  Profits in 2018
In the next example, the gridlines have not been included, which makes readability 
more difficult. In a screen presentation, however, this graph could show a trend 
well without making the graph look too cluttered, especially if the trend is more 
relevant than the absolute figures.
eg
Figure 2:  Profits in 2018

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
281
Multiple line graphs
These graphs can be used to present complex trends. The following is an example of 
a multiple line graph. Care has been taken to distinguish the lines from one another. 
eg
Figure 3:  Growth in the number of cases processed by the pathology labs in the 
months Jan–April over the period 2017–2020
Make sure that the lines are sufficiently different from one another. The lines 
shown in the example above are easily distinguishable. The graph would be more 
difficult to read if the lines crossed one another, as is shown in the next example 
(a cumulative line graph, Figure 4). Use colour, dashed lines and different shapes 
for data points to differentiate between the lines, but beware of relying only on 
colour — the differentiation will be lost if the graph is printed in black and white.
Cumulative line graphs
These graphs are a cross between a line and a cumulative bar graph. They are 
very useful for showing trends at a quick glance. They are not good for showing 
accurate information. Yearly totals would have to be worked out separately.

Professional Communication
282
eg
Figure 4:  Pathology lab output for the period 2017–2020
Bar graphs
While line graphs show a continuous relationship among data points, bar graphs 
are useful for showing discrete and comparative information. The bars may 
run vertically or horizontally (and are named either bar or column graphs in 
processing tools, depending on the orientation). However, bear in mind that people 
expect certain comparisons, such as altitude, to be read vertically, whereas distance 
would be more easily read horizontally.
In order to increase visual impact and accuracy, it is useful to use reference 
lines. You can also place exact numbers at the top of each bar or, if you are using 
cumulative bar graphs, within each bar.
Several options for bar graphs exist. Your choice will depend on the focus of your 
message: 
••
Simple bar graphs compare a series of values for one item.
••
Grouped bar graphs compare two or more items.
••
Cumulative bar graphs compare the component parts of several totals as 
numbers or as percentages of the whole.
••
Two-scale bar graphs are useful for showing complex information, both 
discrete values and comparative relationships.
••
Bilateral bar graphs are used to show negative amounts. 

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
283
Simple bar graphs
These graphs are good for comparing the values of one item over time. 
eg
Figure 1:  Daily sales of Noxis in the week of 9–13 December
Grouped bar graphs
Grouped bar graphs can be used effectively to compare more than one item, as 
shown in the following example.
eg
Figure 2:  Daily sales of Noxis compared to Saxonby in the week of 9–13 December
Cumulative bar graphs
Cumulative bar graphs compare the component parts of several totals as numbers or 
as percentages of the whole. They are good for giving a quick visual impression of 
the data, but not for an accurate representation. In order to rectify this, you could:
••
add numbers inside the bars to make them read more accurately (as in the 
example that follows)

Professional Communication
284
••
use a legend or key to explain each component of the graph
••
use a key or legend to explain the colours or shading.
eg
Figure 3:  Breakdown of cellphone sales in the week of 9–13 December
Two-scale bar graphs
Two-scale bar graphs (see the example that follows) are useful for showing 
relationships that are difficult to show in any other way. The line graph shows the 
relation of Noxis pre-ordered sales to the other types of sales shown in the bars. 
The bars and key describe different information on the bars.
eg
Figure 4:  Noxis pre-ordered sold more stock than Noxis, Saxonby and DGV combined 
last week

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
285
Bilateral bar graphs
Bilateral bar graphs need to show negative amounts very clearly. Note how the 
zero line in the following example distinguishes positive numbers from negative 
numbers.
eg
Figure 5:  Average daily temperatures in three cities last week
Pie charts
Pie charts are useful for showing parts as a percentage of a whole, but they 
do not indicate relationships and trends. As pie charts are not visually precise 
– particularly three-dimensional (3D) pie charts – they are not favoured by 
the scientific community. However, they are effective in conveying a general 
impression and are easily understood by non-specialist audiences.
It is sometimes difficult to distinguish between slices in a pie chart when it is 
printed in a single colour, even if there is a legend accompanying the pie. To offset 
this, write the values or labels within the pie segments. Consider the use of shading 
or other fill effects to enhance your graphic if you are not able to reproduce colour. 
However, patterns and shading within slices of a pie chart should be used with 
care, as they can make the graphic overwhelmingly busy and the text difficult 
to read. You may also consider giving emphasis to a critical segment through a 
pop-out. 
When creating a pie chart, start at 12 o’clock with the largest slice and work 
around in a clockwise direction, from largest to smallest. The example that follows 
is a simple flat pie chart showing population figures.

Professional Communication
286
eg
Figure 1:  Expected world population distribution by 2020
Avoid the temptation of using three-dimensional pie charts, particularly in screen 
presentations, as the visual impact of the facing segment is sometimes enhanced, 
thus distorting the message. See the examples that follow.
eg
Figure 2:  Expected world population distribution by 2020

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
287
eg
Figure 3:  Expected world population distribution by 2020
Exploding pie charts (2D or 3D) can look busy, 
even messy. Furthermore, they are no easier to 
read than a normal pie chart. However, should 
a single segment need to be highlighted, a pop-
out segment can be very effective.
Pictograms
In pictograms, representational forms are used to show statistical information. These 
graphs are not accurate. They are most useful for conveying broad information to 
a wide audience who are not used to seeing graphics and can relate to the pictorial 
element as shown in the example that follows. Pictograms are often used to liven up 
a presentation but should be used with caution in an academic presentation.
eg
Figure 1:  Projected Saudi Arabian oil production for five years: 2017–2021

Professional Communication
288
Flow charts
A flow chart is a sequential diagram employed in many fields to show the stepwise 
procedures used to perform a task, as in manufacturing, solving a problem or in 
an algorithm. In flow charts, lines are used to help readers follow a process or a 
set of possibilities. A flow chart makes it easier for readers to decide which details, 
circumstances or conditions relate to their interests and needs. 
The information is arranged from the point of the most important overall 
question, and then follows a decision-making sequence through a number of 
points or questions and comments. Information which can be ignored is indicated 
(see the word ‘NO' in the example that follows).  
Conventions in the design of flow charts are that the main body of the flow 
chart should run down the centre of the page from top to bottom and left to right. 
The symbols used include: 
••
rounded squares to indicate the starting or finishing point
••
diamonds to indicate questions
••
rectangles to represent discussion points.
eg
START with 
a word that is 
singular
You will probably 
need to add <es>
Just add <s>
Just add <es>
YES
YES
NO
NO
Count the number of 
syllables in the word
Make the word into the 
plural and say it out loud
Does the 
word end 
with <o>
Is there 
an extra syllable 
in the plural?
Figure 1:  How to form plurals in English
The Shapes option on the Insert tab in Microsoft® Word™, 
PowerPoint™ and Excel™ contains a section of flow chart 
shapes. 

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
289
Gantt charts
A Gantt chart is a horizontal bar chart developed as a production control tool in 
1917 by Henry L Gantt, an American engineer and social scientist. Henry Gantt 
and Frederick Taylor are generally credited with being the ‘fathers’ of scientific 
management or project management as we know it today. Henry Gantt’s charts 
are built on the principles of scientific management to depict complex time-work 
schedules visually.
Gantt charts are therefore visual representations of intended tasks, their 
sequence and the proposed allocation of time for each task over a specific period. 
They are frequently used in project management to provide a graphical illustration 
of a schedule that helps people to plan, co-ordinate and track specific tasks in a 
project. Gantt charts are an integral part of technical or academic proposals.
A Gantt chart must include a statement of events or undertakings in the 
left column. The number of days, weeks or months that each task will take are 
represented graphically by means of horizontal bars, as shown in the example that 
follows.
eg
30 September
07 October
ID
Task name
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
1
Inventory and research
    
2
Inventory artifacts
    
3
Arrange loans — other museums
    
4
Pick up donations
    
5
Design and development
    
6
Create exhibit space
               
7
Photograph artifacts
8
Design artwork and graphics
9
Prepare audiovisual segments
10
Create titles and labels
11
Construction
12
Install new lighting system
13
Install clocks
14
Installation complete
Project: Project 2
Date: Friday 02/09/––
Task 
	
Summary	
Progress 
	
Rolled Up Task	
Milestone 
	
Rolled Up Milestone	
14 October
21 October
28 October
04 Nov
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
Researcher
Chief archivist
Donations 
curator
Chief archivist, researcher
Donations curator
Chief archivist

Professional Communication
290
Rolled Up Progress 
	
Project Summary	
Split 
	
External Tasks	
Figure 1:  A simple Gantt chart
Photographer
Graphic artist
Audiovisual technician
Graphic artist
Chief archivist, researcher, don
Audiovisual technician
It is usual to state the names of specific individuals or their designations unless the 
chart reflects the work of a single person. Notice the key supplied in the example 
above to explain the bars.
Gantt charts may be simple versions created on a wall chart, for example, 
showing the use of rooms or various resources over time. More complex versions 
can be created using Microsoft® Excel™, and automated Gantt charts can be 
created using project management applications such as Microsoft® Project, 
Microsoft® Smartsheet™ or GanttProject (a free downloadable project scheduling 
and management tool available at ttps://www.ganttproject.biz).
eg
Figure 2:  A Gantt chart created with Microsoft® Project™

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
291
Scientific models
Research in science, medicine and engineering includes the extensive use of 
technical diagrams and models. The example that follows shows a design created 
for a specific project.
eg
Figure 1:  A diagram drawn in Microsoft® Project™ for a specific project  
(Molteno, MR & Becker, TH. 2015. ‘Mode I–III Decomposition of the  
J‐integral from DIC Displacement Data’. Strain 51(6): 492–503)
See pages 25–26 in Chapter 1 for detail on typefaces and their various qualities, such as the 
comparative font sizes of different typefaces. The visual impact made by a font with a large 
body and short ascenders and descenders contrasts with one in the same point size but with 
a small body and long ascenders and descenders. 
10.6	 Posters
Posters are a key component of communicating your research or business proposals,
and an important element in a successful business or academic career. (See  
Chapter 13). Posters, although different to oral presentations or published papers, 
still delivers high-quality content.  Posters are intended to engage colleagues or 
investors in a dialogue about the content. It can be accompanied by a representative 
or it can stand alone at events such as conferences or trade fairs. A poster requires 
careful planning so that it can be tailored to a particular audience and purpose. 
You will need to decide what you want the passing reader to do — engage in a 
dialogue, collaborate or be sufficiently interested to seek further information. You 
will have to design your poster accordingly.

Professional Communication
292
Rules for research and business posters
Rule
Reason and method
Decide on content to 
fit the audience and 
purpose.
By identifying the audience and the purpose, you will be able to 
select the relevant material and the extent of the detail.
Attract attention.
Make the first impression striking, as you will probably have to 
compete with other posters in the room. Be sure to state the 
topic and purpose boldly and clearly. The banner title describes 
the topic and holds the material below it together. It could pose 
a decisive question, define the scope of the study, hint at a new 
finding or establish the need for a new invention. Above all, the 
title should be short and comprehensible and easy to read from 
far away.
Distil the information.
Use only key points. Avoid details and information overload. The 
content should be self-explanatory.
In an academic poster, 
include the necessary 
information.
The poster must contain a title, author names and affiliations, 
the supervisor’s name, an introduction, methodology, results, 
conclusions and future work, references and acknowledgements.
Use as much illustrative 
material as possible.
Use illustrations to replace text. Use photographs, charts, tables 
and diagrams to simplify complex material. Create clear, concise 
captions, headings and labels. In academic posters, you need to 
give literature citations, but keep them to a minimum.
Ensure the images are 
large enough.
This ensures that they do not pixelate when they are enlarged on 
a slide or projected.
Keep the design simple.
Consider the layout carefully so that the eye can move in a 
logical manner. Typically, use three to five columns and arrange 
the material vertically from top left to bottom right. This is the 
easiest for the reader. However, other designs can be appropriate, 
for example a horizontal or circular sequence. Use arrows or 
numbering if necessary to guide the reader through the data in 
the correct sequence. Keep some open space so the information 
does not appear crowded.
Ensure the text is 
readable.
Follow the guidelines given in Section 10.7 of this chapter to 
make sure your text is clear and legible.
Use colour for effect.
Aim for a striking impression with your use of colour. A suitably 
transparent watermark can be effective as a background. Use 
contrasting colours to help isolate text for easy readability. Use 
space to avoid the poster appearing cluttered, but avoid large, 
bland areas of colour. Avoid combinations of complimentary 
colours, such as green and red.
Include professional 
product photographs 
wherever possible.
An enlarged product photograph can help emphasise and 
reinforce the impact long after the exhibition is over.

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
293
Guidelines for text sizes in posters
If you use text in a poster, keep in mind that you need to be able to read the text 
on your computer screen for your poster to be read from approximately two metres 
away. This will give you an idea of how the audience will experience reading from 
your poster. Follow these guidelines to make sure your text is readable:
••
Use text blocks with clear titles and headings. 
••
Keep the text to a minimum, as clarity and precision of expression is important. 
••
Avoid full sentences. 
••
Avoid upper case.
••
Keep the font size legible (not less than 24 points). Use the following font 
sizes for these features:
◗◗
Title: 72 pt
◗◗
Subtitle or authors’ names: 48 pt
◗◗
Affiliations: 36 pt
◗◗
Section headings: 36 pt
◗◗
Text: 28–32 pt
◗◗
References and acknowledgements: 24 pt
••
Use a sans serif font, such as Ariel, Calibri, Tahoma or Verdana. 
Finally, it is important to laminate your poster with either a glossy or matt finish. 
This is a practical and professional way to display the poster easily. A large sheet 
of paper has a tendency to tear or look worn. See an example of a well-designed 
poster in Figure 10.4.

Professional Communication
294
eg
Figure 10.4  Elements of a well-designed poster (final-year thesis poster by Matthew 
Molteno on the design of an electro-mechanical walking-assist device for 
drop-foot for BSc [Eng], UCT, 2011)
Clear heading
Effective use of 
watermark
Numbering; clear 
directional logic 
(can be with graphic 
connectors)
Same typeface 
with suitably 
varied size
Good illustrative 
material
Focused  
conclusion and 
‘future’
Key points only
Legible graphics
Catchy  
subheading

Graphics, visual aids and posters      Chapter 10
295
✔
Checklist for creating graphics
Poor graphics and visual aids will not only detract from any message you intend to convey, 
but may even distort it. It is essential to use clearly laid out and appropriate graphics and 
tables to create maximum impact, whether in written text or on a poster. This is particularly 
important as some readers may engage with a poster or written message when you are 
not there to explain what it means. Use the following checklist to ensure your graphics are 
effective:
•	 Be clear about what the graphic is intended to convey.
•	 If you are using generic graphics, adapt them to your context. Alternatively, create your own.
•	 Source photographs of good quality.
•	 Choose the correct style or format, especially for charts and graphs, to display the 
information clearly and accurately.
•	 Keep explanatory text to a minimum and rather use arrows or other highlighting 
techniques to focus the audience’s attention.
•	 Use animation sparingly but with a view to assisting the audience to focus more easily 
on important elements.
•	 Use notes pages or handouts to provide detailed data to accompany graphics. (This will 
allow the graphic to promote understanding rather than just impart information.) 
•	 Check whether there are any issues of copyright infringement that you need to pay 
attention to.

11
296
Visuals to support  
oral messages
In the modern, digital environment, we rely as much on visuals to understand 
a message as on the spoken or written word. This means that oral presentations 
will be enhanced by the use of well-designed presentation visuals. They can help 
a speaker communicate more effectively, hold the attention of an audience and 
imprint powerful memories related to key points or messages. Unfortunately, the 
overuse of text on slides or poorly designed visuals can detract from the speaker’s 
message and even have a negative impact on the company’s or individual’s 
professional reputation. This chapter covers information on:
••
using visuals in oral messages
••
generating and working with visuals to accompany presentations in 
Microsoft® PowerPoint™, including the use of animation
••
creating dynamic and interactive presentations
••
creating non-linear presentations.
By working through this chapter, you will learn that visuals as part of your oral 
delivery are useful to:
••
clarify processes or explain procedure
••
simplify complexity
••
denote order and show connectivity and relationships
••
demonstrate moving parts
••
show spatial locations.
11.1	 Importance of using visuals in oral messages 
When you need to do a presentation, you may be tempted to simply transfer 
tables and graphs from written text to a Microsoft® PowerPoint™ slide. Although 
it might seem convenient to use material that has already been formulated and 
used in a text, invariably the size and amount of detail is unsuitable for a visual 
presentation. Text-heavy slides will not just bore an audience, but will also create 
the impression that little thought has been given to the presentation and the main 
points to be made. 

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
297
Dangers of bullet points
Microsoft® PowerPoint™ has become ubiquitous in the world of business 
presentations, and this has not always been to the benefit of the presentations 
themselves. It is a versatile and easy-to-use program that has enormous capacity. 
However, it has also acquired a poor reputation because of some presenters tending 
to overuse bullet points in an attempt to avoid writing down all their content on a 
slide. While it may appear advantageous to have short phrases neatly captured on 
a slide to help your audience follow a presentation, lists of bullet points more often 
than not indicate a lack of thought about how best to present information. They 
may even prove counterproductive, as audience members’ attention easily drifts 
away when they are confronted by the monotony of bulleted slide after bulleted 
slide. Neither is a long list of bullets mitigated by the speaker making the bullet 
points appear one by one either on a control transition or the click of a mouse. 
Furthermore, such a presentation almost always requires the presenter to face the 
screen more than the audience and, often, to read from the screen bullet point by 
bullet point.
Research from the 1980s onwards has consistently shown significantly improved 
retention of information from slides containing visuals. Message retention after 
three days has been shown to be up to 50% to 65% for slides containing visuals 
versus 10% to 25% for slides with text and bullets only, with a corresponding 
increase in the chance of achieving presenter objectives (Gutierrez, 2014). Figure 
11.1 is an example of a visual representation of these figures — significantly more 
memorable than the same information provided in this paragraph.
Visual slides significantly increase message retention when 
compared to bullet points, even after three days
Figure 11.1  Message retention after three days when using bullet  
points vs visuals

Professional Communication
298
Presenters often excuse the use of text in oral presentations by suggesting that 
the presentation will serve as a record which, when viewed again later by a 
member of the audience, will act as a reminder of the information provided. This 
approach is commonly used with lecture presentations. Slides are not, however, 
an easy reading medium and in reality people rarely read back over the slides of 
presentations or lectures for recall. Audience members rather rely on the notes they 
took at the time (perhaps on a handout with reduced copies of slides). They may 
also rely on a fact sheet that adds detail to a memorable message provided by a 
visual, but in this case it will be the visual that draws the audience back to the fact 
sheet or notes, and not vice-versa. 
Effective visuals in presentations
The aim in a presentation is therefore to include well-considered, targeted visuals 
that enhance understanding or emphasise key points. (The effective design of 
visuals will be discussed in the next section of this chapter.) Many programs are 
available for preparing slide presentations, including Microsoft® PowerPoint™, 
Prezi and Keynote, or a combination of them. 
Inserting multimedia, such as short movie clips and moving data from the 
Internet, is becoming more common in oral presentations. You can use Google 
Images, Instagram and other sites to source images — some sites are free and 
some may charge, but you should be clear that you have permission to use any 
externally sourced images or clips. Furthermore, as quality images are important, 
it is usually well worth sourcing a good image even if it requires a small fee, 
particularly if the presentation or poster is likely to be used multiple times.  
Infographics are great examples of how text and research can be visually 
combined. Before designing a presentation, a quick Internet search of infographics 
around your subject may give ideas for visuals if you are uncomfortable with 
generating ideas for graphics. But do make your own graphics after you have 
found some ideas, not just because of copyright issues but also because a graphic 
from one context is rarely completely suitable in another. 
Some go so far as to believe that a presentation should contain the minimum 
amount of text (no more than six words per slide — usually in the heading to make 
a point) or even no text at all. In such a case, detailed facts and information would 
be provided in an accompanying handout or fact sheet (should that be required). 
This is particularly viable since programs such as Microsoft® PowerPoint™ and 
Keynote allow you to prepare presentations that include slides, audience handouts 
and speaker’s notes. 

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
299
As Microsoft® PowerPoint™, Prezi or other presentation media are designed to be visual, 
that is what should be on the slides. If detailed figures or information is required in the 
presentation, consider accompanying the presentation with a handout of relevant facts and 
figures rather than cramming them all onto the slides. Afterwards, the information provided 
will be enhanced for the audience members by their memory of the accompanying visual 
on the slide. Information can easily be set up to accompany a presentation in Microsoft® 
PowerPoint™, for example by formatting the layout of the Notes Page view to match the 
presentation or company style and then adding the relevant facts, figures, quotes and other 
evidence for reference (rather than relying on handouts containing just the slides). These 
pages can then be printed out to accompany either specific slides or the presentation as 
a whole. These accompanying notes can also be set up as a guide or manual in a training 
presentation, or just as a useful reminder of the presentation content for the presenter at a 
later date.
11.2	 Guidelines for the design of effective visuals
It is not enough to merely create and use visuals, as poorly designed visuals can 
ruin your presentation. Elaborate, complex or cluttered visuals will not necessarily 
be perceived as excellent. In addition, including more visuals rarely compensates 
for a lack of quality visuals — too many visuals can be just as counterproductive 
as too much text. Table 11.1 highlights good and poor practice in the creation and 
use of visual aids. 
Table 11.1  Designing successful visual aids
Poor visual aids 
Good visual aids
Example of a good visual aid
Too many 
unnecessary slides
Slides that are fully integrated 
into the speech with relevant 
information on the slides
Using 10 slides for a 10-minute 
presentation
Wrong choice 
of graphic (eg 
a complex table 
instead of a simple 
chart)
Data that is presented in 
proportionally sized shapes, 
eg pie charts and bar graphs; 
animations used to highlight 
important factors
A solid bar graph with an 
animated graph line coming in 
to show the trend only
Use of clip art or 
poor quality images
Photographs or high-quality 
images that show up sharply 
and cleanly when projected as 
well as on screen
A relevant photograph with a 
simple caption and minimum 
text, or a clear diagram with 
easily read labels

Professional Communication
300
Poor visual aids 
Good visual aids
Example of a good visual aid
Poor choice of 
colour (eg tones 
which have little 
differentiation or 
that clash)
Slides that have a background 
and contrasting text to suit the 
venue — depending on whether 
the venue is light or dark.
Not orange and brown but 
white and blue and other strong 
contrasts in colour and tone
Data in tiny, 
illegible letters 
or minute colour 
blocks
Data within the visual, and 
sufficiently large to be legible
Data shown in proportional sizes 
of pie chart or bar graph, and 
with descriptor added
Unnecessary 
decoration, too 
many special effects 
or a completely 
white background 
Using an appropriate template 
in keeping with professional 
image; sans serif text; an off-
white background; animations 
only to disclose material and 
even then sparingly
A discreet banner giving own or 
company name or logo above or 
below main body of slide 
Too much text on a 
slide and overusing 
bullet points
Text of approximately 40 pt for 
headings and 24–32 pt for text, 
for readability and to limit the 
amount of text on any one slide; 
limited use of bullets
Slides with images that replace 
or support text 
In particular, you need to pay attention to the use of text and colour in slides.
Use of text on slides
The typeface you choose, and the size of the typeface, can affect the legibility of 
text on slides. Follow these guidelines for readability:
••
Use a sans serif font (eg Arial, Calibri, Tahoma or Verdana); it is easier to 
read from afar.
••
For content text, the font size should be at least 22 to 28 pt. However, also 
bear in mind that some fonts have a large body and short ascenders and 
descenders, and others have a small body and long ascenders and descenders. 
This will create the impression of a difference in size even if the fonts are in 
the same point size.
••
The size of text and numbers on graphs should be between 22 and 28 pt, to 
ensure that they are legible when projected.
••
For title text, the size needs to be about 40 to 44 pt.
••
Stick to one font throughout the body text. A second font may be used for 
headings. 
••
Avoid special effects such as text shadows in your slide, as this can reduce 
the legibility of the writing.
••
Keep text to a minimum — full sentences are not usually required.

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
301
Use the slide title to make a statement or assertion highlighting the key point of your slide 
and use the rest of the slide to provide evidence for your point, preferably in visual form with 
minimal text. If you do this, make sure the title is left aligned to make it easy to read across. 
This technique helps you remember the key point you need to make on that slide, allowing 
you to focus more on the audience. 
Do not read out the slide title. The audience can read it faster than you can say it, and it 
is therefore irritating when a presenter reads out slide titles of any kind, or the table of 
contents slide, should you have one.
Use of colour on slides
The visibility of your text is affected by your choice of colours:
••
Light backgrounds are beneficial if the environment is likely to be darkened, 
as they tend to give a clean, uncluttered look. Light backgrounds often 
benefit from gradient shading to soften them. 
••
Darker backgrounds can project better and be easier to view than light 
backgrounds in certain environments, especially very light ones. 
••
Do not make backgrounds too dark. Blue or grey is better than black, which 
can appear quite intimidating. Red as a background colour is hard on the eyes.
••
Use contrast between the colours that you choose, for example dark on light 
or vice versa. 
••
Do not use multiple colours. Use a maximum of two colours. Rather use bold 
for emphasis than a colour change. Red text especially can be hard to see.
Data projectors in lecture halls, board rooms or conference venues may distort colours. What 
seems bright and legible on your computer screen may not always be so on the larger screen 
in the room. Check in advance, where possible, and adjust your colours accordingly.
11.3	 Slides in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ 
Create templates 
When you open Microsoft® PowerPoint™, you have two options. You can either 
use one of the variety of installed design templates, with pre-set colours, graphics, 
fonts, and so forth, or you can use a blank presentation, which allows you to 
choose and change all the design elements.
Just as in Microsoft® Word™, PowerPoint™ allows you to set up templates 
that can be used over and over. As with documents, finding an old presentation 

Professional Communication
302
and using the Save As command before replacing unwanted material means you 
run the risk of the slide design becoming degraded over time, with fonts and so 
on becoming inconsistent. A Microsoft® PowerPoint™ template has a different 
file extension to a regular presentation (.potx rather than .pptx). This allows it to 
launch a presentation identical to the template, but leaving the template untouched 
for the next time it is needed and thereby preserving the design.
Using a pre-set Microsoft® PowerPoint™ template may initially appear to be 
a timesaver, but it can also prove restricting where the design does not fit all the 
elements of your presentation. Adapting the template can take as long as, if not 
longer than, setting up your own design template. Furthermore, there is always 
the risk that an installed design template could have inappropriate or distracting 
associations should an audience member have seen that design in a different 
context. It is therefore preferable to create your own slide design so that you are 
able to manipulate various elements to suit your needs. 
If you work for a company or organisation, it is important to maintain the company’s brand 
at all times. Even if the company does not have a required template to use for presentations, 
it is a good idea to ensure that your slide design follows the company’s style sheet, 
particularly regarding the colour palette and the use of the corporate logo. If no style sheet 
is available, then the organisation’s website is a good guide to the look and feel that should 
be embodied in your slide design. 
If your presentations are for your own purposes, having your own design template is still 
advisable, as it contributes to your personal or professional brand. 
Slide Master 
The Slide Master function, accessed via the View tab on the ribbon, acts as a 
convenient one-stop shop for setting up a presentation in Microsoft® PowerPoint™, 
whether to use once or to save as a template. Making the effort to get the master 
slide right saves hours of extra work formatting every separate slide.
Clicking this button on 
the View tab opens the 
Slide Master view and 
a contextual tab on 
the ribbon called Slide 
Master.
This tab also allows you to 
see the ruler around the 
slide in Print Layout view 
and the gridlines, to help 
with lining up objects on 
the slide.
Figure 11.2  Useful viewing options accessible from the View tab

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
303
The Slide Master function allows you to set the fonts, colours and layout you 
would like to appear on each slide, which could include the company logo, for 
example. Once the master slide is set up, you can then adapt the specialised slide 
layouts available in Microsoft® PowerPoint™. This is shown in Figure 11.3.
Contextual Slide  
Master tab
Button to choose which 
features appear on the 
Master: Title, Text, Date, 
Slide number, Footer.
Choose the slide size 
(Standard or Widescreen), 
bearing in mind that 
not all projectors can 
accommodate the 
Widescreen size. 
This button closes the 
Slide Master when you 
are done.
You can select font size, 
style, colour, line spacing 
and paragraph spacing as 
you would in a document.
You can choose a standard 
bullet and choose its 
colour. You can also use a 
picture or shape or import 
a picture or shape.
Two levels of bullets 
should be more than 
enough for any 
presentation. If you need 
more, perhaps review how 
you are presenting your 
message. 
Each element is in a 
separate placeholder. 
These can also be resized 
or moved around the slide 
to suit your needs.
These are individual slide 
layout options flowing 
from the Slide Master.
Figure 11.3  Editing with Slide Master
When you open the Slide Master, by default it shows the title page slide layout option. In 
the panel to the left, scroll up and click on the very first slide to ensure that you are working 
on the actual master slide. The dotted lines in that panel show how all the other slides take 
their cue from this one. A single presentation can, however, contain more than one master 
slide, especially if slides have been copied from other presentations with a different look. 
Always check you are working on the correct master slide.

Professional Communication
304
Figure 11.4 is an example of a formatted master slide, showing a logo. Once you 
have formatted your master slide, each new blank slide will share the same look, 
albeit with different layouts depending on the option you select for each slide. For 
example, the logo could be in the same place, for continuity of the theme. Your 
text formatting will be maintained throughout.
Slide title: Calibri, 
40pt, aligned left, 
bold
First level: custom 
bullet, Calibri, 32pt
Second level: 
standard bullet, 
28pt
The remaining 
levels have been 
deleted, as they are 
unnecessary.
Company logo
Slide size: Standard
Shaded 
background with 
gradient to break 
up solid white
6pt border around 
edge of slide (a 
rectangle with no 
fill was placed over 
the slide and sent 
to the back)
Automatic date, 
no footer or slide 
number
Figure 11.4  An example of a formatted master slide with logo
From the View tab you can also access Handout or Notes Master to set them up to 
match your presentation design.
If you work in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ regularly, you will use certain commands often. Just 
as in Microsoft® Word™ (see Chapter 2), it is useful to customise the Quick Access Toolbar to 
contain all your regularly used commands so that you do not have to keep moving between 
different tabs on the ribbon for the required actions. You can do this in one of two ways:
1.	
Right-click on the ribbon and select Show Quick Access Toolbar Below the Ribbon. Now 
right-click on any command you use frequently and choose Add to Quick Access Toolbar.
	
OR
2.	
Go to the File tab and click on Options to bring up the PowerPoint Options dialog box. 
Choose Quick Access Toolbar and add the commands that you want.
Alternatively, you can customise the ribbon itself by adding a new personalised tab to 
include all your required commands. Using the Options button on the File tab to bring up 
the PowerPoint Options dialog box, select Customise Ribbon and click on the New Tab 
button below the pane on the right-hand side. You can then add one or more groups to the 
tab and select commands from the left-hand pane to add, as with the Quick Access Toolbar 
(see Figure 11.5). Both the tab and the custom groups can be renamed to identify them.

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
305
Figure 11.5  Customising the Quick Access Toolbar and ribbon
Save your master slide as a template
To save your design as a Microsoft® PowerPoint™ template, click on the Close 
Master View button on the Slide Master tab and then save your slide as a template 
by using the Save As command. Select ‘PowerPoint Template’ from the dropdown 
options in the Save as type box at the bottom of the Save As dialog box.
If you save your presentation as a Microsoft® 
PowerPoint™ show (.ppsx), your presentation will open 
directly in slideshow mode — effectively as a ‘read only’ 
presentation. 
If you need to edit a show, select the file or 
show you want to edit, click Open and carry 
on editing as normal. When you save it, the file 
will still be a show. 
If you do not want your show to be edited, 
or you need send out notes, handout pages 
or selected slides, consider saving the 
presentation as a PDF to protect it. After 
selecting .pdf from the Save as type dropdown 
box, click on the Options button to open the 
Options dialog box and then select which 
slides you want to save as a PDF.
Figure 11.6  Opening the Options dialog 
box when saving as a PDF
How to insert a graphic or chart
To insert a chart, you can either create one via the Chart option on the Insert tab 
or you can import one you have already created in Microsoft® Excel™. Creating a 
simple chart directly in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ is straightforward, although you 
will still be prompted to add data in Microsoft® Excel™ via a pop-up window once 

Professional Communication
306
the chart type has been selected. However, as most people present work already done 
elsewhere, it usually ends up being easier to copy and paste from Microsoft® Excel™. 
You can do an ordinary copy and paste, which still allows you to edit the chart 
by double-clicking on it to access the Microsoft® Excel™ base data. You can also 
paste the chart as a picture (in which case it will be unchangeable) or as a link (see  
pages 45–46 in Chapter 2 for information on how to use the Paste Special options). 
Get the formatting and look of the chart correct in the original program before you paste it 
into your presentation.
Animations 
Animation is a useful tool in presentations, as there is inherent meaning in the 
movement of images or text apart from and in addition to the visual impact of the 
content itself. The animation options in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ include:
••
entrances and exits of text or images
••
timing and triggers
••
motion pathways of moving images around the screen 
••
the treatment of clips from films or YouTube
••
slide transitions — note that these can make the presentation appear fussy if 
overused.
The following are some examples of the effect of animation: 
••
Revealing text (bullet points) to coincide with the moment the speaker 
makes a point allows the listeners to focus on one point at a time. This is 
more effective than putting up the whole list and revealing too much to the 
listeners, as this would mean they are ahead of the speaker.
••
Revealing sections on a flow chart incrementally allows the audience to 
focus on each stage of the process.
••
The use of arrows or highlighting tools that point out significant elements 
on the slide as they occur in the presentation helps focus the audience. 
••
Animating parts of machinery or specific elements within a diagram can 
help clarify complex movements.
••
The appearance of correctional material superimposed on existing faulty or 
incomplete sections is more effective than two static slides showing ‘before’ 
and ‘after’. Also note, however, that two consecutive slides can achieve the 
same effect as an animated addition onto a slide.
••
A moving diagrammatic version can be clearer than a photograph that lacks 
clarity.

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
307
It is important, however, not to get carried away with animations, as you then run 
the risk of their dominating the content and distracting from the real purpose of 
the slide.
Figure 11.7 is a screenshot of the Animations tab and the listed animations on 
the Animation pane.
The numbered list in 
the Animation pane 
corresponds to the 
numbered objects on the 
slide. This list is not shown 
during the presentation. 
Click on an object 
and select an 
animation from 
the Animations 
tab.
Use the Effect 
Options button to 
review the effect 
options, timings 
and start options 
for the animation.
Use the Add 
Animation button 
to add further 
animation to the 
same object. 
Use the buttons 
to re-order the 
animation if 
required. 
Figure 11.7  The Animations tab and the Animation pane in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ 
Keep the number of animations per slide to the minimum, as the animations can actually 
hold you up while you are presenting — you can adapt what you want to say to fit an 
audience and the flow of the presentation, but it is not possible to cancel the animations 
mid-presentation. This is especially problematic if you do not have a presenter mouse, as 
you can end up trapped by constantly needing to trigger the animations at the laptop or 
keyboard. Less can be more.

Professional Communication
308
Animation should be used only to the extent that it enhances understanding and facilitates 
retention.
Animation should not be overused, as it can distract from the points being made in the 
presentation.
Viewing modes in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ 
Table 11.2 gives details about the uses of the various viewing modes in Microsoft® 
PowerPoint™.
Table 11.2  Viewing your slides in working modes
Presentation 
view
How to access it
Description and purpose
Normal 
Via the View tab or 
the corresponding 
icon on the status 
bar
Numbered slide miniatures appear in a pane to 
the left of the main slide, giving you an overview 
and allowing you to easily move around or delete 
slides. This is the standard view for working on 
slides.
Slide Sorter  
Via the View tab or 
the corresponding 
icon on the status 
bar
This view provides an overview of the entire slide 
deck so you can delete or rearrange slides by 
cutting and pasting or dragging selected slides.
Slide Show 
Via the Slide 
Show tab, the 
corresponding icon 
on the status bar or 
F5/Function F5
This allows you to show your presentation. The 
Slide Show tab contains various options for ways 
to present the show as well as to rehearse the 
timings and record narration.
Presenter View 
Via the Slide Show 
tab (see figures 11.8 
and 11.9)
This option is only available for selection when the 
computer is attached to another monitor or screen 
for presenting. It shows the current slide, the 
notes page, the next slide, your timing and various 
show options, including a laser pointer and 
drawing tool. These allow you to be interactive 
with the slide during the presentation. 
Holding the Shift button down and clicking on the first and last slide in a sequence selects 
all of them. Holding the Control button down allows you to select discrete slides that are not 
next to each other.  

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
309
Figure 11.8  The Slide Show tab with options for viewing the completed presentation and 
rehearsing timing
The timing is 
shown above the 
slide.
Slide show options, 
including the 
laser pointer, are 
displayed here. If 
you click on the 
pointer, you can 
also select various 
pen options. 
Figure 11.9  Presenter View
11.4	 Non-linear presentations
Non-linear presentations in Microsoft® PowerPoint™
One of the drawbacks often cited about Microsoft® PowerPoint™ presentations is 
that they have little flexibility. Once you have begun on a sequence of slides, the 
order is fixed even if the presentation itself takes a different turn. In addition, 
fixed-order, linear presentations preclude spontaneous changes to presentations 
where the agenda is set by the audience as much as the speaker. This is particularly 
relevant for small-group presentations aimed at promoting discussion. This 
drawback can be effectively countered by developing a deck of slides with optional 
routes through individual slides or short sequences of slides.
Rather than having a range of presentations for similar (or even widely 
different) audiences or topics, you can rather build up or create a comprehensive 
deck of slides compiled from all your presentations. If they are not all designed 
using the same template, then the first requirement is to make sure that they are. 
One of the most common presentation errors (and timewasters) is to take slides 
from different presentations and create a new presentation, the problem being that 
it takes time to format the slides to look the same. The chances are that differences 
and inconsistencies will creep in, which in turn make their way into the next 
presentation and the next as slides are re-used and adapted.

Professional Communication
310
Hyperlinks in Microsoft® PowerPoint™
Once you have created a master deck of slides all in the same template, you can 
create hyperlinks to specific slides or groups of slides from your title or contents 
slide, as shown in Figure 11.10. Should a particular question or the need for a 
specific explanation arise, this organisation allows the presenter to go straight to 
a relevant group of slides in response to the enquiry or topic that has arisen.
For each 
presentation a title 
slide or a contents 
slide can be 
created, mapping 
the various topics 
relevant to that 
presentation. 
Each thumbnail 
on this title slide 
is hyperlinked to a 
specific slide or a 
group of slides in 
the main deck of 
slides. Each slide 
will also contain a 
hyperlink back to 
the main slide and/
or to the beginning 
of a section.
Figure 11.10  An example of a title slide showing the hyperlink dashboard
It is not necessary for the hyperlink triggers to be slide thumbnails, but it is 
convenient to do this as a reminder of the slide content. Do the following to create 
slide thumbnails with hyperlinks:
1. 	 Either take a screenshot of the relevant slide you want the hyperlink to lead to, 
or copy the slide in Slide Sorter view. Then use Paste Special to paste it onto 
the title slide as a picture, and then resize and position it in a convenient place. 
2. 	 If the thumbnails look too prominent, apply a faint colour format to the image 
to make it appear semi-transparent. Do the same for all other target slides. 
3. 	 Click on one of the slide miniatures and do the following to insert a hyperlink 
to the relevant place in the presentation:
a. 	 Select the Hyperlink option from the Links section on the Insert tab (or 
press Ctrl+K). This will make the Insert Hyperlink dialog box appear. 
b. 	 Select Place in This Document and scroll through the slides to select the 
slide that you want the hyperlink to lead to, as shown in Figure 11.11.
c. 	 Click OK. 

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
311
The Slide preview 
box indicates the 
content of the 
selected slide.
If a link is no 
longer valid or has 
changed, use the 
Remove Link option.
Select Place in This 
Document to get a 
list of slides in the 
presentation. The 
list also contains 
generic options, 
such as 'First Slide'.
Figure 11.11  The Insert Hyperlink dialog box
Once all the hyperlinks have been set up to the required slides or groups of slides, 
you need to add a hyperlink to each individual slide to enable the presenter to 
link back to the title or contents slide. You can add a hyperlink to any shape or 
item, but a sensible option is to add an invisible rectangle in the same place on 
each slide (for example, the bottom right-hand corner) as a hyperlink. The invisible 
hyperlink can be on top of a logo and will not interfere with any text or graphics 
on the slide). The hyperlink is therefore not obvious to the audience, but is there 
for you to use. Follow these steps: 
1.	 Draw a shape using the Shapes dropdown menu on the Insert tab.
2.	 Size the shape appropriately and position it, for example, in the bottom right-
hand corner of one of the presentation’s content slides.
3.	 Select the pasted shape and format it to have no colour and no outline.
4.	 Select Hyperlink from the Insert tab. 
5.	 In the Insert Hyperlink dialog box, select Place in This Document.
6.	 Choose a specific slide (eg the contents slide) or one of the generic options, for 
example ‘First Slide’.
7.	 Click OK to finalise the hyperlink.
Having set up one of these invisible hyperlinks, copy the hyperlink object and 
paste it onto each slide. This means each slide is now hyperlinked to the primary 
slide which contains a dashboard of links to all the other slides or groups of slides.
Working in this way means that at a moment’s notice you can access almost 
any slide you have ever created. Alternatively, you can set up more than one deck 
of slides and set up a hyperlink to your other decks as well as to slides in the deck 
you are currently in. It takes a short time to open the new presentation via the 
link and you do not have to exit your presentation to find the one you now want. 
This method relies on the decks remaining stored in the same location, but it can 
be very useful for locating a particular set of slides very quickly.

Professional Communication
312
Other non-linear presentation software
There are many alternatives when it comes to presentation software and, as can be 
expected, some are free or have free versions and others carry a cost. Free versions 
of commercial software are usually quite adequate, but the more skilled you 
become at using them, the more likely you are to want to upgrade to a professional 
or business version. 
The most interesting alternatives are perhaps programs such as Prezi (see 
https://prezi.com/) or Focusky (see https://focusky.com), both of which have free 
versions. Essentially, they are like an open, blank canvas on which you can create 
a concept map or poster style presentation. Having created all the presentation 
elements, you can map a pathway through the different areas, zooming in and out 
to go into greater detail. Emphasis and hierarchy are created through size of text 
or images and placement of material. You can also include material to enable you 
to respond to questions in an ad hoc manner without being forced to include the 
material in the initial pathway. They also allow you to have an overview of the 
entire presentation — rather like the Slide Sorter view in Microsoft® PowerPoint™ 
but more interactively, showing links and relative importance.
These programs, with capacity for embedded video, audio and imagery 
like traditional programs, are designed to be more visual and interactive than 
traditional presentation platforms. The presentations can be shared easily online, 
although the offline editing functions in the free versions can be limited. It may 
take a while to become proficient at these programs, but they are definitely worth 
exploring. 
Microsoft has added Zoom for PowerPoint™ (only available through Office 
365 subscriptions at the time of publication of this book) and Microsoft® Sway™ 
to its suite of standard programs. Creating a Zoom allows you to jump to and 
from selected slides, sections, or portions of the presentation as you present, 
so it effectively allows you to choose the order, similar to the dashboard slide 
mentioned above, rather than following a linear route through the presentation. 
Microsoft® Sway™ is an online, digital storytelling app, which can be used to 
create presentations as well as interactive reports, newsletters, personal stories — 
all of which can be shared online by sending a link.

Visuals to support oral messages      Chapter 11
313
✔
Checklist for presenting with visual aids
Presenting is a multifaceted activity. While some presentations may be successful without 
any form of visual support, appropriate and well-planned visuals not only enhance the 
presentation itself but also facilitate both understanding and retention. The visuals, however, 
should be just that: visuals. Too much text on a slide may even be counterproductive. Use 
the following checklist when you prepare visuals for a presentation:
•	 Choose an appropriate title for the presentation.
•	 Try to minimise the amount of text on your slides. Summarise your points with phrases 
rather than whole sentences. Your oral presentation will include the more detailed 
explanations, so there should be no need to put much text on the slides.
•	 Keep charts and graphs simple, without too many elements such as lines, colours and 
textures.
•	 In an audio-visual presentation, show trends rather than detailed data.
•	 Use bright and contrasting colours to help your audience read the text easily. Do not 
use too many colours throughout your presentation; choose two main colours and be 
consistent (you can use shades of those colours if you need more). 
•	 Make sure your lines are thick enough for easy visibility.
•	 Make sure your labels and numbers are legible.
•	 Consider whether there is appropriate lighting and equipment in the venue. For example, 
you do not want too much light on the screen or a poor quality data projector that will 
not be able to reproduce colour definition.

12
314
Foundations: approaching 
the research journey
Taking on a research task, be it for an academic assignment, a marketing report or 
a business proposal, can be a daunting prospect. Yet, we engage in research on a 
daily basis. Before buying a product, we weigh up the pros and cons of different 
options. When going on a holiday, we prepare by reading up about the climate, 
culture and food we can look forward to. We may even search for information 
online about our new employer before we meet him or her in person!
It is therefore clear that going in search of the information we need is, in many 
cases, second nature to us. Ready access to the Internet means that most people 
are able to locate exactly what they need to know more quickly and efficiently 
than has ever been possible. Yet, too often, this haste can lead to research that is 
sloppy, superficial and inadequate. 
The aim of this chapter is to introduce the main elements you will need to master 
to become a confident, competent researcher. To do this, you will consider:
••
the appropriate paradigm and approach for your research
••
locating your research question
••
strategies to promote ethical research
••
referencing and citation.
After studying this chapter, you will be:
••
informed of the theory supporting approaches to research
••
apprised of options for managing your data
••
able to select appropriate and ethical approaches to accessing and recording 
information
••
equipped to integrate literature into your text and be able to cite and 
reference these readings according to your discipline.
12.1	 Research paradigms and approaches
Once you know the research task you need to complete, it can be tempting to dive 
right in. Yet, you would do well to set time aside before you begin to consider the 
approach that you plan to adopt for the task.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
315
Research paradigms 
First, you need to decide which research paradigm is appropriate to your work. A 
paradigm is the particular worldview you bring to a task. In research, this involves 
careful consideration of two factors: ontology and epistemology. Ontology refers 
to your understanding of reality and epistemology refers to how we, as humans, 
can know this reality. These two factors will affect all elements of your research, 
from formulating your research question to the research methods you adopt and 
your research design. 
For example, if a researcher believes that reality is stable and unchanging, he 
or she will believe that it is possible to objectively know this reality. This is known 
as a positivist paradigm, and researchers working in this paradigm adopt methods 
that quantify and measure this reality, such as surveys and questionnaires. On 
the other hand, if a researcher believes that there is no single, stable reality and 
that people only ‘perceive’ the world as working in a particular way, knowledge 
becomes far more subjective. This interpretive paradigm calls on research methods 
such as interviews and focus groups that delve into people’s experiences. Table 
12.1 presents an overview of two of these paradigms.
Table 12.1  Positivist and interpretive paradigms (adapted from Terre Blanche & Durrheim, 
2006: 6–7)
Paradigm
Ontology
Epistemology
Examples of methods
Positivist
There is a stable, 
fixed reality. 
It is possible to know 
this reality. 
•	 Surveys
•	 Questionnaires 
Interpretive
Reality is subjective.
It is possible to know 
people’s interpretations 
of this reality.
•	 Interviews
•	 Ethnographic 
observation 
The research paradigm you adopt will depend on the nature of your task. Research 
in the sciences and the built environment field most often requires a positivist 
paradigm, while humanities fields such as sociology or education often sway 
towards the interpretive. Sometimes you will be guided by your methodologies 
or the nature of the research topic. For example, if you are required to survey 
customers’ product preferences for a report, you are researching for a single 
correct answer, which means your paradigm is positivist. As an advanced student, 
for example at PhD level, you will need to locate the paradigm that makes the 
most sense for your piece of work. This forethought lays the groundwork for a 
well-designed, coherent piece of research. Terre Blanche and Durrheim (2006: 6–7) 
provide a more thorough analysis of the various research paradigms. 

Professional Communication
316
Research approaches
Another element to consider before beginning your research task is whether 
the research approach you adopt will be quantitative, qualitative or a mixed 
approach. 
Quantitative research is characterised by three main qualities (Maree & Pietersen, 
2007: 145): 
1.	 It is objective because it is trying to portray the truth about a situation. For 
example, quantitative research could be used to find out how many students 
at a university use WhatsApp for group projects. 
2.	 It draws on numerical data because its findings are quantifiable. In the 
previous example, a survey could be administered across campus to determine 
the percentages of students who do and do not use WhatsApp for group 
projects. 
3.	 It is generalisable because the findings can be applied to other contexts. 
For example, if 73% of students at a certain university use WhatsApp for 
group projects, this can give us a sense of WhatsApp usage at other similar 
universities too. 
Qualitative research, in contrast, focuses on exploring the ‘why’ questions of 
research (Nieuwenhuis, 2007: 51). Instead of seeking out a single ‘truth’, it looks to 
find ways of explaining the way the world works, or what Nieuwenhuis calls ‘the 
processes and the social and cultural contexts which underlie various behavioural 
patterns’ (2007: 51). This often means learning about how individuals and groups 
perceive the world and make meaning for themselves. To use our previous 
example, a qualitative study on the use of WhatsApp for group projects could 
therefore involve trying to understand the reasons why students do or do not use 
WhatsApp in their projects. Students could be interviewed, with these interviews 
being analysed for deeper meaning. 
Qualitative research differs from quantitative research in that the findings 
are not normally generalisable. Thus, a qualitative study would incorporate 
information about the specific context of the university where the research was 
carried out, meaning that the findings would not necessarily be relevant to other 
universities. 
Figure 12.1 summarises the main qualities of quantitative and qualitative 
research.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
317
Research
Objective
Numerical 
data
Generalisable
Subjective
Draws on text
Context-
specific
Qualitative
Quantitative
Figure 12.1  Qualitative and quantitative research
When determining your own research approach, remember that it can be helpful 
to think of quantitative and qualitative research as two poles on a continuum. 
This means that it is possible to tackle a research task that has both qualitative 
and quantitative elements, although it may lean more towards one approach. For 
example, look at the following research topic:
eg
Graduates today are required to enter the workplace with strong communication skills. How 
confident are the students in your class about their communication skills? Explain and discuss.
For this particular topic, you may decide to develop a questionnaire which you 
administer to all the students in your class, asking them to rank their confidence 
levels from ‘poor’ to ‘very strong’. You may also decide to interview five students to 
obtain a clearer picture of their perspectives. In this scenario, you are drawing on 
both quantitative and qualitative techniques to inform your study. This is known 
as a mixed approach and it can yield rich results for a researcher. 

Professional Communication
318
12.2	 How to locate your research question
Part of producing a focused piece of research is having a strong awareness of the 
research question that underpins your work. All research is guided by a question 
that involves something that you are trying to find out. Sometimes this will be 
quite overt. For example, a research topic could be: 
eg
What are the factors that lead to attrition in the engineering industry in South Africa?
Here, the research question is clearly stated in the topic, giving the researcher a 
strong sense of what must be investigated. 
Other times, the research question may be implied. For example:
eg
Discuss the relationship between matric results and the orientation to learning adopted by 
first-year accounting students.
While this is phrased as a statement (and not a question), the topic is clearly asking 
the researcher to explore a question (Ratele, 2006: 540).
At more advanced levels of research, such as postgraduate studies, you may 
be required to formulate your own research question. This can be challenging, 
given the almost endless possibilities available. Immersing yourself in the current 
literature around your field will be helpful, as this will give you a sense of what 
research already exists and what still needs to be explored further. 
A strong research question is important for several reasons:
••
It can help define the boundaries of your study, giving you a sense of what 
you need to include and what you can leave out. 
••
It can help you decide what research methodologies to adopt, as these will be 
guided by what it is you are trying to find out.
••
Certain research projects can take years to complete, during which time you 
may stray off task. A strong research question can be a directive that pulls 
you back to the initial objectives. 
••
Developing a strong research question at the start of the study can save you 
time (and other resources) later on, as this will keep your study on track.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
319
The following questions will be helpful as you develop your research question:
••
Is my question answerable? For example, a question such as ‘How do all 
South African doctors feel about vaccinations?’ will be impossible to answer, 
as the scope is far too wide.
••
What questions have been asked previously? Valuable research, particularly 
at PhD level, should develop new knowledge. As such, your question should 
not simply replicate those that have come before. 
••
How is my research question phrased? A question such as ‘Does religion 
influence career choice?’ requires a yes/no answer. A question such as 
‘In what way can religion influence career choice?’ is open-ended and 
leaves scope for more in-depth responses. The former is better suited to 
a quantitative approach, while the latter is better suited to a qualitative 
approach.
••
Is my research question theoretically rich? Jansen (2007: 4) compares a 
good research question to an onion. Just as a peeled onion reveals more 
layers as you go deeper, so too a good research question should create space 
for the emergence of other interesting research questions.
••
Is my question easy to understand? While your research study may deal 
with complex concepts and ideas, your research question should be clear and 
concise. This is especially important, as it will guide your study throughout 
the research process. A complex research question could obfuscate your 
process.
Once you have developed your research question, consider sharing it with respected 
peers, colleagues or, if you are undertaking postgraduate studies, your supervisors. 
Their feedback can help you assess whether your question adequately encompasses 
the full scope of the issue and whether your findings will be a valuable addition 
to the body of knowledge in your field. Remember, your research question might 
change over the course of your studies as your understanding of an issue evolves. 
This is perfectly acceptable since research, by its nature, is dynamic. Nevertheless, 
taking time at the start of your study to articulate a strong research question is one 
of the most valuable tasks you can undertake as you begin your research journey. 
See pages 374–376 in Chapter 14 for detailed information on writing research 
questions and hypotheses.
12.3	 Research ethics
Another issue you will need to consider before starting your research is whether 
the task that you are undertaking is based on ethically sound principles. This is 
most obvious when research involves human participants, particularly those who 
are vulnerable to exploitation, such as children. However, it is also a consideration 
in other fields such as medicine, science and engineering. 

Professional Communication
320
Research ethics often yield issues that are not clear-cut. One example of this is 
animal testing. Another is research involving the study of people without their 
knowledge. The researcher often has to weigh up issues of transparency and 
integrity versus the greater good that the research findings could lead to. 
For this reason, many institutions such as universities have strong procedures 
in place to manage the research that is undertaken. This entails getting ethical 
clearance from university and/or faculty ethics committees before starting your 
research project. To do so, you will need to indicate that you have taken ethical 
issues into consideration and developed appropriate strategies to deal with these. 
Wassenaar (2006: 67–68) highlights four widely accepted philosophical principles 
that you will need to consider to determine whether your research is ethical:
••
Autonomy and respect for the dignity of persons: This relates to your 
study participants, for example interviewees. It could also relate to people 
with whom you are working on joint projects, for example in a laboratory 
setting.
••
Non-maleficence: This refers to inflicting the least harm possible in order to 
fulfil the aims of your research. 
••
Beneficence: This refers to action done for the benefit of others. What is the 
potential benefit of your research and how does this weigh up against the 
potential risks thereof?
••
Justice: You should treat research participants with fairness and equity 
throughout the research process.
Once you have built these principles into your research, you will also need to 
consider whether your research findings are valid. Threats to validity, according to 
Maxwell (2013: 123), are answers to the question ‘How might I be wrong?’ These 
relate to ethics because they have to do with how your identity as a researcher 
could impact your research findings. The following are some potential threats to 
your research validity:
••
Insider research relates to how you are located in relation to your research. 
Some people believe that if your research setting is an area you are very 
familiar with, you are unable to study it in an objective way. For example, 
if you are a nursing student researching how patients respond during the 
admission process, you may take certain things for granted and let your own 
anecdotal experience from working with patients overtake your research 
findings. 
••
Reactivity refers to how you, as researcher, could influence the setting or 
individuals studied (Maxwell, 2013: 124). Particularly in the social sciences, 
it relates to whether you can be sure that your interviewees will answer 
your questions openly and honestly. If you are observing a staff meeting in 
order to research effective corporate practices, can you be sure that the staff 
members are behaving as they usually do?

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
321
••
Researcher bias entails any prior beliefs, values and perspectives that you 
bring to the research that you are undertaking. It can be challenging to shed 
your personal frames of reference, but as a researcher you will constantly be 
enacting bias, from the topic that you choose to focus on to the sources that 
you choose to include or leave out. 
••
Lack of response variability can be an issue in spaces where you are 
conducting research with groups, such as focus group interviews. Some 
participants may be reluctant to share personal experiences or ideologies, 
while others may overpower the group. How will you ensure that you 
obtain a variety of inputs from different participants, which will lead to rich 
research?
While these validity threats may be challenging, there are strategies that can be 
implemented to support the four principles of ethical research mentioned above. 
These include:
••
Triangulation: Use two (or more) sources to ensure that your findings are 
consistent. For example, check that your observations of how students 
behave in academic libraries match up to how they describe their own 
behaviour in interviews and how the literature says they behave. 
••
Informed consent: Ensure that you have participants’ consent to be 
involved in your research. Be sure to draw up a consent form that outlines 
the background to your study, the goals thereof and the extent of the 
participants’ involvement. Always keep this for your records. Participation in 
your study should always be voluntary.
••
Confidentiality: Always take active measures to protect the confidentiality 
of your participants. Where appropriate, use pseudonyms when writing up 
your results and, if necessary, also change the name of study locations and 
institutions. Video or audio recordings should be destroyed once the research 
is complete. 
••
Member-checking: You can test emerging theories and results with your 
study participants to ensure that you are adequately representing their 
contributions. This can be done during the research process to ensure the 
integrity of your work. 
••
Researcher reflexivity: This entails a thorough exploration of your own 
researcher identity. What prior beliefs are you bringing to the study? How 
might your ideology, status and/or experiences affect the way you interpret 
your data? For example, how might a psychology student’s research on 
family structure be affected if that student is an only child, is strongly anti-
monogamy or has religious beliefs that prohibit divorce? Researchers need to 
acknowledge their own identity in order to understand how this could impact 
their research and how to build ways to deal with this into their research 
design. 

Professional Communication
322
12.4	 Referencing and citation
Acknowledging the work of those who have come before you is a cornerstone 
of research, whether you are writing in the academic or professional sphere. The 
concept of ‘standing on the shoulders of giants’ is relevant here, as it refers to 
the idea of building new knowledge on the foundations of what has come before. 
Plagiarism is often cited as the main reason why it is necessary to reference 
the work you cite in your research. Plagiarism is when you pass off the work of 
others as your own. This can range from submitting essays downloaded from 
the Internet as your own to using an idea that you read about in a book without 
acknowledging it. There are severe consequences for plagiarism, including loss of 
reputation and, in some cases, expulsion from university or loss of employment. 
However, while the consequences of plagiarism serve as a warning, it is also 
possible to view referencing from a more positive perspective. Referencing the 
ideas of another author connects you to a global, dynamic body of knowledge 
that is constantly evolving. When researchers use other researchers’ ideas in their 
work, they are building on what has gone before to create something new. At the 
same time, those researchers are laying the platform for others to do the same with 
their work, and so on. 
There are a number of reasons why someone may neglect to reference, 
beyond deliberately stealing another person’s ideas. Referencing is seen as time-
consuming and tedious, taking precious research time away from the actual task 
at hand. Also, referencing can seem overwhelming and difficult, and researchers 
may refrain from doing it because they do not know how to. However, once the 
principle of referencing is understood, it is straightforward.
Basics of referencing
No matter which referencing system you are using, referencing consists of two 
main aspects: in-text citation and a reference list, as shown in Figure 12.2.
Referencing
In-text citation
Reference list
Figure 12.2  The two aspects of referencing

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
323
In-text citations are the references to where you located an idea, concept or quote 
that you are using within the text itself. For example, you could find the following 
paragraph within an essay on team dynamics:
eg
However, team dynamics can also be understood as heavily influenced by the effects of 
context (Chansa, 2016). This includes geographic context, meeting site, demographics of the 
company and material resources at the disposal of the group leader …
Here, you know that the researcher has used Chansa’s idea, written in 2016, about 
team dynamics.
A reference list appears at the end of the study and includes full details about 
all of the sources that you have referenced within your essay. Thus, in the example 
above, the reference list would provide more details about the publication in which 
Chansa’s idea was found. Below is the reference list entry for the book by Chansa:
eg
Chansa, Z. 2016. Team dynamics in practice. Cape Town: Corporation Press.
The purpose of a reference list is that another reader should be able to easily locate 
all the sources that you have used. 
A bibliography is not usually essential for research reports. It is similar to a 
reference list in that it provides the details of sources, but it differs in that it can 
include any sources you used in your research, not only those that you cite directly 
in your study. It can thus be useful if you want to show the full scope of your 
research or provide a supplementary reading list.
In-text citations and a reference list are standard when referencing. However, 
there are a number of different referencing systems that exist. While each system 
may differ in format, the principles of referencing remain the same. Referencing 
systems are categorised into two main sets: author—date methods and number 
methods. 
Author–date methods
Author–date methods of referencing include the Harvard system, the Modern 
Language Association (MLA) and the American Psychological Association (APA) 
system. They are so named because when you reference a source within the 
text, you include the name of the author and the date in which the source was 
published. When you have used a direct quote or an idea from a specific page, you 
also include a page reference. This method is used in this book.

Professional Communication
324
The following examples provide a guide of how to apply the Harvard system of 
referencing. Remember, each system has developed correct ways of referencing all 
kinds of sources, including telephone conversations, YouTube videos and blogs. 
The following examples are not exhaustive, but should serve as a guide. 
In-text citations
When the author’s name forms part of the sentence, only include the year and page 
number (if relevant) in brackets in the text.
eg
Nene (2013: 12) is a strong proponent of the concept of discourse as language-in-use.
When the author’s name is not part of the sentence, it should appear within the 
brackets. 
eg
One way to understand discourse is as language-in-use (Nene, 2013: 12).
When there is more than one author, the first time you cite the reference you 
should refer to all the authors. Thereafter, you can use ‘et al’ after the first author’s 
name. 
eg
It is therefore evident that matric scores for South African students are directly linked to 
early childhood development initiatives (Pieterse, Lameez & Newton, 2011). This can be 
understood as a ‘step forward for educational planning’ (Pieterse et al, 2011: 44).
The reference list
In the Harvard system, the reference list is arranged alphabetically. The following 
section provides some common methods for referencing different kinds of sources 
in your reference list (and in-text citations). Note aspects such as the use of 
italics and punctuation. These vary according to the different systems you may 
be required to use. See Chapter 8 for the inclusion of a reference list in a report.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
325
A guide to referencing different types of sources
Referencing books
When referencing a book, you need to include the author’s initials and surname, 
the year of publication, the title of the book, the name of the publisher and the 
place where the book was published. 
A book with a single author:
eg
Smith, A. 2016. Engineering tomorrow: An industry in transition. Cape Town: Capitol 
Publishing. 
A book with more than one author:
eg
Dinler, H, Behr, L & Dlamini, K. 2015. Watershed moments. Pretoria: Harfeld Press.
A later edition of a book:
eg
Mboweni, Z. 2009. Healing hands: Tertiary health education. 3rd ed. London: Exactfile.
Referencing a chapter or section in a book
Note the inclusion of the page numbers of the chapter or section: 
eg
Terre Blanche, M, Durrheim, K & Kelly, K. ‘First steps in qualitative data analysis’, in Research 
in practice: Applied methods for the social sciences, edited by M Terre Blanche, K Durrheim 
& D Painter. Cape Town: University of Cape Town Press: 320–344. 
Referencing a journal article 
When referencing a journal article, you need to include the title of the journal 
article, the name of the journal in which it appears, the year of publication, the 
authors’ names and the page numbers. Where relevant, you must also include the 
volume and issue of the journal. 

Professional Communication
326
eg
Ni, X, Wong, ZJ, Mrejen, M, Wang, Y & Zhang, X. 2015. ‘An ultrathin invisibility cloak for 
visible light’. Science 349(4): 1310–1314. 
Referencing a website
When referencing an online source, include the author (if known), the date on 
which the document was created, the title, the URL and the date on which you 
accessed the page. 
eg
Botes, P. 2016. Shooting the struggle. Mail & Guardian. Available: http://mg.co.za/
article/2016-07-04-shooting-the-struggle. (Accessed 9 July 2016). 
Referencing personal communication
Personal communication includes private emails, letters, interviews and telephone 
conversations. When referencing these, only use in-text citation. Do not include 
any entry on the reference list. The in-text entry should include the author, year, 
format, day and month of the communication. 
eg
Strong oral communication skills emerged as the most important focus for employers when 
choosing a candidate (P Naidoo 2016, personal communication, 23 August).
OR
In an interview conducted on 23 August 2016, Paul Naidoo explained that strong oral 
communication skills were the most important focus for employers when choosing a candidate.
Referencing a secondary source
Sometimes authors refer to another author’s work in their writing. Ideally, you 
should track down this original source if you wish to use it in your research, but if 
you are unable to do so, only include the source you did read in your reference list. 
In-text, the words ‘cited in’ indicate that you are referring to a secondary source. 
eg
Of the students at Klipford College, 86% use their cellphones for research purposes  
(Sithole, cited in Mahlangu, 2015). 

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
327
In the reference list, include the full reference for both the authors citing 
Mahlangu’s publication and then write ‘cited in’ Sithole – and give the full details 
for this work. 
Number methods
Number methods of referencing include the Vancouver system, the American 
Institute of Physics (AIP) system and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) system. According to these systems, in-text citations are signalled 
by a number (either in brackets or superscripted). These either refer to a numbered 
note at the bottom of the page or a numbered reference list at the end of the text. 
The following examples are of the IEEE system. Again, remember that the precise 
formatting will change depending on which system you are utilising. 
In-text citations
When you refer to a source in-text, the number signalling the citation may either 
be located within the sentence or at the end of the sentence. 
eg
Perhaps this is a result of another benefit of insider research: that of increased credibility 
and rapport with research participants [1]. Furthermore, logistically, insider research is often 
more practical [2] in that it is cheaper and easier.
The reference list
According to the IEEE system (and other number methods of referencing), the 
reference list is organised according to the chronological appearance of sources 
within your work. Thus, the reference list for the above example would look like this:
eg
[1] J Mercer. ‘The challenges of insider research in educational institutions: wielding a 
double-edged sword and resolving delicate dilemmas’. Oxford Review of Education, vol 33, 
no 1, p 7, 2007.
[2] P Trowler. ‘Researching your own institution: higher education’. British Educational 
Research Association online resource. Available: http://bera.dialsolutions.net/system/
files/Researching%20your%20own%20institution%20Higher%20Education_0.pdf 2011. 
(Accessed 28 May 2014).

Professional Communication
328
Some footnote systems will require you to have a bibliography at the end of your 
text that lists all the sources that you have used. These should be organised into 
categories of different kinds of materials, for example books, articles, cases (for 
legal writing), Internet sources and newspaper articles. Within these categories, 
sources should be listed alphabetically. 
A guide to referencing different types of sources
Referencing books
A book with a single author:
eg
[1] R Soulsby, Dynamics of marine sands: a manual for practical applications. London: 
Thomas Telford, 1997.
A book with more than one editor:
eg
[2] WF Chen & L Duan, eds. Bridge Engineering Handbook: Construction and Maintenance. 
Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2014. 
A later edition of a book:
eg
[3] JP Gee. Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. 3rd ed. London: 
Routledge, 2008.
Referencing a chapter or section in a book
eg
[4] J Garraway, ‘Higher education and the world of work’ in Higher education in South 
Africa: A scholarly look behind the scenes, E Bitzer, ed. Stellenbosch: SUN Media, pp. 
229–254, 2009.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
329
Referencing a journal article 
Note the abbreviated journal title:
eg
[5] M Kipping and I Kirkpartrick, ‘Alternative pathways of change in professional services 
firms: The case for management consulting, JMS, vol 50, no 5, pp 777–807, 2013.
Referencing a website
eg
[6] K Kruger. ‘South Africa leads the way in mobile health services which will change 
healthcare.’ Available: http://www.engineeringnews.co.za/article/south-africa-leads-the-
way-in-mobile-health-services-which-will-change-healthcare-2012-03-14-1, 2012. 
(Accessed 11 July 2016).
Footnote styles
If you are using a system that uses footnotes, for example the South African Law 
Journal house style or the Chicago citation style, the footnote number should 
always be inserted after the punctuation in the text.
eg
Current discourses on graduates’ employability focus on how higher education prepares 
them for the labour market.1
This number will relate to the details of the source from which you have drawn 
your information, which can be found at the bottom of the page. The first time 
you cite a source, include a full citation. 
eg
1.	
Michael Tomlinson ‘Graduate employability: a review of conceptual and empirical 
themes’ (2012) 25 Higher Education Policy 408.
If you refer to the same source again, you need to use Latin abbreviations to refer 
to previous references. Explanations and examples of three of these can be found 
in Table 12.2.

Professional Communication
330
Table 12.2  Latin abbreviations in footnote referencing
Abbreviation
Use
Example
ibid
(in the same 
place)
This indicates the same 
source as the footnote 
immediately above. 
Include page numbers 
if these are different.
1.	
Benjamin Sulcas Discourse in practice in 
higher education (2006) 115.
2.	
Ibid.
3.	
Ibid at 120.
loc cit
(in the place 
cited)
This indicates a source 
and page number 
already used, but not 
immediately above.
1.	
Gloria Dall’Alba ‘Learning professional 
ways of being: ambiguities of becoming’ 
(2009) 41 Educational Philosophy and 
Theory 36.
2.	
Roy Bhaskar A realist theory of science 
(1975) 146.
3.	
Dall’Alba, loc cit.
op cit
(in the work 
cited)
This indicates a 
different page 
number of a source 
already used, but not 
immediately above.
1.	
Gloria Dall’Alba ‘Learning professional 
ways of being: ambiguities of becoming’ 
(2009) 41 Educational Philosophy and 
Theory 36.
2.	
Roy Bhaskar A realist theory of science 
(1975) 146.
3.	
Dall’Alba, op cit, 45.
Online referencing tools
Many resources online can help you master referencing, including extensive style 
guides that will provide you with the correct formatting for referencing even the 
most obscure types of sources. In addition, Google Scholar (see www.scholar.
google.com) has a ‘cite’ function that shows you how to reference each source in 
its database according to a variety of different systems, including MLA, APA and 
Harvard. 
However, as a savvy researcher, you would do well to acquaint yourself with 
one of the numerous online referencing tools that currently exist, including Zotero 
(see Figure 12.3), Mendeley, Refworks and EndNote. These programs provide 
innovative ways to manage your references. While they differ in specifics, each 
offers most (if not all) of the following functions: 
••
collecting sources directly from your web browser with a single click
••
gathering your sources in a single, searchable interface
••
organising your sources into collections and sub-collections
••
tagging your sources for easy searches
••
creating citations simply in Microsoft® Word™ via a plugin (See Figure 12.3)
••
formatting according to any referencing style 
••
creating reference lists instantly
••
synching across various devices.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
331
The Zotero plugin 
allows you to input 
in-text citations 
while working 
and to create a 
reference list. 
Figure 12.3  The Zotero plugin for Microsoft® Word™ 
These online referencing tools are free and fairly intuitive to use. Each site provides 
comprehensive support in the form of guides, tutorial videos and discussion 
forums where you can post specific queries. Visit the following sites to learn more 
about these tools: 
••
Zotero: http://www.zotero.org
••
Mendeley: http://www.mendeley.com
••
Refworks: http://www.refworks.com
••
EndNote: http://www.endnote.com
In addition to these online tools, Microsoft® Word™ has an in-built referencing 
function. See Chapter 2 for more information on this. 
12.5	 Integrating sources into your work
Once you have located an idea, quote or concept in a source that you wish to use in 
your research, you have two options. You can either quote or paraphrase the author. 
Quotes
Consider the following extract:
eg
Case’s definition of a profession as ‘a distinct body of individuals who take charge of a 
particular domain of knowledge for the purposes of practice in society’ (2013: 75) locates 
the emergence of engineering as a profession around the time of the industrial revolution.

Professional Communication
332
In the example above, notice how the quotation has been integrated into the flow 
of the text. Do not let quotes stand alone with no introduction. Also, note that for 
direct quotes the citation must include a page number, as in the example above. 
If it is a longer quotation (normally 40 or more words), it should be indented to 
stand out clearly from the rest of the text.
Only use direct quotations when you are certain that there is no way to 
adequately express the author’s idea in your own words. If you do use direct 
quotations in your writing, do so very sparingly. 
Paraphrasing
Paraphrasing consists of finding your own way to express an idea from a source 
that you are using in your research. This can be challenging when it feels 
impossible to state something more effectively than the original author. 
When paraphrasing, it is not sufficient to simply change a few words of the 
original. Rather, find a way to encompass the whole idea the author has presented. 
The best way to do this is by breaking away from the original source. Once you 
have read the source and located an idea you wish to use in your work, close the 
book or put away the journal article and write down how you understand the idea. 
Check to see whether this corresponds to the original idea. You may need to refine 
this to ensure clear expression. 
Look at the following extract from a journal article. Note that this extract is from 
page 551 of an article written in 2013 by an author called L Holmes:
eg
By opening up, rather than closing down, the analysis, we can see that the employability-
as-possession approach to graduate employability has major flaws. One alternative, that 
is based on notions of social positioning, provides little clear and positive guidance on 
how we might intervene at the level of the curriculum. The third, the processual approach, 
particularly in terms of identity project, it has been argued, avoids the problems with the 
other two approaches.
The following is an illegitimate paraphrase of the source content given above:
eg
By broadening the analysis, we can see that the employability-as-possession approach 
to graduate employability has many issues. One alternative, based on ideas of social 
positioning, does not provide clear and positive guidance of how to intervene in the 
curriculum. The third, the processual approach, particularly in terms of identity project, 
avoids the problems with the other two approaches.

Foundations: approaching the research journey      Chapter 12
333
In this example, the author has simply substituted certain words from the original. 
Also, the author has not provided any in-text referencing. 
The following is an example of a legitimate paraphrase:
eg
Of the three approaches to graduate employability, the processual approach, which relates to 
identity development, is the most effective. Both graduate employability as possession and 
as positioning are problematic (Holmes, 2013: 551).
Here, the author has reworked the concept from the original example into his or 
her own words. The author has also included an in-text citation. Note the page 
number which is included, as it is a reference to a particular idea. 
See Chapter 1 for more information on good discourse and writing style.
✔
Checklist for the savvy researcher
The research journey begins long before the researcher enters the field and begins to collect 
data. Strategies need to be developed and plans put in place in order to ensure that the 
research will be of high quality. This involves careful decisions around paradigm, approach, 
research question and ethics and validity. In addition, you will save time by referencing from 
the very start of the project. Use the following checklist to guide you as you undertake your 
research task:
•	 Select an appropriate research paradigm and approach.
•	 Formulate a well-articulated research question.
•	 Consider the ethical implications of the study and develop a strategy to address these.
•	 Implement a referencing system which includes, where appropriate, using an online 
referencing tool.

13
334
Working with data and  
research methodologies
Whether you are working on a feasibility study, newspaper article or academic 
thesis, your research project will require you to use external sources as part of your 
information gathering. The data that you use will come from two kinds of sources: 
1.	 Primary sources provide direct, first-hand evidence about your object of study. 
They are original documents and objects. These would include interviews, 
experimental results, speeches, historical and legal documents, statistical data, 
emails, fieldwork and surveys. 
2.	 Secondary sources discuss data that was originally presented elsewhere. This 
always involves some level of interpretation of the data. Some examples of 
secondary sources are newspaper and magazine articles, scholarly journal 
articles and textbooks. 
Books can be considered primary or secondary sources, depending on their 
content. An autobiography is a primary source, as it presents a first-hand account. 
A history book dealing with a particular subject, however, is a secondary source, 
as it synthesises different data sources and incorporates the author’s interpretation.
This chapter provides an overview of how to use sources to strengthen your 
research. It does so by describing:
••
strategies to locate data sources
••
quantitative and qualitative research methodologies
••
techniques for data analysis
••
research presentation.
Once you have read this chapter, you will be able to:
••
find appropriate sources of data that you can use in your literature review
••
design your qualitative and/or quantitative research strategy
••
analyse any data you generate
••
deliver your research in a document or presentation.

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
335
13.1	 How to locate sources
If your research project requires you to complete a literature review, your initial 
groundwork will consist of locating appropriate sources. With the Internet enabling 
unfettered access to a mass of information at any time, it becomes more and more 
important to base your research on sources that are credible. This entails knowing 
where to search and how to search. Both aspects are covered in this section. 
Libraries 
While much research, both academic and professional, is moving into a virtual 
space, it is still a good idea to begin your research journey at a library. Many 
libraries have access to the most recent books and journals, as well as up-to-date 
technology that can aid your literature search. In addition, reference librarians are 
specially trained to help you locate relevant sources that will help your research. 
Some libraries even have specialist librarians for different areas of study.
Most academic libraries will have access to services such as online library 
catalogues and electronic journal databases (described in the following sections) 
that you can draw on when locating sources.
Online library catalogues 
The online library catalogue can be used to browse through all the material 
(including books, DVDs, theses and journals) the library has available or to look 
for a specific source. 
When doing a general search to locate sources on a topic, you can do a 
keyword search of the whole catalogue. This will return a list of sources that 
contain your keyword(s). Use the Boolean operators (AND, OR and NOT) to aid 
your online search, as illustrated in Table 13.1.
Table 13.1  The Boolean operators
Operator
Function
Example
AND
Narrows the search
A search for ‘dogs AND cats’ will return any sources 
with the word ‘dogs’ and the word ‘cats’ as keywords.
OR
Widens the search
A search for ‘dogs OR cats’ will return any sources 
with either ‘dogs’ or ‘cats’ as keywords.
NOT
Excludes terms from 
the search
A search for ‘dogs NOT collies’ will return sources 
with the keyword ‘dogs’, but not those that have 
‘collies’ as a keyword.

Professional Communication
336
You can combine the Boolean operators in various ways as needed. For example, 
the search ‘(Dogs AND Cats) NOT (Collies or Siamese)’ can deliver a more targeted 
search.
If, after using keywords and the Boolean operators, your search still produces 
an overwhelming number of results, consider using the ‘advanced search’ function 
to limit the results to the most recent publications only or to those that relate to a 
particular field, such as the humanities or the built environment.
Alternatively, you can use a source’s title and/or author to locate the specific 
source on an alphabetically organised list of all available sources. Here, you would 
search using the title and/or author. This method will be ideal if you already know 
the sources you need to locate from a reading list or a bibliography. If the source is 
already out on loan, many libraries offer a service whereby you can use the online 
catalogue to request that it be returned promptly. 
Electronic journal databases
The benefit of using journal articles in your research is that you know that the 
research will be up to date. Also, because journals are reviewed by academic 
experts before being published, you can be sure that the source will be valid. If you 
know that you need to access journal articles for your research, utilise electronic 
journal databases to locate general sources or to search for a specific source. There 
are various online databases that cater for different research areas, for example: 
••
Engineering Village: engineering
••
LexisNexis: law
••
PubMed: biomedical
••
JSTOR: multidisciplinary
••
EBSCOhost: multidisciplinary
A number of these databases are subscription-based. This means that you must 
access them via an institution, such as a university, that has a subscription 
agreement with the database. In this case, you would need to either use a computer 
in the library, or access the database after logging on to the library’s website. 
Databases may differ in the level of results that they yield. Some provide the 
citations of relevant journal articles, which you can then use to search your own 
library. Others provide abstracts or summaries of the articles, which can provide 
you with more information about the article before you decide whether you want 
to search for the full version. Finally, there are some databases that provide the 
full text versions of articles. You are then able to print or download the articles 
as you need them. 
The Internet
Inevitably, you will use the Internet in the course of your research project. 
Consisting of billions of pages, the Internet is an incredible source of data. This 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
337
does, however, mean that during your search you will encounter a lot of content 
that is irrelevant, invalid or of questionable integrity. Targeted, purposeful use of 
the Internet will ensure that you are able to find credible sources that aid your 
research. There are various ways of searching the Internet. Some are discussed in 
the following sections. 
Search engines
Most people access the Internet via search engines such as Google, Yahoo, Bing, 
AOL or ask.com. A search engine is a software system that allows you to search 
the World Wide Web (WWW) using keywords that you generate. The search engine 
works in three basic stages: 
1.	 Web crawling: Sites on the Internet are visited by an automated spider or 
robot.
2.	 Indexing: The content is analysed and placed in a huge database.
3.	 Retrieval: The search engine returns a list of sites related to your search.  
There are a number of strategies that you can implement in order to increase the 
relevancy of the sites that the search engines yield:
••
Choose keywords carefully. Remember, the search engine will yield sites that 
contain the words you search for. Therefore, use keywords that would appear 
on the pages you want. Also, be specific. A search such as ‘jobs South 
Africa’ will yield far more irrelevant results than ‘marketing jobs Cape Town’.
••
Use Boolean operators. Boolean operators (see Table 13.1 on page 335) can 
also aid your web search by specifying the bounds of your search.
••
Use double quotation marks when searching for an exact phrase. For 
example, the search “a rolling stone gathers no moss” will return pages with 
these exact words in this order.
••
Limit the date. Many search engines will allow you to limit your search 
according to when the website was created.
••
Use the ‘advanced search’ feature. Most search engines offer an advanced 
search feature that allows you to specify factors such as country of origin, 
date of publication and the type of document you are searching for. 
••
Get to know your search engine well. Search engines differ in terms of 
their specific tools. It is therefore worthwhile to get to know the one you use 
regularly, including shortcuts, so that you can maximise your searches.
••
Use a different search engine. Search engines employ different algorithms. 
As such, the same search may yield different sites on different search 
engines. If you are struggling to locate the sites you need, consider using an 
alternative search engine. 

Professional Communication
338
Google Scholar (see Figure 13.1) is a particularly useful search engine for academic 
research, as it indexes the full text or abstracts/summaries of scholarly literature 
such as journal articles, books, theses and conference presentations. You can browse 
articles according to key words (using the strategies explained earlier to focus your 
search) and arrange the results according to year or relevance. Google Scholar also 
allows you to create a library as you work, where you can save search results to read 
or cite later. You can access Google Scholar at www.scholar.google.com.
Figure 13.1  The Google Scholar home page
Directories
Web directories differ from search engines because they are compiled by human 
beings, not robots. This means that while a search on a directory will yield fewer 
sites, these will be more relevant. On a directory, sites are organised hierarchically 
by categories and subcategories and the user navigates through these in order to 
locate the topic area. Most directories are general in scope, but some are more 
specific. Some examples of comprehensive directories are the Open Directory 
Project (www.dmoz.org), the WWW Virtual Library (www.vlib.org) and the Best of 
the Web Directory (www.botw.org).
Other ways to search the Internet
The following are some additional tools you can use for Internet searches:
••
Gateways and subject databases: These consist of collections of sites 
and databases, arranged by subject, which are organised, maintained and 
evaluated by specialists. Some examples are Chemdex (www.chemdex.org), 
which focuses on chemistry; Zunia (www.zunia.org), which focuses on social 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
339
development; and TechXtra (www.techxtra.tradepub.com), which focuses on 
engineering, computing and mathematics.
••
‘Invisible web’ searches: Standard search engines and directories are only 
able to search the limited amount of the content on the Internet that has 
been catalogued. The rest of the content is known as the ‘invisible web’ and 
is by far the largest component of the Internet. The content on these sites 
may contain information that is valuable for your study. Several tools have 
been developed to help you access the invisible web. These include Find 
Articles (www.findarticles.com), the Directory of Open Access Journals  
(www.doaj.org) and the OAIster Database (www.oclc.org/oaister.en.html). 
••
Real-time searches: This is the concept of searching for and finding 
information online as soon as it is produced. This allows you to stay abreast 
of the most current information available. One way of doing a real-time 
search is by using the search function on social media sites such as Twitter 
or Instagram. Another way is to use a social media search engine such  
as Social Searcher (www.social-searcher.com) or Social Mention  
(www.socialmention.com). These allow you to search across various social 
media sites. 
13.2	 Research methodologies
When your research project requires you to generate your own data, you will need 
to employ quantitative, qualitative or mixed methodologies in order to do so.  
(See Chapter 12 for more about these approaches to research.) 
Sampling
Whichever approach you choose for your research, you will need to determine the 
size and composition of your sample. This refers to the portion of a population 
that you choose to use in order to generate your data. There are various techniques 
one can use for sampling. 
Probability sampling 
These techniques rely on random selection, meaning that different subsets of the 
population have an equal chance of being selected for the study. This means that 
the sample is more representative and the findings are generalisable over a wide 
group. Some methods of probability sampling are shown in Figure 13.2.

Professional Communication
340
Cluster sampling: 
The population is divided 
into clusters, often based on 
geography. A sample of these 
clusters is then randomly selected 
and used for the study. 
Stratified random sampling: 
The population is divided into 
subgroups (for example, by age or 
race) and then a sample  
is randomly selected from  
each group.
Simple random sampling: 
The sample is selected from the 
whole population completely at 
random, often electronically. 
Figure 13.2  Methods of probability sampling 
Non-probability sampling 
This refers to the purposeful, non-random choosing of particular subjects for the study. 
There are various methods of non-probability sampling, as shown in Figure 13.3. 
Quota sampling: 
This is when a specific number of subjects 
from particular subgroups are required 
for a study. For example, a study into 
attitudes towards student housing could 
consist of 250 males and 250 females.
Purposive sampling: 
Particular subjects are recruited 
and selected for the study. For 
example, a purposive sample 
could consist of unemployed 
engineers under the age of 25.
Convenience sampling: 
Subjects are selected for the 
study because they are accessible 
and easy to reach. 
Figure 13.3  Methods of non-probability sampling

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
341
The size of the sample that you use in your research will differ depending on 
the nature of the task. For example, quantitative research often relies on large 
samples because of the requirement that the findings be generalisable across other 
contexts. Contrastingly, in qualitative research, with its focus on understanding 
in context, there is often a stronger emphasis on a well-selected sample than on 
attaining a large sample size. In fact, some qualitative research only focuses on 
one subject, for example an in-depth, ethnographic study of a particular school.
Quantitative methodologies
Once you have decided on your approach to the research, your next decision will 
be what methodologies to implement in order to gather your data. In the natural 
sciences, quantitative research methodologies involve empirical investigation or 
the observing and recording of natural phenomena. In the social sciences, on 
the other hand, this usually involves surveying a target population for factual 
information, experiences, opinions or behaviour, depending on the purpose of the 
research. 
There are different ways of going about carrying out a survey. Two of these 
are questionnaires and interviews. Your decision about which data gathering tool 
to use will be based on a number of factors:
••
What financial resources do you have to carry out the study? Questionnaires 
are cheaper to administer than face-to-face interviews. 
••
How big is your required sample size? It may not be feasible to interview 
hundreds of subjects.
••
Is your sample literate? This will affect whether you can use a written 
survey.
••
Can you guarantee that your sample will read, complete and return a 
written survey? ‘Survey fatigue’ means that people often ignore requests to 
complete yet another form. 
••
Is the sample geographically dispersed? If so, it could be difficult to carry 
out face-to-face interviews.
Constructing your survey
Once you have decided whether you wish to utilise a questionnaire or an interview 
to gather your quantitative data, it is necessary to design your survey carefully. 
You may choose to use closed questions or open questions in your survey. 
Closed questions prescribe the range of possible responses. Below are some 
examples of closed questions:
••
Dichotomous question: This is a question that has only two possible 
responses. These may be Yes/No, Agree/Disagree or True/False. For example: 

Professional Communication
342
eg
It is a woman’s responsibility to arrange childcare. Agree/Disagree?
••
Multiple-choice question: The respondent is asked to choose a response from 
a number of possible options. 
eg
What is your role within the factory?
A.	
Worker
B.	
Shop steward
C.	
Manager
D.	
None of the above
••
Likert scale: The respondent must choose a response out of possible 
responses spanning a five-point scale. 
eg
The course has shifted your perception of what it means to be a professional.
Strongly 
disagree
Disagree
Neutral
Agree
Strongly  
agree
••
Filter questions: These can filter out some of your respondents so as to 
direct them to a particular subsequent question. 
eg
Do you have a master’s degree?  Yes/No
If yes, please indicate the faculty in which this was achieved.
A.	
Humanities
B.	
Law
C.	
Engineering 
D.	
Business

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
343
Open questions leave space for a variety of answers from respondents. 
eg
Describe one skill you have learnt as part of the soft skills workshops.
Please complete the following sentence in your own words: An effective engineer…..
Open questions afford a level of personal engagement and depth of response that 
is not possible with closed questions. However, bear in mind that these may lead 
to difficulties at the data analysis stage, as they require complex coding. 
Questionnaires
If you choose to administer your survey via a questionnaire, there are a number 
of guidelines to adhere to with regard to its design: 
••
Pay attention to the appearance of the questionnaire. A messy, hard-to-read 
and poorly laid-out questionnaire will lower the response rate. Ensure that 
there is plenty of space for questions and answers and that the font is large 
enough to read easily. 
••
Instructions should be simple and clear to avoid ambiguity. 
••
Begin the questionnaire with an explanation of the purpose of the research. 
Where appropriate, also include assurances of confidentiality and anonymity.
••
Use headings and subheadings to guide the respondent through the various 
sections of the questionnaire.
••
Adhere to the rules for Plain English, given in Chapter 1. Avoid jargon 
where possible. 
••
End the questionnaire by thanking the respondent and include your contact 
details for any further correspondence. 
Interviews in quantitative research
In a quantitative research approach, interviews tend to be highly structured. This 
means that the interviewers will ask the questions exactly as they have been 
formatted by the survey designer and will record the responses. This structure is 
important in order to ensure that the research remains objective, the study can 
be replicated and the answers can be collated across multiple interviews. Once an 
interview becomes less structured, the approach shifts towards the qualitative. This 
type of interviewing will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Quantitative interviews can be carried out face to face or telephonically. 
Interviewers should be well trained so as not to influence the answers that are 
given.  

Professional Communication
344
New technologies for quantitative research
In mobile surveys, material is collected via smartphones or tablets. This can result 
in wide dissemination and rapid response time. In addition, online software also 
exists to administer surveys via text message, which would work well in contexts 
where respondents have access to more basic technology.
Online surveys have become common in the field of marketing, but can also 
be useful for academic research. They are fast, simple and easy to disseminate. 
However, they have been associated with lower response rates than traditional 
paper surveys. Another advantage of online surveys is that they offer powerful 
tools for response collation and analysis, thus saving the researcher work at a later 
stage. 
Computer-Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI) sees computer software 
being used to facilitate the interviewing process. The computer dials a telephone 
number, and the interviewer then follows the computer prompts, reads the 
questions to the interviewee and notes the answers. The computer contributes 
to data accuracy and analysis at later stages. Automated Computer Telephone 
Interviewing (ACTI) sees the entire interview being carried out by a computer with 
voice recognition capabilities. 
Qualitative methodologies
As discussed in Chapter 12, qualitative research differs from quantitative research 
in that the findings are not generalisable or directly comparable between various 
contexts. Rather, the research aims to describe and interpret the research material 
in an in-depth manner, in contrast to the quantification- and measurement-based 
explanations common in quantitative research. Whereas quantitative research is 
strongly structured, qualitative research is often more open-ended and inductive, 
with a level of flexibility that allows for dynamism in the research process. 
There are a number of qualitative methodologies and approaches that one can 
use. The sections that follow discuss some examples of these. 
Case studies
Case study research refers to an in-depth research focus on a particular person, 
organisation, event or situation. Once the case has been selected, multiple research 
methods (both qualitative and quantitative) may be used to develop a rich 
understanding of the subject within a real-life context over a sustained period of time. 
For example, adopting a case study approach to a research project about 
mathematics education may see the researcher picking one particular high school 
maths class to focus on as a case study for a full term. The researcher might decide 
to observe the classes, interview the teacher and administer surveys to the learners 
at the beginning and end of the term. The researcher would then use these methods 
to develop a full description and explanation of the maths class. While the findings 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
345
in this case study would not be generalisable to every other maths class in the 
country, they could help us better understand how learning takes place within 
a maths class. As such, the value of case study research lies in the in-context 
descriptions and explanations that it can develop, strengthening previous research 
and opening up areas for future research. 
Different kinds of case studies that you may choose to use for your research 
are discussed in Table 13.2.
Table 13.2  Types of case studies
Type of case study
Description
Illustrative case study
This is a case study that illustrates a particular instance or 
situation. For example, a particular brand of canned drink could 
be used as a case study to illustrate how beverages move to 
market.
Exploratory case study
This is a small-scale case study carried out as a pilot. The purpose 
is to determine the advantages and pitfalls of the methodologies 
that are implemented in preparation for the full study.
Critical instance case 
study
This is a case study that highlights a unique research situation. 
For example, if a school abolished homework altogether, this 
could form the location for a critical instance case study for new 
approaches towards primary education.
Individual qualitative interviews
Individual interviews provide an important data gathering tool for qualitative 
research projects, as they are a way to glean a large amount of in-depth, rich 
information from research subjects. Qualitative interviews differ in their levels of 
structure, as described in Table 13.3.
Table 13.3  Types of qualitative interviews
Type of interview
Process or structure
Structured interview
The interviewer has a set script of questions from which he or she 
does not deviate.
Semi-structured 
interview
The interviewer has an interview schedule with some questions, 
but the conversation may shift from this.
Unstructured interview
The interviewer may use a prompt to begin the conversation, 
but thereafter there is significant flexibility and the interviewer 
follows the interviewee’s lead in determining the interview focus.
Before embarking on individual interviews, consider logistics such as the time 
available and financial resources. Interviews can be time-consuming to organise 
and carry out, and transcription is very labour-intensive. If your project needs to 
take place in a short timeframe, this may not be a feasible method. Also, finances 

Professional Communication
346
may be necessary to pay interviewers, to organise a space to carry out your 
interview, for equipment such as a recording device, and to pay for transcription. 
Qualitative interviewing requires a high level of focus from the interviewer, 
who should be able to use questions effectively to maintain a focus on the aims 
of the research, while still remaining flexible enough to follow potential valuable 
threads that may arise. Critical listening and responding are thus important skills 
for an interviewer. 
When carrying out interviews, it is important to be well prepared. Consider 
how you will record the interview. For example, will you use a digital voice 
recorder, a video camera, or simply paper and pen? Whatever you choose, ensure 
that all equipment is in working order prior to the start of the interview.
If you decide to carry out individual interviews, the following are some ethical 
issues that you should keep in mind:
••
Avoid leading questions that can influence the data you gather. For 
example, the question ‘How many times have you felt unsupported by your 
employer?’ carries the implicit assumption that the interviewee has felt 
unsupported by his or her employer. However, this may not actually be the 
case. A better phrasing could be: ‘Describe the levels of support provided by 
your employer.’
••
Be aware that even in formulating your interview schedule you will 
inevitably be influencing the research by choosing to focus on some areas 
over others. Ensure that you are aware of the influence this could have on 
the data that is collected.
••
Consider the influence that you could have as an interviewer. For example, 
if you are a manager at a company interviewing employees, they may be 
unwilling to share information about bullying in the workplace for fear of 
repercussions, given your higher status within the company. 
••
Some interviewees may be uncomfortable with the idea of having their 
words recorded and saved on a digital voice recorder or video camera 
because of issues around confidentiality. It is standard practice to delete any 
recordings once the study is complete. 
Focus group interviews
Focus group interviews involve carrying out an interview with a group (usually 
between six and ten participants) as opposed to an individual. The advantage of 
this research methodology lies in the interaction between the group members. 
Rich data can emerge from their conversations with one another and through their 
agreements, disagreements and discussions. This is the kind of data that may not 
come to the fore in an individual interview. 
In a focus group interview, the interviewer should take the role of a 
facilitator, creating a safe, enabling space where the views of the participants can 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
347
predominate. There are various ways of encouraging conversation. These include 
the use of stimulus material such as newspaper articles, images or objects; role-
play scenarios; and/or creative activities such as drawing or free writing. 
Again, consider the ethical implications of choosing to gather your data via a 
focus group interview:
••
Consider the impact of group dynamics. For example, a polite, friendly 
group may be unwilling to disagree about issues, resulting in a lack of 
response variability. Also, particular group members could be overpowering 
during the discussion, which would have an impact on the opportunity for 
disparate perspectives to emerge.
••
Consider your role as an interviewer. Again, how the participants perceive 
you could impact on what they are willing to share with you. 
••
While you can ensure that you respect the privacy of your participants and 
keep the contents of the interviews confidential, you cannot guarantee that 
all the participants will do the same. 
Observation
Observation as a data gathering tool involves in-depth immersion in a real-life 
context. It can vary from straightforward observation to participant observation, 
where the researcher becomes a member of the group he or she is observing. 
For example, straightforward observation could involve sitting in a restaurant, 
observing how customers interact with waiters. In participant observation, on the 
other hand, the researcher could actually become a waiter and spend some shifts 
serving customers in a restaurant and noting what emerges from this.
When using observation as a method for qualitative research, there is much 
reliance on the notes developed by the researcher, which need to adequately 
capture the sights, sounds, atmosphere and details of the situation. Consider how 
best to record your experiences. For example, will you take notes or use a video 
camera? Note that these may be obtrusive and interrupt the natural flow of events, 
thus threatening the validity of the data you gather. 
One of the ethical issues around observation involves the impact that the 
researcher may have on the research setting. It is unethical to carry out covert 
research without the participants’ permission; however, if participants are aware 
that an ‘outsider’ is present, they may alter their behaviour, thus affecting the data 
that is gathered. In addition, observations always occur through the perceptions 
of the researcher and as such will always be affected by some level of bias. It is 
important for researchers to be aware of their impact on the research. A research 
journal in which the researcher tracks his or her evolving perceptions can be an 
important way of making these explicit. 

Professional Communication
348
13.3	 Data analysis
Quantitative data analysis
Once you have implemented your quantitative research methodologies, you will 
have generated raw data, such as completed questionnaires or transcripts of 
interview surveys. These will provide you with lists of numbers that represent 
the responses to your questions. Next, you will need to turn your attention to 
the analysis of this data so that you can draw valid conclusions to answer your 
research question. 
There have been entire textbooks and courses dedicated to the statistical 
methods behind quantitative data analysis. This in-depth approach is beyond the 
scope of this chapter. Our discussion here will, however, set you on the path to 
working with your quantitative data and point you in the direction of tools that 
can support your work in this field. 
Durrheim (2006: 188–193) highlights three steps that are necessary in order to 
prepare your data for analysis. They are coding, entering and cleaning, as shown 
in Figure 13.4.
1. 	 Coding data
This means applying a 
set of rules to the data 
to transform information 
from one form to 
another. For example, if 
you have asked a Yes/No 
question on your survey, 
you would code ‘yes’ 
answers as 1 and ‘no’ 
answers as 2.
2. 	 Entering data
The codes are entered 
into a statistical 
computer package. On 
a spreadsheet, the data 
for the research subjects 
is displayed in rows, 
and the variables are 
displayed in columns.
3. 	 Cleaning data
This is done in order to 
locate and fix errors that 
may have arisen during 
coding and entering. This 
is important because 
errors could lead to the 
study findings being 
invalid.
Figure 13.4  Steps in preparing data for analysis
Once the data has been coded, entered and cleaned, it is ready to be statistically 
analysed. There are two methodologies for quantitative data analysis (Durrheim, 
2006: 196): 
1.	 Descriptive data analysis techniques describe the data by investigating the 
different scores for each variable and determining whether these are related. 
2.	 Inferential data analysis techniques see the researcher draw conclusions about 
wider populations based on the sample data from the study. 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
349
A number of computer software applications have been released in recent years 
that can aid the quantitative data analysis process. These have the benefits of 
reducing calculation errors and supporting data management processes. However, 
users should remember that while applications can support analysis, the researcher 
still needs to manage the process. Some of the most popular applications are the 
following: 
••
SPSS (Statistical Package for the Social Sciences): This package supports 
the entire quantitative data analysis process, from planning and data 
collection to analysis, reporting and deployment. An intuitive interface 
allows for high levels of functionality for both beginners and more advanced 
users. 
••
STATISTICA: This advanced data analysis package offers a comprehensive 
variety of statistical techniques and covers thousands of functions, 
algorithms, tests and methods. In addition, it has strong data visualisation 
capabilities, allowing the creation of unique 2D and 3D graphs.
••
Stata: This is an interactive data analysis program that has capabilities 
including data management, statistical analysis, graphics and custom 
programming. It can import data in a variety of formats (including from 
other statistical packages, spreadsheets and data sets) and can be used across 
Microsoft, Mac and Linux/Unix computers. In addition, there is a version 
called Small Stata which is designed specifically for students. 
Qualitative data analysis 
Once you have completed your qualitative data gathering, you will have collected 
a large number of texts, be they interview transcripts, field notes, memos or 
relevant documents. Remember that analysis should begin while you are still 
collecting the data, as this is when it is most fresh in your mind. You can start 
thinking about ways to link the different data you come across, noting similarities, 
differences and ideas that arise from them. Be sure to write these burgeoning ideas 
in your research journal. 
Terre Blanche, Durrheim and Kelly (2006: 322–326) break the qualitative data 
analysis process into five steps. These are shown in Figure 13.5.

Professional Communication
350
This initial stage is an 
opportunity for you to get 
to know your data very 
well. This means reading 
the texts, making notes 
and brainstorming so that 
it becomes very familiar.
This relates to the careful 
examination of the data 
categorised under each 
code in order to capture 
the nuances that lie in 
the selections that you’ve 
made.
This means inferring 
themes from the data itself 
as opposed to applying 
predetermined conceptions. 
It could be said that this 
stage requires you to ‘listen 
to the data’ to see what 
ideas emerge.
At this stage, you develop 
your interpretation of the 
data. Having done so, it is 
important to check your 
interpretation critically in 
order to ensure that it is 
valid, reliable and ethical.
Maxwell (2013: 107) 
defines coding as the 
act of fracturing the 
data and rearranging 
it into categories that 
allow for the comparison 
of elements and the 
development of theory. 
Here, you run through the 
data, marking different 
sections (including words, 
phrases, sentences and 
paragraphs) as being 
instances of the themes 
you have developed.
1. Familiarisation  
and immersion
3. Coding
2. Inducing themes
4. Elaboration
5. Interpretation and 
checking
Figure 13.5  Steps in analysing qualitative data
Again, whole books have been devoted to the topic of qualitative data analysis, and 
the brief explanation in this chapter simply presents an overview of the process. 
The novice researcher may find it useful to become familiar with one of the many 
software packages designed specifically for qualitative data analysis. This software 
is called Computer-Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS).
CAQDAS facilitates the organisation, management and analysis of qualitative 
data, providing ways of storing and retrieving data and coding and sorting this. 
Some can support the development of theory by allowing you to attach memos 
to particular codes and to create concept maps. The following are some examples 
of CAQDAS:
••
NVivo allows the researcher to import and analyse text or multimedia files 
and to code these using coding stripes. The researcher can then work within 
these codes, add memos and notations, and create word clouds, mind maps, 
diagrams and other visualisations. 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
351
••
ATLAS.ti aims to help researchers uncover complex phenomena hidden 
in qualitative data by allowing for the coding and annotation of primary 
data material and the provision of a number of powerful tools to facilitate 
visualisation of the relationship between elements. A useful feature is PDF 
support, which allows you to work seamlessly with PDF files.
••
CAT (Coding Analysis Toolkit) is a free, open source, web-based service that 
provides a way to code raw text data. It offers tools to work with multiple 
collaborators and is a reliable and safe program to use if working on a team 
project. 
13.4	 How to present your research
Academic writing
Assignments that are written in an academic context, such as a college or a 
university, require that you adhere to a particular genre of writing. This involves 
adhering to particular conventions regarding structure, style and tone. The 
following sections discuss approaches to academic writing. 
A proper approach to the assignment
Before you begin writing your assignment, ensure that you have taken time to 
properly analyse the topic. This will ensure that the response that you develop 
matches the requirements of the topic. 
One way to analyse the topic is to look for two types of words: process words 
and content words. The process words will give you a clear sense of what you 
need to do in the assignment, and the content words will tell you what you need 
to research. For example, look at the following assignment topic:
eg
List the traits required for becoming a successful entrepreneur. Discuss the various financial 
incentives offered by government to promote entrepreneurs. (1 000 words)
In this topic, the process words are ‘list’ and ‘discuss’, because these tell you what 
the topic is asking you to do. Note how these are requiring you to do two different 
things. The word ‘list’ requires you to mention a number of different elements, 
while ‘discuss’ requires you to go further than this by weighing the elements up 
and adding your own input.

Professional Communication
352
Many different process words may appear in your assignment topic. Here are some 
examples, along with the action they require you to take:
eg
•	 Assess:	
Weigh up to what extent something is true, taking into consideration 
evidence. Conclude strongly.
•	 Contrast:	
Look at two or more different elements and point out how these are 
dissimilar.
•	 Define:	
Offer a precise meaning.
•	 Explore: 	
Consider something from a variety of different viewpoints.
•	 Justify:	
Make a case for an argument, providing different lines of evidence.
•	 Summarise:	
Give a condensed version of something.
The content words in a topic provide focus for your research. Returning to the 
example used earlier, the content words are ‘entrepreneur(s)’, ‘financial incentives’ 
and ‘government’.
Plan your assignment structure
Once you have a clear sense of the topic requirements, the next step is to develop 
a rough structure of the assignment, which will form an outline for your writing. 
Start by determining how long the assignment is. Next, look at previous samples of 
your work and example essays to determine the average length of your paragraphs. 
This will give you a sense of how many paragraphs you will need to write. 
For example, in the essay topic above, based on an average of 120 words per 
paragraph, you will know that you need to write approximately seven paragraphs. 
With the first and last paragraphs containing the introduction and conclusion, this 
leaves five body paragraphs for content.
Next, you may find it helpful to use your process words to begin to develop a 
rough outline. For example, you may decide that of the five body paragraphs, the 
first will be used to ‘list the traits required for becoming a successful entrepreneur’ 
and the remaining four will be used to ‘discuss the financial incentives offered by 
government’. 
Do bear in mind that this structure is very flexible and may change during 
the course of your research and writing. However, having a sense of the essay 
structure early on and using this to develop your outline will help you remain 
focused during the process.
Introductions and conclusions
The introduction of your assignment is the first time your reader will engage with 
your writing, so it is important that you create a positive impression. You also 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
353
want to hook your reader to compel him or her to read on. Here are some strategies 
you may utilise in your introduction:
••
Define key terms. If the topic contains any terminology that may be 
unfamiliar to the reader, you may define it in the introduction. Do, however, 
avoid the clichéd sentence: ‘The Oxford English Dictionary defines X as …’ 
Rather, work the definition into the flow of your text.
••
Catch the reader’s attention. There are various ways to do this. You may 
include an interesting statistic, a relevant quote or an alternative perspective 
on the topic. 
••
Provide an overview of the assignment. This will prepare the reader for 
what to expect in the body of the writing. 
••
Be succinct, brief and crisp in style.
The conclusion is the section that will most likely stay with the reader once he 
or she has finished reading your assignment. This is your opportunity to leave a 
lasting impression. The following are some strategies to do this effectively:
••
Reiterate your argument. This is important, as it will tie together the 
argumentative thread running through the paper.
••
Summarise the main points. Do this in order to remind the reader of the 
gist of your writing. 
••
Leave food for thought. One way to do this is to include a reference about 
your topic’s implications for the future. For instance, using the example topic 
used earlier, you could leave the reader thinking about how government may 
incentivise entrepreneurship in the future. 
••
Suggest areas for future research. This shows that you are aware of the 
longevity of the subject area. 
Academic style
See Chapter 1 for guidelines on writing effectively. These principles, with a 
particular focus on the writing style for Plain English, will stand you in good stead 
with your academic writing. The following are some additional stylistic elements 
that are unique to academic writing:
••
Unless explicitly stipulated (for example, in a reflective assignment), use the 
third person for academic writing. Avoid the personal pronoun ‘I’. 
••
Use the present tense when incorporating the work of other authors.
eg
Van Niekerk (2015) explains that … Mbongeni (2013) describes the context …

Professional Communication
354
••
Avoid unnecessary words. 
eg
Instead of writing:
In his book Anatomy of Freedom (2016), Bertrand Make effectively discusses the 
various approaches towards conceptualising models of social freedom.
Rather write:
Make (2016) discusses approaches to social freedom.
••
Be specific when mentioning people and dates. 
eg
Instead of writing:
Many people believe communication skills are important for engineering students. 
Rather write:
Communication skills are important for engineering students (Johnson, 2012; 
Govender, 2016; Ndlovu, 2010). 
Instead of writing:
Greenside University recently opened a new Science Centre.
Rather write:
Greenside University opened a new Science Centre in December, 2015. 
••
Avoid asserting your personal opinions too strongly.
eg
Instead of writing:
Nkosi (2011) has an excellent approach to the topic … .
Rather write:
Nkosi’s (2011) approach is significant because … .
Formatting and proofreading
Adhere to the guidelines for readability given in Chapter 1, including typefaces, 
headings and subheadings, and columns. These will contribute to the overall 
quality of your document. 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
355
Also, proofread your document carefully before submitting it to ensure that you 
eliminate any errors. After working on an assignment for a significant period 
of time, it can be hard to pick up mistakes. In this case, follow these tips for 
proofreading:
••
Read the document sentence by sentence in reverse order, from the end to 
the beginning. By breaking up the logic of the piece, you should be able to 
spot small technical errors. 
••
If you have been working off a computer screen, consider printing the 
document out and proofreading a hard copy. 
••
Read the paper aloud.
••
Recruit a friend to proofread your work. A fresh pair of eyes may pick up 
errors that you miss.
••
As you work through various assignments, develop a list of your common 
errors. Pin this up in your work area and refer to it as you write. 
Collaborative writing
In some situations, you may be required to complete a group academic writing 
assignment. It can be challenging to distil different people’s styles and content into 
a cohesive piece of writing, so it is worth deciding on a strategy with your group 
before commencing the work. 
On the one hand, you may decide that all members of the group will work 
on all sections of the assignment together, from conceptualisation to the finished 
product. The positive aspect of this approach is that the assignment will truly be a 
group effort. The negative aspect is that the process will most likely be unwieldy, 
with many conflicting contributions and much debate. 
On the other hand, one person may take on the role of primary writer, with 
some feedback from the other group members. This process will likely be more 
efficient, but the assignment may lack the richness of diverse contributions.
Ideally, formulate a strategy that falls between these two options. This could 
see the group planning the assignment together face to face, working on different 
sections separately, and then coming back together to assemble the final version. 
Alternatively, some group members may focus on the research part of the process, 
while others write up the work. 
Whatever strategy you develop for your group writing, there are some principles 
you can implement in order to achieve consistency in the group assignment: 
••
Develop a style guide with your group. This can include aspects such as 
the template, length of paragraphs and vocabulary. This style guide can be 
dynamic and will change over time.
••
Brainstorm the topic together and use the guidelines above to agree on the 
assignment’s outline. This will ensure that all group members are working 
towards the same vision.

Professional Communication
356
••
Plan your time carefully. Schedule meeting times with your group and agree 
on benchmarks for progress. Allow plenty of time for revision.
••
Work review mechanisms into your assignment scheduling. This means 
that at various points in the process, different group members will have an 
opportunity to review and report back on the process of the assignment. 
Writing collaboratively over a distance
With distance learning and part-time study becoming viable options for students 
internationally, you may find yourself needing to complete a written assignment 
with group members who are geographically dispersed. In this scenario, there is a 
wide variety of technological support available in order to ease the process:
••
Doodle (www.doodle.com) is a scheduling tool that allows you to set up 
convenient meeting times with your group members.
••
Skype (www.skype.com) can be used to video-call with up to 25 group 
members. This provides an opportunity for face-to-face communication. 
••
Google Docs (www.docs.google.com) allows you to share files between group 
members. These are instantaneously updated as they are worked on, with the 
changes appearing automatically in the document seen by all members.
••
Dropbox (www.dropbox.com) provides a way to share up to 2GB of files with 
different users. These can be accessed via any computer through the Dropbox 
website.
••
Wiggio (www.wiggio.com) is an online group collaboration tool which 
brings together a number of the functions in the applications named above, 
including scheduling meetings, sending messages, hosting conference calls, 
sharing files and polling group members. 
These are just some of the online tools available, and the options are expanding 
rapidly. Most of these applications are highly intuitive, but online help is available 
through the sites or on YouTube (www.youtube.com). See Chapter 2 for more about 
online collaboration tools.
New media for your research
While academic essays and journal articles remain the most ubiquitous formats 
for the dissemination of research, researchers are constantly developing new and 
innovative ways of sharing their work. The benefit of this is that your research 
can reach unfamiliar and diverse audiences who may not have access to the more 
formal academic channels. Utilising new media can also challenge you to find 
ways to make your work accessible to non-experts and can help you see your 
research in fresh ways. The following sections discuss three alternative ways to 
share your research. 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
357
Blogs
A blog (short for weblog) is a personal online site created and maintained by 
individuals or small groups. There are millions of blogs online dealing with 
all manner of subjects, from sports to the arts, from history to science. The 
differentiating factor for blogs, as opposed to static websites, is that they are 
highly interactive, inviting visitors to comment and authors to respond, thereby 
stimulating networking.
Researchers create blogs for different reasons. For example, a researcher 
working on an in-depth project may share his or her experience, from fieldwork 
to data analysis and write-up of the findings. Another person may chart his or her 
development as a researcher over time from a personal perspective. Another could 
use a blog to make his or her work accessible to a wider audience than would be 
possible through formal academic publishing. Figure 13.6 shows an example of a 
blog that deals with a specific field.
Figure 13.6  A WordPress blog on higher education (personal blog by Gabrielle Nudelman)
There are a number of free online platforms one can use to create a blog. These 
include WordPress, Blogger and Tumblr. Online tutorials are available via the 
platforms themselves and YouTube, and these can guide you through the process. 
E-portfolios
Like a traditional portfolio, an e-portfolio is a space for you to store samples of 
your work. However, an e-portfolio is unique in that it is an online space and, as 
such, you can store a variety of different media types, such as videos, audio clips, 
images and documents. Using free, easy-to-access software such as Wix.com, 

Professional Communication
358
WordPress or Pathbrite, it is simple to create a customised website to showcase 
your work. This becomes your e-portfolio. See Figure 13.7 for an example of an 
e-portfolio.
Figure 13.7  An e-portfolio home page (by Puleng Lelala for BSc [Geomatics], UCT)
You may choose to use your website to focus on one research project, such as your 
thesis or an investigation you have carried out at work. In this case, you could 
incorporate a variety of different media. For example, you may include a video 
of the experiment you carried out, an audio recording of an interview with your 
supervisor and a PDF document of the completed full paper.
Alternatively, you could use your e-portfolio to showcase the full spectrum 
of your research over time. You could upload all your articles or essays to date, 
organised according to logical categories, as well your CV in order to show your 
credentials. 
A major positive aspect of e-portfolios is that you can include links to external 
sites, such as YouTube videos, organisations’ home pages, the work of researchers 
in related fields, and social media pages. This is useful for creating networks 
between your work and the field in which it is situated, thus showing its relevancy 
within a wider context.
Posters
If you plan on showcasing your research at a conference, trade fair or expo, you 
may be required to create a poster. In this context, your poster needs to be able 
to stand alone, as you will not always be around to explain the content. As such 
it needs to be comprehensive enough to present the gist of your research to the 

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
359
audience. This means that you need to refer to your research problem, findings, 
conclusions and recommendations on the poster.
However, remember that your poster is primarily a visual medium. As such, it 
should not be too word-heavy. Also, bear your audience in mind. If the audience 
may include non-experts in your field, steer away from the use of jargon as far as 
possible. Explain all technical terms as appropriate. 
Figure 13.8 is an example of a research poster that will accompany a 
presentation by a speaker.
Figure 13.8  A research poster for a chemical process, created to complement a delivery by 
a speaker (poster by Mark Hambrock for a BSc Chemical Engineering project)

Professional Communication
360
Here are some tips to consider as you develop your posters:
••
Ensure that the font you use is readable from a distance.
••
Use graphics where possible instead of text. Consider the inclusion of tables, 
graphs, diagrams and images where appropriate. All graphics should be 
labelled and clearly integrated.
••
Design your poster taking into consideration the theme of the research. This 
means choosing fonts, colours and graphics that are appropriate to the topic. 
For example, a poster dealing with environmental issues may incorporate 
earthy colours (for example green and brown).
••
Organise your information logically and intuitively for the reader. This could 
mean using a clockwise layout, or moving from the top left corner of the 
poster to the bottom right corner. 
••
Use text connectors such as arrows to guide the reader from section to 
section of your poster.
••
Remember to include important information such as your name and contact 
details and the logos of any organisations to which you are affiliated. 
See pages 291–293 in Chapter 10 for more information on how to create posters. 
Figure 13.9 shows an example of a stand-alone research poster. It contains 
extensive information and references. It is in hard copy and very large (AO), which 
means the type can be read with ease.

Working with data and research methodologies      Chapter 13
361
Figure 13.9  A stand-alone research poster for a process for clearing space debris (poster 
by Louis Feng and Abhijit Nath for an MSc in Space Studies)

Professional Communication
362
✔
Checklist for working with data
Working with data can be challenging, stimulating and frustrating. Particularly when your 
research deals with human subjects, the process can be unpredictable, requiring you to be 
flexible and dynamic in your approach. However, research can also be extremely rewarding, 
particularly when understood as the creation of new knowledge. As you collect, analyse and 
present your data, use the following checklist:
•	 Use the library’s resources to search for relevant sources, including the catalogue, 
electronic journal databases and librarians.
•	 Search the Internet purposefully, utilising search engines, directories, gateways, the 
‘invisible web’ and real-time searches as and when appropriate.
•	 Determine whether you will use quantitative or qualitative methodologies to generate 
your data, or whether you will use a combination of these.
•	 Formulate a plan for data analysis, supported by software packages.
•	 Implement the principles for good academic writing, including effective structure, 
introductions and conclusions, academic style, and formatting and proofreading.
•	 Consider the use of new media to showcase your research, including blogs, e-portfolios 
and posters.

14
363
Academic proposals,  
dissertations, theses  
and papers
A thesis for a postgraduate degree is a scholarly work that presents an integrated, 
well-supported argument. Requirements for the degree depend on the level of 
the degree: honours, minor or full master’s and doctorates all have different 
requirements. At master’s level, the thesis must show that the candidate has learnt 
the various crafts needed to conduct research, but the thesis does not necessarily 
have to introduce new knowledge. A PhD thesis must display novel ideas and 
concepts, complexity and originality in thought, critical thinking and publishable 
outcomes. It must make a contribution to the knowledge in the field explored.
All academic writing has a cyclical nature. While this chapter describes the 
process chronologically, many of the stages, such as reading literature, writing up 
the literature review and handling the empirical work, happen simultaneously or 
are revisited.
This chapter will introduce you to the requirements of an academic submission 
such as a proposal, a thesis or a journal paper. From this you will learn about the:
••
process of writing up research
••
writing of academic proposals to take a master’s or doctoral degree
••
main elements of a proposal
••
writing academic theses
••
sections of a thesis
••
timetable for writing a thesis
••
style for a proposal and thesis 
••
presentation of a thesis
••
writing journal papers and articles.
After studying this chapter, you will be able to:
••
plan and manage your research so that you write it up timeously and in stages
••
write persuasively about research when submitting a proposal
••
select appropriate data for each section of the proposal
••
know the requirements of a postgraduate thesis and its sections
••
manage your time to write each section to the appropriate length
••
use appropriate style and tone, while applying prescribed formats, when  
writing your proposal, thesis or paper.

Professional Communication
364
14.1	 How to manage the process of writing up 
research
Write from the start of your degree programme. Do not wait until you have 
completed all the research – both deskwork and fieldwork – in order to write. 
Some theses do not reach fruition because the researcher becomes absorbed in the 
reading and practical work and leaves writing up until the end, in the belief it is 
a quick and easy task. Although writing is taxing, it is an exercise that, like all 
exercise, becomes easier as you become fitter at doing it. A trend for PhD theses is 
to write up sections as academic papers as you complete them. Thus, by the time 
the final writing-up stage is reached, you may have written and even published a 
few papers which are the foundation of chapters, for example on the literature, on 
the methodology or on some of the results.
It is particularly important to write about the literature you are reading as 
you read it, to avoid losing the links to the paper when you eventually do get to 
writing and referencing. Likewise, it is advisable to write the methodology section 
as you experience it — or else you run the risk of forgetting what you did or why 
you made certain decisions along the way.  
Take care of yourself during this period of research, as writing can be a lonely 
task. Join writing groups with other postgraduates so you can review each other’s 
work and provide support and encouragement. One way to try to insure yourself 
against potential problems is to have a clear Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) drawn up between your supervisor (the representative of the university) 
and yourself regarding meetings, preparation for meetings, feedback and extent 
of support. A good MoU will outline your role and that of your supervisor and 
include important details, such as the number of meetings, the work required for 
the meetings, whose names will be given as authors on publications arising out of 
the thesis and in what order these names will be given.
A university, with the author, owns copyright on all theses. It remains the right 
of the author to cede copyright of his or her thesis to another party; however, the 
university will always hold the thesis and protect the knowledge.
14.2	 Academic proposals
Many of you will have to write academic proposals as part of your degree studies. 
These proposals set out your plans to undertake academic research. They are 
similar to business and industrial proposals, but have additional sections relating 
to the theoretical basis of your research. They stress your theoretical approach 
and record the academic reading you have done. They include a possible chapter 
outline of your proposed thesis. Most proposals also require a timeline or Gantt 
chart (see Chapter 10) and an outline of predicted expenses.

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
365
In your proposal, you tell your department, potential supervisors and possible 
funders exactly what research you plan to undertake. A well-researched proposal 
is the essential basis for a successful research programme. It helps your department 
to decide whether your project is worth accepting and supporting. It helps your 
supervisor to understand your focus and your proposed methods. The department 
will need to choose an external examiner. If your work is interdisciplinary, it must 
be housed in a core discipline in which the main supervisor and external examiner 
will be based.
In terms of writing academic proposals, the following sections of this chapter 
discuss:
••
how to identify the problem and research methodology
••
the main elements of a proposal
••
a suggested layout for your proposal.
Once your proposal has been approved and the necessary systems put in place (for 
example funding) you can continue with the research. The proposal forms the basis 
for the introduction chapter in the thesis.
Identify the problem and research methodology 
In your proposal you identify a particular problem or topic before you investigate 
it. You will need to review current literature on the subject and on your chosen 
methodology. Your problem statement may come out of a gap in the literature 
(accepted body of knowledge) or be part of a continuum of current research. You 
identify your proposed research methodology so that others can judge whether or 
not your project is worth supporting. You will need to review current literature on 
the subject and on your chosen methodology.
Before you embark on new research, the following are possible questions to ask 
yourself:
••
What is the problem I have to investigate?
••
What is the significance and originality of the proposed study in its field?
••
Is the research likely to produce new data or will it confirm existing 
hypotheses?
••
Will the hypothesis/es be valid? And how will the hypothesis/es be tested? 
••
What procedures – such as Finite Experimental Methods (FEM) – will I use to 
investigate the problem?
••
Will there be a representative sample if a field study is required?
••
Are the facilities, equipment, funding and other resources adequate for the 
proposed work?
••
What are the ethical considerations?
••
Is there an appropriate supervisor in the system I am studying who can guide 
the work?

Professional Communication
366
Main elements of a proposal
A proposal may be as few as 3 pages or be up to 10 or, even, 30 pages. It may 
include some, or all, of the following elements (which are all discussed in the 
sections that follow):
••
A title page with a provisional title for your research project
••
A glossary: A definition of the technical terms and concepts that you will be 
using. This section is very important if you are using unusual terms or newly 
coined terms.
••
The introduction, including details about:
◗◗
the background to your thesis topic and reasons why you think the study 
is worth undertaking
◗◗
a statement of the main problem to be investigated, or the main topic to 
be covered
◗◗
the overall aim of the study
◗◗
some of the possible sub-problems to be investigated
◗◗
the scope or limits of your study. You could, for example, state the 
boundaries within which the investigation will be confined, for example 
time, geographical area, cultural groups, statistical sampling and age groups
••
The motivation: The significance of the specified problem in relation to 
business or industry or your academic discipline
••
A preliminary literature review, which will identify gaps in the literature
••
Hypothesis/es and key questions that will be used as a way to unpack or 
investigate the elements of each hypothesis
••
The proposed methodology, detailing your methods of empirical data 
gathering, such as field research, opinion surveys, focus groups, tests, rating 
scales, interviews, questionnaires. For example, you may include sample 
questionnaires that you wish to use, or a preliminary list of the names of 
those whom you wish to interview and their companies.
••
The expected outcomes: A sample layout or chapter headings of your 
proposed thesis will give an indication of the expected outcomes.
••
Possible conclusions and recommendations, including:
◗◗
some tentative conclusions, particularly implications for further study or 
for applications
◗◗
some tentative recommendations that focus particularly on action to be 
taken
••
A proposed budget
••
A timeline
••
A reference list (see Chapter 12 for details on citation and referencing) that 
will include:
◗◗
the references used in the proposal
◗◗
other reading of appropriate literature undertaken.

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
367
Suggested layout for your proposal
The following sections are suggested for your research proposal. Do not, however, 
feel constrained by this layout. Your research proposal will differ in format 
according to the purpose and the type of research you propose to undertake.
Title page
The title page should contain the following:
••
Title of the proposed research (provisional, as the research may change)
••
Proposal for honours, master’s or doctoral thesis
••
Prepared for: Supervisor’s name and institution
••
Thesis in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of ... (special 
field)
••
Prepared by: Author
••
Date of proposal.
Summary or abstract
As most proposals are only a few pages, a summary is usually not included. 
However, if the proposal is lengthy, a short, half-page summary should be included.
Your summary should contain information about:
••
the topic
••
the essential background, description and motivation (introduction)
••
essential literature that may form the departure point of the proposed study 
(if applicable)
••
the hypothesis/es developed
••
the main purpose of the study
••
a brief outline of the procedure
••
the expected conclusions and recommendations.
Some universities refer to this section as an abstract. An abstract is a short summary 
sent to a journal or conference for consideration for publication. Depending on 
the requirements of the publishing body, your abstract may be as many as 300 
words or as few as 150 words. Some abstracts are now presented graphically, as 
illustrated in Figure 14.1. 

Professional Communication
368
Figure 14.1  Abstract for funding submission for a research grant by Dr Sinead English, 
University of Cambridge
Introduction
This section may or may not carry subheadings. Ensure that it includes: 
••
a description of the topic 
••
the background to the study
••
details about the core problem to be solved, or the hypothesis to be proved
••
a motivation for the topic through its importance, for example, to research, 
society, industry or commerce
••
an outline and justification of the major limitations that might be placed on 
the research, for example time constraints and access to data. It is essential 
that known or predicted limitations and/or assumptions that are being made 
be considered at the outset of the study. 
Description of proposed research
Describe exactly what you propose to do. Make it clear to what extent you see the 
project being manageable and where you predict there may be challenges. It is 
sensible to be realistic from the outset. For example, if your empirical work needs to 
take place in another location, logistical matters need to be in place, such as funding.
Justification for research 
This section describes the significance of the research in relation to your academic 
discipline. Research is not finite, but a continuum. Your research will contribute to 
this continuum within its given field, be it business, the social sciences, medicine 
or industry. Describe the position of the research in relation to historical and 
current knowledge and, if pertinent, discuss the impact it may have on current or 
future work in the given field. Your research may be justified according to several 
aspects: 
••
Describe the specific outcomes of the research and their importance; for 
example discuss a model that might be developed or a checklist that might 
be compiled where none exists at present.
••
Indicate gaps in the literature, if there are any.

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
369
••
Discuss the possible contribution your research will make to the existing 
body of knowledge, for example by:
◗◗
filling gaps in the literature
◗◗
providing unusual or new methodology
◗◗
benefiting the outcomes of future research, future policy and practice
◗◗
benefiting industry or business (the size of the industry or enterprise 
involved may be relevant here).
••
Mention the role of your work in the continuum of research, such as:
◗◗
a conference at which a paper about the research could be presented
◗◗
a journal in which your paper may be published as an article.
Preliminary literature review
In this section, give a brief review of your reading to date: 
••
Show how this reading gives a good theoretical base to your proposed 
research. 
••
Start from the most general perspective and then narrow your review to 
specific theory. 
••
Expand on the major issues in the literature that led to your research 
proposal and/or hypothesis.
••
Describe where your research will fill gaps in the literature.
••
Discuss some likely research questions or hypotheses you might use that 
arise from these gaps. They could become the focus of your data collection 
and data analysis.
See Chapter 13 for more information on how to find appropriate sources.
Proposed methodology or procedure
Use some or all of the following subsections and give literature references to 
support this (for example field research, opinion surveys, your methodology and 
analysis):
••
methods of selecting the sample or sources of data (qualitative research)
••
methods of undertaking experiments (quantitative research)
••
description of instruments to collect data, for example field research, 
proposed interviews or focus groups
••
planned administration of instruments and procedures for analysis, for 
example SPSS, NVivo (see Chapter 13) and rating scales to be used (describe 
your proposed rating scales if these are relevant)
••
limits of the methodology (for example time, geographical area, selected 
cultural groups, types of statistical sampling, selected age groups).

Professional Communication
370
You may use a graphic to show your intention for methodology developing in 
relationship with the analysis of the literature, as illustrated in Figure 14.2.
Model-building
Methodological 
study
Case study 
analysis
Methodological 
study
Computer 
simulation
Process environmental 
performance
Flowsheet complexity
Process design tools and 
software (literature)
Conceptual process design 
approaches and methodologies 
(literature)
Sensitivity analysis
Flowsheet specification based on 
complexity
Figure 14.2  Research design for methodology 
Background of researcher
If appropriate, describe any pilot studies that you have done, your research 
qualifications and work experience and/or word lengths of dissertations. Such 
background should be described so as to give the context of the proposed work 
in relation to your previous work. Also, particularly in qualitative research, your 
identity as a researcher can impact your findings. This section shows that you have 
taken this into consideration. 
Tentative outline of your proposed thesis
The following outline is suggested. If possible, give specific headings relevant 
to your proposed thesis that may become the chapter headings. These are the 
headings and subheadings that inform your reader about your expected outcomes. 
The following example is based on a thesis that contained 11 chapters: 

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
371
eg
Chapter 1: Introduction
Chapter 2: Literature review
Chapter 3: Methodology
Chapter 4, 5, 6 and so on: The findings or facts
Chapter 7: Discussion of results 
Chapter 8: Conclusions
Chapter 9: Recommendations  
(and implications for future research) 
Chapter 10: References
Chapter 11: Bibliography  
Appendices 
This section can be divided 
into a number of chapters. 
Use specific headings 
relevant to your thesis. 
Optional: the discussion may 
also fall into the chapter in 
which the findings are given.
Tentative at this stage
Now often absorbed into the 
list of references
Given letters A, B, C, etc and 
titles 
At this point, a mind map, such as the one in Figure 14.3, is often made. It may 
be used in giving a presentation on the proposal.
Figure 14.3  Mind map of an MSc thesis plan by Genevieve Harding, University of Cape 
Town, 2016

Professional Communication
372
Resources requirements
Give a tentative estimate of all refunding needed, for example IT needs, laboratory 
and equipment, support personnel, travel and printing. Justify all potential 
expenses. These should clearly flow from what you have said about the aims and 
designs of your research. If external funding is being used, state this and make 
it clear that the requirements of the relevant ethical standards are being met. For 
example, for studies in engineering, the ethical constraints set by the Engineering 
Council of South Africa (ECSA) need to be met.
Proposed evaluation and timeline 
Mention how the research project will be monitored, such as fortnightly meetings 
with your supervisor and regular seminars or normal examination procedures 
organised by your supervisor. These details should be covered in an MoU. Most 
institutions require that the MoU be signed by the institution, supervisor/s and the 
student, to ensure that due process is followed.
A description of the timeline or work plan (and accompanying Gantt chart) 
shows that you have planned your research and the key experimental work that is 
needed. If possible, speak to your supervisor about whether your timeline plan is 
realistic. See Figure 14.4.
Date
6–12 
Sept
13–19 
Sept
20–26 
Sept
27–3 
Oct
4–10 
Oct
11–17 
Oct
18–24 
Oct
25–31 
Oct
1–7 
Nov
8–14 
Nov
15–21 
Nov
22–28 
Nov
29–5 
Dec
6–10 
Dec
Week
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Submit research 
proposal
✓
Request access to 
company
✓
✓
Develop in-depth 
interview questions
✓
✓
Conduct  
interviews
✓
✓
✓
✓
Transcription of 
interviews
✓
✓
✓
✓
Interpret data
✓
✓
✓
✓
Data findings
✓
✓
Submit 1st draft to 
supervisor
✓
Revise draft
✓
✓
✓
Submit 2nd draft to 
supervisor
✓
Revise draft and 
prepare for final 
submission
✓
✓
Print & bind
✓
Submit final
✓
Figure 14.4  A proposed timeline for an honours thesis
Preliminary bibliography
List the material that you have read and propose to read. In addition, summarise 
exploratory work. For example, describe the initial laboratory work or list the interviews 

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
373
that you have already conducted and propose to conduct. If these references cover 
various forms, it is expedient to list your material under the following subheadings:
••
Books
••
Journals
••
Web/Internet
••
Unpublished sources (eg theses, company reports).
14.3	 Academic theses
A dissertation or thesis conveys the research context, the theoretical approach to 
and the results of an investigation into a specific area. Every thesis or dissertation 
should present an argument. It can also develop a purely theoretical approach to 
a topic. The most important task of the writer is to communicate these findings or 
theoretical approaches clearly and effectively. This section covers the sections of a 
thesis and an approach to writing them.
Sections of a thesis
Most institutions give the limit on length for a thesis. For example, a master’s thesis 
may be between 40 and 80 pages of text and a doctoral thesis between 90 and 110 
pages of text. This would not include the appendices. The thesis may include some 
or all of the following elements (which are discussed in the sections that follow):
••
Title page
••
Preliminary pages, eg table of contents, list of illustrations, glossary, 
nomenclature
••
Acknowledgements
••
Summary or abstract with key words
••
Introduction: This includes the research design, problem statements and/or 
hypotheses.
••
Literature review: Content headings apply, as the literature may encompass 
a number of chapters, each of which must include an introduction and 
summary section.
••
Methodology: This includes a justification for the choice of methods and 
details of ethical considerations.
••
Analysis of data: Content headings apply, as this section may encompass a 
number of chapters.
••
Conclusions: Each hypothesis requires a conclusion, and the overall research 
question needs to be concluded.
••
Further research: Suggest a next step or steps in this study.
••
Reference list
••
Appendices

Professional Communication
374
As the thesis evolves from the proposal for work and research design, have an 
overall mind map of your thesis which you develop. It is effective to continue 
to develop the mind maps done for the proposal. Figure 14.5 illustrates the inter-
relationship between all the sections of a thesis.
Figure 14.5  Schematic for a PhD thesis showing the inter-relationship between all sections 
(English, J. 2007. The development of women in the South African construction 
workforce in terms of employment, training and skills acquisition. Unpublished 
thesis. Scotland, Glasgow Caledonian University: 30)

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
375
Write up each section of work as you complete it. This writing will be easier if you 
do it while you are working in the area and while your focus is there, rather than 
leaving it for months or even a year later. By that time, you will have covered 
other empirical work and written up other sections, and lost touch with this work. 
At the end of writing up, when you are tired, you will be grateful to have clear and 
informative introductions and conclusions from each chapter which can be pulled 
together as a basis for the summary or synopsis.
Preliminary pages
The template of your institution will give you the requirements for the title page, 
summary, table of contents and lists of tables and figures. (See Chapter 8 for a full 
description of these standard sections.) In a thesis, you may also need a glossary, 
nomenclature and acknowledgements.
Glossary or definitions of technical terms, acronyms or symbols/
nomenclature
A glossary lists definitions of the technical terms and concepts that you will be 
using. This section is very important if you are using unusual terms or newly 
coined terms. To help you compile the glossary, it is useful to have a non-expert 
(eg a family member or friend) read the text and make a list of the words they do 
not understand.
The nomenclature section lists symbols used. This is particularly important if 
your work includes many equations with various Greek (or other) symbols. 
Acknowledgements
This section is not a requirement, but often writers want to thank professional 
or personal connections who have offered help and support through this long 
process. Keep a list of those who assist you from the time you start so as not to 
forget anyone. You are not under any obligation to include those who were paid 
to do work.
When you submit your thesis, make contact with the people on your 
acknowledgements list. Communicate to them that you have submitted and thank 
them for their assistance. Attach a soft copy of the thesis, if appropriate. 
Introduction
This section sets out your intention for the thesis. Some of this content would 
have been researched for your proposal, with the addition of the detailed problem 
analysis or presentation of hypotheses. The following example shows the possible 
subheadings for an introduction:

Professional Communication
376
eg
1.1 	 Topic of and background to study
1.2 	 Problem statement
1.3 	 Significance of the specified questions or problems
1.4 	 Brief reference to literature out of which the  
hypothesis is presented
1.5	 Major and minor hypotheses
1.6	 Scope and limitations of the study
Describe the main and sub-
questions or -problems to be 
investigated, and state why 
these problems are worth 
investigating. 
State the significance of your 
specified problems in relation 
to your academic discipline, 
business or industry. A full 
motivation may be given in a 
separate section if warranted. 
Researchers in the humanities 
and the social sciences tend 
to explore questions, while 
researchers in science and 
engineering tend to solve 
problems and state hypotheses.
Present problems and 
purposes as hypotheses to 
be proved or disproved by 
the study.
If you are working on a design for your research, you should go through the 
following stages: 
1.	 State the research question or problem and the aims you have to answer or solve 
it. What exactly is the question or problem that you have been set? Can you describe 
it precisely so that you can attempt to answer or solve it? Have you isolated the 
fundamental question or problem? Have you narrowed down its scope?
2.	 State your hypothesis. Alternatively, you may work with hypotheses which 
may be expressed positively or negatively or as a null hypothesis. Hypotheses 
are tentative answers to questions. They are educated guesses to be verified or 
disproved by gathering data and by the logical analysis of relationships between 
data. Formulate your hypotheses after conducting an initial literature review. 
Hypotheses: Major and minor, and research objectives 
A hypothesis should be justified by the reasons it will be proven. 
The following are two examples of a positive hypothesis in the area of 
communication studies:
eg
A communication-needs analysis of students and employees in organisations will result in an 
improved communicative syllabus. This is because … 
Or:
The academic achievements of accountants who do aerobics are significantly higher than 
the achievements of those who do not do aerobics. This is because … 

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
377
An example of a negative hypothesis would be:
eg
The evaluation of driving competence in the driver’s test is inadequate to assess the ability 
of drivers when confronted by extreme weather conditions.
Two examples of a null hypothesis would be:
eg
There is no significant difference in driving competence between drivers who pass the test 
and those who do not.
Or:
There is no significant difference between the academic achievements of accountants who 
do aerobics and those who do not.
To solve a problem, for example the need to increase the number of women in the 
construction industry, you would have the following aim:
eg
The thesis aims to establish the barriers that must be overcome for women and to define 
the skills and employment uptake that needs to be provided for their employment in 
construction.
Emerging from this aim you could have a major hypothesis which is supported by 
a number of minor hypotheses. These, in turn, are unpacked through objectives. 
An example of a main positive hypothesis could be:
eg
In order to achieve this aim, the following hypothesis is tested: Women can be employed as 
artisans on construction sites in South African industry.

Professional Communication
378
A minor positive hypothesis which arises from the main hypothesis could be the 
following:
eg
A sub-hypothesis arising from this is that:
A process and methods can be developed for the improvement of skills in the construction 
industry through the employment of women, and that this development will contribute to:
•	 an environment for economic growth, particularly for entrepreneurship and the 
development of SMMEs as a route to growth
•	 improved infrastructure and services
•	 increased human resources, particularly skills, labour training systems and employment 
creation.
In order to test the hypotheses, the thesis has detailed research objectives which 
set out what you wish to achieve by your research. Key questions may also provide 
a way to unpack the hypothesis and answer it in parts.
eg
The research objectives of this study are to:
•	 ascertain the image of construction and the level of self-awareness of employability in 
construction held by women 
•	 analyse the barriers that need to be dismantled in order to enable more women to enter 
the construction industry, either as employees or as entrepreneurs
•	 assess the attitudes to and the priorities of the industry in relation to the inclusion of 
women in the construction workforce
•	 establish a database of levels of education, work histories, patterns of skill acquisition 
and job status which are available to women working in construction in the spectrum of 
the skilled workforce
•	 define the initiatives needed to facilitate the entry of women into the construction 
industry workforce.
Literature review
A literature review is a chapter in a thesis that debates relevant research read 
and studied by the writer and which has led to the writer’s approach to the work. 
The literature review brings together readings describing different approaches in 
the subject. You use these approaches, formulated by experts, to support your 
theoretical approach. Thus the literature review of prior theory is part of the 
development of the methodology.
Your use of prior knowledge is extremely important, because it gives 
you credibility and places your study in context. It shows how your research 

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
379
project relates to the broad environment of similar research done by others. The 
fundamental view of researchers is that the more you know about other people’s 
work in your field, the better you can approach your own research.
There are three main purposes in undertaking a literature review, namely to:
1.	 gain help in approaching your research problems by finding investigations 
similar to your own and learning how others tackled problems similar to your 
own
2.	 gain theoretical knowledge that enables you to keep your research central
3.	 evaluate your own research by comparing it with that of others.
First, your literature review shows that you have read widely in your chosen topic, 
your field and/or a field close to it. Secondly, a good literature review synthesises 
all the theoretical viewpoints into a whole. It sets these viewpoints under headings 
in a systematic order, for example from general to specific. Thirdly, your literature 
review should not only report on previous work in the field, but should also 
interrogate, compare and critique previous work. You aim to synthesise different 
pieces of work to draw greater conclusions or highlight areas of confusion, 
uncertainty or disagreement. This analysis is very important, because it shows 
your readers that, besides understanding the theory, you are also able to make the 
connections between different theories in a systematic way. 
Make a conscientious and thorough review of the literature. For your supervisor 
to see you have gained this knowledge, you need to discuss and paraphrase 
material you have read. Synthesise and paraphrase the work in your own words to 
indicate your understanding of it. If you repeatedly quote directly from the text, 
you are not indicating your understanding of the text: you are reproducing, not 
reviewing. 
The following is an approach to managing the reading of sources:
1.	 On accessing a document such as a journal article for the first time, read for the 
overarching message. Therefore, read closely the introduction and conclusions 
only and scan the bulk of the article. In this initial reading, you will avoid 
becoming absorbed in the detail – for example, being slowed down by needing 
to understand complex equations – and you will focus on the main message.
2.	 If the content you read is pertinent to your study, re-read and absorb the whole 
article.
The following are approaches to managing the writing of the review:
••
Constantly group other people's studies and relate them to one another, as 
well as to your own study.
••
Compile a hierarchy of information.
••
Connect your special area of interest to the broad historical horizon from 
which you can gain perspective for your work.

Professional Communication
380
••
Emphasise relationships and state exactly what these are.
••
Write a cohesive account of previous research, not simply a chain of 
pointless isolated summaries. Do not, for example, say: ‘X says …; Y says …; 
Z says …’. In other words, review the literature, do not simply reproduce it.
••
Do not quote long passages from the literature. Use short, direct quotations.
••
File the work you are reading in a logical, easy-to-search way. This may 
mean including key words or summaries for each piece of literature. Use a 
referencing tool. 
For details on how to avoid plagiarism and on citing and referencing, see Chapter 12. 
For sourcing and locating data, see Chapter 13.
Methodology or research design
You will have selected appropriate research methods before writing your proposal. 
Methodology is selected according to your discipline and intended outcomes. Your 
supervisor will assist you.
Pay attention also to the methodologies undertaken in literature that is 
relevant to your study; these may suggest approaches useful for you. For detail on 
working with data and different methodologies, see Chapter 13.
Results 
You have to lead your reader through each stage in your argument and negotiate 
your findings with your reader. The results will fall across a number of chapters. 
Each chapter must have a topical, content-based heading. The results must discuss, 
in the text, the graphical material included; that is, tables and figures which are 
required for understanding the thesis.
The results are interpreted by the author for the reader within the context of 
the literature and the theory, and within the context of the problem or hypotheses. 
You should therefore argue as logically as you can and be aware of the bases for 
argumentation discussed in Table 14.1. 
Table 14.1  Bases for argumentation
Aspect
Checklist of questions to ask yourself
Facts and opinions
•	 Have I differentiated between fact and opinion?
•	 Have I judged the reliability and qualifications of my sources?
Inferences
•	 What are the bases for my inferences?
•	 How reliable are they?
•	 How important are they to my conclusions?
Assumptions
•	 Can I justify my assumptions?
•	 How reliable are they?
•	 How important are they to my conclusions?

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
381
Aspect
Checklist of questions to ask yourself
Analogies
Are there enough similarities between the objects or ideas compared 
to justify an analogy?
Logic
•	 Have I pretended to use logic when in reality my argument is 
illogical?
•	 Have I used effective discourse words to reflect my logic?  
(See Chapter 1.)
Primary and 
secondary 
information
Have I used both primary and secondary information? (Primary 
information is information that you have generated, whereas secondary 
information is information that you have gained from other people’s 
work. Always ensure that you acknowledge other people’s work in your 
text through an appropriate citation method. See Chapter 12.)
Conclusions
When you draw a conclusion based on research evidence, make sure that you and 
your reader are aware of the general principles upon which your argument rests. 
These general principles establish a logical connection between your findings and 
your conclusions. They explain why your findings are relevant to your conclusions.
If your thesis presented hypotheses, each of these requires a conclusion. 
Always check your underlying principles or assumptions to make sure that they 
link to your findings and your conclusions reliably. The conclusions to your study 
should reflect all or some of the following:
••
A systematic progression from the known to the unknown
••
Verifiable and accurate results
••
Research conducted objectively
••
Conclusions clearly drawn from facts by logical reasoning.
Future work or recommendations
Based on the conclusions, you may suggest future work arising out of your study 
and conclusions. This future work may be further research to be conducted by 
a researcher, or it may mean actions to be adopted or changes to be made in 
systems described. It is desirable to include this section, as all research is part of a 
continuum and you need to show that your work is not isolated.
References
The list of references (which may be called a reference appendix) comes at the end 
of the main thesis chapters but before the appendices. Before you seek articles and 
other reference material, set up a system for automated citation and referencing, 
such as RefWorks or Zotero. Programs such as these enable you to store and access 
your readings. See Chapter 12 for more on these programs.  

Professional Communication
382
Appendices
Any data which should be absorbed by the reader as part of the understanding of 
the document must be presented in the main document; that is, in the appropriate 
chapter in the results. However, a study of the breadth and depth of a postgraduate 
thesis may contain information that is too detailed, complex or simply not 
sufficiently relevant to the main argument to be contained in the document. Such 
information can be contained in an appendix and must be referred to in the text of 
the thesis. Increasingly, the appendices are placed on a CD, even where the thesis 
is printed in hard copy.
Examples of data appropriate for the appendices are:
••
computer printouts  
••
codes for mathematical modelling 
••
detailed mathematical calculations 
••
examples of questionnaires
••
transcriptions of recorded dialogue
••
illustrations such as sets of photographs and plans
••
supporting correspondence.
Appendices are not part of the document, so are not given a chapter number or title. 
They are listed by letters of the alphabet and with the title of each appendix given.
eg
Appendix A: Acts and Promulgations
Appendix B: Acts and Regulatory Bodies
Appropriate style for a thesis 
You should take great care over your style:
••
For some disciplines (eg engineering) you are required to write in a formal, 
impersonal style which, in keeping with the scientific approach, emphasises 
your research work rather than you as the experimenter. For others (eg the 
social sciences), a personal voice is required, as it demonstrates the writer 
taking ownership of the opinions expressed. 
••
Check your argument for clarity and conciseness: sentences in a paragraph 
must have a logical narrative flow. 
••
Write in the active voice rather than the passive voice. 
••
The past tense is commonly used, as work is completed when written up. 
The introduction may be written in the present tense, as it describes the 
thesis, which is current. Avoid mixing tenses in one section. 

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
383
••
Choose your vocabulary well and use a low average number of words per 
sentence. Use effectively chosen discourse words (conjunctions, conjunctive 
adverbs, pronouns) to ensure your argument flows well. 
Finally, start the process early to give yourself time to review the document and 
for others to read it and give you feedback. Do not leave the writing until a few 
days before the deadline; a carefully crafted paper takes time to create but will 
have more chance of acceptance or publication. 
For more details on effective writing style, see Chapter 1. Also see  Chapter 13 
for a discussion on academic writing style. These principles also apply to writing 
an academic proposal.
Presentation of a thesis
A written message is both a verbal and a non-verbal message. The appearance 
of the text and in particular the elements mentioned in the list below affect the 
readability of that text. Always make sure that your thesis is as appealing to the 
eye as possible and that the text is easy to follow. In this way you will avoid two 
of the major barriers to clear communication: a badly set out text and a dense 
style that is hard to follow.
A thesis is a structured document with major and minor numbered headings 
to guide the reader through the essential components of the text at a glance. Some 
institutions provide templates pre-set with the desired formatting. For journal articles, 
numbering is not required. All journals provide strict guidelines or a template. 
If you are not given one, create a template. A well-constructed template will 
ensure that your document looks professional and is easy to edit, particularly 
if it includes built-in functions such as cross-referencing to make editing and 
formatting easier over time. See Chapter 2 for more on templates and using 
Microsoft® Word™ effectively.
Most institutions and all journals specify a template. However, if you need to 
create or choose one, there are various important elements to consider, namely the:
••
cover
••
layout of the title page
••
typeface chosen
••
use of white space throughout the text
••
numbering system
••
effective use of type styles to indicate the hierarchy of material and text 
emphasis 
••
built-in, automated functions for all captions, illustration titles, equations, 
cross-references and citations
••
colour to direct the eye to key points in diagrams or other graphics. 
However, keep in mind that if the thesis is to be printed, the graphics need to 
be readable in greyscale.

Professional Communication
384
Timetable and tasks for writing a thesis
Allow two months at the beginning for settling in and at the end to put the 
finishing touches to the whole thesis. If there is a lead-in or follow-up study to the 
main methodology, allow a few more months. A timetable such as the one in Table 
14.2 could be shown in detail for each chapter. The word counts and timelines 
given in Table 14.2 are a guideline — these details will depend on your institution 
and on whether you are submitting a thesis at honours, master’s or PhD level.
Table 14.2  Guidelines for writing a PhD thesis
Chapter
Section*
%
Words
Months**
1
Introduction
   5
  3 500
 3
2
Literature review
  30
21 000
 6
3
Methodology
  20
14 000
 4
4
Data analysis
  25
17 500
 5
5
Conclusions and implications
  20
14 000
 6
100
70 000
24
* Some sections may be written in a different order or concurrently.
** Suggestions for minimum time are given.
Table 14.3 summarises all the tasks that need to be completed and ways to 
approach them.
Table 14.3  Summary of your thesis-writing tasks
Thesis task
Description of task
How to do the task
1.
Prepare your 
thesis proposal.
Think about what research you 
wish to do. Think about your 
problem statement and the 
exact purpose of your research. 
Read widely around the 
research topic.
Follow the guidelines in 
this chapter and prepare a 
detailed research proposal that 
communicates to your supervisor.
2.
Once your 
proposal has 
been accepted, 
work on your 
terms of 
reference (your 
MoU) with your 
supervisor.
The terms of reference is a 
statement of your supervisor’s 
instructions to you. These 
instructions will show the 
purposes and scope of your 
research. You and your 
supervisor must agree on these 
terms of reference.
•	 Seek written approval of 
your proposal and terms of 
reference.
•	 Apply for ethics clearance if 
pertinent.
•	 Confirm your MoU.

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
385
Thesis task
Description of task
How to do the task
3.
On the basis of 
your reading 
and research, 
create a topic 
outline of your 
thesis.
This is a detailed numbered 
topic or heading outline in the 
correct order.
•	 Generate a master document 
in Microsoft® Word™.
•	 Use Outline view in 
Microsoft® Word™ to draw 
up a detailed outline to guide 
your writing. (See Chapter 2.)
4.
Read about 
the theories 
on which you 
will base your 
research. Work 
out your own 
theoretical 
base. This is 
your literature 
review.
The literature review brings 
together all the theories that 
give you a basis for your 
research. It also positions your 
research in the context of work 
that has already been done. 
Where novelty is required (eg 
for a PhD) it highlights where 
the gap/s in the literature is/are. 
•	 Use your library to find 
relevant books, journal 
articles, theses and other 
sources.
•	 Use the Internet to find 
information. However, you 
need to check your sources 
very carefully. Include a 
disclaimer in your literature 
review, especially if you are 
not using refereed sources.
•	 Make sure that you synthesise 
theories. Do not simply say ‘X 
says …’ or ‘Y says …’.
5.
Prepare a list 
of the research 
procedures 
that you have 
followed. These 
procedures are 
also called your 
methodology.
This is a detailed description of 
the exact research procedures 
that you have followed. Describe 
all experimental apparatus and 
your techniques for gathering 
information. This will include 
technical descriptions. Include 
a range of illustrations here, 
especially diagrams.
•	 Describe exactly what you 
did, in such detail that your 
reader is able to repeat your 
procedure.
•	 Use the past tense to describe 
what you did.
•	 Write in an impersonal, active 
style.
6.
Present your 
findings or 
results.
This is a detailed statement of 
what you found out as a result 
of your research. It is a factual 
account.
•	 Set out your facts in a logical 
order.
•	 Use a range of illustrations, 
including flow charts, 
tables, graphs, diagrams and 
photographs.
•	 Integrate your illustrations 
into your text. Show your 
supervisor where to look by 
using arrows and shading.
•	 Write in a factual, impersonal 
style.

Professional Communication
386
Thesis task
Description of task
How to do the task
7.
Discuss your 
findings or 
results.
Interpret the significance of 
your facts in terms of your 
theoretical approach. Use this 
section to prepare your reader 
for your conclusions. You may 
position your results in the 
context of and in comparison 
with the literature. 
•	 Make sure that you show the 
differences between facts, 
your interpretation of the 
facts, others’ opinions and 
speculation. 
•	 If you draw inferences, state 
whether they are strong or 
weak.
•	 Indicate your confidence in 
the results, discuss errors and 
uncertainties, and explain 
how you minimised these.
8.
Draw 
conclusions.
Conclusions are not a summary 
of your findings. They are 
inferences drawn from your 
results. 
•	 Use implication language, 
with the correct use of 
modifying and qualifying 
words such as ‘however’, ‘if’ 
and ‘nevertheless’.
•	 Do not introduce new 
information at this stage.
9.
Recommend 
action.
This is the exact action that 
should be taken as a result of 
the conclusions. This action 
stresses further research 
required, better designed 
experiments or better designed 
research. Your research may 
have implications for policy 
makers, the corporate world, 
industry etc. In this case, 
include recommendations 
applicable to these groups. 
•	 Use imperatives here.
•	 Stress the exact action to be 
taken.
•	 Do not introduce new 
information at this stage. 
Your recommendations must 
flow from your conclusions, 
which should flow from your 
findings.
10.
Put together all 
your references.
The development of your 
reference list should be ongoing 
and preferably managed via 
referencing software. 
You may also have a 
bibliography. This includes your 
general reading and related 
work that you have read but 
have not referenced.
See Chapter 12 for guidelines 
on citation and referencing.
•	 Use the Harvard method of 
referencing (unless otherwise 
specified — check with your 
supervisor).
•	 In your reference section, 
record only those works that 
you read, used directly or 
quoted from.
•	 If you have a bibliography, 
this should include work that 
you read but did not use 
directly.

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
387
Thesis task
Description of task
How to do the task
11.
Write your 
summary.
This is a summary chapter. It 
must be so well written that 
it replaces your thesis for the 
busy reader. It is commonly one 
or two pages, except in some 
institutions which require up 
to 10 pages. It is placed at the 
beginning of your thesis and has 
a high impact.
•	 Summarise all the sections of 
your thesis.
•	 You may include a good 
summary illustration, such as 
a photograph or diagram.
•	 Write this section last.
12.
Check that your 
preliminary 
sections 
are correct. 
They are an 
important 
lead-in to your 
thesis.
Check that the table of contents 
and list of illustrations have 
been updated in the template. 
Check that the glossary and 
nomenclature are there and are 
complete. 
Use your formatting styles 
correctly. You can then generate 
your table of contents and your 
list of illustrations automatically. 
13.
Draw up an 
index, if your 
supervisor 
considers this 
necessary.
An index is an alphabetical list 
of all the important ideas and 
concepts used in your thesis. 
The pages on which these ideas 
are listed are given.
Use your word processer to 
put together your index. If you 
cannot do this, write each idea 
on a card, with the relevant page 
number. Then put your cards into 
alphabetical order.
14.
Edit your thesis. 
Confirm that 
the formatting 
is correct.
This is a final check to get rid 
of all errors in content (eg 
references) and presentation 
(eg layout, numbering and 
pagination).
•	 Use your software to check 
your spelling and grammar. 
(See Chapter 2.)
•	 Have another person or 
several other people read 
your whole thesis to check for 
errors.
15.
Assemble the 
final master 
copy.
Online and soft copy theses  
are becoming more common.  
For hard copy, allow up to a 
week for copying and binding.
There is a required number to be 
printed: one for the university 
library, one for each supervisor 
and each examiner, and the 
number you want for yourself. 
Thus you may need a minimum of 
five copies.

Professional Communication
388
14.4	 Papers and journal articles
Many theses are comprised of a number of academic papers which were written 
in the course of the research and presented at conferences or published in 
journals. Your research is your passion, but it may not necessarily be your reader’s 
prime interest. Even if also in your field, others will not necessarily have your 
background, as they may not have been drilling down into the same detail. Readers 
and listeners will not remain interested if your content is not well explained. 
Follow these guidelines when you present your work as a paper or journal article: 
••
Present your work in the context of other research.
••
Ensure you define all terms and concepts. 
••
Minimise theoretical sections in favour of experimental, new material.
••
Avoid overloading the text with detail (eg pages of equations) which is only 
relevant to the full thesis.
A paper must tell a story about a section of the work. The first paper may be based 
on the literature study, a following one on methodologies, and more than one may 
come out of the results. The introduction to a paper needs to attract the reader: 
motivate, state what is particularly pertinent about this work and how it relates or 
not to other work. Give the structure of the paper. 
Figure 14.6 shows how the layout accommodates illustrative matter.
Figure 14.6  An academic journal paper in a template that accommodates two columns 
(Drewe, JA, O’Riain, MJ, Beamish, E, Currie H & Parsons, S. 2012. ‘Survey 
of Infections Transmissible between Baboons and Humans, Cape Town, South 
Africa’. Emerging Infectious Diseases 18(2), February: 298–301)

Academic proposals, dissertations, theses and papers      Chapter 14
389
✔
Checklist for a well organised and coherent proposal, thesis or article
For your research to be effective, it must be accessible to the reader. Consider the following 
pointers:
•	 Make sure the background to the thesis is clear. The reader should know why the study 
was undertaken.
•	 Clearly set out the objectives in the introduction.
•	 If there are hypotheses, set them out clearly in the introduction or in the literature 
review. Justify them. 
•	 Set out the specific problems either in the introduction or in a separate chapter.
•	 Organise the chapters logically.
•	 In the final chapter, draw together all the arguments and findings in the thesis.
•	 Make sure the overviews and summaries for each chapter are adequate.
•	 Check that the thesis is an integrated whole, with every graphic device in the right 
place and properly referred to.
•	 Make sure the reader knows how to interpret complex tables and other graphics.
Go through this checklist regarding the parts of the thesis:
•	 The title page should be well set out.
•	 The synopsis, summary or abstract should reflect the entire content of the thesis.
•	 The table of contents should be informative.
•	 Avoid obscure one-word headings. These should be expanded for clarity.
•	 Make sure all the illustrations and equations are listed, each one with a number and a 
clear title.
•	 Check if you need to include a glossary or nomenclature. 
•	 Make sure your introduction is clear.
•	 Include a specific chapter on method if required.
•	 Make the chapter headings clear and specific.
•	 If conclusions are drawn, set them out clearly in a conclusions chapter.
•	 If recommendations are made or suggestions for future work, set them out clearly in a 
separate chapter.
•	 Set out the references at the end of each chapter according to the chosen specifications.
•	 Organise the appendices. Refer to each appendix in the main body of the thesis. Make 
sure the reader knows how to interpret the information in the appendices.
Go through this checklist regarding the discourse structure and logic:
•	 Use proper links between the chapters so that the reader can follow your arguments.
•	 Use proper links between paragraphs.
•	 Use sentence links within paragraphs so that your reader can follow your arguments.
•	 Adhere to the principles of unity, coherence and emphasis.
•	 Avoid leaps in logic or unsupported generalities in the argument.
•	 Label your assumptions as such and justify or reference them.
•	 Label your inferences.
•	 Justify any analogies.

Professional Communication
390
Go through this checklist regarding the language and readability:
•	 Use referential (factual) language.
•	 Base your arguments on facts. (For example, do not write ‘obviously’ when there are no 
facts to support this emotive statement.)
•	 Choose your vocabulary carefully to reflect on the topic.
•	 Pitch your writing at the correct level of formality.
•	 Check your grammar. For example, check that subjects and verbs agree in number.
•	 Set your word processor to the correct spelling for your area.
•	 Write paragraphs of reasonable length (100–200 words). Avoid large blocks of 
continuous writing. 
•	 Write sentences that are coherent and of reasonable length (on average about 15–20 
words per sentence).
•	 Avoid overly complex sentences with convoluted arguments. Rather simplify these.
•	 Create a template that is inviting to the eye.
•	 Make sure there is good cross-referencing between sections: body of document to 
appendices, chapter to chapter, section to section, text to graphics and literature 
references.
•	 Present an integrated message.

391
Bibliography and 
suggested reading
Barkley, EF, Cross, KP & Major, CH. 2005. Collaborative learning techniques: A 
handbook for college faculty. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Berlo, DK. 1960. Process of Communication. New York: International Thomson 
Publishing.
Bolman, LG & Deal, TE. 2008. Reframing Organizations: Artistry, Choice and 
Leadership. 4th edition. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Case, JM. 2013. Researching student learning in higher education: A social realist 
approach. London: Routledge.
Chetty, S. 2012. Tackling interview questions. UCT Careers Service Guide 
2012. Available: http://www.careers.uct.ac.za/sites/default/files/image_tool/
images/37/tackling_interview_questions.pdf. (Accessed 29 September 2016).
Cleary, S, Harran, M, Luck, J, Potgieter, S, Scheckle, E, Van der Merwe, R & Van 
Heerden, K. 2010. Communication: A Hands on Approach. Claremont: Juta.
Curry, DE. 2005. Developing and Applying Study Skills: Writing Assignments, 
Dissertations and Management Reports. London: CIPD.
De George, RT. 2015. A history of business ethics. Available: http://www.scu.edu/
ethics/practicing/focusareas/business/conference/presentations/businessethics-
history.html. (Accessed 2 October 2016).
Durrheim, K. 2006. ‘Basic quantitative analysis’, in Research in practice: Applied 
methods for the social sciences. Cape Town: UCT Press: 188–214.
Engineering Council of South Africa: Rules of Conduct for Registered Persons: 
Engineering Profession Act, 2000 (Act No. 46 of 2000). Available: 
https://www.ecsa.co.za/regulation/RegulationDocs/2014_Code_of_Conduct.pdf 
(Accessed 13 December 2016).
Giordano, L. 2016. The ultimate guide to job interview preparation. Available: 
https://www.livecareer.com/quintessential/job-interview-preparation. 
(Accessed 29 September 2016).
Gustavii, B. 2008. How to Write and Illustrate a Scientific Paper. 2nd Edition. 
United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Gutierrez, K. 2014. Studies confirm the power of visuals in elearning. Available: 
http://info.shiftelearning.com/blog/bid/350326/Studies-Confirm-the-Powerof-
Visuals-in-eLearning. (Accessed 23 October 2016).

Professional Communication
392
Hamilton, C. 2010. Communicating for Results: A Guide for Business and the 
Professions. 9th Edition. California: Thomson/Wadsworth.
Holmes, L. 2013. ‘Competing perspectives on graduate employability: Possession, 
position or process?’ Studies in Higher Education 38(4): 538–554.
Hovland, CI. 1957. The Order of Presentation in Persuasion. New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Hudson. 2016. Career advice. Available: http://au.hudson.com/job-seekers/
helpfultips-career-advice. (Accessed 29 September 2016).
Jansen, JD. 2007. ‘The research question’. In First steps in research, 2nd Edition, 
edited by K Maree. Hatfield, Pretoria: Van Schaik: 1–13.
Kitchin, R. & Fuller, D. 2005. Academics’ Guide to Publishing. Thousand Oaks: 
Sage
MacLeod, L. & Zanders, E. 2010. Presentation Skills for Scientists: A Practical 
Guide. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.
Maree, K & Pietersen, J. 2007. ‘The quantitative research process’, in First steps in 
research, 2nd edition, edited by K Maree. Pretoria: Van Schaik: 145–153.
Maxwell, JA. 2013. Qualitative research design: An interactive approach. 3rd 
edition. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Nieuwenhuis, J. 2007. ‘Introducing qualitative research’, in First steps in research, 
2nd edition, edited by K Maree. Pretoria: Van Schaik: 47–68.
O’Hair, D, Friedrich, G and Dixon, L. 2011. Strategic Communication in Business 
and the Professions. 7th Edition. Cape Town: Allyn and Bacon.
Pease, A & Pease, B. 2011. Body Language in the Work Place. London: Orion.
Porter, ME. 1985. Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior 
performance. New York: Free Press.
Ratele, K. 2006. ‘Postcolonial African methods and interpretation’, in Research in 
practice: Applied methods for the social sciences, 2nd edition, edited by M 
Terre Blanche, K Durrheim & D Painter. Cape Town: UCT Press: 539–556.
Rogers, CR. 1951. Client Centred Therapy: Its Current Practice, Implications and 
Theory. London: Constable and Company Limited.
Samovar, L, Porter, R & McDaniel, E. 2010. Communication between Cultures. 7th 
Edition. Wadsworth: Cengage Learning.
Sandler, C & Keefe, J. 2004. 1001 Letters for All Occasions: The Best Models for 
Every Business & Personal Need. Cincinnati: Adams Media.
Seely, J. 2005. The Oxford Guide to Effective Writing and Speaking. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Seglin, JL. 2002. The AMA Handbook of Business Letters. New York: AMACOM 
American Management Association.
Terre Blanche, M & Durrheim, K. 2006. ‘Histories of the present: Social science 
research in context’, in Research in practice: Applied methods for the social 
sciences, 2nd edition, edited by M Terre Blanche, K Durrheim & D Painter. Cape 
Town: UCT Press: 1–17.

Bibliography and suggested reading
393
Terre Blanche, M, Durrheim, K & Kelly, K. 2006. ‘First steps in qualitative data 
analysis’, in Research in practice: Applied methods for the social sciences, 
edited by M Terre Blanche, K Durrheim & D Painter. Cape Town: UCT Press: 
321–344.
Tubbs, S. 2007. A systems approach to small group interaction. 9th edition. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Tubbs, S & Moss, S. 2008. Human communication: Principles and contexts. 11th 
edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tufte, ER. 2001. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. 2nd edition. 
Cheshire: Graphics Press.
Turabian, K. 2007. A Manual for Writers of Research Papers, Theses and 
Dissertations. 7th Edition. Revised by WC Booth, GG Colomb & JM Williams. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Available: http://www.press.uchicago.
edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/M/bo5059214.html (Accessed 5 August 2011).
Van Staden, E, Marx, S & Erasmus-Kritzinger, L. 2011. Corporate Communication: 
Getting the Message Across. 2nd Edition. Pretoria: Van Schaik.
Virtual Dr. 2016. [Forum discussion] Available: http://discussions.virtualdr.com/
showthread.php?212865-Silly-Analogies. (Accessed 17 October 2016).
Von Brocke, K. 2012. The Marketing Mix. [illustration]. Available: https://vonbrocke. 
files.wordpress.com/2012/10/the-marketing-mix-or-4ps-of-marketing.png. 
(Accessed 4 October 2016).
Wassenaar, DR. 2006. ‘Ethical issues in social science research’, in Research in 
practice: Applied methods for the social sciences, 2nd edition, edited by M 
Terre Blanche, K Durrheim & D Painter. Cape Town: UCT Press: 60–79.
Weil, V. 2003. Emerging technologies and ethical issues in engineering: Papers 
from a workshop, October 14–15, 2003. Chapter: Ethics in engineering 
education. Ethics across the curriculum: Preparing engineering and science 
faculty to introduce ethics into their teaching. Available: http://books.nap.edu/
openbook.php?record_id=11083&page=119. (Accessed 17 October 2016).
Williams, K, Krizan, A, Logan, J and Merrier, P. 2011. Communicating in Business. 
8th Edition. USA: South Western Cengage Learning.
Wordhippo.com. 2016. What is the meaning of the word gobbledygook? Available: 
http://www.wordhippo.com/what-is/the-meaning-of-the-word/gobbledygook. 
html. (Accessed 17 October 2016).

394
Index
A
abstract  227, 367, 368
	
see also summary
academic CV  119–122, 119–122
academic papers  387–388
	
guidelines for  388
	
template for  388
academic proposals  364–373
	
background of researcher  370
	
description of proposed research  368
	
introduction  368
	
justification for research  368–369
	
layout suggested for  367–373
	
main elements of  366
	
mind map  371
	
outline of proposed thesis  370–371, 371
	
preliminary bibliography  372–373
	
preliminary literature review  369
	
problem statement  365, 373
	
proposed evaluation and timeline  372, 372
	
proposed methodology or procedure  369–
	
	
370, 370
	
research methodology proposed  365, 366,
	
	
369
	
resource requirements  372
	
summary or abstract  367, 368
	
title page  367
academic thesis
	
acknowledgements  375
	
aim  377, 377
	
appendices  382
	
argumentation  380–381
	
conclusions  381
	
elements of  373–382
	
future work or recommendations  381
	
glossary  375
	
hypothesis  376–378, 376, 377, 378
	
introduction  375–376, 376
	
length of  373
	
literature review  378–380
	
managing of reading of sources  379
	
methodology or research design  380
	
mind map of  374, 374
	
preliminary pages  375
	
presentation of  383
	
references  381
	
research objectives  378, 378
	
research question or problem  376
	
results  380
	
style for  382–383
	
summary of tasks for writing  384–387
	
template for  383
	
timetable  384, 384
academic writing  351–355
	
analysis of topic  351–352, 352
	
approach to  351–352
	
conclusion  353
	
formatting  354
	
introduction  352–353
	
proofreading of  355
	
structure  352
	
style  353–354, 353, 354
acknowledgements
	
in reports  224, 225
	
in thesis  375
action  170
	
items  153, 161
	
minutes  177–179, 178
	
table of  153, 156, 157, 179–180, 180
active voice  15, 22, 180, 181, 219, 382
adjustment (emails/letters)  86, 89, 92–94, 93, 94
advertisements, for proposals  186–188
agenda
	
confirming of  151, 154, 
	
embedding of a file in  168, 169
	
format of  158
	
item  174
	
layout  158
	
numbering  163–165, 164, 165
	
purpose of  158
	
standard items  160–162, 160–162
	
template for  158
	
see also working agenda
aide memoire  149, 170
aim (of thesis)  377, 377
AIP see American Institute of Physics 
ambiguity  20, 343
American Institute of Physics (AIP) system  327
American Psychological Association (APA) system
	
	
323, 330
analytical tools (for proposals)  188, 188
animations  295
	
effect of  306
	
options in Microsoft PowerPoint  306, 307
	
in oral presentations  306–308
annual general meeting  149
anxiety (dealing with)  254–255
APA see American Psychological Association 
appendices
	
to proposals  197
	
to reports  214, 243–244, 244
	
to thesis  382

Index
395
argument
	
flaws in  7–10
	
logic of  7
argumentation (in thesis), checklist for bases of 
	
	
380–381
article, checklist for well-organised and coherent
	
	
389–390
assignment (academic writing)  351–355
	
analysis of topic  351–352, 352
	
approach to  351–352
	
conclusion  353
	
formatting  354
	
introduction  352–353
	
principles to achieve consistency in group
	
	
355–356
	
proofreading of  355
	
structure  352
	
style  353–354
assumptions  10–11, 380, 381
audience
	
analysis of  247
	
and choice of figures  278, 279
	
and non-verbal cues  260, 261
	
and presentation skills  246, 248, 249, 250,
	
	
255, 255, 256, 257, 266
	
rapport with  255–257
	
and visual aids  261, 263, 264, 269
	
see also reader; readership; receiver 
author–date methods of referencing  323–327
	
books  325, 325
	
different types of sources  325–327
	
in-text citation  322, 323, 323, 324, 324
	
journal article  325, 326
	
personal communication  326, 326
	
reference list  322, 323, 323, 324
	
secondary source  326–327, 326
	
website  326, 326
authority
	
in negotiation  140, 141
	
in presentations  256
AutoCorrect  52–53, 52
autocratic leadership  134
automated citation and referencing  381
Automated Computer Telephone Interviewing
	
(ACTI)  344
automated features in Word  61–64
automatic correction see AutoCorrect
autonomy  320
B
bar graphs  272, 273, 279, 282–285, 283–285
	
cumulativebar graphs  283–284, 284
	
grouped bar graphs  283, 283
bargaining  137, 138, 140
	
vs joint problem solving  138
barriers, overcoming of  266, 267
best practice  140, 165
bias  321, 347
bibliography  64, 65, 66, 67, 322, 328, 372–373,
	
	
386
bilateral bar graphs  285, 285
blind carbon copy (Bcc)  94, 213
blogs  31, 357, 357 
board meeting  149, 154
body language  129, 254, 260
	
dynamism (of speaker)  256, 257
	
eye contact  255, 260, 268
books (referencing of)  325, 325, 328, 328
Boolean operators  335, 335, 336, 337
branding  33, 69, 201
bullet points (on slides)  297–298, 297
business plans, checklist for effective  211
business plans
	
budget  198
	
company’s finances  209
	
description of basic business idea  206–207,
	
	
207
	
description of management team  207
	
description of products and services  207, 207
	
description of proposed organisation  209
	
exit plan  207
	
exit strategy  198, 199
	
financial plan  202, 209, 209–210
	
goal setting for  200, 200
	
goals and objectives  199, 200, 206
	
justification  210
	
legal requirements  209
	
marketing and sales plan  201, 208, 208
	
marketing mix  201, 201
	
production programme  201
	
vs proposals  184, 198
	
proposed company location  209
	
purpose of  198
	
stages in development of  199, 200
	
statement of requirement  210, 210
	
summary  203, 203–204, 205–206
	
target market  199
	
title page  202, 202
	
vision or mission statement  199, 206
	
writing of  202–210
business proposals
	
advertisements for  186–188
	
analytical tools  188, 188
	
appendices  197
	
body of  193–196, 193–196
	
proposals vs business plans  184, 198
	
checklist for effective  211
	
client’s objectives  190, 190
	
costs  190
	
creating an overview of  189
	
glossary  193
	
justification for  185, 191, 193, 196–197,
	
	
197, 203, 210
	
non-requested  188, 198
	
objectives  185, 185
	
references  197
	
requested  186–188
	
summary  190–191, 191
	
symbols and acronyms  193
	
table of contents  192, 192–193
	
tables and figures  193
	
terms of reference  189–190
	
title page  189
	
types of  186–188
	
writing of  189–198
C
captions  63–64, 63
captions and titles  270–271
CAQDAS see Computer-Assisted Qualitative Data 

Professional Communication
396
Analysis Software 
case studies  344–345, 345
chair (in meetings), role of  149, 150
	
conclusion of meeting  155
	
confirming agenda  151, 154
	
controlling the process  155
	
opening the meeting  154, 155
charts  285–287, 286, 287, 288–290, 288–290
	
parts of  278–279, 279
	
term  278
	
see also graphs  
checklist
	
for bases of argumentation  380–381
	
for business proposals and business plans  211
	
for correspondence  98
	
for creating graphics  295
	
for CV, letter of application and interview
	
	
130
	
for managers  147
	
for meetings  183
	
for message  27
	
for monitoring online presence and 
developing skills  72
	
for presentations  268
	
for presenting with visual aids  313
	
for proposal, thesis or article  389–390
	
for reports  245
	
for research task  333
	
for working with data  362
chief negotiator  140
chronological/traditional CV  100–111, 101–111
citation
	
automated  381
	
editing of  67, 67
	
inserting a  65–66, 66
	
in text  322, 323, 323, 324, 324, 327, 327
claims in correspondence  89–92
	
see also complaints, letters
clarity (of voice)  258, 258
clichés  74, 75
Clipboard, the  42–43, 43
cloud 
	
sharing  246
	
storage  152
	
system  6, 32
Code of Corporate Practices and Conduct  145
codes 
	
of conduct  29, 142, 143, 144, 144, 146
	
of ethics  142, 144, 146, 147
coherence 
	
in findings  236
	
in piece of writing  11–12
	
in presentation  248, 248
	
in reports  216–217
collaborative writing  6, 7, 355–356
	
collaboration tools  32–33, 356
	
online tools for  356
	
over a distance  356
	
principles to achieve consistency in  355–356
	
style guide  355
columns (of text)  26–27
command buttons  46
comments feature  54
commercial collaboration tools  32
committee, purpose and operation of  149
communication
	
good practice  139
	
skills  33, 127, 148, 326
	
tools  32, 131
complaints  89–92
	
see also claims
compromise  136
Computer-Assisted Qualitative Data Analysis 
Software (CAQDAS)  350–351
Computer-Assisted Telephone Interviewing (CATI)
	
	
344
conclusion  11, 13, 14
	
in assignments  353
	
of meeting  155
	
of presentation  249
	
in reports  214, 240, 241–242
	
in thesis  381
conduct, codes of  29, 142, 143, 144, 144, 146
conference presentations  119, 120, 251 
confidentiality  321, 343, 346
conflict of interest  146–147
conjunctions  15, 216, 217
	
see also linking words; transition
connecting words and phrases  14, 240, 241
	
see also linking words; transition words and 
phrases
connectors (between sections)  11, 245, 360
consent (to research)  321
consistency (in documentation)  33, 34, 42
constitution, of organisation  148, 149
contents slide  310, 310
contents, table of  61–62, 62
continuity in content  11 
copy and paste  42–45
copyright
	
issues  2, 298
	
symbol  53
	
on theses  364 
corporate
	
branding  69
	
ethical practice, in South Africa  145–146,
	
	
146
	
ethics  140, 142, 143, 145
	
governance 142, in South Africa  145
	
social responsibility  143, 145
	
wrongdoing  143
correspondence
	
checklist for well-organised and persuasive
	
	
98
	
courteous and tactful tone  76–77
	
etiquette for digital  94–98
	
formal and informal tone  74–76
	
formats  78–81, 79–80
	
purpose  79–80
	
readability  77, 80
	
structure  77–78
	
styles  79, 79–80
	
templates  80–81
	
see also email; letters; message
cover page  12
covering letter  82, 83
	
presentation and formatting  127
	
structure of  123–127, 124–127
	
see also letter of application

Index
397
credibility
	
as speaker  255, 256, 256–257
	
of writer  7, 15
cross-cultural issues  143, 244
cross-references  63, 63
cross-referencing  216, 390
	
line graph  281–282, 282
curriculum vitae (CV)
	
academic  119–122, 119–122
	
checklist for  130
	
chronological/traditional  100–111, 101–111
	
non-traditional/functional  111–118, 112–118
	
presentation and formatting  127
	
summary  100
	
supporting documents  22, 125, 127
	
templates  100
	
types of  99–122
custom table style  69–71, 70, 71
CV see curriculum vitae 
D
dashboard (of links to slides)  310, 311, 312
data
	
analysis techniques  348–349
	
checklist for working with  362
	
numerical  316, 317
	
preparing for analysis of  348, 348
	
presentation of  261–263, 262
	
sources  334
databases  336, 337, 338, 339
De Bono’s Six Thinking Hats  136
decimal numbering system  6, 163, 216, 236
decision-making, sequence  288
deduction  9, 10
delivery (verbal) see presentation
democratic leader, qualities of  135
descriptive data analysis techniques  348
Dewey’s six stages of problem solving  136, 136,
	
	
189
diagrams  2, 4, 4, 291
digital work skills  28, 32–45
direct expression  15, 22
direct eye contact 255, 260, 268
direct quotations  332, 380
direct speech  180, 181, 182
directories  338
discourse structure  11–12, 177, 216–217
dissertation see thesis
document
	
basic elements of written  12–14 
	
body of written  13
	
conclusion of  13, 14
	
copy and paste from  42–45
	
editing of  53–54
	
practical steps in producing  7–12
	
properties  38–39, 39
	
protection  38
	
type of structure  6
documentation
	
guidelines on  152, 158
	
in meetings  153
	
skills  33–45
	
storage  152
draft, editing of final  23–27
dressing (for presentation)  265
Dropbox  6, 32, 356
E
editing
	
citation  67, 67
	
document  53–54
	
with Slide Master  303, 303, 305
	
Track Changes  49, 53–54, 53, 54
electronic 
	
journal databases  335, 336, 338
	
signatures  30, 78
email 
	
accounts, personal vs professional  29–30
	
of application see covering letter; letter of 
application
	
etiquette  97–98
	
styles  79
	
of transmittal  223
	
types of  81–94
	
see also correspondence; letters; message
embedding, of documents/files in an agenda  168, 
169
empathy (in presentation)  255
emphasis  12, 24
	
in presentation  249
	
in reports  217
end matter (in reports)  243–244
epistemology  315
e-portfolio  31, 357–358, 358
ethical 
	
clearance (research)  320, 384
	
codes  131
	
culture  143
	
issues (in research)  320, 346, 347
ethics 
	
of care  143
	
codes of  142, 144, 146, 147
	
and conflict of interest  146–147
	
at corporate level  142
	
description of  140
	
at individual level  142
	
integration of  144, 144
	
levels of  143–144, 145
	
philosophical principles in  320 
	
at professional level  142
	
in research  319–321
	
role of CEO in  143
	
rules and laws  141
	
schools of thought regarding  142–143
	
theories of  142, 143
etiquette for digital correspondence  94–98
evaluation and timeline (academic proposal)  372,
	
	
372
evaluative reports  220, 222–223
	
acknowledgements  224, 225
	
appendices  243–244, 244
	
checklist for  245
	
conclusions  240, 241–242
	
example of  224–244
	
findings  235–237, 237–240
	
glossary  232, 232
	
illustrations (list of)  231, 232

Professional Communication
398
	
introduction  233, 234
	
method of investigation  234–235, 235
	
recommendations  242, 242–243
	
summary  226–227, 228–229
	
symbols or acronyms (list of)  232
	
table of contents  229, 229–231
	
terms of reference  225, 226, 242
	
title and title page  224, 224
exit strategy  198, 199
expertise (as speaker)  256, 256
expression, expertise, projection (in presentation)
	
	
256, 256,257–259, 258–259
F
faxes  80, 98
feasibility reports  223
figures
	
captions and titles  270–271
	
numbering of  270
	
templates for  272
	
term  270
	
type of  278
	
see also graphics; illustrations; images; visual 
aids
financial plan  202, 209, 209 
findings
	
coherence in  236
	
discussion of  236–237
	
example of  237–240
	
illustrations  236
	
readability of  236
	
in reports  214, 221, 222, 235–237, 237–240
	
in research  316, 320, 321
	
in thesis  381
Flesch Reading Ease score  19
Flesch-Kincaid Grade Level score  19
flexibility  32, 33
	
in systems and structures  228, 231, 241
flexi-hours  32
flipcharts (for presentations)  264
flow charts  288, 288
fluency (of voice)  258, 258
focus group interviews  346–347
Fonts
	
size  24, 24–25, 215
	
sans serif font  25, 26, 275, 293, 300
	
serif font  25, 26, 275
footnote styles  328, 329, 330
footnotes  226
	
styles  328, 329, 330
	
abbreviations in  330
	
and endnotes  62, 62
formality, levels of  14–15, 14
formatting  33, 34, 35
formulas in tables  68, 71–72, 72
four Ps  201, 201
G
Gantt charts  289–290, 289, 290
gateway databases  338
global business ethics  143
glossary 
	
for proposal  193, 366
	
in reports  221, 232, 232 
	
for thesis  375
goal setting, for business plan  200, 200
goodwill
	
in letters  76, 223
	
in presentations  256
Google Docs  6, 32, 256, 356
Google Scholar  330, 338, 338
governance (and ethics)  142, 143, 145
grammar  21–22, 27
	
check  15, 50, 51, 77, 217
	
style  79–80, 
graphics
	
checklist for creating  295
	
design options  272
	
integration of  271
	
in message  23–24
	
placement of  271–272
graphs  270, 271, 279–285, 279–285
	
generating of  273
	
term  278
	
see also charts
H
handouts (in presentations)  264, 298, 299
Harvard system  67, 323, 324, 330
header row (tables)  72
headers and footers  38, 58, 59, 59, 60, 61
headings and subheadings
	
in agenda  160, 161, 162, 163
	
levels  6, 56, 57
	
numbering of  5, 6
	
in reports  213, 215, 216, 229, 236
	
styles  34, 35, 42, 56
	
template for  6, 7
	
typeface  25, 26
hyperlinks in Microsoft PowerPoint  310–311, 310,
	
	
311
hypothesis (in academic thesis)  376–378
	
negative hypothesis  377, 377
	
null  378
	
positively expressed  376
	
research objectives  378, 378
I
IEEE reference system  327
illustrations  23
	
advantages of  269–270
	
captions and titles  270–271
	
conventions for using  270–272
	
criteria for readability of  23–24
	
generating and editing of  272
	
list of  271
	
in reports  231, 232
	
spreadsheet programs/software  270, 272, 278
	
see also figures; graphics; images; visual aids
images 
	
in presentations  249, 263–264
	
sourcing of  298
	
referencing of  291
	
see also figures; graphics; illustrations; visual 
	
	
aids
indexing  337
indirect
	
expression  15, 17, 22
	
speech  182

Index
399
individual qualitative interviews  345–346, 345
inference  9–10, 10, 380, 386
inferential data analysis techniques  348
infographics  298
information 
	
arrangement of  11
	
flow of  7
	
in presentation  248
	
and purpose  3
	
retention of  297, 297
	
scale of importance of  12
	
selection of relevant  3
	
sources of  2
informative reports  220–222
insider research  320
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
	
	
(IEEE) system  327
integrity (research)  320, 321
intellectual property  39, 143
interconnectivity  32
interim reports  220, 235
internet  336–339
	
search engines  337–338
	
directories  338, 339
	
additional tools for searches  338–339
	
invisible web  339, 362
interpretive paradigms  315, 315
interview
	
body language and appearance during
	
	
129–130
	
checklist for well-organised and persuasive
	
	
130
	
closing and follow-up  130
	
for commercial position or funding  127–130
	
new technologies  344
	
preparation  128–129
	
in qualitative research  345–346, 345
	
in quantitative research  343, 344
	
questions and responses  128
	
in research  341, 343, 344, 345–346, 345
	
schedule  346
	
STAR approach to  129–130
in-text citation  322, 323, 323
	
number methods  327, 327
	
Harvard system  324, 324
introduction  12
	
in academic proposal  368
	
in report  233, 234
	
in thesis  375–376, 376
introductory letter  82
investigative reports  223
invisible web  339, 362
J
jargon  18–19, 74, 180, 267, 267
joint problem solving  137
	
vs pure bargaining  138
journal article  387–388,
	
referencing of  325, 326, 329, 329
	
template  388
journal databases  335, 336, 338
justification
	
for proposals  185, 191, 192, 193, 196–197, 
	
	
197, 203, 210
	
of text  26, 27, 71
	
and statement of requirement  210
	
for research  368–369
K
key words (in reports)  214
Keynote  298
King Committee on Corporate Governance  145
King I (1994)  145
King II (2002)  145
King III (2009)  145, 146
King IV (2017)  145
King Report on Corporate Governance (King I)  145
knowledge (of speaker)  247, 256, 267
L
label options  63, 64
laissez-faire leadership  134
language 
	
difference between written and spoken  250
	
for glossaries  232
	
in minutes  180, 183
	
in presentations/speeches  254, 255, 260
	
in proposal, thesis or article  390
	
Plain English, guidelines  17–19
	
and readability  17, 18, 19, 50, 51
	
in reports  215, 217–219
	
and Word Options  42, 50, 51
laptop (in presentations)  263, 267
layout 
	
for academic proposal  367–373
	
of Microsoft Word  46, 46
	
of slides  303
	
of text  23, 34, 38, 
leadership
	
autocratic  134
	
democratic  135
	
and ethics  143
	
laissez-faire  134
	
leader member exchange (LMX)  134
	
styles  131, 134–135
leading questions  346
legislation (and ethics)  141, 145
letter of application  122–127, 130
	
checklist for  130
	
see also covering letter
letter 
	
of adjustment  86, 89, 92–94, 93, 94
	
of claim  89–90
	
of complaint  89, 90–92, 90–92
	
of refusal  88–89, 88, 89
	
styles  79
	
of transmittal  82–83, 223
	
types  81–94
	
see also correspondence; email; message
letterhead  80, 81
letters of enquiry/request/complaint  85–86, 86
	
replying to  86–87, 87
libraries  335–336
	
electronic journal databases  336
	
online library catalogues  335
line graphs  279–282, 280–282, 284, 284
	
cumulative line graph  281-282, 282
	
multiple line graph  281, 281

Professional Communication
400
linear diagrams  4
linking words  12, 21, 217
	
see also connecting words and phrases; 
transition words and phrases
list
	
of figures  64, 64
	
of tables  64, 64
literature review
	
managing of reading of sources  379
	
managing the writing of  379–380
	
purposes in undertaking of  379
	
in thesis  378–380
logic
	
of argument  7
	
common abuses of  7–10
M
mail see correspondence
major/main hypothesis  377, 377
managers, checklist for effective  147
maps (for presentations)  264
margins tab  37
marketing
	
mix  201, 201
	
plan  201, 205, 208, 208
master of ceremonies (MC)  249, 251, 252, 253
master 
	
slide  302, 303, 304, 304, 305
	
template  35, 69
MC see master of ceremonies 
meetings
	
action items  153
	
administration of  152–153
	
checklist for effective  183
	
controlling the process  155
	
documentation storage  152, 152
	
flowchart of activities  157
	
guidelines for conducting  149
	
housekeeping issues  151
	
key roles in  149
	
minutes  155, 156
	
notes  149, 155, 156, 170
	
opening of  154
	
paperless  153
	
preparation phase  150–153
	
reasons for  148–149
	
role of chair  150, 151, 153, 154, 155
	
standard procedure/protocol  149
	
summarising during  155
	
three phases of  150–157, 150, 157
	
timekeeping during  155
	
two-tier technique  155
member-checking (research)  321
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  364, 372,
	
	
384
message 
	
body  78
	
checklist for well-organised and coherent  27
	
elements of  11–12
	
features/structure  77–78
	
formats  78–81, 79
	
layout of text  23
	
planning of 3–7
	
purpose of  3
	
readability of  15 
	
responding to  2
	
retention  297
	
style  2, 94, 95
	
subject of  2
	
tone  94
	
types of  78, 79
	
visual readability of  23
	
see also correspondence; email; letter
messaging services/systems  32, 33
method of investigation  234–235, 235
methodology  380
	
see also method of investigation
Microsoft Excel (for graphics)  272, 290, 305, 306
Microsoft Office (for graphics)  272
Microsoft PowerPoint 
	
for animation  306–308
	
for graphics  272
	
hyperlinks in  310–311, 310, 311
	
non-linear presentations in  309–313
	
for presentations  261, 263
	
slides  301–308
	
templates  301–305
	
viewing modes in  308–309, 308, 309
	
for visuals  297, 298, 299, 301–309
Microsoft Project  290, 290, 291
Microsoft SharePoint  32
Microsoft Smartsheet  290
Microsoft Sway  312
Microsoft Word 
	
document icons in  34, 34
	
layout of  46, 46
	
readability statistics  19, 19, 217–218
	
style and grammar check  15
	
styles  34, 35
	
template icons in  34, 34
	
templates  35–39
mind mapping  2, 3–4, 4, 27, 371, 371, 374, 374
	
software  2, 272 
	
spray-type diagrams  4
minor hypothesis  377, 378, 378 
minute taker (in meetings) role of  149, 150, 155,
	
	
156, 157
minutes  150, 171–174, 175
	
after meeting  156
	
before meeting  151, 152, 153
	
direct and indirect speech  181, 182
	
discourse structure and style  177
	
during meeting  154, 155
	
guidelines to taking of  170
	
language  180
	
numbering of  170
	
purpose of  148–149, 170
	
quorum  170
	
styles for  177, 180–183
	
template  170
	
tenses  182, 183
	
weaknesses in  175, 176, 175–176
mixed research approach  316–317, 317 
MLA see Modern Language Association 
mobile surveys  344
models (for presentations)  264
Modern Language Association (MLA) system  323,
	
	
330

Index
401
morality  141, 144, 145
MS Excel see Microsoft Excel
MS PowerPoint see Microsoft PowerPoint
MS Word see Microsoft Word
multimedia  298
N
negative 
	
hypothesis  377, 377
	
utilitarianism  143
negotiating team, roles in  140
negotiation  131
	
approaches to  131, 137–138
	
good communication practice  139
	
joint problem solving  137, 138
	
vs persuasion  136
	
pure bargaining  138
	
stages in  138–140
	
strategy  139
	
sub-processes in  137, 138
new media for presentation of research  356–361
	
blogs  357, 357
	
e-portfolio  357–358, 358
	
posters  358–361, 359, 361
nominalisation  16–17
non-linear presentations
	
hyperlinks in Microsoft PowerPoint  310–311,
	
	
310, 311
	
in Microsoft PowerPoint  309–311
	
other software  312
non-probability sampling (in research)  340–341,
	
	
340
non-requested proposals  188, 198
non-traditional/functional CV  111–118, 112–118
non-verbal cues (in presentation)  255, 255
	
eye contact and facial expression  260
	
gestures and posture  260–261
note cards (in presentation)  249, 250, 255
number methods of referencing  327–330
	
books  328, 328
	
different types of sources  328–329
	
footnote styles  328, 329, 330
	
IEEE system  327
	
in-text citation  327, 327
	
journal articles  329, 329
	
reference list  327–328, 327
	
systems  327
	
websites  329
numbering  35, 42, 56
	
in agenda  163–165, 164, 165
	
of headings of  5, 6
	
hierarchy  6
	
of pages  60–61, 60
	
in reports  215, 216, 236, 237
	
system  6
numerical data  316, 317
O
observation (in research)  347
online 
	
collaboration tools  32–33, 356
	
courses  33
	
databases  336
	
platforms  31
	
portfolio  31
	
presence  28, 31, 72
	
reputation  28
	
surveys  344
	
tools for referencing  330–331, 331
	
training  33 
	
tutorials  31, 357
ontology  315
opinion surveys  366, 369
oral presentation  291
	
animation in  306–308
	
multimedia in  298
	
slides in  300–302
	
see also message; presentation
Outline view  56–57, 57
P
page 
	
breaks  56, 57–59, 58
	
layout  38
	
margins  37
	
numbering  60–61, 60
	
setup  37–38, 38
papers (academic)  387–388
	
guidelines for  388
	
template  388
paradigms (in research)  315, 315, 333
paragraphing  15, 20, 21
paraphrasing  332–333, 332, 333
participants (in research)  320, 321, 347
passive voice  22, 77, 180
pauses (in talk)  258, 258
personal communication (referencing of)  326, 326
persuasion vs negotiation  136
PESTLE analysis  188, 201
philosophical principles for ethical research  320
pictograms  287, 287
pie charts  285–287, 286, 287
plagiarism  322
Plain English  14–22
	
ambiguity  20
	
characteristics of  15
	
direct vs indirect expression  22
	
grammar  21–22
	
jargon  18–19
	
language/vocabulary  17–19
	
levels of formality  14–15, 14
	
nominalisation  16–17
	
paragraphing  20, 21
	
prepositions  16, 17
	
punctuation  20
	
rule of proximity  20, 21
	
sentences  15–16
	
topic sentence  15, 20–21
planning, of presentation  247–249
Porter’s five forces  188
posters  291–294, 358–361, 359, 361
	
elements of well-designed  294
	
guidelines for text sizes  293
	
purpose of  291
	
rules for effective  292
	
tips for developing  360
postgraduate studies (research question)  318, 319
preliminary literature review (academic proposal)  
	
	
369

Professional Communication
402
preliminary pages (in reports)  224–232
	
acknowledgements  224, 225
	
glossary  232, 232
	
illustrations (list of)  231, 232
	
summary  226–227, 228–229
	
symbols or acronyms (list of)  232
	
table of contents  229, 229–231
	
terms of reference  225, 226, 242
	
title and title page  224, 224
prepositions  16, 17 
presentation by speaker
	
anxiety (dealing with)  254–255
	
aspects of the voice  258, 258–259
	
clarity (of voice)  258, 258
	
expression  15, 22
	
expression and projection  257–259, 258–259
	
quotations  332, 380
	
speech  180, 181, 182
	
attitude  254, 267
	
audience (analysis of)  247
	
credibility as speaker  255, 256, 256–257
	
non-verbal cues  255, 255, 260–261
	
rapport with audience  255–257
	
self-confidence  254, 254–255
	
checklist for well-organised and persuasive
	
	
268
	
closing of  266
	
coherence  248, 248
	
conclusion  249
	
question-and-answer session  265–266
	
for conferences  251
	
dressing for  265
	
empathy  255
	
emphasis  249
	
handouts  264, 298, 299
	
ideas or themes  247, 248
	
information selection for  248
	
introduction  249
	
key phrases  249–251, 250, 255
	
language  255
	
linear vs non-linear  309
	
major principles  248–349
	
note cards  249, 250, 255
	
overcoming barriers to effective  266, 267
	
overview of  312
	
paired and group  251–253, 251, 252–253
	
planning of  247–249
	
practising  253–254
	
preparation for  246
	
pronunciation  258, 259, 267
	
purpose statement  247
Presentation preparation
	
animations in  306–308, 307
	
of data  261–263, 262
	
multimedia in  298
	
non-linear  309–312
	
rapport with audience  255–257
	
self-confidence  254, 254–255
	
software  309–312
	
software and hardware  261–264, 262, 309–
	
	
312
	
teamwork  251, 252
	
of thesis  383
	
topic  247, 248
	
unity  248
	
visual aids  249, 254, 255, 261–264, 262
presentation of research  351–361
	
academic writing  351–355
	
blogs  357, 357
	
collaborative writing  355–356
	
e-portfolio  357–358, 358
	
new media for  356–361
	
posters  358–361, 359, 361
primary sources  334
privacy settings  30–31
probability sampling (in research)  339–340, 340
problem solving
	
De Bono’s Six Thinking Hats  136
	
Dewey’s six stages for  136, 136
	
joint problem solving  137
	
vs pure bargaining  138
	
techniques of  135–136
problem statement  365, 373, 376, 384
process roles (of team members)  133, 133–134
production programme  201
professional
	
blogs  31, 357
	
email accounts  29–30
	
ethics see corporate ethics 
	
online presence  31
	
profile  31
	
reputation  3, 28, 29, 296
	
webpages/websites  31
progress reports  220
project management  289, 290
pronunciation (in presentation)  258, 259, 267
proposal
	
checklist for well-organised and coherent  
	
	
389–390
	
request for (RfP)  184, 186, 189
	
see also academic proposals; business 
	
	
proposals
proximity, rule of  20, 21
punctuation  20, 90, 264, 324, 329
purpose statement  2, 247
Q
qualitative 
	
data analysis  349–351, 350
	
interviews  345–346, 345
	
research  334, 341, 344, 370
	
research approach  316–317, 317, 319
qualitative research methodologies  344–348
	
case studies  344–345, 345
	
ethical issues  346, 347
	
focus group interviews  346–347
	
individual qualitative interviews  345–346, 
	
	
345
	
observation  347
quantitative data analysis  348–349
	
methodologies of  348–349
	
software applications for  349
quantitative research 
	
approach  316–317, 317, 319
	
methodologies  341–344
	
new technologies for  344
question-and-answer session (in presentation)
	
	
265–266

Index
403
questionnaires  315, 315, 317, 341, 343, 366
Quick Access Toolbar  46–49, 47, 48–49, 304, 305
quorum  149, 154, 170
quotes  331–332, 331
R
ragged right (text layout) 
readability 
	
editing for visual  23–27
	
of illustrations  23–24
	
measurement of  19
	
of message  15
	
scoring exercises  19
	
statistics  19, 19, 50–51, 51, 217, 217–218
readers  1, 2, 3, 23
	
classification of  214
	
of different ages  25
	
levels of  214
	
of reports  213–214, 217
	
see also audience; readership; receiver
readership  4, 5, 79–80
	
see also audience; readers; receivers
real-time searches  339
receivers  2, 73, 79
	
see also audience; reader; readership
recommendations (in reports)  214, 242, 242–243
records, reports as permanent  214–215
reference list  322, 323, 323
	
author-date methods  324
	
Harvard system  324
	
number methods  327–328, 327
references 
	
in business proposals  197
	
list of  67
	
in thesis  381
	
see also sources
References tab  61–64, 61, 65
Referencing  2, 64–67, 64
	
aspects of  322, 322
	
author–date methods of  323–327
	
automated  381
	
basics of  322–323
	
books  325, 325, 328, 328
	
different types of sources  325–327, 328–329
	
footnote styles  328, 329, 330
	
Harvard system of  323, 324
	
in-text citation  322, 323, 323, 324, 324, 327
	
journal articles  325, 326, 329, 329
	
number methods of  327–330
	
online tools for  330–331, 331
	
personal communication  326, 326
	
reference list  322, 323, 323, 324, 327–328,
	
	
327
	
secondary sources  326–327, 326
	
systems  323–330
	
websites  326, 326, 329
report
	
appendices  214, 243–244, 244
	
body of  233–243, 234, 235, 237–243
	
checklist for well-organised  245
	
conclusion  214
	
cross-referencing  216
	
discourse structure  216–217
	
emphasis  217
	
end matter  243–244
	
evaluative  222–223
	
example of evaluative  224–244
	
feasibility  223
	
findings  214, 235–237, 237–240
	
font sizes  215
	
headings and subheadings  213, 215, 216,
	
	
229, 236
	
informative  220–221
	
investigative  223
	
letter or email of transmittal  223
	
numbering system  215, 216, 236, 237
	
as permanent record  214–215
	
programs for  212, 215
	
readability statistics  217, 217–218
	
readers of  213–214, 217
	
recommendations  214
	
relationship to other documents  213
	
results section  214
	
style and readability  22, 215, 217, 219–220,
	
	
219, 220
	
flow of ideas and facts in  213
	
coherence  216–217
	
summary  214, 217, 226–227, 228–229
	
technical  213 ,221–222
	
templates  33, 36, 69, 215
	
title  214, 217
	
topic outline  216
	
typeface  25, 26
	
unity  216
	
writing techniques to improve readability  215
reputation  28, 29, 143, 146, 296
requested proposals  186–188, 186–188
	
request for proposal (RfP)  184, 186, 189
	
request to tender see request for proposal
	
	
(RfP)
research  314
	
approaches  316–317, 317
	
bias  321
	
design see research methodologies
	
epistemology  315
	
ethical clearance  320
	
ethical issues  320
	
ethics  319–321
	
findings  316, 320, 321
	
integrity  320, 321
	
managing process of writing up  364
	
member-checking  321
	
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)  364,
	
	
372, 384
	
methods  315, 318
	
objectives (of thesis)  378, 378
	
ontology  315
	
paradigms  315, 315
	
participants  320, 321, 347
	
philosophical principles for ethical  320
	
presentation of see presentation of research
	
procedures  320
	
question  315, 318–319, 333, 376
	
strategies in support of ethical research  321
	
task, checklist for  333
	
transparency  320
	
validity of  320, 321, 333
	
variability of response  321

Professional Communication
404
research methodologies 
	
for academic proposals  365, 366, 369–370,
	
	
370
	
closed or open questions  341–342
	
ethical issues  346, 347
	
focus group interviews  346–347
	
interviews  341, 343, 344, 345–346, 345
	
non-probability sampling  340–341, 340
	
observation  347
	
probability sampling  339–340, 340
	
qualitative  344–348
	
quantitative  341–344
	
questionnaires  341, 343, 366
	
sampling  339–341
	
surveys  341–343, 344, 366
researcher
	
background of  370
	
bias  321, 347
	
checklist for  333
	
and ethics  320
	
identity (impact on research findings/setting)
	
	
320, 321, 347
	
and referencing  322, 323, 330
	
reflexivity  321
resource requirements (academic proposal)  372
results see findings
retrieval  337
reviewing options  53–54
RfP see request for proposal 
S
sales plan  201, 208
salutation (closing of message)  78, 81, 124
sample  339, 340, 341
sampling (in research)  339–341
scientific 
	
models  291, 291
	
reports  220, 233
search engines  337–338, 339
	
indexing  337
	
retrieval  337
	
strategies to increase relevancy of sites 
yielded by  337
	
web crawling  337
secondary source (referencing of)  326–327, 326,
	
	
334
secretary (to meetings)  149
	
see also minute taker
section breaks  56, 57–59, 58
self-confidence (in presentation)  254, 254–255
sentences
	
conjunctions and transitional words  16
	
length of  15–16, 20
	
nominalisation  16–17
	
prepositions  16, 17
sequence
	
of data  292
	
decision-making  288
	
of ideas  216–217
	
of slides 309
	
of tasks  289
signatures  30, 73, 78, 124
sign-posting  216
Skype  254, 268, 356
Slide Master  302–305
	
editing with  303
	
formatted master slide  304
	
Quick Access Toolbar and ribbon  305
	
viewing options  302
slides  299, 299, 300, 301–308
	
animations in  306–308, 307
	
colour on  301
	
deck of  309, 310, 310, 311
	
designing of  301–305
	
graphic or chart  305–306
	
layout of  303
	
programs for preparing  298
	
and retention of information  297, 297, 298
	
sequence of  309
	
Slide Master  302–305, 302, 303, 304, 305
	
templates for  301–305
	
text on  296, 300–301
	
text-heavy  296
	
thumbnails  310
	
viewing modes in PowerPoint  308–309, 308,
	
	
309
smartboards (for presentations)  264
social media 
	
accounts  29, 30
	
platforms  31
social observers  140
software 
	
and hardware for presentations  261–264,
	
	
262
	
for slides  310–311, 310, 311, 312
sources
	
Boolean operators  335, 335, 336, 337
	
editing of  67, 67
	
electronic journal databases  335, 336, 338
	
integrating of  331–333
	
internet  336–339
	
invisible web  339, 362
	
kinds of  334
	
libraries  335–336
	
locating of  335–339
	
managing of  66, 66
	
online library catalogues  335–336, 335
	
paraphrasing  332–333, 332, 333
	
quotes  331–332, 331
	
referencing different types of  325–327,
	
	
328–329
	
referencing of  2, 65, 65
	
see also references
speeches see presentations
spelling
	
correcting of  217, 218
	
and grammar check  50, 51, 77, 217, 218, 390
spokesperson (in negotiating team)  140
spreadsheet programs/software  45, 270, 272, 278
standard committees 149
STAR approach to interviews  129–130
stock phrases  74, 75
strategies in support of ethical research  321
style  22, 215, 217
	
concrete  219–220, 220
	
formal  219
	
and grammar checks  15
	
guide  33, 355

Index
405
	
impersonal  219, 219
	
of reports  22, 215, 217, 219–220, 219, 220
	
of thesis  382–383
styles (in Microsoft Word)  39–45
	
access to  39–40, 40
	
creation and modification of  40–42, 41
subheadings  5, 6, 26, 78, 95, 163, 164
	
see also headings
subject 
	
database  338
	
line  26, 77, 82, 87, 88, 95, 97
summary
	
in academic proposal  367, 368
	
contents  226
	
different terms for  227, 228–229
	
length  227
	
procedure or writing a  227
	
readability of  227
	
in reports  214, 217, 220, 223,226–227, 228–
	
	
229
	
of tasks for writing a thesis  384–387
supporting documents (CV)  122, 125, 127
survey  315, 341
	
closed or open questions  341–342, 343
	
constructing of  341–343, 344
	
fatigue  341
	
filter questions  342, 342
	
Likert scales  342, 242
	
multiple choice questions  342
	
new technologies  344
	
in research  341–343, 344, 366
SWOT analysis  188, 199, 200, 201
symbols or acronyms (in reports)  232
T
table of contents  61–62, 62, 229, 229–231
tables
	
arrangement/ordering of information in  274, 
	
	
276
	
captions and titles  270–271
	
drawing  68, 68
	
formulas in  71–72, 72
	
function of  273, 275
	
inserting  68, 68
	
list of  64, 64
	
numbering of  270
	
parts of  276–277, 277
	
shading in  275, 275
	
styles of  69, 70, 70
	
templates for  272
	
term  270
	
tools for  69, 69
	
unlabelled  277–278, 277
task roles (of team members)  133, 133–134
teams
	
characteristics of  132
	
vs groups  132
	
phases of development of  132, 132–133
	
process and task roles of  133, 133–134
teamwork (in presentation)  251, 252
technical
	
diagrams and models  290–291, 291
	
information (in reports)  213
	
reports  220, 221–222
	
terms  19, 215, 232, 259, 375
teleconference  151
template
	
for action minutes  178, 179
	
for CV  100
	
for graphics  301–305
	
for headings and subheadings  6, 7
	
for reports  33, 36, 69, 215
	
saving of document as a  36
	
for slides  301–305 
	
for thesis  383
	
trees  35–36, 36
tenders  184
terms of reference 
	
of a client  186, 188, 189, 190
	
of organisation/body/committee  148, 149
	
for reports  221, 222, 223, 225–226, 225, 
	
	
226, 242
	
for thesis  384
thesis 
	
acknowledgements  375
	
aim  377, 377
	
appendices  382
	
argumentation  380–381
	
checklist for well-organised and coherent  
	
	
389–390
	
conclusions  381
	
elements of  373–382
	
future work or recommendations  381
	
glossary  375
	
hypothesis  376–378, 376, 377, 378
	
introduction  375–376, 376
	
length of  373
	
literature review  378–380
	
managing of reading of sources  379
	
at master’s level  363
	
methodology or research design  380
	
mind map of  374, 374
	
at PhD level  363, 364
	
preliminary pages  375
	
presentation of  383
	
references  381
	
research objectives  378, 378
	
research question or problem  376
	
results  380
	
style for  382–383
	
summary of tasks for writing  384–387
	
template for  383
	
timetable  384, 384
	
see also academic thesis
thumbnails (for slides)  310
timetable (for thesis)  384, 384
title 
	
and caption (graphics)  270–271
	
page (academic proposal)  367
	
slide  310, 310 
	
and title page (of reports)  214, 217, 224, 224
tone, of correspondence  73–77, 79
toolbars  46, 47, 48, 48
topic 
	
outline  5–7, 216
	
sentence  11, 15, 20–21, 216
	
statement  3
Track Changes  6, 48, 49, 53–54
traditional CV  100–111, 101–111
training, online  33

Professional Communication
406
transition  249, 252, 253, 268
	
words and phrases  11, 12, 248
	
see also connecting words and phrases; 
	
	
linking words 
transitional words  11, 16 
transparency (research)  320
triangulation  321
typeface  23, 24–27, 24–25
U
unity 
	
in presentation  248
	
in reports  216
	
in writing  11
V
validity of research  320, 321, 333
Vancouver system  327
variability of response (in research)  321
video- and audioconferencing  32
viewing 
	
modes  55, 55, 56, 56
	
options (Microsoft Word)  55–57, 55, 56, 57
vison or mission statement  199
visual aids (in presentations)  249, 254, 255, 269
	
charts  262, 263, 264
	
checklist for presenting with  313
	
designing of  299–300
	
flipcharts  264
	
handouts  264
	
laptop (positioning of)  263, 267
	
maps  264
	
Microsoft PowerPoint  263
	
physical models  264
	
for presentation of data  261–263, 262
	
and presentation software and hardware  
	
	
261–264, 262
	
projecting images onto a screen  263–264
	
smartboards  264
	
whiteboards  264
	
see also figures, graphics; illustrations; 
	
	
images; visuals
visuals
	
diagrams  2
	
vs bullet points  297–298, 297
	
designing of  299–301, 299–300
	
importance in oral messages  296–299
	
Microsoft PowerPoint for  297, 298, 299, 
	
	
301–309
	
in presentations  298–299
	
retention of information  297, 297 
	
slides  297, 297, 299
vocabulary
	
guidelines (Plain English)  17–19
	
style  79–80
voice, variety, volume, aspects of  258, 258–259
W
Web
	
crawling  337
	
directories  338, 339
webinar  33, 269
webpages/websites  31
website (referencing of)  326, 326, 329
WhatsApp  79, 79, 316
whiteboards (for presentations)  264
Word Options dialog box  48, 49–50, 50, 52, 53
working agenda  151, 158, 165–169
	
advantages of  165
	
embedding of associated documents/files in  
	
	
168, 169
	
example of extensive  167–168
	
example of simple  166
workplace flexibility  32
World Wide Web (WWW)  337
writer, credibility of  7, 15
writing
	
the brief/task/assignment  2
	
discourse structure of piece of  11–12
	
drafts  7
	
ideas in a piece of  11
	
planning process for  2–7
	
practical steps for  7–12
	
purpose of  3
	
requirements for  1
	
selection of information  2, 3
	
style  14, 14, 15 
	
topic outline  5–7
writing techniques (for reports)  215–220
	
to improve readability  215
	
order of ideas and facts  216–217
	
style  215, 217, 219–220, 219, 220
Z
Zotero  330, 331, 331
 
 

