

Project Management  
in Practice
Sixth Edition
Jack R. Meredith
Broyhill Distinguished Scholar and Chair in Operations,  
Wake Forest University
Scott M. Shafer
Associate Dean and Professor of Management,  
Wake Forest University
Samuel J. Mantel, Jr. (deceased)
University of Cincinnati

EXECUTIVE EDITOR
Lise Johnson
SPONSORING EDITOR
Jennifer Manias
PROJECT MANAGER
Gladys Soto
PROJECT SPECIALIST
Nichole Urban
CONTENT MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR
Lisa Wojcik
SENIOR CONTENT SPECIALIST
Nicole Repasky
PRODUCTION EDITOR
Ezhilan Vikraman
COVER PHOTO CREDIT
© Alvov/Shutterstock
This book was set in 10.5/12 GoudyStd by SPi Global and printed and bound by Lightning Source Inc. The cover was printed by Lightning 
Source Inc.
Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. has been a valued source of knowledge and understanding for more than 200 years, helping people 
around the world meet their needs and fulfill their aspirations. Our company is built on a foundation of principles that include responsibility to 
the communities we serve and where we live and work. In 2008, we launched a Corporate Citizenship Initiative, a global effort to address the 
environmental, social, economic, and ethical challenges we face in our business. Among the issues we are addressing are carbon impact, paper 
specifications and procurement, ethical conduct within our business and among our vendors, and community and charitable support. For more 
information, please visit our website: www.wiley.com/go/citizenship.
Copyright © 2017, 2014, 2011, 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or 
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 
01923 (Web site: www.copyright.com). Requests to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at: www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Evaluation copies are provided to qualified academics and professionals for review purposes only, for use in their courses during the next 
academic year. These copies are licensed and may not be sold or transferred to a third party. Upon completion of the review period, please return 
the evaluation copy to Wiley. Return instructions and a free of charge return shipping label are available at: www.wiley.com/go/returnlabel.  
If you have chosen to adopt this textbook for use in your course, please accept this book as your complimentary desk copy. Outside of the  
United States, please contact your local sales representative.
ISBN: 978-1-119-29885-4 (PBK)
ISBN: 978-1-119-29867-0 (EVALC)
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data:
Names: Meredith, Jack R., author. | Shafer, Scott M., author. | Mantel, 
   Samuel J., author.
Title: Project management in practice / Jack R. Meredith, Broyhill 
   Distinguished Scholar and Chair in Operations, Wake Forest University, 
   Scott M. Shafer, Associate Dean and Professor of Management, Wake Forest 
   University, Samuel J. Mantel, Jr. (deceased), University of Cincinnati.
Other titles: Project management in practice.
Description: Sixth edition. | Hoboken, NJ : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., [2017] | 
   Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016034810 (print) | LCCN 2016038655 (ebook) | ISBN 
   9781119298854 (pbk.) | ISBN 9781119298632 (pdf) | ISBN 9781119298601 (epub)
Subjects:  LCSH: Project management.
Classification: LCC HD69.P75 P7288 2017 (print) | LCC HD69.P75 (ebook) | DDC 
   658.4/04—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016034810
Printing identification and country of origin will either be included on this page and/or the end of the book. In addition, if the ISBN on this 
page and the back cover do not match, the ISBN on the back cover should be considered the correct ISBN.
Printed in the United States of America

To Kiersten, Brandon, and Jeremy, my most successful projects.
J. R. M.
To Brianna and Sammy and Kacy, my most important  
and rewarding projects.
S. M. S.
To the memory of Sam Mantel, Jr.: Scholar, author, mentor, friend.
J. R. M. and S. M. S.


  v
C
o
n
t
e
n
t
s
	 1	
The World of Project Management  1
1.1	 What Is a Project?  1
Trends in Project Management  3
1.2	 Project Management vs. General Management  4
Major Differences  4
Negotiation  5
1.3	 What Is Managed? The Three Goals of a Project  7
1.4	 The Life Cycles of Projects  10
1.5	 Selecting Projects To Meet Organizational Objectives  11
Nonnumeric Selection Methods  12
Numeric Selection Methods  13
1.6	 The Project Portfolio Process  21
1.7	 The Materials in this Text  25
Review Questions  27
Discussion Questions  27
Exercises  28
Incident for Discussion  28
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility—1  29
Case: Handstar Inc.  30
Bibliography  32
	 2	
The Manager, the Organization, and the Team  33
2.1	 The PM’s Roles  34
Facilitator  34
Communicator  36
Virtual Project Manager  39
Meetings, Convener and Chair  40
2.2	 The PM’s Responsibilities to the Project  41
Acquiring Resources  41
Fighting Fires and Obstacles  42
Leadership  42
Negotiation, Conflict Resolution, and Persuasion  44
2.3	 Selection of a Project Manager  46
Credibility  47
Sensitivity  47
Leadership, Style, Ethics  47
Ability to Handle Stress  48
2.4	 Project Management as a Profession  50
2.5	 Fitting Projects into the Parent Organization  51
Pure Project Organization  52
Functional Project Organization  53

vi  •
Contents
Matrix Project Organization  54
Mixed Organizational Systems  57
The Project Management Office and Project Maturity  57
2.6	 The Project Team  59
Matrix Team Problems  61
Intrateam Conflict  62
Integration Management  64
Review Questions  66
Discussion Questions  66
Incidents for Discussion  67
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility—2  68
Case: The Quantum Bank  68
Case: Southern Care Hospital  69
Bibliography  71
	 3	
Project Activity and Risk Planning  74
3.1	 From the Project Charter to the Project Plan  74
3.2	 The Planning Process—Overview  76
3.3	 The Planning Process—Nuts and Bolts  77
The Launch Meeting—and Subsequent Meetings  77
Sorting Out the Project—The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)  80
Extensions of the Everyday WBS  83
3.4	 More on the Work Breakdown Structure and Other Aids  86
The RACI Matrix  86
A Whole‐Brain Approach to Project Planning  88
The Design Structure Matrix  91
Agile Project Management  92
3.5	 Risk Management  94
Review Questions  101
Discussion Questions  101
Exercises  102
Incidents for Discussion  103
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility—3  104
Case: John Wiley & Sons  105
Case: Samson University  106
Bibliography  107
	 4	
Budgeting the Project  109
4.1	 Methods of Budgeting  110
Top‐Down Budgeting  112
Bottom‐Up Budgeting  113
4.2	 Cost Estimating  113
Work Element Costing  114
The Impact of Budget Cuts  114
An Aside  116
Activity versus Program Budgeting  118
4.3	 Improving Cost Estimates  119

Contents
•  vii
Forms  119
Learning Curves  119
Other Factors  123
4.4	 Budget Uncertainty and Project Risk Management  125
Budget Uncertainty  125
Project Budgeting in Practice  128
4.5	 Project Risk Simulation with Crystal Ball®  129
Considering Disaster  136
Review Questions  137
Discussion Questions  137
Exercises  138
Incidents For Discussion  139
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility Project Budget Development—4  140
Case: Photstat Inc.  142
Case: Building the Geddy’s dream house  143
Bibliography  144
	 5	
Scheduling the Project  145
5.1	 Pert and CPM Networks  146
The Language of PERT/CPM  146
Building the Network  147
Finding the Critical Path and Critical Time  149
Calculating Activity Slack  151
Doing It the Easy Way—Microsoft Project (MSP)  152
5.2	 Project Uncertainty and Risk Management  155
Calculating Probabilistic Activity Times  155
The Probabilistic Network, an Example  156
Once More the Easy Way  158
The Probability of Completing the Project on Time  159
Selecting Risk and Finding D  162
The Case of the Unreasonable Boss  162
A Potential Problem: Path Mergers  163
5.3	 Simulation  164
Incorporating Costs into the Simulation Analysis  166
Traditional Statistics versus Simulation  167
5.4	 The Gantt Chart  170
The Chart  170
5.5	 Extensions to PERT/CPM  172
Precedence Diagramming  173
Final Thoughts on the Use of These Tools  174
Review Questions  175
Discussion Questions  176
Exercises  176
Discussion Exercise  179
Incidents for Discussion  179
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility Program Plan—5  180
Case: NutriStar  182
Case: Launching E‐Collar  184
Bibliography  185

viii  •
Contents
	 6	
Allocating Resources to the Project  186
6.1	 Expediting a Project  187
The Critical Path Method  187
Crashing a Project with Excel  191
Fast‐Tracking a Project  195
Project Expediting in Practice  195
6.2	 Resource Loading  196
The Charismatic VP  202
6.3	 Resource Leveling  202
Resource Loading/Leveling and Uncertainty  209
6.4	 Allocating Scarce Resources to Projects  211
Some Comments about Constrained Resources  211
Some Priority Rules  211
6.5	 Allocating Scarce Resources to Several Projects  213
Criteria of Priority Rules  214
The Basic Approach  215
Resource Allocation and the Project Life Cycle  215
6.6	 Goldratt’s Critical Chain  216
Estimating Task Times  219
The Effect of Not Reporting Early Activity Completion  220
Multitasking  221
Common Chain of Events  223
The Critical Chain  224
Review Questions  225
Discussion Questions  226
Exercises  226
Incidents for Discussion  228
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility Resource Usage—6  229
Case: Charter Financial Bank  231
Case: Rand Contractors  232
Bibliography  233
	 7	
Monitoring and Controlling the Project  234
7.1	 The Plan‐Monitor‐Control Cycle  234
Designing the Monitoring System  236
7.2	 Data Collection and Reporting  237
Data Analysis  237
Reporting and Report Types  238
Meetings  240
Virtual Meetings, Reports, and Project Management  241
7.3	 Earned Value  242
7.4	 Project Control  249
Purposes of Control  249
7.5	 Designing the Control System  251
Types of Control Systems  252
Tools for Control  254
Burnup and Burndown Charts  257
7.6	 Scope Creep and Change Control  257
Review Questions  259

Contents
•  ix
Discussion Questions  260
Exercises  260
Incidents for Discussion  261
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility Case—7  263
Friendly Assisted Living Facility Construction coordination meeting 4/11/X8 ACTION ITEM 
LIST  265
Case: Palmstar Enterprises, Inc.  266
Case: Peak Lighting, Inc.  266
Bibliography  267
	 8	
Evaluating and Closing the Project  269
8.1	 Evaluation  269
Evaluation Criteria  270
Measurement  271
8.2	 Project Auditing  272
The Audit Process  272
The Audit Report  274
8.3	 Project Closure  277
When to Close a Project  277
Types of Project Closure  278
The Closure Process  279
The Project Final Report  281
Review Questions  283
Discussion Questions  283
Incidents for Discussion  284
Case: Friendly Assisted Living Facility Case—8  284
Case: Datatech  287
Case: Ivory Tower Systems  288
Bibliography  290
	
appendix: Probability and Statistic  291
A.1  Probability  291
Subjective Probability  292
Logical Probability  292
Experimental Probability  292
A.2  Event Relationships and Probability Laws  292
The Multiplication Rule  293
The Addition Rule  294
A.3  Statistics  294
Descriptive versus Inferential Statistics  295
Measures of Central Tendency  296
Measures of Dispersion  297
Inferential Statistics  298
Standard Probability Distributions  299
Bibliography  300
	 	
Index  301


  xi
Approach
Amazingly, the use of projects and project management continues to accelerate in our 
global societies. With the addition of Agile, project management is now also being used 
for dynamic, “quasi” projects: initiatives where the scope, budget, and deadline are 
changing constantly. One of the more interesting areas of growth, however, has been in 
the use of projects for achieving the strategic goals of organizations through the use of 
sponsors, portfolio management, project management offices, and program managers. 
The exponential growth of membership in the Project Management Institute (PMI) is 
further convincing evidence, as are the sales of computer software devoted to project 
management. Several societal forces are driving this growth, and many economic factors 
are reinforcing it. We describe all these in Chapter 1 of this book.
A secondary effect has also been a major contributor to the use of project manage-
ment. As the use of projects has grown, its very success as a way of getting all kinds of 
activities carried out successfully has become well established, especially when a tight 
budget or timeline, or both, were involved. The result has been a striking increase in the 
use of projects to accomplish jobs that in the past would simply have been turned over to 
someone with the comment, “Take care of it.”
What happened then was that some individual undertook to carry out the job with 
little or no planning, minimal assistance, few resources, and often with only a vague 
notion of what was really wanted. Some of these projects were large, but most were quite 
small. Some were complex, but most were relatively straightforward. Some required the 
full panoply of project management techniques, but most did not. All of them, however, 
had to be managed and thus required a great many people to take on the role of project 
manager in spite of little or no education in project management.
One result was rising demand for education in project management. The number of 
college courses grew apace, as did the number of consulting firms offering seminars and 
workshops. Perhaps most striking was the growth in educational opportunities through 
post‐secondary schools offering “short courses”—schools such as DeVry Institute, and 
ITT. In addition, short courses were offered by colleges, such as the University of 
Phoenix, and community colleges concentrating on both part‐time and full‐time educa-
tion for individuals already in the work force. Communications from some instructors 
in these institutions told us that they would like a textbook that was shorter and focused 
more directly on the “technical” aspects of project management than those currently 
available. They were willing to forego most of the theoretical aspects of management, 
particularly if such were not directly tied to practice. Their students, who were not apt 
to take advanced course work in project management, had little use for understanding 
the historical development of the field nor the latest academic research. Finally, instruc-
tors asked for increased use of project management application software, though they 
added that they did not want a replacement for the many excellent “step‐by‐step” and 
­“computing‐for‐dummies” types of books that were readily available. They wanted the 
emphasis to be on managing projects, and not on managing project management software.
These requests sounded sensible to us, and we have tried to write such a book.
P
r
e
f
a
c
e

xii  •
Preface
Organization and Content
With few exceptions, both readers and instructors are most comfortable with project 
management texts that are organized around the project life cycle, and this book is so 
organized. In Chapter 1 we start by defining a project and differentiating project manage-
ment from general management. After discussing the project life cycle, we cover project 
selection, the project management office, and the project portfolio. We feel strongly that 
project managers who understand why a project was selected by senior management also 
understand the firm’s objectives for the project. Understanding those things, we know, 
will be of value in making the inevitable trade‐offs between time, budget, and the speci-
fied output of the project, as well as how to handle the inevitable risks that will arise to 
threaten the project.
Chapter 2 is devoted to the various roles the project manager must play and to the 
skills required to play them effectively. In addition, we cover the various ways in which 
projects can be organized. The nature of project teams, including multidisciplinary teams, 
and the behavioral aspects of projects are also discussed.
Project and risk planning, budgeting, and scheduling are covered in Chapters 3 to 5. 
Planning the project initiates our discussion in Chapter 3, where we introduce the work 
breakdown structure and other planning aids such as the RACI matrix, and end with a 
thorough discussion and illustration of risk management planning. Project budgeting is 
then described in Chapter 4 where we introduce the use of simulation through software 
such as Crystal Ball® to analyze financial risk. Risk analysis using Oracle’s Crystal Ball® 
(CB) simulations is demonstrated in several chapters with detailed instructions on build-
ing and solving simulation models. Software is used throughout the book, where rele-
vant, to illustrate the use and power of such software to aid in managing projects. 
Chapter 5 initially uses standard manual methods for building project schedules, and 
Microsoft Project®  (MSP) is then demonstrated for doing the same thing.
Chapter 6 deals with resource allocation problems in a multiproject setting. A major 
section of this chapter is devoted to the insights of E. Goldratt in his book Critical Chain.* 
Chapter 7 concerns monitoring and controlling the project, especially through the use of 
earned value analysis, which is covered in detail. The final chapter deals with auditing, 
evaluating, and closing the project.
Interest in risk management has grown rapidly in recent years, but the subject gets 
only minimal attention in most introductory level project management textbooks. We 
deal with risk throughout this book, introducing methods of risk management and analy-
sis where relevant to the subject at hand. For example, simulation is used in Chapter 4 
for solving a project budgeting problem, in Chapter 5 on a scheduling problem, and in 
Chapter 6 for examining the impact of a generally accepted assumption about probabil-
istic project schedules that is usually false, and also to test the usually false assumption 
that multitasking is an efficient way to improve productivity.
We are certainly aware that no text on project management could be structured to 
reflect the chaos that seems to surround some projects throughout their lives, and a vast 
majority of projects now and then. The organization of this book reflects a tidiness and 
sense of order that is nonexistent in reality. Nonetheless, we make repeated references to 
the technical, interpersonal, and organizational glitches that impact the true day‐to‐day 
life of the project manager.
*Goldratt, E. M. Critical Chain. Great Barrington, MA: North River, 1997.

Preface
•  xiii
Pedagogy
The book includes several pedagogical aids. The end‐of‐chapter material includes Review 
Questions that focus on the textual material. Discussion Questions emphasize the implica-
tions and applications of ideas and techniques covered in the text. Where appropriate, 
there are Exercises that are primarily directed at developing skills in the technical areas 
of project management as well as familiarizing the student with the use of relevant software.
In addition to the above, we have included Incidents for Discussion in the form of 
caselettes. In the main, these caselettes focus on one or more elements of the chapter to 
which they are appended. Several of them, however, require the application of concepts 
and techniques covered in earlier chapters so that they also serve an integrative function.
More comprehensive Cases are also appended to each chapter. A special set of these, 
beginning in Chapter 1, is associated with the same project—the planning, building, and 
marketing of an assisted living facility—which continues on through the following chap-
ters. That is, each chapter is followed by a continuation of this case calling upon the 
ideas and methods covered in that chapter. With all these cases, integration with mate-
rial in previous chapters is apt to be required.
We include Learning Objectives for each chapter but instead of putting them at the 
beginning of the chapter, we have added them to the Instructors’ Manual. Many teachers 
feel that their students should have the Learning Objectives as they begin each chapter. 
Many don’t. Many teachers like to use their own LOs. Many do not like to use LOs 
because they feel that students focus solely on the listed objectives and ignore everything 
else. Given our LOs in the Instructor’s Manual, each teacher may opt for his/her own 
notion on the matter.
We have used Excel® spreadsheets where appropriate throughout the book. Microsoft 
Office® is widely available, and with few exceptions students and professional project 
managers are familiar with its operation.
Each copy of the text also comes packaged with a registration card, which professors 
and students can use to download a free trial edition of Oracle’s Crystal Ball®. Crystal 
Ball was chosen because it works seamlessly with Excel® and is user friendly. For those 
professors using an e‐book version of the text, instructions for accessing Crystal Ball 
(CB) are posted on the instructor companion website for the text. If you have questions, 
please contact your local Wiley sales rep. We have demonstrated in Chapters 4–6 some 
of the problems where the use of statistical decision models and simulation can be very 
helpful in understanding and managing risk. In addition, a number of the end‐of‐chapter 
problems have been rewritten to adapt them for solution by Microsoft Project and Crystal 
Ball. The solutions can be found in the Instructor’s Manual along with added instructions 
for use of the software.
As we have noted elsewhere, projects have often failed because the project manager 
attempted to manage the software rather than the project. We feel strongly that students 
and professionals should learn to use the basic project management techniques by hand—
and only then turn to software for relief from their manual efforts.
As is true with any textbook, we have made some assumptions about both the stu-
dents and professionals who will be reading this book. We assume that they have all had 
some elementary training in management, or have had equivalent experience. We also 
assume that, as managers, they have some slight acquaintance with the fundamentals of 
accounting, behavioral science, finance, and statistics. We even assume that they have 
forgotten most of the statistics they once learned and have therefore included an 
Appendix on relevant elementary statistics and probability as a memory refresher.

xiv  •
Preface
What’s New
Both students and instructors have been generous and kind with their comments on the 
earlier editions of this book. They have given us very useful suggestions and feedback, 
which we appreciate. To further improve the student’s perspective of project manage-
ment from the view of project managers in actual practice, we describe project manage-
ment from the perspective of the two primary roles of the project manager: 1) the need 
to constantly manage trade‐offs between the three main goals of scope, time, and cost, 
and 2)  managing risk. To highlight these areas where we talk about trade‐offs and risk, 
we have added icons to the book margins where important discussion on these topics 
appear. We also use an icon to indicate areas of discussion that we believe exemplify 
“best practice” in the project management field. And we have expanded our references 
to locations in PMBOK® that discuss the topic at hand for those who are also studying 
for the Project Management Professional® (PMP) or other certification exams offered 
by the Project Management Institute.
Specific additions and changes are listed below:
• Throughout the chapters, we have added more review questions, discussion ques-
tions, and problems (which we now call “exercises,” to avoid any pejorative 
implications). We have also added a running Microsoft Project exercise in 
Chapters 3, 5, and 6.
• Similarly, we have extended the running medical center case to now begin in 
Chapter 1, and simultaneously changed the formerly dismal name to Friendly 
Medical Center.
• We now identified managing trade‐offs and risk management as the two primary 
duties of the project manager, and rewrote other discussions throughout the book 
to reflect this perspective.
• We enhanced many discussions throughout the book, such as emotional intelli-
gence, team development, conflict, stakeholder management, project planning, 
simulation, etc.
• We also cut back on some discussions, such as the project portfolio process due to 
its currently wide recognition (Chapter  1), multidisciplinary teams, interface 
management, and simultaneous engineering  (Chapter 2), and tracking signals 
(Chapter 4).
• Project governance is currently a major trend in project management, involving 
the new roles of the project manager, the program manager, the project office, the 
portfolio manager, the sponsor, the client, the customer, the project owner, and 
other internal and external stakeholders in the project. This is discussed in terms 
of a recent trend in Chapter 1 and then elaborated on in Chapter 2.
• We have added an expanded discussion of Agile project management in Chapter 3 
due to its continuing proliferation among public and private organizations for 
handling dynamically changing projects such as R&D, innovation, and especially 
information technology.
• Based on reviewer requests, we added a short discussion on using Excel’s Solver 
for crashing a network in Chapter 6.
PMBOK Guide
Risk
Trade-Offs
Best Practice

Preface
•  xv
• In Chapter 7 we added a brief description of burnup and burndown charts.
• Last, again based on reviewer requests, we rewrote portions of Chapter 8 to 
end the project discussion on a high, optimistic note, including replacing the 
term “termination” with the more pleasant “closeout” throughout the book, as 
used in PMBOK.
Supplements
The Instructor’s Manual will provide assistance to the project management instructor 
in the form of answers/solutions to the questions, problems, incidents for discussion, 
and end‐of‐chapter cases. This guide will also reference relevant Harvard Business 
School type cases and readings, teaching tips, and other pedagogically helpful material. 
Wiley maintains a website for this and other books. The address is www.wiley.com/­
college/meredith. The site contains an electronic version of the Instructor’s Manual, an 
extensive set of PowerPoint slides, and test questions to test student understanding.
Acknowledgments
There is no possible way to repay the scores of project managers and students who have 
contributed to this book, often unknowingly. The professionals have given us ideas about 
how to manage projects, and students have taught us how to teach project management. 
We are immensely grateful.
For this edition we thank the following reviewers:
Above all, we thank Suzanne Ingrao, Ingrao Associates, whose help in production 
was invaluable. Our gratitude is also extended to Wiley Editor Gladys Soto who did her 
best to keep the book on track and on time. Finally, we owe a massive debt to those col-
leagues who contributed ideas or reviewed  earlier editions: Kwasi Amoako‐Gyampah, 
University of North Carolina at Greenboro; James M. Buckingham, United States Military 
Academy, West Point; Michael J. Casey, George Mason University; James Cochran, 
Louisiana Tech University; Larry Crowley, Auburn University; Catherine Crummett, 
James Madison University; George R. Dean, DeVry Institute of Technology, DuPage; James 
Evans, University of Cincinnati; Geraldo Ferrer, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill; Byron Finch, Miami University, Ohio; Linda Fried, University of Colorado, Denver; 
Karen Garrison, Dayton Power & Light Co.; William C. Giauque, Brigham Young 
University; Bertie Greer, Northern Kentucky University; David Harris, University of New 
Mexico; Jesus Jimeniz, Texas State University; H. Khamooshi, George Washington 
University; Timothy Kloppenborg, Xavier University, Ohio; Bill Leban, Keller Graduate 
School of Management; Leonardo Legorreta, California State University, Sacramento; Steve 
MacQueen, Midlands Technical College; Samuel J. Mantel, III, RadioShack, Inc.; William 
E. Matthews, William Patterson University; Jim McCarthy, McCarthy Technologies, Inc.; 
Sara McComb, University of Massachusetts Amherst; Al Morelli, University of Southern 
California; J. Wayne Patterson, Clemson University; Ann Paulson, Edmonds Community 
College; Patrick Philipoom, University of South Carolina; Dee Piziak, Concordia University, 
Wisconsin; Arthur C. Rogers, City University; Dean T. Scott, DeVry Institute of Technology, 
Pomona; Richard V. Sheng, DeVry Institute of Technology, Long Beach; William A. 
Sherrard, San Diego State University; Kimberlee Snyder, Winona University; Margaret M. 
Sutton, Sutton Associates, Cincinnati, OH; James Szot, The University of Texas at 

xvi  •
Preface
Dallas; Louis C. Terminello, Stevens Institute of Technology; Malee Walton, Iowa State 
University; Stephen Wearne, University of Manchester, Institute of Science and Technology; 
Richard Wendell, University of Pittsburgh; and Jeffrey L. Williams, University of Phoenix. 
While we give these reviewers our thanks, we absolve each and all of blame for our 
errors, omissions, and wrong‐headed notions.
Jack R. Meredith
Broyhill Distinguished Scholar and Chair 
of Operations
Schools of Business
Wake Forest University
Winston Salem, NC 27109
meredijr@wfu.edu
(336) 758‐4467
http://business.wfu.edu/apps/facprofiles.
cfm?id=jack.meredith
Scott M. Shafer
Professor of Management and Associate Dean 
of Fulltime MBA ProgramSchools of Business
Wake Forest University
P.O. Box 7659
Winston Salem, NC 27109
shafersm@ wfu.edu
(336) 758‐3687
http://business.wfu.edu/apps/facprofiles.
cfm?id=scott.shafer

c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
  1
1
The World of Project Management
Once upon a time there was a heroine project manager. Her projects were never late. 
They never ran over budget. They always met contract specifications and invariably 
satisfied the expectations of her clients. And you know as well as we do, anything that 
begins with “Once upon a time . . .” is just a fairy tale.
This book is not about fairy tales. Throughout these pages we will be as realistic as we 
know how to be. We will explain project management practices that we know will work. 
We will describe project management tools that we know can help the project manager 
come as close as Mother Nature and Lady Luck will allow to meeting the expectations of 
all who have a stake in the outcome of the project.
	 1.1	
WHAT IS A PROJECT?
The accomplishment of important tasks and goals in organizations today is being 
achieved increasingly through the use of projects. As a result, a new kind of organization 
is emerging to deal with the accelerating growth in the number of multiple, simultane-
ously ongoing, and often interrelated projects in organizations. This project oriented 
organization, often called “enterprise project management” (Levine, 1998), “manage-
ment by projects” (Boznak, 1996), and similar names, was created to tie projects more 
closely to the organization’s goals and strategy and to integrate and centralize manage-
ment methods for the growing number of ongoing projects.
Why this emphasis on project management? The answer is simple: Daily, organiza-
tions are asked to accomplish work activities that do not fit neatly into business-as-usual. 
A software group may be asked to develop an application program that will access U.S. 
government data on certain commodity prices and generate records on the value of 
­commodity inventories held by a firm; the software must be available for use on April 1. 
The Illinois State Bureau for Children’s Services may require an annually updated  

2  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
census of all Illinois resident children, aged 17 years or younger, living with an illiterate 
single parent; the census must begin in 18 months. A manufacturer initiates a process 
improvement project to offset higher energy costs.
Note that each work activity is unique with a specific deliverable aimed at meeting a 
specific need or purpose. These are projects. The routine issuance of reports on the value of 
commodity inventories, the routine counseling of single parents on nurturing their off-
spring, the day-to-day activities associated with running a machine in a factory—these 
are not projects. The difference between a project and a nonproject is not always crystal 
clear. For almost any precise definition, we can point to exceptions. At base, however, 
projects are unique, have a specific deliverable, and have a specific due date. Note that 
our examples have all those characteristics. The Project Management Institute (PMI) 
defines in its Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 5th edition, a 
project as “A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or 
result” (Project Management Institute, 2013).
Projects vary widely in size and type. The writing of this book is a project. The reor-
ganization of Procter & Gamble (P&G) into a global enterprise is a project, or more 
accurately a program, a large integrated set of projects. The construction of a fly-in fish-
ing lodge in Manitoba, Canada, is a project. The organization of “Cat-in-the-Hat Day” 
so that Mrs. Payne’s third grade class can celebrate Dr. Suess’s birthday is also a project.
Both the hypothetical projects we mentioned earlier and the real-world projects 
listed just above have the same characteristics. They are unique, specific, and have 
desired completion dates. They all qualify as projects under the PMI’s definition. They 
have an additional characteristic in common—they are multidisciplinary. They require 
input from people with different kinds of knowledge and expertise. This multidiscipli-
nary nature of projects means that they tend to be complex, that is, composed of many 
interconnected elements and requiring input from groups outside the project. The vari-
ous areas of knowledge required for the construction of the fly-in fishing lodge are not 
difficult to imagine. The knowledge needed for globalization of a large conglomerate like 
P&G is quite beyond the imagination of any one individual and requires input from a 
diversified group of specialists. Working as a team, the specialists investigate the problem 
to discover what information, skills, and knowledge are needed to accomplish the overall 
task. It may take weeks, months, or even years to find the correct inputs and understand 
how they fit together.
A secondary effect of using multidisciplinary teams to deal with complex problems is 
conflict. Projects are characterized by conflict. As we will see in later chapters, the pro-
ject schedule, budget, and specifications conflict with each other. The needs and desires 
of the client conflict with those of the project team, the senior management of the 
organization conducting the project and others who may have a less direct stake in the 
project. Some of the most intense conflicts are those between members of the project 
team. Much more will be said about this in later chapters. For the moment, it is sufficient 
to recognize that projects and conflict are often inseparable companions, an environ-
ment that is unsuitable and uncomfortable for conflict avoiders.
It is also important to note that projects do not exist in isolation. They are often 
parts of a larger entity or program, just as projects to develop a new engine and an 
improved suspension system are parts of the program to develop a new automobile. The 
overall activity is called a program. Projects are subdivisions of programs. Likewise, pro-
jects are composed of tasks, which can be further divided into subtasks that can be broken 
down further still. The purpose of these subdivisions is to allow the project to be viewed 
at various levels of detail. The fact that projects are typically parts of larger organizational 
programs is important for another reason, as is explained in Section (1.5).
PMBOK Guide

1.1 WHAT IS A PROJECT
•  3
Finally, it is appropriate to ask, “Why projects?” The reason is simple. We form 
­projects in order to fix the responsibility and authority for the achievement of an organi-
zational goal on an individual or small group when the job does not clearly fall within the 
definition of routine work.
Trends in Project Management
Many recent developments in project management are being driven by quickly changing 
global markets, technology, and education. Global competition is putting pressure on 
prices, response times, and product/service innovation. Computer and telecommunica-
tion technology, along with rapidly expanding higher education across the world allows 
the use of project management for types of projects and in regions where these sophisti-
cated tools had never been considered before. The most important of these recent devel-
opments are covered in this book.
Achieving Strategic Goals  There has been a growing use of projects to achieve an 
organization’s strategic goals, and a new role has arisen to help attain the target benefits 
desired by the funder of the project: a project “owner” (Section 1.5). Additionally, exist-
ing major projects are screened to make sure that their objectives support the organiza-
tion’s strategy and mission. Projects that do not have clear ties to the strategy and mission 
are not approved. A discussion of this is given in Section 1.6, where the Project Portfolio 
Process is described.
PMOs for Improving Project Effectiveness  A variety of efforts are being pursued 
to improve the process and results of project management, whether strategic or routine. 
These efforts are typically now being led by a formal Project Management Office (PMO, 
Section 2.5) that provides training in project management skills and techniques such 
as the use of phase gates and agile (Section 3.4), earned value (Section 7.3), critical 
ratios (Section  7.4), and other such approaches; continually evaluates and helps 
improve the organization’s project management “maturity” (Section  7.5); educates 
­project managers about the evolving ancillary goals of the organization (Section 8.1); 
and generally helps oversee the organization’s portfolio of programs and projects 
(Section 1.6).
Virtual Projects  With the rapid increase in globalization of industry, many projects 
now involve global teams whose members operate in different countries and different 
time zones, each bringing a unique set of talents to the project. These are known as vir-
tual projects because the team members may never physically meet before the team is 
disbanded and another team reconstituted. Advanced telecommunications and com-
puter technology allow such virtual projects to be created, do their work, and complete 
their project successfully (see Section 2.1).
Quasi-Projects  Led by the demands of the information technology/systems depart-
ments, project management is now being extended into areas where the project’s 
objectives are not well understood, time deadlines unknown, and/or budgets undeter-
mined. This ill-defined type of project is extremely difficult to conduct and to date 
has often resulted in setting an artificial due date and budget, and then specifying 
project objectives to meet those limits. However, new tools for these quasi-projects are  
now being developed—agile management, prototyping, phase-gating, and ­others—to 
help these projects achieve results that satisfy the customer in spite of the  
unknowns.
Best Practice

4  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
	 1.2	
PROJECT MANAGEMENT VS. GENERAL MANAGEMENT
As is shown in Table 1‑1, project management differs from general management largely 
because projects differ from what we have referred to as “nonprojects.” The naturally 
high level of conflict present in projects means that the project manager (PM) must have 
special skills in conflict resolution. The fact that projects are unique means that the PM 
must be creative and flexible, and have the ability to adjust rapidly to changes. When 
managing nonprojects, the general manager tries to “manage by exception.” In other 
words, for nonprojects almost everything is routine and is handled routinely by subordi-
nates. The manager deals only with the exceptions. For the PM, almost everything is an 
exception.
Major Differences
Certainly, general management’s success is dependent on good planning. For projects, 
however, planning is much more carefully detailed and project success is absolutely 
dependent on such planning. The project plan is the result of integrating all informa-
tion about a project’s deliverables, generally referred to as the “scope” of the project, 
and its targeted date of completion. “Scope” has two meanings. One is “product 
scope,” which defines the performance requirements of a project, and “project scope,” 
which details the work required to deliver the product scope (see Chapter 5, p. 105 
of PMBOK, 2013). To avoid confusion, we will use the term scope to mean “product 
scope” and will allow the work, resources, and time needed by the project to deliver 
the product scope to the customer to be defined by the project’s plan (discussed in 
detail in Chapter 3). Therefore, the scope and due date of the project determine its 
plan, that is, its budget, schedule, control, and evaluation. Detailed planning is criti-
cally important. One should not, of course, take so much time planning that nothing 
ever gets done, but careful planning is a major contributor to project success. Project 
planning is discussed in Chapter 3 and is amplified throughout the rest of this book.
A project, then, is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product or 
service. It is specific, timely, usually multidisciplinary, and typically conflict ridden. 
Projects are parts of overall programs and may be broken down into tasks, subtasks, 
and further if desired. Current trends in project management include achieving stra-
tegic goals, achieving routine goals, improving project effectiveness, virtual projects, 
and quasi-projects.
PMBOK Guide
Table 1-1  Comparison of Project Management and General Management
Dimension
Project Management
General Management
Type of Work Activity
Unique
Routine
Management Approach
Ability to adapt to change
Manage by exception
Planning
Critical
Important
Budgeting
Start from scratch, multiple budget periods
Modify budget from previous budget period
Sequence of Activities
Must be determined
Often predetermined
Location of Work
Crosses organizational units
Within an organizational unit
Reporting Relationships
Informal
Well defined

1.2 PROJECT MANAGEMENT VS. GENERAL MANAGEMENT
•  5
Project budgeting differs from standard budgeting, not in accounting techniques, but 
in the way budgets are constructed. Budgets for nonprojects are primarily modifications 
of budgets for the same activity in the previous period. Project budgets are newly created 
for each project and often cover several “budget periods” in the future. The project 
budget is derived directly from the project plan that calls for specific activities. These 
activities require resources, and such resources are the heart of the project budget. 
Similarly, the project schedule is also derived from the project plan.
In a nonproject manufacturing line, the sequence in which various things are done 
is set when the production line is designed. The sequence of activities often is not altered 
when new models are produced. On the other hand, each project has a schedule of its 
own. Previous projects with deliverables similar to the one at hand may provide a rough 
template for the current project, but its specific schedule will be determined by the time 
required for a specific set of resources to do the specific work that must be done to achieve 
each project’s specific scope by the specific date on which the project is due for delivery 
to the client. As we will see in later chapters, the special requirements associated with 
projects have led to the creation of special managerial tools for budgeting and scheduling.
The routine work of most organizations takes place within a well-defined structure of 
divisions, departments, areas, and similar subdivisions of the total enterprise. The typical 
project cannot thrive under such restrictions. The need for technical knowledge, informa-
tion, and special skills almost always requires that departmental lines be crossed. This is 
simply another way of describing the multidisciplinary character of projects. When pro-
jects are conducted side-by-side with routine activities, chaos tends to result—the non-
projects rarely crossing organizational boundaries and the projects crossing them freely. 
These problems and recommended actions are discussed at greater length in Chapter 2.
Even when large firms establish manufacturing plants or distribution centers in dif-
ferent countries, a management team is established on site. For projects, “globalization” 
has a different meaning. Individual members of project teams may be spread across coun-
tries, continents, and oceans, and speak several different languages. Some project team 
members may never even have a face-to-face meeting with the project manager, though 
transcontinental and intercontinental video meetings combining telephone and com-
puter are common.
The discussion of structure leads to consideration of another difference between 
­project and general management. In general management, there are reasonably well-
defined reporting relationships. Superior-subordinate relationships are known, and lines 
of authority are clear. In project management this is rarely true. The PM may be relatively 
low in the hierarchical chain of command. This does not, however, reduce his or her 
responsibility of completing a project successfully. Responsibility without the authority of 
rank or position is so common in project management as to be the rule, not the exception.
Negotiation
With little legitimate authority, the PM depends on negotiation skills to gain the coop-
eration of the many departments in the organization that may be asked to supply tech-
nology, information, resources, and personnel to the project. The parent organization’s 
standard departments have their own objectives, priorities, and personnel. The project is 
not their responsibility, and the project tends to get the leftovers, if any, after the depart-
ments have satisfied their own need for resources. Without any real command authority, 
the PM must negotiate for almost everything the project needs.
It is important to note that there are three different types of negotiation, win-win 
negotiation, win-lose negotiation, and lose-lose negotiation. When you negotiate the 

6  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
­purchase of a car or a home, you are usually engaging in win-lose negotiation. The less 
you pay for a home or car, the less profit the seller makes. Your savings are the other 
party’s losses—win-lose negotiation. This type of negotiation is never appropriate when 
dealing with other members of your organization. If you manage to “defeat” a department 
head and get resources or commitments that the department head did not wish to give 
you, imagine what will happen the next time you need something from this individual. 
The PM simply cannot risk win-lose situations when negotiating with other members of 
the organization.
Lose-lose negotiation occurs when one party is unwilling to assert his or her position 
aggressively while at the same time resists cooperating with the other party. This often 
occurs in situations where one or both of the parties are conflict avoiders. When one 
party is not willing to help the other party achieve his or her objective and at the same 
time is unwilling to pursue his or her own objectives, the end result is that both parties lose.
Within the organization, win-win negotiation is mandatory. In essence, in win-win 
negotiation both parties must try to understand what the other party needs. The problem 
you face as a negotiator is how to help other parties meet their needs in return for their 
help in meeting the needs of your project. When negotiation takes place repeatedly 
between the same individuals, win-win negotiation is the only sensible procedure. PMs 
spend a great deal of their time negotiating. General managers spend relatively little. 
Skill at win-win negotiating is a requirement for successful project managing (see Fisher 
and Ury, 1983; Jandt, 1987; and Raiffa, 1982).
One final point about negotiating: Successful win-win negotiation often involves 
taking a synergistic approach by searching for the “third alternative.” For example, con-
sider a product development project focusing on the development of a new printer.  
A design engineer working on the project suggests adding more memory to the printer. 
The PM initially opposes this suggestion, feeling that the added memory will make the 
printer too costly. Rather than rejecting the suggestion, however, the PM tries to gain a 
better understanding of the design engineer’s concern.
Based on their discussion, the PM learns that the engineer’s purpose in requesting 
additional memory is to increase the printer’s speed. After benchmarking the competi-
tion, the design engineer feels the printer will not be competitive as it is currently con-
figured. The PM explains his fear that adding the extra memory will increase the cost of 
the printer to the point that it also will no longer be cost competitive. Based on this 
discussion the design engineer and PM agree that they need to search for another (third) 
alternative that will increase the printer’s speed without increasing its costs. A couple of 
days later, the design engineer identifies a new ink that can simultaneously increase the 
printer’s speed and actually lower its total and operating costs.
Project management differs greatly from general management. Every project is 
planned, budgeted, scheduled, and controlled as a unique task. Unlike nonprojects, 
projects are often multidisciplinary and usually have considerable need to cross 
departmental boundaries for technology, information, resources, and personnel. 
Crossing these boundaries tends to lead to intergroup conflict. The development of a 
detailed project plan based on the scope and due date of the project is critical to the 
project’s success.
Unlike their general management counterparts, project managers have respon-
sibility for accomplishing a project, but little or no legitimate authority to command 
the required resources from the functional departments. The PM must be skilled at 
win-win negotiation to obtain these resources.

1.3 WHAT IS MANAGED? THE THREE GOALS OF A PROJECT
•  7
	 1.3	
WHAT IS MANAGED? THE THREE GOALS OF A PROJECT
The performance of a project, commonly called its “efficiency,” is assessed on the basis of 
three criteria, variously known as the “triple constraints,” the “iron triangle,” the “golden 
constraints,” and so on. Is the project on time or early? Is the project on or under budget? 
Does the project deliver the scope to the agreed-upon specification? Figure 1‑1 shows the 
three goals of a project specifications. The performance of the project and the PM is 
measured by the degree to which these goals are achieved. A recent issue, however, has 
arisen: meeting a project’s triple constraints often does not achieve the aims of the pro-
ject for the client, known as the project’s “effectiveness;” that is, the project didn’t deliver 
the benefits the client was hoping to gain. However, not meeting the project’s triple 
constraint usually dooms the project to failure. This issue is discussed further in 
Section 1.5.
One of these goals, the project’s specifications or “scope,” is set primarily by the cli-
ent (although the client agrees to all three when contracting for the project). It is the 
client who must decide what capabilities are required of the project’s deliverables—and 
this is what makes the project unique. Some writers insist that “quality” is a separate and 
distinct goal of the project along with time, cost, and scope. We do not agree because we 
consider quality an inherent part of the project scope.
If we did not live in an uncertain world in which best made plans often go awry, 
managing projects would be relatively simple, requiring only careful planning. 
Unfortunately, we do not live in a predictable (deterministic) world, but one characterized 
by chance events (uncertainty). This ensures that projects travel a rough road. Murphy’s 
law seems as universal as death and taxes, and the result is that the most skilled planning 
is upset by uncertainty. Thus, the PM spends a great deal of time adapting to unpredicted 
change. The primary method of adapting is to trade off one objective for another. If a 
construction project falls behind schedule because of bad weather, it may be possible to 
get back on schedule by adding resources—in this case, probably labor using overtime 
and perhaps some additional equipment. If the budget cannot be raised to cover the 
additional resources, the PM may have to negotiate with the client for a later delivery 
Trade-Offs
Required scope
Budget limit
Due date
Performance targets
Time
(“schedule”)
Cost
Scope
Figure 1-1  Scope, cost, and time 
project performance targets.

8  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
date of the building. If neither cost nor schedule can be negotiated, the client may be 
willing to cut back on some of the features in the building in order to allow the project 
to finish on time and budget (e.g., substituting carpet for tile in some of the spaces).  
As a final alternative, the contractor may have to “swallow” the added costs (or pay a 
penalty for late delivery) and accept lower profits.
This example illustrates a fundamental point. Namely, managing the trade-offs 
among the three project goals is in fact one of the primary roles of the project manager. 
Furthermore, managing these trade-offs in the most effective manner requires that the 
project manager have a clear understanding of how the project supports broader organi-
zational goals. Thus, the organization’s overall strategy is the most important considera-
tion for managing the trade-offs that will be required among the three project goals.
All projects are always carried out under conditions of uncertainty. Well-tested soft-
ware routines may not perform properly when integrated with other well-tested routines. 
A chemical compound may destroy cancer cells in a test tube—and even in the bodies of 
test animals—but may kill the host as well as the cancer. Where one cannot find an 
acceptable way to deal with a problem, the only alternative may be to stop the project 
and start afresh to achieve the desired deliverables.
As we note throughout this book, projects are all about uncertainty. Therefore, in 
addition to effectively managing trade-offs, the second major role of the project manager 
is dealing with uncertainty, that is, managing risks. The time required to complete a 
project, the availability and costs of key resources, the timing of solutions to technologi-
cal problems, a wide variety of macroeconomic variables, the whims of a client, the 
actions taken by competitors, even the likelihood that the output of a project will per-
form as expected, all these exemplify the uncertainties encountered when managing 
­projects. While there are actions that may be taken to reduce the uncertainty, no actions 
of a PM can ever eliminate it.
As Hatfield (2008) points out, projects are complex and include interfaces, interde-
pendencies, and many assumptions, any or all of which may turn out to be wrong. Also, 
projects are managed by people, which adds to the uncertainty. Gale (2008a) reminds us 
that the uncertainties include everything from legislation that can change how we do 
business, to earthquakes and other “acts of God.” Therefore, in today’s turbulent business 
environment, effective decision making is predicated on an ability to manage the ambi-
guity that arises while we operate in a world characterized by uncertain information. 
(Risk management is discussed in Chapter 11 of the PMBOK, 5th ed., 2013.)
The first step in managing risk is to identify these potentially uncertain events and 
the likelihood that any or all may occur. This is called risk analysis. Different managers 
and organizations approach this problem in different ways. Gale advises expecting the 
unexpected; some managers suggest considering those things that keep one awake at 
night. Many organizations keep formal lists, a “risk register,” and use their Project 
Management Office (PMO, discussed in Chapter 2) to maintain and update the list of 
risks and approaches that have been successful in the past in dealing with specific risks. 
This information is then incorporated into the firm’s business-continuity and disaster-
recovery plans. Every organization should have a well-defined process for dealing with 
risk, and we will discuss this issue at greater length in Section 3.5. At this point we simply 
overview risk analysis.
The essence of risk analysis is to make estimates or assumptions about the probability 
distributions associated with key parameters and variables and to use analytic decision 
models or Monte Carlo simulation models based on these distributions to evaluate the 
desirability of certain managerial decisions. Real-world problems are usually large enough 
that the use of analytic models is very difficult and time consuming. With modern 
­computer software, simulation is not difficult.
Trade-Offs
PMBOK Guide
Risk
Best Practice

1.3 WHAT IS MANAGED? THE THREE GOALS OF A PROJECT
•  9
A mathematical model of the situation is constructed that models the relationship 
between unknown input variables and important outcomes. The model is run (or repli-
cated) repeatedly, starting from a different point each time based on random choices of 
values from the probability distributions of the input variables. Outputs of the model are 
used to construct statistical distributions of outcomes of interest to decision makers, such 
as costs, profits, completion dates, or return on investment. These distributions are the 
risk profiles of the outcomes associated with a decision. Risk profiles can be analyzed by 
the manager when considering a decision, along with many other factors such as strategic 
concerns, behavioral issues, fit with the organization, cost and scheduling issues, and so on.
Thus in this book, we adopt the point of view that the two primary roles of the pro-
ject manager are managing trade-offs and managing risks. Because these two roles are 
fundamental to the work of the project manager, icons are displayed throughout the book 
in the left margin when these topics are discussed. It is also important to point out that 
these two roles are highly integrated with one another. Indeed, managing risk is actually 
tightly coupled with managing the three traditional goals of project management. For 
example, the more uncertainty the project manager faces, the greater the risk that the 
project will go over budget, finish late, and/or not meet its original scope. However, 
beyond these rather obvious relationships, there is also a more subtle connection. In 
particular, project risk can actually be thought of as a fourth trade-off opportunity at the 
project manager’s disposal. For example, the project’s budget can be increased in order to 
collect additional data that in turn will reduce the uncertainty related to how long it will 
take to complete the project. Likewise, the project’s deadline can be reduced, but this 
will increase the uncertainty about whether it will be completed on time.
Most of the trade-offs PMs make are reasonably straightforward if the organization’s 
strategy is well understood and trade-offs are discussed during the planning, budgeting, 
and scheduling phases of the project. Usually they involve trading time and cost, but if 
we cannot alter either the schedule or the budget, the scope of the project may be altered 
or additional risk accepted. Frills on the finished product may be foregone, capabilities 
not badly needed may be compromised. From the early stages of the project, it is the PM’s 
duty to know which elements of project performance are sacrosanct.
One final comment on this subject: Projects must have some flexibility. Again, this 
is because we do not live in a deterministic world. Occasionally, a senior manager (who 
does not have to manage the project) presents the PM with a document precisely listing 
a set of deliverables, a fixed budget, and a firm schedule. This is failure in the making for 
the PM. Unless the budget is overly generous, the schedule overlong, and the delivera-
bles easily accomplished, the system is, as mathematicians say, “overdetermined.” If 
Mother Nature so much as hiccups, the project will fail to meet its rigid parameters.  
A PM cannot be successful without flexibility to manage the trade-offs.
Risk
Trade-Offs
The two primary roles of the project manager are to manage trade-offs among three 
interrelated objectives and to manage risks. The three interrelated objectives are: to 
(1) meet the budget, (2) finish on schedule, and (3) generate deliverables that satisfy 
the client. Because we live in an uncertain world, as work on the project proceeds, 
unexpected problems are bound to arise. These chance events will threaten the pro-
ject’s schedule or budget or scope. The PM must now decide how to trade off one 
project goal against another (e.g., to stay on schedule by assigning extra resources 
to the project may mean it will run over the predetermined budget). If the schedule, 
budget, and scope are rigidly predetermined, the project is probably doomed to failure 
unless the preset schedule and budget are overly generous or the difficulty in meeting 
the specifications has been seriously overestimated.

10  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
	 1.4	
THE LIFE CYCLES OF PROJECTS
All organisms have a life cycle. They are born, grow, wane, and die. This is true for all 
living things, for stars and planets, for the products we buy and sell, for our organizations, 
and for our projects as well. A project’s life cycle measures project completion as a func-
tion of either time (schedule) or resources (budget). The subject of project life cycles is 
discussed in PMBOK’s Chapter 2 on Organizational Influences and Project Life Cycle. 
This life cycle must be understood because the PM’s managerial focus subtly shifts at dif-
ferent stages of the cycle (Adams and Barndt, 1983; Kloppenborg and Mantel, 1990). 
During the early stages, the PM must make sure that the project plan really reflects  
the wishes of the client as well as the abilities of the project team and is designed to be 
­consistent with the goals and objectives of the parent organization.
As the project goes into the implementation stage of its life cycle, the PM’s atten-
tion turns to the job of keeping the project on budget and schedule—or, when chance 
interferes with progress, to negotiating the appropriate trade-offs to correct or minimize 
the damage. At the end of the project, the PM turns into a “fuss-budget” to assure that 
the specifications of the project are truly met, handling all the details of closing out the 
books on the project, making sure there are no loose ends, and that every “i” is dotted 
and “t” crossed.
Many projects are like building a house. A house-building project starts slowly with 
a lot of discussion and planning. Then construction begins, and progress is rapid. When 
the house is built, but not finished inside, progress appears to slow down and it seemingly 
takes forever to paint everything, to finish all the trim, and to assemble and install the 
built-in appliances. Progress is slow-fast-slow, as shown in Figure 1‑2.
It used to be thought that the S-shaped curve of Figure 1‑2 represented the life cycle 
for all projects. While this is true of many projects, there are important exceptions. 
Anyone who has baked a cake has dealt with a project that approaches completion by a 
very different route than the traditional S-curve, as shown in Figure 1‑3.
PMBOK Guide
Trade-Offs
100
Time
Percent project completion
0
Slow start
Slow ﬁnish
Quick momentum
Figure 1-2  The project 
life cycle.
Percent project completion
0
Time
100
Slow start
Rapid ﬁnish
Figure 1-3  An alternate project 
life cycle.

1.5 SELECTING PROJECTS TO MEET ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
•  11
The process of baking a cake is straightforward. The ingredients are mixed while the 
oven is preheated, usually to 350°F. The mixture (technically called “goop”) is placed in a 
greased pan, inserted in the oven, and the baking process begins. Assume that the entire 
process from assembling the ingredients to finished cake requires about 45 minutes—15 
minutes for assembling the materials and mixing, and 30 minutes for baking. At the end of 
15 minutes we have goop. Even after 40 minutes, having baked for 25 minutes, it may look 
like cake but, as any baker knows, it is still partly goop inside. If a toothpick (our grand-
mothers used a broom straw) is inserted into the middle of the “cake” and then removed, 
it does not come out clean. In the last few minutes of the process, the goop in the middle 
becomes cake. If left a few minutes too long in the oven, the cake will begin to burn on the 
bottom. Project Cake follows a J-shaped path to completion much like Figure 1‑3.
There are many projects that are similar to cake—the development of computer 
software, and many chemical engineering projects, for instance. In these cases the PM’s 
job begins with great attention to having all the correct project resources at hand or guar-
anteed to be available when needed. Once the “baking” process is underway—the inte-
gration of various sets of code or chemicals—one can usually not add missing ingredients. 
As the process continues, the PM must concentrate on determining when the project is 
complete—“done” in the case of cake, or a fully debugged program in the case of software.
In later chapters, we will also see the importance of the shape of the project’s life 
cycle on how management allocates resources or reacts to potential delays in a project. 
Management does not need to know the precise shape of the life cycle, but merely 
whether its completion phase is concave (Figure  1‑2) or convex (Figure  1‑3) to 
the baseline.
	 1.5	
SELECTING PROJECTS TO MEET ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
As noted earlier, a major trend occurring in organizations is the use of project management 
to implement the organization’s strategic objectives, especially organizational change. 
Organizations spend about $100 billion a year on creating competitive strategies (Morgan 
et al., 2007, p. 1), yet 90 percent of them (thousands) fail due to poor execution of these 
projects. This has stimulated a variety of new research into why these projects, even when 
successful, often don’t attain the strategic benefits the organization desired. Some of these 
research streams are called “change management,” “benefit realization management,” and 
other such terms. One new approach gaining attention has been the creation of a new 
position in the project governance structure called the “project owner,” an agent of the 
funding organization with the responsibility of ensuring that the project results in the stra-
tegic benefits desired by the funder (Zwikael et al., 2015). The project owner works closely 
with the project manager and the executive “sponsor” (champion) of the project in the 
project manager’s organization, as well as all project stakeholders, to ensure that the 
­strategic benefits are realized when the project is eventually implemented and 
operationalized.
Not all of an organization’s projects will be strategy implementation or organiza-
tional change projects, but all of the projects in the organization’s portfolio should be 
There are two different paths (life cycles) along which projects progress from start to 
completion. One is S-shaped, and the other is J-shaped. It is an important distinc-
tion because identifying the different life cycles helps the PM to focus attention on 
appropriate matters to ensure successful project completion.
Best Practice

12  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
consistent with the organization’s strategic goals. In what follows, we first discuss a vari-
ety of common project selection methods. We then describe the process of strategically 
selecting the best set of projects for implementation, called the Project Portfolio Process.
Project selection is the process of evaluating individual projects or groups of projects 
and then choosing to implement a set of them so that the objectives of the parent organi-
zation are achieved. Before a project begins its life cycle, it must have been selected for 
funding by the parent organization. Whether the project was proposed by someone 
within the organization or an outside client, it is subject to approval by a more or less 
formal selection process. Often conducted by a committee of senior managers, the major 
function of the selection process is to ensure that several conditions are considered before 
a commitment is made to undertake any project. These conditions vary widely from firm 
to firm, but several are quite common: (1) Is the project potentially profitable? Does it 
have a chance of meeting our return-on-investment hurdle rate? (2) Is the project 
required by law or the rules of an industrial association; i.e., a “mandate?” (3) Does the 
firm have, or can it easily acquire, the knowledge and skills to carry out the project suc-
cessfully? (4) Does the project involve building competencies that are considered con-
sistent with our firm’s strategic plan? (5) Does the organization currently have the 
capacity to carry out the project on its proposed schedule? (6) In the case of R&D pro-
jects, if the project is technically successful, does it meet all requirements to make it 
economically successful? This list could be greatly extended.
The selection process is often complete before a PM is appointed to the project. 
Why, then, should the PM be concerned? Quite simply, the PM should know exactly why 
the organization selected the specific project because this sheds considerable light on 
what the project (and hence the PM) is expected to accomplish, from senior manage-
ment’s point of view, with the project. The project may have been selected because it 
appeared to be profitable, or was a way of entering a new area of business, or a way of 
building a reputation of competency with a new client or in a new market. This knowl-
edge can be very helpful to the PM by indicating senior management’s goals for the pro-
ject, which will point to the desirability of some trade-offs and the undesirability of others.
There are many different methods for selecting projects, but they may be grouped 
into two fundamental types, nonnumeric and numeric. The former does not use numbers 
for evaluation; the latter does. At this point it is important to note that many firms select 
projects before a detailed project plan has been developed. Clearly, if the potential pro-
ject’s scope, budget, and due dates have not been determined, it will be quite impossible 
to derive a reasonably accurate estimate of the project’s success. Rough estimations may 
have to suffice in such cases, but specific plans should be developed prior to final project 
selection. Obviously, mandated projects are an exception. For mandates, budget esti-
mates do not matter but scope and due dates are still important. Mandates must be 
selected. We will deal further with the selection problem when we consider the Project 
Management Office in Chapter 2.
Nonnumeric Selection Methods
The Sacred Cow  At times, the organization’s Chief Executive Officer (CEO) or 
other senior executive either formally or casually suggests a potential product or service 
that the organization might offer to its customers. The suggestion often starts, “You know, 
I was thinking that we might . . .” and concludes with “. . . Take a look at it and see if it 
looks sensible. If not, we’ll drop the whole thing.”
Whatever the selection process, the aforementioned project will be approved. It 
becomes a “Sacred Cow” and will be shown to be technically, if not economically, feasible. 
This may seem irrational to new students of project management, but such a judgment 
Trade-Offs

1.5 SELECTING PROJECTS TO MEET ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
•  13
ignores senior management’s intelligence and valuable years of experience—as well as the 
subordinate’s desire for long-run employment. It also overlooks the value of support from 
the top of the organization, a condition that is necessary for project success (Green, 1995).
The Operating/Competitive Necessity  This method selects any project that is 
necessary for continued operation of a group, facility, or the firm itself. A “mandated” 
project obviously must be selected. If the answer to the “Is it necessary . . . ?” question is 
“yes,” and if we wish to continue using the facility or system to stay in business, the pro-
ject is selected. The Investment Committee of a large manufacturing company started to 
debate the advisability of purchasing and installing pumps to remove 18 inches of flood 
water from the floor of a small, but critical production facility. The debate stopped imme-
diately when one officer pointed out that without the pumps the firm was out of business.
The same questions can be directed toward the maintenance of a competitive posi-
tion. Some years ago, General Electric almost decided to sell a facility that manufactured 
the large mercury vapor light bulbs used for streetlights and lighting large parking lots. 
The lighting industry had considerable excess capacity for this type of bulb and the 
resulting depressed prices meant they could not be sold profitably. GE, however, felt that 
if they dropped these bulbs from their line of lighting products, they might lose a signifi-
cant portion of all light bulb sales to municipalities. The profits from such sales were far 
in excess of the losses on the mercury vapor bulbs.
Comparative Benefits  Many organizations have to select from a list of projects that 
are complex, difficult to assess, and often noncomparable, for example, United Way organ-
izations and R&D organizations. Such institutions often appoint a selection committee 
made up of knowledgeable individuals. Each person is asked to arrange a set of potential 
projects into a rank-ordered set. Typically, each individual judge may use whatever criteria 
he or she wishes to evaluate projects. Some may use carefully determined technical criteria, 
but others may try to estimate the project’s probable impact on the ability of the organiza-
tion to meet its goals. While the use of various criteria by different judges may trouble 
some, it results from a purposeful attempt to get as broad a set of evaluations as possible.
Rank-ordering a small number of projects is not inherently difficult, but when the 
number of projects exceeds 15 or 20, the difficulty of ordering the group rises rapidly. 
A Q-sort* is a convenient way to handle the task. First, separate the projects into three 
subsets, “good,” “fair,” and “poor,” using whatever criteria you have chosen—or been 
instructed to use. If there are more than seven or eight members in any one classification, 
divide the group into two subsets, for instance, “good-plus” and “good-minus.” Continue 
subdividing until no set has more than seven or eight members. Now, rank-order the items 
in each subset. Arrange the subsets in order of rank, and the entire list will be in order. Last, 
review the stack and shift any cards that seem out of place until the classifications are 
satisfactory.
The committee can make a composite ranking from the individual lists any way it 
chooses. One way would be to number the items on each individual list in order of rank, 
and then add the ranks given to each project by each of the judges. Projects may then be 
approved in the order of their composite ranks, at least until the organization runs out of 
available funds.
Numeric Selection Methods
Financial Assessment Methods  Most firms select projects on the basis of their 
expected economic value to the firm. Although there are many economic assessment 
*The Q-sort is a handy, useful, and easy-to-use technique. See Helin and Souder (1974).

14  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
methods available—payback period, average annual rate of return, internal rate of return, 
and so on—we will describe here two of the most widely used methods: payback period 
and discounted cash flow.*
The payback period for a project is the initial fixed investment in the project divid- 
ed by the estimated annual net cash inflows from the project (which include the cash 
inflows from depreciation of the investment). The ratio of these quantities is the number 
of years required for the project to return its initial investment. Because of this perspec-
tive, the payback period is often considered a surrogate measure of risk to the firm: the 
longer the payback period, the greater the risk. To illustrate, if a project requires an 
investment of $100,000 and is expected to return a net cash inflow of $25,000 each year, 
then the payback period is simply 100,000/25,000 = 4 years, assuming the $25,000 
annual inflow continues at least 4 years. Although this is a popular financial assessment 
method, it ignores the time value of money as well as any returns beyond the payback 
period. For these reasons, it is not recommended as a project selection method, though it 
is valuable for cash budgeting. Of the financial assessment methods, the discounted cash 
flow method discussed next is recommended instead.
The discounted cash flow method considers the time value of money, the inflation 
rate, and the firm’s return-on-investment (ROI) hurdle rate for projects. The annual 
cash inflows and outflows are collected and discounted to their net present value (NPV) 
using the organization’s required rate of return (a.k.a. the hurdle rate or cutoff rate).
NPV project
I
F
k
o
t
n
t
t
1
1
/
where
I0
the initial investment, which will be negative because iit is an outflow
the net cash flow in period
the requ
F
t
k
t
ired rate of return or hurdle rate
number of periods in 
n
life of project
If one wishes to include the potential effects of inflation or deflation in the calcula-
tion, it is quite easily done. The discounting term, (1 + k)
t, simply becomes (1 + k + pt)
t, 
where pt is the estimated rate of inflation or deflation for period t. If the required rate  
of return is 10 percent and we expect the rate of inflation will be 3 percent, then the 
discount term becomes (1 + .10 + .03)
t = (1.13)
t for that period.
In the early years of a project when outflows usually exceed inflows, the NPV of the 
project for those years will be negative. If the project becomes profitable, inflows become 
larger than outflows and the NPV for those later years will be positive. If we calculate the 
present value of the net cash flows for all years, we have the NPV of the project. If this 
sum is positive, the project may be accepted because it earns more than the required rate 
of return. The following boxed example illustrates these calculations. For clarity and 
convenience in the analysis, we have chosen to illustrate the calculations using Excel®’s 
NPV function rather than using the NPV formula.
Risk
*Explanations of the theory and methods of calculating the net present value of cash inflows are beyond the 
scope of this book. We recommend that the reader who could benefit from an explanation turn to any standard col-
lege textbook on finance.

1.5 SELECTING PROJECTS TO MEET ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
•  15
Perhaps the most difficult aspect related to the proper use of discounted cash flow is 
determining the appropriate discount rate to use. While this determination is made by 
senior management, it has a major impact on project selection, and therefore, on the life 
of the PM. For most projects the hurdle rate selected is the organization’s cost of capital, 
though it is often arbitrarily set too high as a general allowance for risk. In the case of 
particularly risky projects, a higher hurdle rate may be justified, but it is not a good gen-
eral practice. If a project is competing for funds with alternative investments, the hurdle 
Ceramic Sciences, Inc.*
Ceramic Sciences, Inc. (CSI) is a large producer of decorative ceramic pots. The 
firm is considering the installation of a new manufacturing line that will, it is hoped, 
improve the quality of its pots as well as their vases designed to hold artificial flowers.
The plant engineering department has submitted a project proposal that esti-
mates the following investment requirements: an initial investment of $125,000 to 
be paid up-front to the Pocketa Machine Corporation, an additional investment of 
$100,000 to install the machines, and another $90,000 to add new material han-
dling systems and integrate the new equipment into the overall production system. 
Delivery and installation is estimated to take 1 year, and integrating the entire system 
should require an additional year. Thereafter, the engineers predict that scheduled 
machine overhauls will require further expenditures of about $15,000 every second 
year, beginning in the fourth year. They will not, however, overhaul the machinery 
in the last year of its life.
The project schedule calls for the line to begin production in the third year, and 
to be up-to-speed by the end of that year. Projected manufacturing cost savings and 
added profits resulting from higher quality are estimated to be $50,000 in the first year 
of operation and are expected to peak at $120,000 in the second year of operation, 
and then to follow the gradually declining pattern shown in Table A.
Project life is expected to be 10 years from project inception, at which time the 
proposed system will be obsolete and will have to be replaced. It is estimated that the 
machinery will have a salvage value of $35,000. CSI has a 13 percent hurdle rate for 
capital investments and expects the rate of inflation to be about 2 percent per year 
over the life of the project. Assuming that the initial expenditure occurs at the begin-
ning of the year and that all other receipts and expenditures occur as lump sums at 
the end of the year, we can prepare the Net Present Value analysis for the project as 
shown in Table A. Note that Excel’s built in Net Present Value function NPV was 
used to facilitate the analysis. The NPV function has two arguments: the discount 
rate and the range that contains the cash flows to be discounted.
Because the first cash flow of – $125,000 occurs at the beginning of the first 
period, there is no need to discount it as it is already in present value terms. The 
remaining cash flows are assumed to occur at the end of their respective periods. For 
example, the $115,000 cash flow associated with 20X4 is assumed to occur at the 
end of the fifth period. According to the results, the Net Present Value of the project 
is positive and, thus, the project can be accepted. (The project would have been 
rejected if the hurdle rate had been 15 percent or if the inflation rate was 4 percent, 
either one resulting in a discount rate of 17 percent.)
Risk
*The authors thank John Wiley & Sons for permission to adapt material from Meredith J. R., Mantel, S. J., and 
Shafer, S. M., Project Management: A Managerial Approach, 9th ed. New York, John Wiley & Sons, 2015 for use 
in this section and in Section 1.6.

16  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
rate may be the opportunity cost of capital, that is, the rate of return the firm must forego if 
it invests in the project instead of making an alternative investment. Another common, 
but misguided practice is to set the hurdle rate high as an allowance for resource cost 
increases. Neither risk nor inflation should be treated so casually. Specific corrections for 
each should be made if the firm’s management feels it is required. We recommend strongly 
a careful risk analysis, which we will discuss in further detail throughout this book.
Because the present value of future returns decreases as the discount rate rises, 
a high hurdle rate biases the analysis strongly in favor of short-run projects. For ­example, 
given a rate of 20 percent, a dollar 10 years from now has a present value of only $.16, 
(1/1.20)10 = 0.16. The critical feature of long-run projects is that costs associated with 
them are spent early in the project and have high present values while revenues are 
delayed for several years and have low present values.
This effect may have far-reaching implications. The high interest rates during the 
1970s and 1980s, and again in the 2000s, forced many firms to focus on short-run projects. 
The resulting disregard for long-term technological advancement led to a deterioration in 
the ability of some U.S. firms to compete in world markets (Hayes and Abernathy, 1980).
The discounted cash flow methods of calculation are simple and straightforward. 
Like the other financial assessment methods, it has a serious defect. First, it ignores all 
nonmonetary factors except risk. Second, because of the nature of discounting, all the 
discounted methods bias the selection system by favoring short-run projects. Let us now 
examine a selection method that goes beyond assessing only financial profitability.
Financial Options and Opportunity Costs  A more recent approach to project 
selection employs financial analysis that recognizes the value of positioning the organ-
ization to capitalize on future opportunities. It is based on the financial options 
Table A 
=B5−C5 [Copy to D6:D15]
=$65,000 cost savings + 
   $35,000 salvage value
=D5+NPV(B1+B2,D6:D15)
A
B
C
D
4
Year
Inﬂow
Outﬂow
Net Flow
5
20X0*
$0
$1,25,000
−$1,25,000
6
20X0
$0
$1,00,000
−$1,00,000
7
1
2
3
20X1
$0
$90,000
−$90,000
8
20X2
$50,000
$0
$50,000
9
20X3
$1,20,000
$15,000
$105,000
10
20X4
$1,15,000
$0
$1,15,000
11
20X5
$1,05,000
$15,000
$90,000
12
20X6
$97,000
$0
$97,000
13
20X7
$90,000
$15,000
$75,000
14
20X8
$82,000
$0
$82,000
15
16
17
20X9
$1,00,000
$0
$1,00,000
Total
$7,59,000
$3,60,000
$3,99,000
NPV
$17,997
*t = 0 at the beginning of 20X0
Hurdle Rate
13.0%
Inﬂation Rate
2.0%

1.5 SELECTING PROJECTS TO MEET ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
•  17
approach to valuing prospective capital investment opportunities. Through a financial 
option an organization or individual acquires the right to do something but is not 
required to exercise that right. For example, you may be familiar with stock options. 
When a person or organization purchases a stock option, they acquire the right to pur-
chase a specific number of shares of a particular stock at a specified price within a 
specified time frame. If the market price of the stock moves above the specified option 
price within the specified time frame, the entity holding the option can exercise its 
right and thereby purchase the stock below the fair market price. If the market price of 
the stock remains below the specified option price, the entity can choose not to exer-
cise its right to buy the stock.
To illustrate the analogy of financial options to project selection, consider a young 
biotech firm that is ready to begin clinical trials to test a new pharmaceutical product 
in humans. A key issue the company has to address is how to produce the drug both 
now in the low volumes needed for the clinical trials and in the mass quantities that 
will be needed in the future should the new drug succeed in the clinical trial phase. Its 
options for producing the drug in low volumes for the clinical trials are to invest in an 
in-house pilot plant or to immediately license the drug to another company. If it invests 
in an in-house pilot plan, it then has two future options for mass producing the drug: 
(1) invest in a commercial scale plant or (2) license the manufacturing rights. In effect 
then, investing now in the pilot plant provides the pharmaceutical company with the 
option of building a commercial scale plant in the future, an option it would not have 
if it chooses to license the drug right from the start. Thus by building the in-house pilot 
plant the pharmaceutical company is in a sense acquiring the right to build a commer-
cial plant in the future. While beyond the scope of this book, we point out to the 
reader that in addition to the traditional approaches to project selection, the decision 
to build the pilot plant can also be analyzed using valuation techniques from financial 
options theory. In this case the value of having the option to build a commercial plant 
can be estimated.
In addition to considering the value of future opportunities a project may provide, 
the cost of not doing a project should also be considered. This approach to project selec-
tion is based on the well-known economic concept of “opportunity cost.” Consider the 
problem of making an investment in one of only two projects. An investment in Project 
A will force us to forgo investing in Project B, and vice versa. If the return on A is 
12 ­percent, making an investment in B will have an opportunity cost of 12 percent, the 
cost of the opportunity forgone. If the return on B is greater than 12 percent, it may be 
­preferred over selecting Project A.
The same selection principle can be applied to timing the investment in a given 
project. R&D projects or projects involving the adoption of new technologies, for 
example, have values that may vary considerably with time. It is common for the 
passage of time to reduce uncertainties involved in both technological and commer-
cial projects. The value of investing now may be higher (or lower) than investing 
later. If a project is delayed, the values of its costs and revenues at a later period 
should be discounted to their present value when compared to an investment 
not delayed.
Occasionally, organizations will approve projects that are forecast to lose money 
when fully costed and sometimes even when only direct costed. Such decisions by upper 
management are not necessarily foolish because there may be other, more important 
reasons for proceeding with a project, such as to:
• Acquire knowledge concerning a specific or new technology
• Get the organization’s “foot in the door”

18  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
• Obtain the parts, service, or maintenance portion of the work
• Allow them to bid on a lucrative, follow-on contract
• Improve their competitive position
• Broaden a product line or line of business
Of course, such decisions are expected to lose money in the short term only. Over 
the longer term they are expected to bring extra profits to the organization. It should be 
understood that “lowball” or “buy-in” bids (bidding low with the intent of cutting cor-
ners on work and material, or forcing subsequent contract changes) are unethical prac-
tices, violate the PMI Code of Ethics for Project Managers (see PMBOK, p. 2, 2013), and 
are clearly dishonest.
Scoring Methods  Scoring methods were developed to overcome some of the disad-
vantages of the simple financial profitability methods, especially their focus on a single 
criterion. The simplest scoring approach, the unweighted 0–1 factor method, lists multiple 
criteria of significant interest to management. Given a list of the organization’s goals, a 
selection committee, usually senior managers familiar with both the organization’s crite-
ria and potential project portfolio, check off, for each project, which of the criteria would 
be satisfied; for example, see Figure 1‑4. Those projects that exceed a certain number of 
check-marks may be selected for funding.
PMBOK Guide
Project ________________________________________________________________________
Rater _____________________________Date ________________________________________
Qualifies
Does Not 
Qualify
No increase in energy requirements
x
Potential market size, dollars
x
Potential market share, percent
x
No new facility required
x
No new technical expertise required
x
No decrease in quality of final product
x
Ability to manage project with current personnel
x
No requirement for reorganization
x
Impact on work force safety
x
Impact on environmental standards
x
Profitability
Rate of return more than 15% after tax
x
Estimated annual profits more than $250,000
x
Time to break-even less than 3 years
x
No need for external consultants
x
Consistency with current line of business
x
Impact on company image
With customers
x
With our industry
x
Totals
12
5
Figure 1-4  A 
sample project 
selection form, an 
unweighted 0–1 
scoring model.

1.5 SELECTING PROJECTS TO MEET ORGANIZATIONAL OBJECTIVES
•  19
All the criteria, however, may not be equally important and the various projects 
may satisfy each criterion to different degrees. To correct for these drawbacks, the 
weighted factor scoring method was developed. In this method, a number of criteria, n, 
are considered for evaluating each project, and their relative importance weights, wj, 
are estimated. The sum of the weights over all the j criteria is usually set arbitrarily 
at 1.00, though this is not mandatory. It is helpful to limit the criteria to just the 
major factors and not include criteria that are only marginal to the decision, such as 
representing only 2 or 3 percent importance. A rule of thumb is to keep n less than 
eight factors because the more important factors with weights of, say 20 percent or 
more force the weights of the less important factors to be insignificant. The impor-
tance weights, wj, can be determined in any of a number of ways: a particular indi-
vidual’s subjective belief, available objective factors such as surveys or reports, 
group composite beliefs such as simple averaging among the group members, 
and so on.
In addition, a score, sij, must be determined for how well each project i satisfies 
each criterion j. Each score is multiplied by its category weight, and the set of scores 
is summed to give the total weighted score, Si = Σj sij wj for each project, i, from which 
the best project is then selected. Typically, a 5-point scale is used to ascertain these 
scores, though 3-, 7-, and even 9-point scales are sometimes used. The top score, 
such as 5, is reserved for excellent performance on that criterion such as a return on 
investment (ROI) of 50 percent or more, or a reliability rating of “superior.” The 
bottom score of 1 is for “poor performance,” such as an ROI of 5 percent or less, or a 
reliability rating of “poor.” The middle score of 3 is usually for average or nominal 
performance (e.g., 15–20% ROI), and 4 is “above average” (21–49% ROI) while 2 is 
“below average” (6–14% ROI). Notice that the bottom score, 1, on one category 
may be offset by very high scores on other categories. Any condition that is so bad 
that it makes a project unacceptable, irrespective of how good it may be on other 
criteria, is a constraint. If a project violates a constraint, it is removed from the set 
and not scored.
Note two characteristics in these descriptions. First, the categories for each scale 
need not be in equal intervals—though they should correspond to the subjective 
beliefs about what constitutes excellent, below average, and so on. Second, the five-
point scales can be based on either quantitative or qualitative data, thus allowing 
the inclusion of financial and other “hard” data (cash flows, net present value, mar-
ket share growth, costs) as well as “soft” subjective data (fit with the organization’s 
goals, personal preferences, attractiveness, comfort). And again, the soft data also 
need not be of equal intervals. For example, “superior” may rate a 5 but “OK” may 
rate only a 2.
The general mathematical form of the weighted factor scoring method is
S
s w
i
j
n
ij
j
1
where
S
s
i
ij
the total weighted score of the th project
the score
i
 of the th project on the th criterion
the weight or im
i
j
wj
portance of the th criterion
j
Best Practice

20  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
Using a Weighted Scoring Model for an Election Campaign Project
As the campaign manager to elect Jennifer Allison to the city council, you have 
determined that winning the election is largely dependent on Jennifer’s name recog-
nition. One idea for increasing Jennifer’s name recognition is to distribute car bumper 
stickers with her name on them. In selecting a vendor to design and print the bumper 
stickers, you have two primary criteria of equal importance, cost and the reliability of 
the printer to complete the work on time. You have a limited budget for the bumper 
stickers and would like to spend no more than $4,200. Beyond cost and reliability, the 
reputation of the vendor for developing bold and aesthetically pleasing designs is also 
an important consideration. Upon further reflection and since this is only a bumper 
sticker, you determine that the reputation of the vendor is only half as important as 
either cost or reliability. Table B shows a set of scales you created for the three criteria, 
converted into quantitative scores.
Table B  Criteria Scales and Equivalent Scores
Scores
Criterion
1
2
3
4
5
Cost
>$5,000
$4,000–5,000
$3,000–4,000
2,000–3,000
<$2,000
Reliability
Poor
Mediocre
Ok
Good
Great
Reputation
Poor
Fair
Satisfactory
Good
Excellent
You have identified three possible vendors to design and print the bumper stick-
ers. In Table C, you have scored each of the vendors on each of the criteria, calcu-
lated their weighted scores, and summed them to get a total. The weights for the 
criteria were obtained from the following logic: If Y is the importance weight for 
Cost, then Y is also the importance for Reliability and ½Y is the importance for 
Reputation. This results in the formula
Y
Y
Y
or Y
½
.
.
1 00
0 4
Thus, Cost has 0.4 importance weight, as does Reliability, and Reputation has 
0.2 importance.
Table C  Weighted Total Scores for Each Vendor
Criteria (and Weights)
Alternative Vendor
Cost  
(0.4)
Reliability  
(0.4)
Reputation  
(0.2)
Total
Vendor 1
3 × 0.4 = 1.2
2 × 0.4 = 0.8
4 × 0.2 = 0.8
2.8
Vendor 2
2 × 0.4 = 0.8
4 × 0.4 = 1.6
1 × 0.2 = 0.2
2.6
Vendor 3
4 × 0.4 = 1.6
3 × 0.4 = 1.2
1 × 0.2 = 0.2
3.0
Based on this assessment, it appears that the Vendor 3 with a total weighted 
score of 3.0 may best satisfy your need for bumper stickers. As shown in Table D, 
spreadsheets are a particularly useful tool for comparing options using a weighted 
scoring model.

1.6 THE PROJECT PORTFOLIO PROCESS
•  21
Project selection is an inherently risky process. Throughout this section we have 
treated risk by “making allowance” for it. Managing and analyzing risk can be handled in 
a more straightforward manner. By estimating the highest, lowest, and most likely values 
that costs, revenues, and other relevant variables may have, and by making some other 
assumptions about the world, we can estimate outcomes for the projects among which we 
are trying to make selections. This is accomplished by simulating project outcomes.  
In Section 4.5, we will demonstrate how to do this using Crystal Ball® (CB) on a sample 
selection problem.
	 1.6	
THE PROJECT PORTFOLIO PROCESS
The Project Portfolio Process (PPP) attempts to link the organization’s projects directly 
to the goals and strategy of the organization. This occurs not only in the project’s initia-
tion and planning phases, but also throughout the life cycle of the projects as they are 
managed and eventually brought to completion. This topic is compared to project and 
program management in PMBOK’s Chapter 1: Introduction. Thus, the PPP is also a 
means for monitoring and controlling the organization’s strategic projects, as will be 
reiterated in Chapter 7: Monitoring and Controlling the Project. On occasion this will 
Risk
The PM should understand why a project is selected for funding so that the pro-
ject can be managed to optimize its advantages and achieve its objectives. There are 
two types of project selection methods: numeric and nonnumeric. Both have their 
advantages. Of the numeric methods, there are two subtypes—methods that assess 
the profits associated with a project and more general methods that measure non-
monetary advantages in addition to the monetary pluses. Of the financial methods, 
the discounted cash flow is best. In our judgment, however, the weighted scoring 
method is the most useful.
PMBOK Guide
Table D  Creating a Weighted Scoring Model in a Spreadsheet
A
B
C
D
E
  1
Criteria
Cost
Reliability
Reputation
  2
Weights
0.4
0.4
0.2
  3
  4
Alternative Vendor
Cost
Reliability
Reputation
Total
  5
Vendor 1
3
2
4
2.8
  6
Vendor 2
2
4
1
2.6
  7
Vendor 3
4
3
1
3.0
  8
  9
Formula
10
Cell E5
= SUMPRODUCT(B$2:D$2,B5:D5)
11
(copy to cells E6:E7)

22  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
mean shutting down projects prior to their completion because their risks have become 
excessive, their costs have escalated beyond their expected benefits, another (or a new) 
project does a better job of supporting the goals, or any of a variety of similar reasons. The 
steps in this process generally follow those described in Longman, Sandahl, and Speir 
(1999) and Englund and Graham (1999).
The first step is to appoint a Project Council to establish and articulate a strategic 
direction for projects. The Council should report to a senior executive since it will be 
responsible for allocating funds to those projects that support the organization’s goals and 
controlling the allocation of resources and skills to the projects. In addition to senior 
management, other appropriate members of the Project Council include program man-
agers, project managers of major projects; the head of the PMO, and general managers 
who can identify key opportunities and risks facing the organization.
Next, various project categories are identified so the mix of projects funded by the 
organization will be spread appropriately across those areas making major contributions 
to the organization’s goals. In addition, within each category criteria are established to 
discriminate between very good and even better projects using the weighted scoring 
model previously discussed. The criteria are also weighted to reflect their relative 
importance.
The first task in this step is to list the goals of each existing and proposed project—
that is, the mission, or purpose, of each project. Relating these to the organization’s goals 
and strategies should allow the Council to identify a variety of categories that are impor-
tant to achieving the organization’s goals. One way to position many of the projects 
(particularly product/service development projects) is in terms of the extent of product 
and process changes. Wheelwright and Clark (1992) have developed a matrix called  
the aggregate project plan illustrating these changes, as shown in Figure 1‑5. Based on the 
extent of product change and process change, they identified four separate categories 
of projects:
Risk
Best Practice
Derivative
projects
Breakthrough
projects
Extensive
product
changes
Platform projects
C2
G5
G1
R1
C1
S1
R2
S2
Extensive
process
changes
Minor
process
changes
R&D
projects
Minor
product
changes
S3
G4
G2
C3
G3
Figure 1-5  An 
example aggregate 
project plan.

1.6 THE PROJECT PORTFOLIO PROCESS
•  23
1.	 Derivative projects These are projects with objectives or deliverables that are only 
incrementally different in both product and process from existing offerings. They are 
often meant to replace current offerings or add an extension to current offerings 
(lower priced version, upscale version).
2.	 Platform projects The planned outputs of these projects represent major departures 
from existing offerings in terms of either the product/service itself or the process used 
to make and deliver it, or both. As such, they become “platforms” for the next genera-
tion of organizational offerings, such as a new model of automobile or a new type of 
insurance plan. They form the basis for follow-on derivative projects that attempt to 
extend the platform in various dimensions.
3.	 Breakthrough projects Breakthrough projects typically involve a newer technology 
than platform projects. It may be a “disruptive” technology that is known to the 
industry or something proprietary that the organization has been developing over 
time. Examples here include the use of fiber-optic cables for data transmission, cash-
balance pension plans, and hybrid gasoline-electric automobiles.
4.	 R&D projects These projects are “blue-sky,” visionary endeavors, oriented toward 
using newly developed technologies, or existing technologies in a new manner. They 
may also be for acquiring new knowledge, or developing new technologies themselves.
The size of the projects plotted on the array indicates the size/resource needs of the 
project, and the shape may indicate another aspect of the project (e.g., internal/external, 
long/medium/short term, or whatever aspect needs to be shown). The numbers indicate 
the order, or time frame, in which the projects are to be (or were) implemented, sepa-
rated by category, if desired.
The aggregate project plan can be used to:
• View the mix of projects within each illustrated aspect (shape)
• Analyze and adjust the mix of projects within each category or aspect
• Assess the resource demands on the organization, indicated by the size, timing, 
and number of projects shown
• Identify and adjust the gaps in the categories, aspects, sizes, and timing of 
the projects
• Identify potential career paths for developing project managers, such as team 
members of a derivative project, then team member of a platform project, man-
ager of a derivative project, member of a breakthrough project, and so on
For each existing and proposed project, assemble the data appropriate to that cate-
gory’s criteria. Include the timing, both date and duration, for expected benefits and 
resource needs. Use the project plan, a schedule of project activities, past experience, 
expert opinion, whatever is available to get a good estimate of these data. If the project 
is new, you may want to fund only enough work on the project to verify the assumptions.
Next, use the criteria score limits, or constraints as described in our discussions of 
scoring models, to screen out the weaker projects. For example, have costs on existing 
projects escalated beyond the project’s expected benefits? Has the benefit of a project 
lessened because the organization’s goals have changed? Also, screen in any projects that 
do not require deliberation, such as projects mandated by regulations or laws, projects 
that are competitive or operating necessities (described above), projects required for 
environmental or personnel reasons, and so on. The fewer projects that need to be com-
pared and analyzed, the easier the work of the Council.

24  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
When we discussed financial models and scoring models, we urged the use of multi-
ple criteria when selecting projects. ROI on a project may be lower than the firm’s cut-off 
rate, or even negative, but the project may be a platform for follow-on projects that have 
very high benefits for the firm. Wheatly (2009) also warns against the use of a single 
criterion, commonly the return on investment (ROI), to evaluate projects. A project 
aimed at boosting employee satisfaction will often yield improvements in output, quality, 
costs, and other such factors. For example, Mindtree, of Bangalore, India, measures ben-
efits on five dimensions; revenue, profit, customer satisfaction, employee satisfaction, 
and intellectual capital created—in sum, “Have we become a better company?”
Next, assess the availability of both internal and external resources, by type, depart-
ment, and timing. Timing is particularly important, since project resource needs by type 
typically vary up to 100 percent over the life cycle of projects. Needing a normally plenti-
ful resource at the same moment it is fully utilized elsewhere may doom an otherwise 
promising project. Eventually, the Council will be trying to balance aggregate project 
resource needs over future periods with resource availabilities, so timing is as important 
as the amount of maximum demand and availability. Many managers insist on trying to 
schedule resource usage as closely as possible to system capacity. This is almost certain to 
produce a catastrophe (see Section 6.3, subsection on Resource Loading/Leveling and 
Uncertainty).
Then use multiple screens to reduce the number of competing projects. The first 
screen should be each project’s support of the organization’s goals, but other possible 
screens might be:
• Whether the required competence exists in the organization
• Whether there is a market for the offering
• The likely profitability of the offering
• How risky the project is
• If there is a potential partner to help with the project
• If the right resources are available at the right times
• If the project uses the organization’s strengths, or depends on its weaknesses
• If the project is synergistic with other important projects
• If the project is dominated by another existing or proposed project
• If the project has slipped in its desirability since the last evaluation
Now apply the scores and criterion weights to rank the projects within each ­category. 
It is acceptable to hold some hard-to-measure criteria out for subjective evaluation, such 
as riskiness, or development of new knowledge. Subjective evaluations can be translated 
from verbal to numeric terms easily by the Delphi* Method, pairwise comparisons, or 
other methods.
Finally, select the projects to be funded and those to be held in reserve. That is, 
determine the mix of projects across the various categories and time periods. Next be 
sure to leave some percentage (e.g., 20%) of the organization’s resource capacity free for 
new opportunities, crises in existing projects, errors in estimates, and so on. Then ­allocate 
*The Delphi Method, developed more than 40 years ago, is still unequaled as a method for transforming the 
diverse subjective opinions of a group into a numeric scale. See Dalkey (1969).

1.7 THE MATERIALS IN THIS TEXT
•  25
the categorized projects in rank order to the categories according to the mix desired. It is 
usually good practice to include some speculative projects in each category to allow 
future options, knowledge improvement, additional experience in new areas, and so on. 
The focus should be on committing to fewer projects but with sufficient funding to allow 
project completion. Document why late projects were delayed and why any were defended.
Be sure to make the results of the PPP widely known, including the documented 
reasons for project cancellations, deferrals, and nonselection as was mentioned earlier. 
Top management must now make their commitment to this project portfolio process 
totally clear by supporting the process and its results. This may require a PPP champion 
near the top of the organization. As project proposers come to understand and appreciate 
the workings and importance of the PPP, their proposals will more closely fit the profile 
of the kinds of projects the organization wishes to fund. As this happens, it is important 
to note that the Council will have to concern itself with the reliability and accuracy of 
proposals competing for limited funds. Senior management must fully fund the selected 
projects. It is unethical and inappropriate for senior management to undermine PPP and 
the Council as well as strategically important projects by playing a game of arbitrarily 
cutting χ percent from project budgets. It is equally unethical and inappropriate to pad 
potential project budgets on the expectation that they will be arbitrarily cut.
Finally, the process must be repeated on a regular basis. The Council should deter-
mine the frequency, which to some extent will depend on the speed of change within the 
organization’s industry. For some industries, quarterly analysis may be best, while in slow-
moving industries yearly may be fine.
In an article on competitive intelligence, Gale (2008b) reports that Cisco Systems 
Inc. constantly tracks industry trends, competitors, the stock market, and end users to 
stay ahead of their competition and to know which potential projects to fund. 
Pharmaceutical companies are equally interested in knowing which projects to drop if 
competitors are too far ahead of them, thereby saving millions of dollars in development 
and testing costs.
	 1.7	
THE MATERIALS IN THIS TEXT
When reading a text, it is helpful to understand how the book is organized and where it 
will take the reader. Following this introductory chapter, our attention goes to the vari-
ous roles the PM must play and the ways projects are organized. Chapter 2 focuses on the 
behavioral and structural aspects of projects and their management. It describes the PM’s 
roles as communicator, negotiator, and manager. It also includes a discussion of project 
management as a profession and reports briefly on the Project Management Institute 
(PMI), the PM’s professional organization. Then attention turns to the ways in which 
Projects are often subdivisions of major programs. Long-run success is determined by 
the organization’s portfolio of projects. Classified by the extent of innovation in prod-
uct and process, there are four types of projects: derivative, breakthrough, platform, 
and R & D projects. The actual mix of projects is a direct expression of the organi-
zation’s competitive strategy. A proper mix of project categories can help ensure its 
long-run competitive position. It is important for the Project Council or PMO to 
preplan project portfolio adjustments to respond to significant changes in the state of 
competition and other environmental changes.

26  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
projects can be organized within the parent establishment. Matrix organization is dis-
cussed at length as are the conflicts and managerial problems that matrix organizations 
tend to foster. Finally, the chapter moves to the project team: its purposes and the wide-
spread use of transdisciplinary teams. Using transdisciplinary teams to plan and carry out 
the project is a source of both creativity and conflict. The process of building effective 
teams is briefly covered.
The remainder of the book is designed to conform to the life cycle of any project, 
whatever the shape of the life cycle curve. Chapter 3 covers the process of planning and 
launching the project, construction of the work breakdown structure (WBS), and responsibil-
ity assignment matrices. These activities require the project team to estimate resource and 
time requirements for accomplishing what the project plan has described. The chapter 
ends with a full discussion of the topic of risk management. Chapter 4 discusses the 
­construction of a project budget and further illustrates the use of risk management for 
budgeting.
Chapter 5 covers scheduling, the Program Evaluation Review Technique (PERT), 
the Critical Path Method (CPM), and Gantt charts, the most common ways of illustrat-
ing the project schedule. Schedules will be calculated under conditions of uncertainty in 
two ways: (1) using standard probability theory, and (2) using simulation. In Chapter 6 
resource allocation is discussed. To begin, we consider the problem of crashing a project, 
that is, using additional resources in order to shorten project duration. Then we deal with 
two fundamental problems of resource management. First, a schedule of resource usage 
must be prepared (a.k.a., resource loading). Second, we adjust the resource loads to avoid 
gluts and shortages of valuable resources, (a.k.a., resource leveling). The problems of 
resource usage when there are multiple projects competing for a limited resource pool are 
then covered, as are ways of dealing with these problems. The chapter ends with a discus-
sion of Goldratt’s Critical Chain (1997).
The subjects of Chapter 7 are monitoring and controlling projects. The nature of 
project data collection is explained, and various types of project reports, including earned 
value reports, are illustrated and discussed. Following this, we cover the general purposes 
and mechanisms for project control. The chapter ends with a section devoted to the 
control of change on a project. It is here that we discuss “scope creep” and how to control it.
Chapter 8 deals with evaluating, auditing, and closing down projects. The project team 
often fears evaluation and auditing. Team members usually equate these activities with 
fault finding, but when correctly used they are valuable aids for the PM and team. Project 
closure is usually ignored or treated as a trivial problem in practice—and in most works 
on project management. We feel it is an important and complex process that may cause 
serious problems if not handled properly.
Throughout this book there are illustrations of the tools and reports used by project 
managers. Many of these were produced using Microsoft Project® (MSP), Crystal Ball® 
(CB), and Excel®. (All illustrations and applications generated by MSP, CB, and Excel®, 
or any other application software will be clearly identified.) There are literally hundreds 
of project management software packages on the market. Most of them perform with 
reasonable competence in the tasks for which they were designed. Of the packages 
intended for overall project management, MSP is by far the favorite, with roughly half 
the total market. There is also a large number of specialized software packages, for exam-
ple, report generators, and special risk management packages. Most are compatible with 
MSP or Excel®, often seamlessly so, and we mention some of them when relevant. In the 
past decade or two, spreadsheet software has become highly sophisticated. Excel®, for 
example, can perform simulations and statistical analysis as well as handle the usual 
arithmetic, accounting, and financial calculations.

discussion questions
•  27
When one reads the literature of project management, one sees much about risk 
management. Too often, it may seem to the reader that risk management is a highly spe-
cific task. It isn’t. Risk management is a reference to a class of ideas, methods, and tech-
niques that aids the management of projects being carried out in an uncertain world. 
Outside factors can affect projects in a wide variety of ways, and so our discussions of risk 
management cannot be restricted to a chapter on the subject. They appear throughout 
the book. Tools and techniques are introduced as they are needed to deal with specific 
problems. The reader should note that these tools have wide application beyond project 
management and most are valuable for the general manager as well as the PM.
With this introduction, let us begin our study of project management.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1.	 	 What are the primary roles of a project manager? 
How are the primary roles related to one another?
2.	 	 Contrast a project from a nonproject.
3.	 	 Contrast win-lose negotiation, lose-lose negotiation, 
and win-win negotiation and explain why the latter 
is so important in project management.
4.	 	 Identify the three goals of a project. What does it 
mean for a project to be “overdetermined?”
5.	 	 Contrast the two types of project life cycles and 
­discuss why it is important to know which type the 
current project is following.
6.	 	 How does the weighted scoring approach avoid the 
drawbacks of the NPV approach? Can the two 
approaches be combined? How? What weights would 
be appropriate if they were combined?
7.	 	 Why is it suggested that factors with less than 2 per-
cent or 3 percent impact not be considered in the 
weighted scoring approach?
8.	 	 Draw a distinction between a project and a program. 
Why is the distinction important?
9.	 	 Why are R&D projects in a company’s Aggregate Pro­
ject Plan significantly different in type from the firm’s 
Derivative, Breakthrough, and Platform projects?
Risk
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1.	 	 Contrast the three types of nonnumeric project selec-
tion methods. Could any specific case combine two of 
them, such as the sacred cow and the operating neces-
sity, or the comparative benefits and the competitive 
necessity?
2.	 	 What errors in a firm’s project portfolio might the 
Wheelwright and Clark aggregate project plan graphi-
cally identify?
3.	 	 You are the project manager of a team of software spe-
cialists working on a project to produce a piece of 
application software in the field of project manage-
ment. Give some examples of things that might go 
wrong on such a project and the sorts of trade-offs you 
might have to make.
4.	 	 In Figure 1‑5, what distribution of large and small cir-
cles and squares across the four boxes would character-
ize a strong, well-positioned product development 
business? A weak business?
	 5.	 Give several examples of projects found in your city, 
region, or country—avoiding those used as examples in 
the chapter.
	 6.	 For each of the projects identified in the answer to 
Question 5, is the life cycle for the project S-shaped or 
J-shaped? Why?
	 7.	 Construct a list of factors, conditions, and circum-
stances you think might be important for a manufac-
turing firm to evaluate during the project selection 
process. Do the same for a computer repair shop.
	 8.	 How might you use project management for doing a 
major school work assignment?
	 9.	 What advantages are lost if the sum of the weights in a 
weighted scoring approach does not add to 1.0?
	10.	 Why is it important for a project to have “flexibility?”

28  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
1.	 	 A 4-year financial project is forecast to have net cash 
inflows of $20,000; $25,000; $30,000; and $50,000 
in the next 4 years. It will cost $75,000 to implement 
the project, payable at the beginning of the project. If 
the required rate of return is 0.2, conduct a discounted 
cash flow calculation to determine the NPV.
2.	 	 A company has established a project team to identify 
a location for a new manufacturing facility. Use a 
weighted scoring model to analyze three candidate 
locations (A, B, C) for setting up the new factory. The 
relative weights for each criterion are shown in the 
following table. A score of 1 represents unfavorable, 2 
satisfactory, and 3 favorable.
Location
Category
Weight
A
B
C
Labor costs
20
1
2
3
Labor productivity
20
2
3
1
Labor supply
10
2
1
3
Union relations
10
3
3
2
Material supply
10
2
1
1
Transport costs
25
1
2
3
Infrastructure
  5
2
2
2
3.	 	 (a)	 Compare your answer in Exercise 2 to the answer 
you would have found if you had used an 
unweighted, 0-1 scoring model. Assume that a 
score of 1 means does not qualify and a 2 or 3 
means it does qualify.
(b)	 Next, revise the unweighted model by deleting all 
categories that, as recommended, have a weight 
of less than 20 percent. Compare to your answer 
to (a) above and also Exercise 2. Which method 
seems best?
4.	 	 Using a spreadsheet for Exercise 2, find the following:
(a)	 What would be your recommendation if the 
weight for the transport cost went down to 10 and 
the weight for union relations went up to 25?
(b)	 Suppose location A received a score of 3 for 
­transport cost and location C received a score of  
2 for transport cost. Would your recommendation 
change under these circumstances?
(c)	 The VP of Finance has looked at your scoring 
model and feels that tax considerations should be 
included in the model with a weight of 15. In 
addition, the VP has scored the locations on tax 
considerations as follows: A-3, B-2, and C-1. 
How does this affect your recommendation?
5.		 Nina has been asked to lead a team that has been 
tasked with finding a new location for a boutique con-
cept her company would like to test. The team has 
identified four candidate shopping centers to locate 
the new boutique in. Some cater to a higher class of 
clientele than others, some are in an indoor mall, 
some have a much greater volume than others, and, of 
course, rent varies considerably. Because of the nature 
of the boutique, the team has decided that the class of 
clientele is the most important consideration. 
Following this, the team considered expenses and 
rent as the next most important criterion—­probably 
90 percent as important as clientele. An indoor, 
­temperature-controlled mall is a big help for stores 
such as the concept being considered where 70 per-
cent of sales are from passersby slowly strolling and 
window shopping. Thus, the team rates this as about 
95 percent as important as rent. Last, a higher volume 
of shoppers means more potential sales; thus the team 
rates this factor as 80 percent as important as rent.
	
	   As an aid in visualizing her location alternatives, 
the team has constructed the following table. A 
“good” is scored as 3, “fair” as 2, and “poor” as 1. Use a 
weighted score model to help Nina and her team come 
to a decision.
Location
1
2
3
4
Class of clientele
Fair
Good
Poor
Good
Rent
Good
Fair
Poor
Good
Indoor mall
Good
Poor
Good
Poor
Volume
Good
Fair
Good
Poor
6.	 	 Using a spreadsheet for Exercise 5, determine how 
Nina’s ability to negotiate a lower rent at location 3, 
thereby raising its ranking to “good,” will affect the 
overall rankings of the four locations.
EXERCISES
INCIDENT FOR DISCUSSION
Broken Welds
A manufacturer of mountain bicycles designed an auto-
mated system for welding bike frames. For 3 years, the sys-
tem worked nicely, handling about 1,000 frames per shift. 
Production was scheduled for two shifts per day. The sys-
tem was designed to weld the frame and then to check the 
quality of each weld. The welded frames were then trans-
ported to another plant for assembly.

incident for discussion
•  29
Recently, a few of the frames had failed. Careful testing 
showed that a foreign substance in the welding rod pur-
chased from an outside vendor possibly contributed to the 
failure. When checked, however, the rods conformed to 
the specifications given to the Purchasing Department 
and guaranteed by the vendor. The Chief Engineer ordered 
the Production Department’s Project Leader, Alison 
Passette, to create a project immediately to find out pre-
cisely what was causing the failures and to find a way to 
solve the problem. This project was to take priority over 
all other projects in the department.
Alison was familiar with the Chief Engineer’s tendency 
to overreact to any glitches in the production process, so 
she decided to determine the impact of the proposed pro-
ject on all the other projects in the department. She also 
discussed the problem with Ken Kelsey, one of her welding 
experts, who felt sure he could solve the welding problems 
by determining what foreign substance, if any, caused the 
problem. He could then set up a system to detect the pres-
ence of the substance and reweld the affected frames. Of 
course, he added, they would also have to change their 
specifications for the welding rod to eliminate the chemi-
cal responsible for the failures.
Question:  What information does Alison need to deter-
mine the probable impact of Kelsey’s proposed project on the 
other projects in the department? Should her findings affect 
her decision about Kelsey’s project? How?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility—1
Friendly Medical Center, an urban, nonprofit, 450-bed 
rehabilitation hospital, began to see a significant decline 
in admissions. Friendly Medical Center’s mission focuses 
on inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation of the severely 
injured and catastrophically ill. While the patient census 
varied from month to month, it appeared to the Friendly 
Medical Center Board of Trustees that the inpatient popu-
lation was slowly but steadily declining. The hospital’s 
market researchers reported that fewer people were being 
severely injured due to the popularity of seat belts and 
bicycle/motorcycle helmets. In order to get a handle on 
the future of the organization, the Board, and the CEO, 
Fred Splient M.D. called for a major strategic planning 
effort to take place.
In January 20X6, Friendly Medical Center held a plan-
ning retreat to identify future opportunities. The outcome 
of the retreat was that the Medical Center needed to focus 
its efforts around two major strategic initiatives. The first, 
a short-run initiative, was to be more cost-effective in the 
delivery of inpatient care. The second, a long-run strategy, 
was to develop new programs and services that would capi-
talize on the existing, highly competent rehabilitation 
therapy staff and Friendly Medical Center excellent repu-
tation in the region.
At the time of the retreat, Fred Splient’s parents were 
living with him and his family. Fred was an active member 
of the “sandwich generation.” His parents were aging and 
developing many problems common to the geriatric popu-
lace. Their increased medical needs were beginning to 
wear on Fred and his family. It crossed Fred’s mind that life 
might be more pleasant if the hospital Board approved an 
expansion of the Medical Center’s campus to include an 
assisted living facility.
In March 20X6, Fred had his Business Development 
team prepare a rough estimate of the potential return on 
the investment of an assisted living facility. He asked the 
team to identify different options for facility construction 
and the associated costs. The team also did a complete 
competitive analysis and examined the options for services 
to be offered based on Friendly Medical Center’s potential 
population base and catchment area. The Business 
Development team visited several facilities across the 
country. The team also interviewed companies that could 
oversee the design, building, and operation of the facility 
for Friendly Medical Center. The development team pro-
duced a preliminary business plan based on the recom-
mended structure for the facility, estimated capital 
expenditure needs, estimated income from operation of 
the facility, as well as projected revenues to other Medical 
Center programs resulting from the facility’s population.
The plan was presented at the May 20X6 meeting of 
the Board of Trustees. Fred Splient and his team intro-
duced the Board to the concept of opening an assisted liv-
ing facility on Friendly Medical Center’s campus. The 
facility would be set up as a for-profit subsidiary of the 
Medical Center so that it could generate a profit and not 
be subjected to the strict guidelines of the hospital’s 
accrediting agencies. As a subsidiary organization, how-
ever, the Board would still have control.
The chosen facility design was a freestanding 
­apartment-like facility with a sheltered connection to the 
Hospital for access to the kitchen and hospital services. 
The facility would have 100 units with 15 to 30 of the 
units classified as “heavy-assisted” and built to code to 
house the physically and medically disabled. The rest of 
the units would be “light-assisted,” larger apartments. The 
population would be approximately 110 to 150 residents, 
with most being single occupants rather than couples.

30  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
The light-assisted apartments could hold residents who 
required only minor medical and social interventions. The 
residents of the heavy-assisted section would have more 
medical needs and would require assistance getting around. 
The Business Development team recommended this type 
of programming model, because many assisted living facili-
ties were erected across the country, but few had a medical 
focus and offered the types of services that Friendly 
Medical Center could offer—physical and occupational 
therapy programs and behavior management programs to 
name a few.
The Board was assured that the facility would meet the 
strategic initiative of a growing business. The business 
plan projected an immediate increase in the number of 
referrals to the outpatient therapy programs. Another pro-
jected deliverable of the project was to enable Friendly 
Medical Center to strengthen its focus on reimbursable 
preventive and wellness programs for the healthier geriat-
ric population. The project’s longer-term goal was to 
increase the census in the hospital’s inpatient units by 
having a location where people could age in place until 
they were in need of hospitalization, and then such a facil-
ity would be right next door.
Depending on the exact size of the apartments, their 
equipment, and the actual ratio of heavy- to light-assisted 
units, Fred estimated that the entire project would cost 
between $8,500,000 and $11,000,000 for the facility con-
struction. That estimate included the cost of land, furnish-
ings, and a sheltered connection to the hospital. When up 
and running, it was estimated that the net income would 
range between $9,000 and $12,000 per unit per year. The 
team estimated the net cash flow for the entire project to 
be around $1,500,000 per year.
Fred requested the Board to approve the concept and 
allow his team to prepare a pro forma plan to the Board for 
approval. The plan would include a recommended design 
for both heavy- and light-assisted apartments. It would 
also include all costs of land, construction, furnishings, 
and staffing. Income estimates would be included and 
would be conservatively biased. A timetable would also 
be included.
The Board conducted several executive sessions, and 
by the middle of May voted to approve the concept. They 
approved 
the 
architectural-construction-management 
firm recommended by the team, and they requested 
Splient to proceed with developing a complete project 
plan. The Board appointed two Board members to sit on 
Fred’s planning group.
In June, Dr. Splient gathered his executive team 
together and presented the project mission, and scope.  
He reported that the board had approved a small budget to 
finance the planning process. The Board also stipulated 
that construction could not begin until after the November 
20X6 city elections because two of the Board Members 
were running in that election, one for a city council seat 
and one as a county commissioner. The Board also stated 
that they would like a plan that would allow the facility to 
open by July 20X7, as research has shown that many adult 
children find the summer the easiest time to assist their 
parents in finding an alternative to independent living 
arrangements. The CEO and executive team were now 
confident that they were ready to launch the project to 
plan, build, and open an assisted living facility at Friendly 
Medical Center.
QUESTIONS
1.	 	 Identify as well as you can the three iron triangle 
­constraints for this project: cost, time, and scope.
2.	 	 Identify the expected benefits of this project for 
Friendly Medical Center.
3.	 	 Comment on the strategic initiatives resulting from 
the Board’s major strategic planning retreat. Would 
you consider this a productive retreat?
4.	 	 What “project selection” procedure was used here? 
How common do you think this is? How wise do you 
think it is?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Handstar Inc.
Handstar Inc. was created a little over 4 years ago by 
two college roommates to develop apps for smartphones. 
It  has  since grown to ten employees with annual sales 
­approaching $1.5 million. Handstar’s original product was 
an expense report app that allowed users to record expenses 
on their smartphone and then export their expenses into a 

questions
•  31
spreadsheet that then created an expense report in one  
of five standard formats. Based on the success of its first 
product, Handstar subsequently developed three addi-
tional apps: an app for tracking and measuring the perfor-
mance of investment portfolios, a calendar app, and an 
email app.
The two founders of Handstar have recently become 
concerned about the competitiveness of the firm’s offer-
ings, particularly since none of them has been updated 
since their initial launch. Therefore, they asked the direc-
tors of product development and marketing to work 
together and prepare a list of potential projects for updat-
ing Handstar’s current offerings as well as to develop ideas 
for additional apps. The directors were also asked to esti-
mate the development costs of the various projects, prod-
uct revenues, and the likelihood that Handstar could 
retain or obtain a leadership position for the given app. 
Also, with the increasing popularity of mobile computing, 
the founders asked the directors to evaluate the extent to 
which the products made use of the Web.
The product development and marketing directors 
identified three projects related to updating Handstar’s 
existing products. The first project would integrate 
Handstar’s current calendar app with its email app. 
Integrating these two apps into a single app would provide 
a number of benefits to users such as allowing them to 
automatically enter the dates of meetings into the calen-
dar based on the content of an email message. The direc-
tors estimated that this project would require 1,250 hours 
of software development time. Revenues in the first year of 
the product’s launch were estimated to be $750,000. 
However, because the directors expected that a large per-
centage of the users would likely upgrade to this new prod-
uct soon after its introduction, they projected that annual 
sales would decline by 10 percent annually in subsequent 
years. The directors speculated that Handstar was moder-
ately likely to obtain a leadership position in email/calen-
dar apps if this project were undertaken and felt this app 
made moderate use of the Web.
The second project related to updating the expense 
report app. The directors estimated that this project would 
require 400 hours of development time. Sales were 
­estimated to be $250,000 in the first year and to increase  
5 percent annually in subsequent years. The directors spec-
ulated that completing this project would almost certainly 
maintain Handstar’s leadership position in the expense 
report category, although it made little use of the Web.
The last product enhancement project related to 
enhancing the existing portfolio tracking app. This pro-
ject would require 750 hours of development time and 
would generate first-year sales of $500,000. Sales were pro-
jected to increase 5 percent annually in subsequent years. 
The directors felt this project would have a high probabil-
ity of maintaining Handstar’s leadership position in this 
category and the product would make moderate use 
of the Web.
The directors also identified three opportunities for 
new products. One project was the development of a 
spreadsheet app that could share files with spreadsheet 
programs written for PCs. Developing this app would 
require 2,500 hours of development time. First-year sales 
were estimated to be $1,000,000 with an annual growth 
rate of 10 percent. While this app did not make use of the 
Web, the directors felt that Handstar had a moderate 
chance of obtaining a leadership position in this prod-
uct category.
The second new product opportunity identified was an 
app for browsing the Web. Developing this app would 
require 1,875 development hours. First-year sales were 
estimated to be $2,500,000 with an annual growth rate of 
15 percent. Although this app made extensive use of the 
Web, the directors felt that there was a very low probabil-
ity that Handstar could obtain a leadership position in this 
product category.
The final product opportunity identified was a trip 
planner app. This product would require 6,250 hours of 
development time. First-year sales were projected to be 
$1,300,000 with an annual growth rate of 5 percent. Like 
the Web browser app, the directors felt that there was a 
low probability that Handstar could obtain a leadership 
position in this category, although the program would 
make extensive use of the Web.
In evaluating the projects, the founders believed it was 
reasonable to assume each product had a 3-year life. They 
also felt that a discount rate of 12 percent fairly reflected 
the company’s cost of capital. An analysis of payroll 
records indicated that the cost of software developers is 
$52 per hour including salary and fringe benefits. Currently 
there are four software developers on staff, and each works 
2,500 hours per year.
QUESTIONS
1.	 	 Which projects would you recommend Handstar pur-
sue based on the NPV approach?
2.	 	 Assume the founders weigh a project’s NPV twice as 
much as both obtaining/retaining a leadership posi-
tion and making use of the Web. Use the weighted 
factor scoring method to rank these projects. Which 
projects would you recommend Handstar pursue?
3.	 	 In your opinion is hiring an additional software 
development engineer justified?

32  •
Chapter 1 / The World of Project Management
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adams, J. R., and S. E. Barndt. “Behavioral Implications 
of the Project Life Cycle.” In D. I. Cleland, and 
W. R. King, eds., Project Management Handbook. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983.
Boznak, R. G. “Management of Projects: A Giant Step 
Beyond Project Management.” PM Network, January 1996.
Dalkey, N.C. The Delphi Method: An Experimental Study of 
Group Opinion (RM-5888-PR) Santa Monica, CA: The 
Rand Corporation, June 1969.
Englund, R. L., and R. J. Graham. “From Experience: 
Linking Projects to Strategy.” Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, Vol. 16, No. 1, 1999.
Fisher, R., and W. Ury. Getting to Yes. Harmondsworth, 
Middlesex, G. B.: Penguin Books, 1983. (This is a classic 
book on win-win negotiations, in addition to being 
good reading.)
Gale, S. F. “The Great Unknown.” PM Network, 
May 2008a.
Gale, S. F. “In the Know.” PM Network, July 2008b.
Goldratt, E. M. Critical Chain. Great Barrington, MA: 
North River, 1997.
Green, S. G. “Top Management Support of R&D Projects: 
A Strategic Leadership Perspective.” IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management, August 1995. (What Prof. Green 
has to say about the role of a project sponsor in support of 
R&D projects applies equally well to all sorts of projects.)
Hatfield, M. “Danger Ahead.” PM Network, March, 2008.
Hayes, R., and W. J. Abernathy. “Managing Our Way to 
Economic Decline.” Harvard Business Review, July–August 
1980. (An excellent, persuasive, and timeless blast at 
those who focus their business decisions solely on short-
run profits.)
Helin, A. F., and W. E. Souder. “Experimental Test of a 
Q-Sort Procedure for Prioritizing R&D Projects.” IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, November 1974.
Hildebrand, C. “In Flux.” PM Network, December 2008.
Jandt, F. E. Win-Win Negotiating. New York: John 
Wiley, 1987.
Kaplan, R. S. “Must CIM Be Justified by Faith Alone?” 
Harvard Business Review, March–April 1986.
Kloppenborg, T. J., and S. J. Mantel, Jr. “Trade-offs on 
Projects: They May Not Be What You Think.” Project 
Management Journal, March 1990.
Levine, H. A. “Enterprise Project Management: What Do 
Users Need? What Can They Have?” PM Network, 
July 1998.
Longman, A., D. Sandahl, and W. Speir. “Preventing 
Project Proliferation.” PM Network, July 1999.
Meredith, J. R., and S. J. Mantel, Jr. Project Management: 
A Managerial Approach, 8th ed., New York: John 
Wiley, 2012.
Morgan, M., R. E. Levitt, and W. Malek. Executing 
Your Strategy: How to Break it Down and Get it Done. 
Boston: Harvard Business Review Press, 2007.
Moyer, R. C., J. R. McGuigan, and W. J. Kretlow. 
Contemporary Financial Management, 10th ed., Cincinnati: 
South-Western, 2008.
Pennypacker, J. S., and K. P. Grant. “Project Manage­
ment  Maturity: An Industry Benchmark.” Project Man­
agement Journal, March 2003. (This article, based on a 
survey of 123 firms, utilizes a two-dimensional framework 
to assess organizational project delivery capability. 
Organizations can use the results of the study to bench-
mark their level of project management maturity.)
Project Management Institute Standards Committee. A 
Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge 
PMBOK® Guide, 5th ed., Newtown Square, PA: Project 
Management Institute, 2013. (A must own, and read, by 
every project manager.)
Raiffa, H. The Art and Science of Negotiation. Cambridge: 
Belknap/Harvard Press, 1982. [Like Fisher and Ury (1983), 
this is a classic on the subject of win-win negotiation. 
Probably the most influential book in its field, and 
justly so.]
Sharpe, P., and T. Keelin. “How SmithKline Beecham 
Makes Better Resource-Allocation Decisions.” Harvard 
Business Review, March–April 1998. (An excellent process 
for selecting projects as well as for constructing a project 
portfolio. The ability to implement the process depends on 
a fairly sophisticated senior management team.)
Sheffi, Y. The Resilient Enterprise, Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press, 2005.
Wheatly, M. “Beyond the Numbers.” PM Network, 
August 2009.
Wheelwright, S. C., and K. B. Clark. “Creating Project 
Plans to Focus Product Development.” Harvard Business 
Review, March–April 1992.
Zwikael, O., and J. Smyrk. “Project Governance: 
Balancing Control and Trust in Dealing with Risk.” 
International Journal of Project Management, No. 3, 2015.

c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
  33
2
Once a project has been selected, the next step is for senior management to choose a project 
manager (PM). It is the PM’s job to make sure that the project is properly planned, imple-
mented, and completed—and these activities will be the subjects of the chapters that 
follow this one.
While PMs are sometimes chosen prior to a project’s selection, the more typical 
case is that the selection is announced following a meeting between senior management 
and the prospective PM. This appointment sometimes comes as a complete surprise to 
the candidate whose only obvious qualification for the job is not being otherwise fully 
occupied on a task more important than the project (Patterson, 1991). At this meeting, 
the senior manager describes the project and emphasizes its importance to the parent 
organization, and also to the future career of the prospective PM. (In the language of the 
Mafia, “It’s an offer you can’t refuse.”) Occasionally, the senior manager will add further 
information about the project including a fixed budget, due date, and scope. This is an 
offer you must refuse, as politely as possible, because, as we noted in Chapter 1, some 
flexibility is required and there is little chance that you can be successful in meeting all 
the overdetermined targets.
After a brief consideration of the project, the PM comes to a tentative decision 
about what talents and knowledge are apt to be required. The PM and/or a senior man-
ager then calls a meeting of people who have the requisite talent and knowledge, and 
the planning begins. This is the launch meeting, and we will delay further considera-
tion of it until Chapter 3 in which we take up the planning process in detail. First, we 
must examine the skills required by the person who will lead a team of individuals to 
carry out a carefully coordinated set of activities in an organizational setting seemingly 
designed expressly to prevent cooperation. It is helpful if we make a few mild assumptions 
to ease the following discussions. First, assume that the project’s parent organization  
is medium‐to large‐size, and is functionally organized (i.e., organized into functions such 
The Manager, the Organization, 
and the Team

34  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
as ­marketing, manufacturing,­ R&D, human resources, and the like). Further assume that 
the project has some well‐defined components or technologies and that the project’s 
output is being delivered to an arm’s‐length client. These assumptions are not critical. 
They merely give a context to our discussions.
Before we proceed, an experienced project manager has suggested that we share with 
the reader one of her reactions to the materials in this book. To the student or the inex-
perienced PM, it is the project budgets, the schedules with Gantt charts and PERT/CPM 
networks, the reports and project management software, and the mysteries of resource 
allocation to multiple projects that appear to be the meat of the PM’s job. But these 
things are not hard to learn, and once understood, can, for the most part, be managed 
by making appropriate inputs to project management software. The hard part of project 
management is playing the many roles of the PM. The hard part is negotiating with stub-
born functional managers and clients who have their own legitimate axes to grind. The 
hard part is keeping the peace among project team members, each of whom knows, and 
is quick to tell, the proper ways to do things. The hard part is dealing with senior manag-
ers who allow their wild guesses about budget and scope made in the early consideration 
of the project during the selection process to become fixed in concrete. The hard part is 
being surrounded by the chaos of trying to run a project in the midst of a confused mass 
of activity representing the normal business of the organization. These are the things we 
discuss in this chapter, because these are the hard parts. PMBOK covers the material in this 
chapter primarily in Chapter 9 on Human Resources.
	 2.1	
THE PM’S ROLES
In the previous chapter it was noted that the primary roles of the PM were to manage 
trade‐offs and manage risks. In addition to managing trade‐offs and risks, the PM also has 
several other important roles including serving as a facilitator, communicator, virtual 
project manager, and convener and chair of meetings.
Facilitator
First, to understand the PM’s roles, it is useful to compare the PM with a functional man-
ager. The head of a function such as manufacturing or marketing directs the activities of 
a well‐established unit or department of the firm. Presumably trained or raised from the 
ranks, the functional manager has expertise in the technology being managed. He is an 
accountant, or an industrial engineer, or a marketing researcher, or a shop foreman, or so 
on. The functional manager’s role, therefore, is mainly that of supervisor (literally “over-
seer”). Because the project’s place in the parent organization is often not well defined 
and does not seem to fit neatly in any one functional division, neither is the PM’s place 
neatly defined. Because projects are often multidisciplinary, the PM rarely has technical 
competence in more than one or two of the several technologies involved in the project. 
As a result, the PM is not a competent overseer and thus has a different role. The PM is 
a facilitator.
Facilitator versus Supervisor  The PM must ensure that those who work on the 
project have the appropriate knowledge and resources, including that most precious 
resource, time, to accomplish their assigned responsibilities. The work of a facilitator 
does not stop with these tasks. For reasons that will be apparent later in this chapter, the 
project is often beset with conflict—conflict between members of the project team, con-
flict between the team and senior managers (particularly managers of the functional 
PMBOK Guide
Risk
Trade-Offs

2.1 THE PM’S ROLES
•  35
divisions), conflict with the client and other outsiders. The PM must manage these 
­conflicts by negotiating resolution of them.
Actually, the once sharp distinction between the manager‐as‐facilitator and the 
manager‐as‐supervisor has been softened in recent years. With the slow but steady adop-
tion of the participative management philosophy, the general manager has become more 
and more like the project manager. In particular, responsibility for the planning and 
organization of specific tasks is given to the individuals or groups that must perform 
them, always constrained, of course, by company policy, legality, and conformity to high 
ethical standards. The manager’s responsibility is to make sure that the required resources 
are available and that the task is properly concluded. The transition from traditional 
authoritarian management to facilitation continues because facilitation is more effective 
as a managerial style.
A second important distinction between the PM and the traditional manager is that 
the former uses the systems approach and the latter adopts the analytical approach to under-
standing and solving problems. The analytical approach centers on understanding the 
bits and pieces in a system. It prompts study of the molecules, then atoms, then electrons, 
and so forth. The systems approach includes study of the bits and pieces, but also an 
understanding of how they fit together, how they interact, and how they affect and are 
affected by their environment. The traditionalist manages his or her group (a subsystem 
of the organization) with a desire to optimize the group’s performance. The systems 
approach manager conducts the group so that it contributes to total system optimization. 
It has been well demonstrated that if all subsystems are optimized, a condition known as 
suboptimization, the total system is not even close to optimum performance. (Perhaps the 
ultimate example of suboptimization is “The operation was a success, but the patient 
died.”) We take this opportunity to recommend to you an outstanding book on business, 
The Goal, by Goldratt and Cox (1992). It is an easy‐to‐read novel and a forceful state-
ment on the power of the systems approach as well as the dangers of suboptimization.
Systems Approach  To be successful, the PM must adopt the systems approach. 
Consider that the project is a system composed of tasks (subsystems) which are, in turn, 
composed of subtasks, and so on. The system, a project, exists as a subsystem of the larger 
system, a program, that is a subsystem in the larger system, a firm, which is . . . and so on. 
Just as the project’s objectives influence the nature of the tasks and the tasks influence the 
nature of the subtasks, so does the program and, above it, the organization influence  
the nature of the project. To be effective, the PM must understand these influences and 
their impacts on the project and its deliverables.*
Think for a moment about designing a new airplane—a massive product develop-
ment project—without knowing a great deal about its power plant, its instrumentation, 
its electronics, its fuel subsystems—or about the plane’s desired mission, the intended 
takeoff and landing facilities, the intended carrying capacity, and intended range. One 
cannot even start the design process without a clear understanding of the subsystems that 
might be a part of the plane and the larger systems of which it will be a part as well as 
those that comprise its environment.
Given a project and a deliverable with specifications that result from its intended 
use  in a larger system within a known or assumed environment, the PM’s job is 
­straightforward. Find out what tasks must be accomplished to produce the deliverable. 
Find out what resources are required and how those resources may be obtained. Find out 
what personnel are needed to carry out production and where they may be obtained. 
*For those not familiar with general systems thinking, we strongly recommend C. West Churchman’s highly 
readable softback (1979) or an excellent text by Schoderbek, Schoderbek, and Kefalas (1990). Both are out of print 
but are widely available in university libraries and from Amazon.com.

36  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
Find out when the deliverable must be completed. In other words, the PM is responsible 
for planning, organizing, staffing, budgeting, directing, and controlling the project; the 
PM “manages” it. But others, the functional managers for example, will staff the project 
by selecting the people who will be assigned to work on the project. The functional 
­managers also may develop the technical aspects of the project’s design and dictate the 
technology used to produce it. The logic and illogic of this arrangement will be revisited 
later in this chapter.
Micromanagement  At times, the PM may work for a program manager who closely 
supervises and second‐guesses every decision the PM makes. Such bosses are also quite 
willing to help by instructing the PM exactly what to do. This unfortunate condition is 
known as micromanagement and is one of the deadly managerial sins. The PM’s boss 
rationalizes this overcontrol with such statements as “Don’t forget, I’m responsible for 
this project,” “This project is very important to the firm,” or “I have to keep my eye on 
everything that goes on around here.” Such statements deny the value of delegation and 
assume that everyone except the boss is incompetent. This overweening self‐importance 
practically ensures mediocre performance, if not outright project failure. Any project 
successes will be claimed by the boss. Failures will be blamed on the subordinate PM.
There is little a PM can do about the “My way or the highway” boss except to polish 
the résumé or request a transfer. (It is a poor career choice to work for a boss who will not 
allow you to succeed.) As we will see later in this chapter, the most successful project 
teams tend to adopt a collegial style. Intrateam conflict is minimized or used to enhance 
team creativity, cooperation is the norm, and the likelihood of success is high.
Communicator
The PM must be a person who can handle responsibility. The PM is responsible to the 
project team, to senior management, to the client, and to anyone else who may have a 
stake in the project’s performance or outcomes. Consider, if you will, the Central Arizona 
Project (CAP). This public utility moves water from the Colorado River to Phoenix, 
several other Arizona municipalities, and to some American Indian reservations. The 
water is transported by a system of aqueducts, reservoirs, pipes, and pumping stations. 
Besides the routine delivery of water, almost everything done at CAP is a project. Most 
of the projects are devoted to the construction, repair, and maintenance of their system. 
Now consider a PM’s responsibilities. A maintenance team, for instance, needs resources 
in a timely fashion so that maintenance can be carried out according to a precise sched-
ule. The PM’s clients are municipalities. The drinking public (water, of course) is a highly 
interested stakeholder. The system is even subject to partisan political turmoil because 
CAP‐supplied water is used as a political football in Tucson.
The PM is in the middle of this muddle of responsibility and must manage the pro-
ject in the face of all these often‐conflicting interests. CAP administration, the project 
teams, the municipalities (and their Native American counterparts), and the public all 
communicate with each other—often contentiously. In general, we often call this the 
“context” of the project. More accurately, given the systems approach we have adopted, 
this is the environment of the project.
Figure  2-1 shows the PM’s position and highlights the communication problem 
involved in any project. The solid lines denote the PM’s communication channels. The 
dotted lines denote communication paths for the other stakeholders in the project. 
Problems arise when some of these parties propagate communications that may mislead 
other parties, or directly conflict with other messages in the system. It is the PM’s respon-
sibility to introduce some order into this communication mess.

2.1 THE PM’S ROLES
•  37
For example, assume that senior management calls for tighter cost control or even 
for a cost reduction. The project team may react emotionally with a complaint that 
“They want us to cut back on project quality!” The PM must intervene to calm ruffled 
team feathers and, perhaps, ask a senior manager to reassure the project team that high 
quality is an organizational objective though not every gear, cog, and cam needs to be 
gold‐plated.
Similarly, the client may drop in to check on a project and blithely ask a team mem-
ber, “Would it be possible to alter the specs to include such‐and‐such?” The team ­member 
may think for a moment about the technical problems involved and then answer quite 
honestly, “Yeah, that could be done.” Again, the PM must intervene—if and when the 
question and answer come to light—to determine the cost of making such a change, as 
well as the added time that would be required. The PM must then ask whether the client 
wishes to alter the project scope given the added cost and delayed delivery. This scenario 
is so common it has a name, scope creep. It is the PM’s nightmare.
To compound these issues further, conventional thinking suggests different stake-
holders (e.g., clients, the parent organization, the project team, and the public) define 
success and failure in different ways. For example, the client wants changes and the par-
ent organization wants profits. Likewise, the individuals working on projects are often 
responsible to two bosses at the same time—a functional manager and the project man-
ager (discussed in more detail later in this chapter). Under such conditions conflict can 
arise when the two bosses have different priorities and objectives.
While the conventional view tends to regard conflict as a rather ubiquitous part of 
working on projects, more recently, others have challenged this view. For example, John 
Mackey, cofounder and co‐CEO of Whole Foods Market, suggests in his recent book 
Conscious Capitalism (2013) that satisfying stakeholder needs is not a zero‐sum game 
where satisfying one stakeholder must come at the expense of another. Rather, Mackey 
suggests a better approach is to identify opportunities to satisfy all stakeholder needs 
simultaneously. One way to accomplish this is to identify ways to align the goals of all 
stakeholders with the purpose of the project. As was mentioned earlier, one of the pri-
mary roles of the project manager is to manage the trade‐offs. However, as Mackey warns, 
if we look for trade‐offs, we will always find trade‐offs. On the other hand, if we look for 
synergies across the stakeholder base, we can often find them too. The clear lesson for 
project managers is to not be too quick to assume only trade‐offs exist among competing 
project objectives and stakeholder groups.
Identifying and Analyzing Stakeholders  We concur with Mackey that the pre-
ferred approach is to proactively take steps to align the goals of the various stakeholders 
with the purpose of the project. To facilitate this, several techniques for identifying and 
analyzing stakeholders are discussed in this section.
Before the goals of the shareholders can be aligned with the purpose of the project, 
the stakeholders must be identified. Most commonly, the expert judgment of the PM and 
project team are employed to identify the stakeholders. After identifying the stakeholders,­ 
Trade-Offs
Trade-Offs
Senior
management
PM
Client
Project
team
Outside
interested parties
Figure 2-1   
Communication 
paths between a 
project’s 
stakeholders.

38  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
a stakeholder register should be created to maintain key information about them includ-
ing contact information, their requirements and expectations, what stage in the project 
they have the most interest in, their power over the project, and so on. In addition, sepa-
rate from the stakeholder register, a stakeholder issue log should be maintained to catalog 
issues that arise and how they were resolved.
Once the stakeholders have been identified, a number of tools can be used to analyze 
them to gain insight about how to manage the relationship with them. And as additional 
information is learned about a stakeholder, the stakeholder register should be updated.
For the purpose of illustrating a couple of representative stakeholder analysis tools, 
we will use the example of a process improvement project that is about to be launched at 
a hospital with the goal of reducing the turnaround times for patients’ stress tests. The 
turnaround time for a stress test is measured as the elapsed time from when the stress test 
was ordered by a cardiologist until the results are signed off by a radiologist. Delays in 
receiving the results from stress tests impact the timeliness of treating patients which in 
turn impacts the patients’ length of stay at the hospital. For the purpose of this example, 
we further assume that during an early project team meeting, the PM and process 
improvement team identified the following stakeholder groups: radiologists, cardiolo-
gists, hospital administration, the stress test technicians, and the patients/families.
One tool that is useful for analyzing stakeholders is the Power‐Interest Grid. As its 
name suggests, this tool analyzes stakeholders on two dimensions: their interest in the 
project and their relative power in the organization. Based on these two dimensions the 
model suggests the appropriate relationship between the PM and the stakeholder group 
from monitoring to keeping informed, to keeping satisfied, to closely managing. Figure 2-2 
provides an illustrative Power‐Interest Grid for the stress test process improvement project.
Referring to Figure 2-2, we observe that the PM should closely manage the cardiolo-
gists and hospital administrators, given their high interest in the project and their power 
in the organization. Likewise, the radiologists (who are in effect the customers of this 
project) should be kept satisfied. Finally, the patients/families should be monitored and 
the test technicians kept informed on the status of the project.
In addition to thoughtfully considering the type of relationship the PM and project 
team should have with stakeholders, it is also important to assess how much engagement 
and commitment is needed from various stakeholder groups in order for the project to 
succeed. A useful tool for accessing the level of commitment needed from stakeholders is 
the Commitment Assessment Matrix. In this matrix, both the current level of commit-
ment and the desired level of commitment are assessed for each stakeholder group.
High
Keep Satisﬁed
Monitor
Closely Manage
Keep Informed
• Radiologists
• Cardiologists
• Administration
• Test Technicians
• Patients/Families
Power
Low
Low
Interest
High
Figure 2-2  Power-
Interest Grid for 
stress test project.

2.1 THE PM’S ROLES
•  39
Figure 2-3 provides an example Commitment Assessment Matrix for the stress test 
process improvement project. In comparing the current and desired levels of commit-
ment to the process improvement project, we observe that the cardiologists are more 
committed than desired perhaps indicating the risk that they will interfere in ­unproductive 
ways with the project. On the other hand, for the project to succeed, greater commit-
ment is needed from the test technicians and especially the radiologists. Thus, the PM 
and project team need to develop an appropriate communication plan to reduce the 
cardiologists’ commitment to the project and to substantially increase the commitment 
of the test technicians and radiologists.
Managing stakeholder engagement is an important process and because of this was 
added as a new knowledge area in the most recent update to the PMBOK. According to 
Section 13.3 in the PMBOK, managing stakeholder engagement involves the following 
activities:
• Obtaining and confirming stakeholders’ commitment to the project’s success at 
the appropriate stages in the project.
• Communicating with stakeholders to manage their expectations.
• Proactively addressing stakeholder concerns before they become major issues.
• Resolving issues in a timely fashion once they have been identified.
Virtual Project Manager
More and more often, project teams are geographically dispersed. Many projects are 
international, and team members may be on different continents, for example, aircraft 
engine design and engine construction. Many are carried out by different organizations 
in different locations. For example, Boeing created global supplier/strategic partner teams 
for their 787 Dreamliner aircraft to co‐design and produce various portions of the new 
plane: the vertical fin in Seattle, WA, the cockpit in Wichita, KS, the wings in Japan, 
and the center fuselage in Italy. Similarly, many projects involve different divisions of 
one firm where the divisions are in different cities. These geographically dispersed 
­projects are often referred to as “virtual projects,” possibly because so much of the intra‐­ 
project communication is conducted via email, through websites, by telephone or video 
conferencing, and other high‐technology methods. In recent decades, the international 
dispersion of industry, “globalization,” has dramatically increased the communication 
problems, adding the need for translators to the virtual communication networks. An 
interesting view of “virtual” people who work in one country but live in another (often 
on another continent) is given in a Wall Street Journal article (Flynn, 1999).
PMBOK Guide
Level of
Commitment
Stakeholder Groups
Cardiologists
X
X = current level of commitment
0 = desired level of commitment
0
0
X 0
0
X 0
0
0
Test
Technicians
Administration
Patients/
Families
Radiologists
Strongly Support
Support
Neutral
Opposed
Strongly Opposed
Figure 2-3   
Commitment 
Assessment  
Matrix for stress 
test project.

40  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
Long‐distance communication is commonplace and no longer prohibitively expensive. 
It may, however, be beset with special problems. In the case of written and voice‐only 
communication (and even in video conferencing when the camera is not correctly 
aimed), the communicators cannot see one another. In such cases we realize how much 
we depend on feedback—the facial expression and body language that let us know if our 
messages are received and with what level of acceptance. Two‐way, real‐time communi-
cation is the most effective way to transmit information or instructions. For virtual 
­projects to succeed, communication between PM and project team must be frequent, 
open, and two‐way.
The PM’s responsibility for communication with senior management poses special 
problems for any PM without fairly high levels of self‐confidence. Formal and routine 
progress reports aside (cf. Chapter 7), it is the PM’s job to keep senior management up to 
date on the state of the project. It is particularly important that the PM keep manage-
ment informed of any problems affecting the project—or any problem likely to affect the 
project in the future. A golden rule for anyone is “Never let the boss be surprised!” 
Violations of this rule will cost the PM credibility, trust, and possibly his or her job. 
Where there is no trust, effective communication ceases. Senior management must be 
informed about a problem in order to assist in its solution. The timing of this information 
should be at the earliest point a problem seems likely to occur. Any later is too late. This 
builds trust between the PM and senior managers. The PM who is trusted by the project 
sponsor and can count on assistance when organizational clout is needed is twice blessed.
The PM is also responsible to the client. Clients are motivated to stay in close touch 
with a project they have commissioned. Because they support the project, they feel they 
have a right to intercede with suggestions (requests, alterations, demands). Cost, sched-
ule, and scope changes are the most common outcome of client intercession, and the 
costs of these changes often exceed the client’s expectations. Note that it is not the PM’s 
job to dissuade the client from changes in the project’s scope, but the PM must be certain 
that the client understands the impact of the changes on the project’s goals of delivery 
time, cost, and scope.
The PM is responsible to the project team just as team members are responsible to 
the PM. As we will see shortly, it is very common for project team members to be assigned 
to work on the project, but to report to a superior who is not connected with the project. 
Thus, the PM will have people working on the project who are not “direct reports.” 
Nonetheless, the relationship between the team and the PM may be closer to boss‐­
subordinate than one might suspect. The reason for this is that both PM and team 
­members often develop a mutual commitment to the project and to its successful conclu-
sion. The PM facilitates the work of the team, and helps them succeed. As we will see in 
the final chapter, the PM may also take an active interest in fostering team members’ 
future careers. Like any good boss, the PM may serve as advisor, counselor, confessor, and 
interested friend.
Meetings, Convener and Chair
The two areas in which the PM communicates most frequently are reports to senior man-
agement and instructions to the project team. We discuss management reports in 
Chapter 7 on monitoring and controlling the project. We also set out some rules for 
­conducting successful meetings in Chapter 7. Communication with the project team typi-
cally takes place in the form of project team meetings. When humorist Dave Barry reached 
50, he wrote a column listing 25 things he had learned in his first 50 years of living. 
Sixteenth on the list is “If you had to identify, in one word, the reason why the human 
race has not and never will achieve its full potential, that word would be ‘meetings’.”

2.2 THE PM’S RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PROJECT
•  41
Most of the causes of meeting‐dread are associated with failure to adopt common 
sense about when to call meetings and how to run them. As we have said, one of the first 
things the PM must do is to call a “launch meeting” (see Chapter 3). Make sure that the 
meeting starts on time and has a prearranged stopping time. As convener of the meeting, 
the PM is responsible for taking minutes and keeping the meeting on track. The PM 
should also make sure that the invitation to the meeting includes a written agenda that 
clearly explains the purpose for the meeting and includes sufficient information on the 
project to allow the invitees to come prepared—and they are expected to do so. For some 
rules on conducting effective meetings that do not result in angry colleagues, see the 
subsection on meetings in Chapter 7.
	 2.2	
THE PM’S RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PROJECT
The PM has three overriding responsibilities to the project. First is the acquisition of 
resources and personnel. Second is dealing with the obstacles that arise during the course 
of the project. Third is exercising the leadership needed to bring the project to a success-
ful conclusion primarily by managing the trade‐offs necessary to do so and proactively 
managing project-related risks.
Acquiring Resources
Acquiring resources and personnel is not difficult. Acquiring the necessary quality and 
quantity of resources and personnel is, however. Senior management typically suffers 
from a mental condition known as “irrational optimism.” While the disease is rarely 
painful to anyone except PMs, the suffering among this group may be quite severe.
It has long been known that the farther one proceeds up the managerial ladder, the 
easier, faster, and cheaper a job appears to be compared to the opinion of the person who 
has to do the work (Gagnon and Mantel, 1987). The result is that the work plan devel-
oped by the project team may have its budget and schedule cut and then cut again as the 
project is checked and approved at successively higher levels of the organization. At 
times, an executive in the organization will have a strong interest in a pet project. In 
order to improve the chance that the pet project will be selected, the executive may 
deliberately (or subconsciously) understate the resource and personnel commitments 
required by the project. Whatever the cause, it is the PM’s responsibility to ensure that 
the project has the appropriate level of resources. When the project team needs specific 
resources to succeed, there is no acceptable excuse for not getting them—though there 
may be temporary setbacks.
When a human resource is needed, the problem is further complicated. Most human 
resources come to the project on temporary assignment from the functional departments 
of the organization. The PM’s wants are simple—the individual in the organization who 
Risk
Trade-Offs
The PM is a facilitator, unlike the traditional manager who is a supervisor. The PM 
must adopt the systems approach to making decisions and managing projects. Trying 
to optimize each part of a project, suboptimization, does not produce an optimized 
project. Multiple communication paths exist in any project, and some paths bypass 
the PM, causing problems. Much project communication takes place in meetings 
that may be run effectively if some simple rules are followed. In virtual projects, much 
communication is via high technology channels. Above all, the PM must keep senior 
management informed about the current state of the project.

42  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
is most competent on the specific task to be accomplished. Such individuals are, of 
course, precisely the people that the functional managers are least happy to release from 
their departmental jobs for work on the project, either full‐ or part‐time. Those workers 
the functional manager is prone to offer positions are usually those whom the PM would 
least like to have.
Lack of functional manager enthusiasm for cooperation with the project has another 
source. In many organizations, projects are seen as glamorous, interesting, and high‐­ 
visibility activities. The functional manager may be jealous or even suspicious of the PM 
who is perceived to have little or no interest in the routine work that is the bread and 
butter for the parent organization.
Fighting Fires and Obstacles
Still another key responsibility of the PM is to deal with obstacles. All projects have their 
crises—fires that must be quenched. The successful PM is also a talented and seasoned 
fire fighter. Early in the project’s life cycle, fires are often linked to the need for resources. 
Budgets get cut, and the general cuts must be transformed into highly specific cuts in the 
quantities of highly specific resources. An X percent cut must be translated into Y units 
of this commodity or Z hours of that engineer’s time. (An obvious reaction by the PM is 
to pad the next budget submitted. As we argue just below and in Chapters 4 and 6, this 
is unethical, a bad idea, and tends to cause more problems than it solves.)
As work on the project progresses, most fires are associated with technical problems, 
supplier problems, and client problems. Technical problems occur, for example, when 
some subsystem (e.g., a computer program) is supposed to work but fails. Typical supplier 
problems occur when subcontracted parts are late or do not meet specifications. Client 
problems tend to be far more serious. Most often, they begin when the client asks “Would 
it be possible for this thing to . . . ?” Again, scope creep.
Most experienced PMs are good fire fighters. If they do not develop this skill, they 
do not last as PMs. People tend to enjoy doing what they are skilled at doing. Be warned: 
When you find a skilled fire fighter who fights a lot of fires and enjoys the activity, you 
may have found an arsonist. At one large, highly respected industrial firm we know, there 
is a wisecrack commonly made by PMs. “The way to get ahead around here is to get a 
project, screw it up, and then fix it. If it didn’t get screwed up, it couldn’t have been very 
hard or very important.” We do not believe that anyone purposely botches projects (or 
knowingly allows them to be botched). We do, however, suspect that the attitude breeds 
carelessness because of the belief that they can fix any problem and be rewarded for it.
Leadership
In addition to being responsible for acquiring resources for the project and for fighting 
the project’s fires, the PM is also responsible for making the trade‐offs necessary to lead the 
project to a successful conclusion and proactively managing project related risks through 
the development of contingency plans. As noted in the previous chapter, the primary 
roles of the PM are managinge trade‐offs and risks and as such these issues are key fea-
tures of the remainder of this book. In each of the following chapters and particularly in 
the chapters on budgeting, scheduling, resource allocation, and control, we will deal 
with many examples of trade-offs and managing risks. They will be specific. At this point, 
however, we establish some general principles for managing trade‐offs.
The PM is the key figure in making trade‐offs between project cost, schedule, and 
scope. Which of these has higher priority than the others is dependent on many factors 
having to do with the project, the client, and the parent organization. If cost is more 
Risk
Trade-Offs

2.2 THE PM’S RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PROJECT
•  43
important than time for a given project, the PM will allow the project to be late rather 
than incur added costs. If a project has successfully completed most of its specifications, 
and if the client is willing, both time and cost may be saved by not pursuing some remain-
ing specifications. It is the client’s choice.
Of the three project goals, scope (specifications and client satisfaction) is usually the 
most important. Schedule is a close second, and cost is usually subordinate to the other 
two. Note the word “usually.” There is anecdotal evidence that economic downturns 
result in an increased level of importance given to cost. There are many other ­exceptions, 
and this is another case where the political acuity of the PM is of primary importance. 
While deliverables are almost always paramount when dealing with an “arm’s‐length” 
client, it is not invariably so for an inside client. If the parent firm has inadequate profits, 
some specifications may be sacrificed for cost savings. Organizational policy may influ-
ence trade‐offs. Grumman Aircraft (now a part of Northrop‐Grumman) had a longstand-
ing policy of on‐time delivery. If a Grumman project for an outside client fell behind on 
its schedule, resources (costs) were added to ensure on‐time delivery.
The global financial crisis caused headaches for project managers around the world. 
Swanson (2009) reports that in Hong Kong there were thousands of PMs from China 
suddenly available and willing to manage projects for substantially lower than prevailing 
wages. As a result, Hong Kong PMs were finding that they needed to increase their value 
to business in order to compete with the new arrivals from China. Because the Hong Kong 
firms were outsourcing many project tasks, the Hong Kong PMs acquired new skill sets to 
deal with people and organizations with whom they have not previously dealt. They 
learned networking, communication, and leadership skills to augment their technical 
skills. They also focused on delivering “business” results such as increased revenues, 
improved profit margins, cost reductions, and they made sure that these appear in the 
organization’s financial statements.
Another type of trade‐off occurs between projects. At times, two or more projects 
may compete for access to the same resources. This is a major subject in Chapter 6, but 
the upshot is that added progress on one project may be traded off for less progress on 
another. If a single PM has two projects in the same part of the project life cycle and 
makes such a trade‐off, it does not matter which project wins, the PM will lose. We 
strongly recommend that any PM managing two or more projects do everything possible 
to avoid this problem by making sure that the projects are in different phases of their life 
cycles. We urge this with the same fervor we would urge parents never to act so as to 
make it appear that one child is favored over another.
Before leaving the topic of leadership, it is worth discussing a critical dimension of 
effective leadership, namely, emotional intelligence (EQ). Indeed, researchers have 
found that EQ is the single best predictor of job performance. For example, bestselling 
author Daniel Goleman cites research suggesting that EQ is a critical factor in explaining 
differences between the best leaders and mediocre leaders and that EQ accounted for 
approximately 90 percent of the success of leaders (Goleman, 1998). Similarly, Swanson 
(2012) reports that those PMs who use EQ outperform their peer PMs by 32 percent in 
leadership effectiveness and development.
So what exactly is EQ? Fundamentally, emotional intelligence governs a person’s 
ability to effectively deal with and in fact harness their emotions to achieve positive 
outcomes. According to Goleman (1998) , EQ is comprised of four foundational skills: 
self‐awareness, self‐management, social awareness, and relationship management. Some 
researchers consider self‐awareness and self‐management to be personal competencies, 
and social awareness and relationship management as social competencies.
EQ begins with self‐awareness, or a person’s ability to observe and recognize his or 
her own emotions. Becoming more self‐aware of our emotions in turn positions us to 

44  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
­better manage our emotions. Thus, self‐management is associated with the ability to 
positively manage our thoughts, behaviors, and actions based on the understanding of 
our emotions gained through self‐awareness. In effect then, self‐management reflects our 
ability to manage our emotional reactions given the situation or circumstances we find 
ourselves in.
While self‐awareness focuses on understanding our own emotions, social awareness 
is focused on understanding the emotions of others. Understanding our own emotions is 
certainly important in helping us guide how we respond to a particular set of circum-
stances. By the same token, understanding the other person’s emotions is also important 
in helping us choose how we respond. For example, it is likely that the most effective way 
to respond would be different when a team member was angry versus when the team 
member was hurt. Thus, social awareness is based on developing effective listening, 
empathy, and observational skills. The goal is to truly understand what the other person 
is feeling. Furthermore, when it comes to emotions, there is no right or wrong. Our job is 
to be an objective observer of these emotions so that we can choose effective courses of 
action, given the emotions and the people we are interacting with are currently feeling.
Practically speaking, developing your social awareness skills requires developing your 
listening and observational skills. Effective listening requires an ability to focus your 
attention on what the other person is saying and not thinking about what you are going 
to say in response. Effective listening also means letting the other person finish before 
you respond. It is also useful to give the speaker feedback to show that you are listening 
such as nodding or smiling while the person is speaking. Pay attention to the main points 
made by the speaker, the speakers’ tone of voice, how quickly the person is speaking, and 
the person’s body language. And very importantly, ask questions based on your sincere 
interest in understanding the other person’s perspective, which will usually not be inter-
preted as being judgmental.
Self‐awareness, self‐management, and social awareness are not our end goals. Rather, 
these are means to the overarching goal of building quality relationships. More specifi-
cally, relationship management is based on our ability to use both our awareness of our 
own emotions and the other person’s emotions to positively manage our interactions and 
ultimately build quality relationships. Swanson (2012) notes that EQ will lead PMs to 
ask questions such as: How can we collaborate more effectively with one another on this 
project? Or, what reservations do you imagine the client will have, and how can we 
address them? Or, how has this project addressed the needs of all the stakehold-
ers involved?
The good news about EQ is that there are proactive steps you can take to enhance 
your EQ. Travis Bradberry and Jean Greaves provide an EQ assessment and numerous 
practical strategies for enhancing EQ in their book Emotional Intelligence 2.0 (Bradberry 
and Greaves, 2009). This book should be required reading for all PM’s.
Negotiation, Conflict Resolution, and Persuasion
It is not possible for the PM to meet these responsibilities without being a skilled nego-
tiator and resolver of conflict. The acquisition of resources requires negotiation. Dealing 
with problems, conflict, and fires requires negotiation and conflict resolution. The same 
skills are needed when the PM is asked to lead the project to a successful conclusion—
and to make the trade‐offs required along the way.
In Chapter 1, we emphasized the presence of conflict in all projects and the resultant 
need for win‐win negotiation and conflict resolution. A PM without these skills cannot 
be successful. There is no stage of the project life cycle that is not characterized by spe-
cific types of conflict. If these are not resolved, the project will suffer and possibly die. 

2.2 THE PM’S RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE PROJECT
•  45
For new PMs, training in win‐win negotiation is just as important as training in PERT/
CPM, budgeting, project management software, and project reporting. Such training is 
not merely useful, it is a necessary requirement for success. While an individual who is 
not (yet) skilled in negotiation may be chosen as PM for a project, the training should 
start immediately. A precondition is the ability to handle stress. Much has been written 
about negotiation and conflict resolution which we shall briefly summarize shortly.
Projects must be selected for funding, and they begin when senior management has 
been persuaded that they are worthwhile. Projects almost never proceed through their 
life cycles without change. Changes in scope are common. Trade‐offs may change what 
deliverable is made, how it is made, and when it is delivered. Success at any of these 
stages depends on the PM’s skill at persuading others to accept the project as well as 
changes in its methods and scope once it has been accepted. Any suggested change will 
have supporters and opponents. If the PM suggests a change, others will need to be per-
suaded that the change is for the better. Senior management must be persuaded to sup-
port the change just as the client and the project team may need to be persuaded to 
accept change in the deliverables or in the project’s methods or timing.
Persuasion is rarely accomplished by “my way or the highway” commands. Neither 
can it be achieved by locker‐room motivational speeches. In an excellent article in the 
Harvard Business Review, Jay Conger (1998) describes the skill of persuasion as having 
four essential parts: (1) effective persuaders must be credible to those they are trying to 
persuade; (2) they must find goals held in common with those being persuaded; (3) they 
must use “vivid” language and compelling evidence; and (4) they must connect with the 
emotions of those they are trying to persuade. The article is complete with examples of 
each of the four essential parts.
Dealing with Conflict  Managing conflict is critical to effective leadership, and we 
now turn our attention to the strategies employed to deal with conflict.
When we think of the ways people deal with conflict, it is helpful to consider how 
they approach the situation along two dimensions. On the one hand, we can consider 
how assertive the parties are, which can range from being unassertive to assertive. On the 
other hand, we can evaluate how cooperative the parties are, ranging from uncoopera-
tive to cooperative. Based on these two dimensions, researchers Kenneth Thomas and 
Ralph Kilmann (1975) identified five strategies people use to deal with conflict, as illus-
trated in Figure 2-4.
Referring to Figure 2-4, approaching a situation assertively and being unwilling to 
cooperate is referred to as a “competing” strategy. When a competing strategy is employed, 
the person is viewing the situation as though someone must lose in order for the other to 
win, or in this case, I win and you lose (win‐lose). This competing strategy may be appro-
priate in situations where the decision must be made quickly.
Trade-Offs
Assertive
Unassertive
Uncooperative
Competing
Avoiding
Accommodating
Collaborating
Compromising
Cooperative
Figure 2-4   
Conflict  
resolutions 
strategies.

46  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
Alternatively, when the position is not asserted aggressively but the person is still 
unwilling to cooperate, we have a conflict “avoiding” strategy. This is a lose‐lose strategy 
because you are neither cooperating with the other person to help them achieve their 
goals nor are you actively pursuing your own goals. An avoiding strategy might be applied 
when the issue is not that important to you or you deem the detrimental effects from the 
conflict outweigh the benefits of resolving the issue in a desirable way.
When you assertively state your position but do so in a spirit of cooperation you are 
employing a “collaborating” strategy. Here your focus is on achieving your goals but with 
the recognition that the best solution is one that benefits both parties. Thus, the collabo-
rating strategy can be considered a win‐win strategy. This is the preferred strategy in most 
situations and particularly in situations where the needs of both parties are important.
In situations where you do not assert your position and focus more on cooperating 
with the other party, you are employing an “accommodating” strategy. In this case, the 
focus is on resolving the issue from the other person’s point of view. Here the situation 
can be described as I lose, you win, or lose‐win. It would be appropriate to employ the 
accommodating strategy when you were wrong or the issue is much more important to 
the other person.
Finally, when you take a middle ground position on both dimensions, you are “com-
promising.” In these cases, nobody wins and nobody loses. Thus, you have likely arrived 
at a solution that you and the other party can live with but are not particularly happy 
about. You might employ a compromising strategy when the potential benefits of trying 
to develop a win‐win solution are exceeded by the costs.
The value of this framework is that it helps us recognize that there are alternative 
strategies that can be utilized to resolve conflicts. Successful project management requires 
that when conflict arises, the situation is carefully evaluated and the approach for man-
aging the conflict is proactively chosen in a way that best enhances the quality of the 
relationship between the parties.
	 2.3	
SELECTION OF A PROJECT MANAGER
A note to senior management: It is rarely a good idea to select a project manager from a 
list of engineers (or other technical specialists) who can be spared from their current jobs 
at the moment. Unfortunately, in many firms this appears to be the primary criterion for 
choice. We do not argue that current availability is not one among several appropriate 
criteria, but that it is only one of several—and never the most important. Neither does 
the list of criteria begin with “Can leap over tall buildings with a single bound.”
The most important criterion, by far, is that the prospective PM, in the language of 
sales people, is a “closer.” Find individuals who complete the tasks they are given. As any 
senior manager knows, hard workers are easy to find. What is rare is an individual who is 
driven to finish the job. Given a set of such people, select those who meet the following 
criteria at reasonably high levels.
The PM is responsible for acquiring the human and material resources needed by the 
project. The PM is also responsible for exercising leadership, fire fighting, and dealing 
with obstacles that impede the project’s progress. Finally, the PM is responsible for 
making the trade‐offs between budget, schedule, and scope that are needed to ensure 
project success. To be successful at meeting these responsibilities, the PM must be 
skilled at negotiation, conflict resolution, and persuasion.
Trade-Offs

2.3 SELECTION OF A PROJECT MANAGER
•  47
Credibility
For the PM, credibility is critical. In essence, it means that the PM is believable. There 
are two areas in which the PM needs believability. The first is technical credibility, and the 
second is administrative credibility. The PM is not expected to have an expert’s knowledge 
of each of the technologies that may be germane to the project. The PM should, how-
ever, have expertise in one or more areas of knowledge relevant to the project. In par-
ticular, the PM must know enough to explain the current state of the project, its progress, 
and its technical problems to senior management who may lack technical training. The 
PM should also be able to interpret the wishes of management and the client to the pro-
ject team (Grant, Baumgardner, and Stone, 1997; Matson, 1998).
While quite different, administrative credibility is just as significant to the project. 
For management and the client to have faith in the viability of the project, reports, 
appraisals, audits, and evaluations must be timely and accurate. For the team, resources, 
personnel, and knowledge must be available when needed. For all parties, the PM must 
be able to make the difficult trade‐offs that allow the project to meet its objectives as well 
as possible. This requires mature judgment and considerable courage.
Sensitivity
There is no need to belabor what should, by now, be obvious. The PM needs a finely 
tuned set of political antennae as well as an equally sensitive sensor of interpersonal 
conflict between team members, or between team members (including himself or her-
self) and other parties‐at‐interest to the project. As we will see, open and honest 
intrateam communication is critical to project success. Also needed are technical sensors 
that indicate when technical problems are being swept under the rug or when the project 
is about to fall behind its schedule.
Leadership, Style, Ethics
A leader is someone who indicates to other individuals or groups the direction in which 
they should proceed. When complex projects are decomposed into a set of tasks and 
subtasks, it is common for members of the project to focus on their individual tasks, 
thereby ignoring the project as a whole. This fosters the dreaded suboptimization that we 
mentioned early in this chapter. Only the PM is in a position to keep team members 
working toward completion of the whole project rather than its parts. In practice, leaders 
keep their people energized, enthusiastic, well organized, and well informed. This, in 
turn, will keep the team well motivated.
At the beginning of this chapter, we noted that the PM’s role should be facilitative 
rather than authoritarian. Now let us consider the style with which that role is played. 
There has been much research on the best managerial style for general management, and 
it has been assumed that the findings apply to PMs as well. Recent work has raised some 
questions about this assumption. While there is little doubt that the most effective over-
all style is participative, Professor Shenhar of the Stevens Institute of Technology adds 
another dimension to style (1998). He found that as the level of technological uncer-
tainty of a project went from “low tech” to “very high tech,” the appropriate manage-
ment style (while being fundamentally participative) went from “firm” to “highly 
flexible.” In addition, he found that the complexity of the project, ranked from “simple” 
to “highly complex,” called for styles varying from “informal” to “highly formal.” To sum 
up, the more technically uncertain a project, the more flexible the style of management 
should be. The more complex a project, the more formal the style should be. In this 
Trade-Offs

48  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
­context, flexibility applies primarily to the degree that new ideas and approaches are 
considered. Formality applies primarily to the degree to which the project operates in a 
structured environment.
Professor Shenhar’s work has the feeling of good sense. When faced with technologi-
cal uncertainty, the PM must be open to experimentation. In the same way, if a project 
is highly complex with many parts that must be combined with great care, the PM can-
not allow a haphazard approach by the project team. In the end, the one reasonably sure 
conclusion about an effective management style for PMs is that it must be participative. 
Autocrats do not make good project managers.
Another aspect of leadership is for the PM to have—and to communicate—a strong 
sense of ethics. In recent years, the number and severity of unethical practices by busi-
ness executives (and politicians) have increased dramatically. Because projects differ 
from one to another, there are few standard procedures that can be installed to ensure 
honest and ethical behavior from all parties‐at‐interest to the project. One has only to 
read a daily paper to find examples of kickbacks, bribery, covering up mistakes, use of 
substandard materials, theft, fraud, and outright lies on project status or performance. 
Dishonesty on anyone’s part should not be permitted in projects.
Due, however, to the increasing number of multicultural projects, it is easy to make 
ethical missteps when managing a project in an unfamiliar country. Jones (2008) notes 
that what may be common practice in one country may be illegal in another—paying 
(bribing) a government agent to fast‐track an approval, leaving out obvious information 
in a bid, inviting a client (or being invited) to dinner, and so on. Discovering another 
culture’s ethical standards is difficult. One can engage local partners who have demon-
strated knowledge of a local culture and are willing to share their information. 
Organizations should ensure that their employees are trained to recognize potential ethi-
cal issues and to communicate anything that seems amiss with their superiors. Insisting 
that employees follow the highest ethical standards, both domestic and foreign, may 
result in the firm having to abandon a project or a bid when it compromises those stand-
ards, but having a solid reputation for integrity will be a strong long‐run benefit to the firm.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) has developed a Code of Ethics for the 
profession. The Code is the thoughtful result of an extended discussion and debate on 
ethical conduct in the project management profession. A new version of the Code, 
resulting from even more extended discussions, appeared in 2006. It is roughly eight 
times the length of the earlier version, including two Appendices. The new Code is 
available to anyone at the PMI website, www.PMI.org.
The new Code should be read carefully by anyone contemplating a career in project 
management. It accents behavior that will lead to high trust levels among team mem-
bers, and between the team and the client and senior management as well as other stake-
holders. The section titled “Honesty” should be reread . . . and reread . . . and reread. We 
will revisit the subjects of honesty and trust throughout this book.
Ability to Handle Stress
Throughout this book we have noted and will continue to note that the life of the pro-
ject manager is rarely serene. The PM is surrounded by conflict (discussed in more detail 
later in this chapter) and trapped in a high‐stress occupation.
Kent (2008)  identifies six signs of excessive stress in the workplace: (1) inability to 
switch‐off work issues, (2) disturbed sleep, (3) lack of pleasure in non‐work‐related lei-
sure activities, (4) difficulty concentrating or making decisions, (5) tendency to anger 
quickly, and (6) lack of energy. There are ways to deal with excessive stress. It is best if 
the organization is attuned to the problem and monitors their PMs and employees for 

2.3 SELECTION OF A PROJECT MANAGER
•  49
work overload. Also, as we discuss shortly in the context of EQ, the PM should be self‐
aware and spot the danger signals early. Kent suggests several ways to control stress:
1.	 Keep a journal, taking time to reflect on the events of the day.
2.	 Prioritize all tasks facing you, eliminating tasks that do not really need to be done, 
transferring or delegating what you can, delaying low priority items, and minimizing 
the scope of any subtask that is not crucial to your overall task (the online Appendix 
to this chapter provides a primer on effective time management).
3.	 Give yourself time to unwind from high-stress meetings, perhaps by taking a short 
walk or doing 15 minutes of exercise or meditation. Avoid meditating on the high‐
stress meeting.
4.	 Engage in after‐work physical activities that take your mind off the tasks.
5.	 Improve your physical surroundings so they are pleasant, enjoyable, and comfortable, 
helping you to relax.
6.	 Become aware of the control you do or do not have over events. One of the great laws 
of living is “Do not develop anxiety about things over which you have no control!”
One way PMs try to handle excess work is by “multitasking.” But as Hunsberger 
(2008)  points out and as is discussed in Section 6.6, this does not work. In fact, multi-
tasking is a misnomer. What you are doing is switching back and forth between tasks. You 
lose time whenever you do this. Her advice is to divide your tasks into small steps, prior-
itize them on a to‐do list, be proactive by tackling and completing tasks as soon as pos-
sible, and then cross them off the list (see the online Appendix for additional ideas on 
effective time management). If you can’t finish in one sitting, leave notes that trigger 
your memory about where you were when you were interrupted.
There are numerous factors in life that cause stress, and project managers are as sub-
ject to them as other humans. There do, however, appear to be four major causes of stress 
often associated with the management of projects. First, some PMs never develop a rea-
sonably consistent set of procedures and techniques with which to manage their work. 
Second, many simply have “too much on their plates.” Third, some have a high need to 
achieve that is consistently frustrated. Fourth, the parent organization is in the throes of 
major change.
This book is primarily devoted to helping the PM deal with the first cause of stress. 
As for the second cause, we would remind the PM to include him/herself as a “resource” 
when planning a project. Almost all project management software packages will signal 
the planner when a project plan calls for a resource to be used beyond its capacity (see 
Chapter 6). Such signals, at least, provide PMs with some evidence with which to discuss 
the work load with the appropriate senior manager.
Concerning the third cause of stress, Slevin (1989) points out that stress results 
when the demands made on an individual are greater than the person’s ability to cope 
with them, particularly when the person has a high need for achievement. It is axiomatic 
that senior managers give the toughest projects to their best project managers. It is the 
toughest projects that are most apt to be beset with unsolvable problems. The cure for 
such stress is obvious, except to the senior managers who continue the practice.
Finally, in this era of restructuring and downsizing, stress from worry about one’s 
future is a common condition in modern organizations. Dealing with and reducing these 
stresses as well as the stress resulting from everyday life is beyond the scope of this book 
as well as the expertise of its authors. Fortunately, any bookstore will have entire sections 
devoted to the subject of stress and its relief.

50  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
	 2.4	
PROJECT MANAGEMENT AS A PROFESSION
It should be obvious to the reader that project management is a demanding job. Planning 
and controlling the complexities of a project’s activities, schedule, and budget would be 
difficult even if the project had the highest claim on the parent organization’s knowledge 
and resources, and if the PM had full authority to take any action required to keep the 
project on course for successful completion. Such is never the case, but all is not lost 
because there are tools available to bring some order to the chaos of life as a PM—to cope 
with the difficulties of planning and the uncertainties that affect budgets and schedules. 
Also, as we have indicated, it is possible to compensate for missing authority through 
negotiation. Mastering the use of project management tools requires specialized knowl-
edge that is often acquired through academic preparation, which is to say that project 
management is a profession. The profession comes complete with career paths and an 
excellent professional organization.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) was founded in 1969. By 1990, the PMI 
had 7500 members. It grew to 17,000 by 1995, but 5 years later membership had exploded 
to more than 64,000. By March of 2014, the PMI had more than 447,000 members 
worldwide. The exponential growth of the PMI is the result of the exponential growth in 
the use of projects and PMs as a way of getting things done. For example, a senior vice 
president of an international chemical firm installed project management as a way 
of  controlling the workloads on his technical specialists and on a few overloaded 
­facilities—project management having tools to handle the allocation of scarce resources. 
In another instance, a new CEO of a large hospital mandated that all nonroutine, one‐
time operations be managed as projects so that she could have information on the nature 
and status of all such activities.
In Chapter 1 we mentioned the project‐oriented organization. In these firms all non-
routine activities are organized as projects. In addition, the process of instituting change 
in routine operations is also commonly organized as a project. The motives behind this 
approach to handling change are the same as those motivating the chemical firm VP and 
the hospital CEO, the need to control and to have information about what is happening 
in the organization.
To establish standards for project management and to foster professionalism in the 
field, the PMI has codified the areas of learning required to manage projects. This Project 
Management Body of Knowledge, 5th edition (PMBOK) has been compiled into a book 
published by the PMI, also available as a CD. It serves as a basis for practice and educa-
tion in the field (PMI Standards Committee,  2013). PMBOK devotes Chapter  9 to 
human resource management, including organizational planning, staffing, and team 
development. The PMI also publishes two important periodicals: first, the Project 
Management Journal, oriented to project management theory, though its articles are 
almost uniformly related to the actual practice of project management; and second, the 
PMBOK Guide
Successful PMs have some common characteristics. They are “closers.” They also 
have high administrative and technical credibility, show sensitivity to interpersonal 
conflict, and possess the political know‐how to get help from senior management 
when needed. In addition, the PM should be a leader, and adopt a participatory man-
agement style that may have to be modified depending on the level of technological 
sophistication and uncertainty involved in the project. Another critical project man-
agement skill is the ability to direct the project in an ethical manner. Finally, project 
managers need the ability to utilize effective strategies to manage stress.

2.5 FITTING PROJECTS INTO THE PARENT ORGANIZATION
•  51
PM Network magazine, which is a trade journal aimed at practitioners. Both publications 
are valuable for the experienced PM as well as the neophyte or student. The PMI also 
offers certification testing programs for project managers. By March 2015, over 600,000 
individuals had been certified by the PMI as Project Management Professionals (PMPs).
The fantastic variety of projects being conducted today ranges from esoteric research 
on gene identification to specialized maintenance of machine tools. A quick glance at 
any daily paper will describe multiple projects such as cleaning up the image of down-
town, improving air quality in various global cities, and reports of projects concerning 
natural disasters such as earthquakes.
Opportunities for careers in project management abound, but where can people who 
are competent to manage projects be found, or how can they be trained? A rapidly grow-
ing number of colleges, universities, and technical institutes have developed courses and 
degree programs in project management. In recent years, many local chapters of the PMI 
have also offered training programs of varying length and depth. Nonetheless, the demand 
for project managers far exceeds the supply. (PMI Today, a supplement to PM Network, is 
recommended for more information on training and employment opportunities.)
The career path for the PM usually starts with work on a small project, and then on 
some larger projects. If the individual survives life as a project worker, graduation to the 
next level comes in the form of duty as a “project engineer” or as a “deputy” PM for a 
project. Then comes duty as the manager of a small project, and then as PM of larger 
ones. All of this, of course, presumes a track record of success.
The highest visibility for a PM is to manage a “megaproject,” either successfully or 
unsuccessfully. As Gale (2009) points out, success is defined as bringing the megaproject 
in on time and on budget. There is no room for error. The main difference between a 
“normal” project and a megaproject is that the technical issues tend to disappear on a 
megaproject. Instead, the PM’s hardest tasks are those of communicating, managing ven-
dors and contractors, dealing with stakeholders, running smooth task processes, guiding 
the project team, engaging the client, helping map the project to the business objectives, 
and handling the political and cultural issues.
	 2.5	
FITTING PROJECTS INTO THE PARENT ORGANIZATION
Earlier in this chapter we referred several times to problems caused by the way projects 
are organized and fit in as a part of the parent organization. It is now time to deal with 
this subject. Project organization is also discussed in Chapter 2: Organizational Influences 
and Project Life Cycle of PMBOK. It would be most unusual for a PM to have any influ-
ence over the way work is structured in the parent organization and how projects are fit 
within this structure. Rather, the organizational structure is decided by senior manage-
ment. The way the organization is structured, however, has a major impact on the PM’s 
life, and it is necessary that the PM understand the implications of fitting projects into 
alternative organizational structures.
PMBOK Guide
A professional organization, the Project Management Institute (PMI) has been 
devoted to project management. The growth in the field has been exponential. 
Among other reasons for this growth is the project‐oriented organization. The PMI 
has published the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK). It also publishes 
two professional periodicals. Many courses and degree programs in project manage-
ment are available. Project management has numerous career possibilities.
PMBOK Guide

52  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
Pure Project Organization
Consider the construction of a football stadium or a shopping mall. Assume that the land 
has been acquired and the design approved. Having won a competitive bid, a contractor 
assigns a project manager and a team of construction specialists to the project. Each spe-
cialist, working from the architectural drawings, develops a set of plans to deal with his 
or her particular specialty area. One may design and plan the electrical systems, another 
the mechanicals, still another the parking and landscaping, and so forth. In the mean-
time, someone is arranging for the timely delivery of cranes, earth movers, excavation 
equipment, lumber, cement, brick, and other materials. And someone is hiring a suitable 
number of local construction workers with the appropriate skills. See Figure 2-5 for a 
typical pure project organization.
The supplies, equipment, and workers arrive just when they are needed (in a perfect 
world), do the work, complete the project, and disband. The PM is, in effect, the CEO of 
the project. When the project is completed, accepted by the client, equipment returned, 
and local workers paid off, then the PM and the specialists return to their parent firm and 
await the next project.
For organizations like our construction example here, the work of the organization is 
of a finite nature and therefore is naturally organized into projects. Other examples 
include law firms assigning lawyers to specific trials, consulting firms assigning teams to 
client engagements, studios assigning personnel to specific movie projects, and market-
ing research firms that assign analysts to specific client projects. In each of these cases, 
the work performed by the organization is of a fixed duration, making it logical and natu-
ral to organize the work and resources around specific projects. In these situations, when 
the work is completed on one project, the resources are shifted to another project. For 
example, as one trial wraps up, the attorneys in a law firm can be assigned to another 
trial. When work is structured and organized on the basis of projects, it is referred to as a 
pure project organization.
One challenge pure project organizations face is planning the smooth transition of 
resources from one project to another. For example, in a law firm a particular attorney 
may be needed on another trial before the one she/he is working on is completed. 
Alternatively, a trial may finish up before the attorney is needed for the next trial. There 
are other drawbacks to the pure project. While they have a broad range of specialists, 
President
Program manager
 Marketing
Manufacturing
 R&D
Marketing
Manufacturing
R&D
Finance
Personnel
Marketing
Manufacturing
R&D
Finance
Personnel
Manager, Project A
Manager, Project B
Figure 2-5   
Pure project 
organization.

2.5 FITTING PROJECTS INTO THE PARENT ORGANIZATION
•  53
they have limited technological depth. If the project’s resident specialist in a given area 
of knowledge happens to be lacking in a specific subset of that area, the project must hire 
a consultant, add another specialist, or do without. If the parent organization has several 
concurrent projects drawing on the same specialty areas, they develop fairly high levels 
of duplication in these specialties. This is expensive.
There are other problems, and one of the most serious is seen in R&D projects or in 
projects that have fairly long lives. People assigned to the project tend to form strong 
attachments to it. The project begins to take on a life of its own. A disease we call “pro-
jectitis” develops. One pronounced symptom is worry about “Is there life after the pro-
ject?” Foot dragging as the project end draws near is common, as is the submission of 
proposals for follow‐up projects in the same area of interest—and, of course, using the 
same project team.
Nevertheless, despite these challenges and drawbacks, the pure project organization 
is well suited to situations where the nature of the work is of a finite nature. In particular, 
the pure project organization provides the requisite flexibility to effectively mobilize the 
organization’s resources to complete work that by its nature is of a finite duration.
Functional Project Organization
Some projects have a very different type of structure. Assume, for example, that a project 
is formed to install a new automated production machine in an operating production 
line. The project includes the removal of the old machine and the integration of the new 
machine into the production system. In such a case, we would probably house the project 
in the Manufacturing division where the production system is located. Figure 2-6 shows 
a typical example of functional project organization with the project in this case, housed 
in the manufacturing function.
Based on Adam Smith’s division of labor concept, it is still common today to see 
organizations that have structured work activities around the type or function of the work. 
Thus, we see marketing, accounting, manufacturing, engineering, and other departments 
in many organizations. Likewise, in universities we see the faculty separated into differ-
ent schools based on their discipline such as liberal arts, business, engineering, law, and 
medicine. It is also common to find projects housed within a particular functional depart-
ment. Examples include a marketing department conducting a marketing research pro-
ject, an engineering department working on a new product development project, and a 
business school developing the curriculum for a new master’s program in Business 
Analytics.
In contrast to pure project organizations where the work is organized around specific 
projects, functionally organized projects are embedded in the functional group where the 
President
Manufacturing
Marketing
R&D
Personnel
P
r
o
j
e
c
t
Finance
Figure 2-6   
Functional project 
organization.

54  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
project will be used. This immediately addresses some of the challenges associated with 
pure projects. First, the functional project has immediate, direct, and complete contact 
with the most important technologies it may need, and it has in‐depth access. Second, 
project it is will be minimal because the project is not removed from the parent organiza-
tion and specialists are not divorced from their normal career tracks.
A key challenge associated with functionally organized projects is communication 
across functional departments. Communications across functional department bounda-
ries are rarely as simple as most firms think they are. When technological assistance is 
needed from another department, it may or may not be forthcoming on a timely basis. 
Technological depth is certainly present, but technological breadth is missing. The same 
problem exists with communication outside the function. In the pure project, communi-
cation lines are short and messages move rapidly. This is particularly important when the 
client is sending or receiving messages. In most functionally organized projects, the lines 
of communication to people or units outside the functional department are slow and 
tortuous. Traditionally, messages are not to be sent outside the division without clearing 
through the department’s senior management. Insisting that project communications 
follow the organizational chain of command imposes impossible delays on most projects. 
It most certainly impedes frank and open communication between project team mem-
bers and the project client.
On the other hand, a key benefit of the functional project is that the priority assigned 
to the project is determined by the department that is also the client of the project. 
Because the project is housed in the department that will benefit from the project, the 
department’s leadership team has more leeway in determining the priority of the project 
relative to other departmental work and is subjected less to the concerns and priorities of 
other departments. Of course, this could also lead to suboptimization where the achieve-
ment of one department’s goals comes at the detriment of the overall organization.
Matrix Project Organization
In an attempt to capture the advantages of both the pure project organization and the 
functionally organized project as well as to avoid the problems associated with each type, 
a new type of project organization—more accurately, a combination of the two—was 
developed.
To form a matrix organized project, a pure project is superimposed on a functionally 
organized system as in Figure  2-7. The PM reports to a program manager or a vice‐­ 
president of projects or some senior individual with a similar title whose job it is to 
President
Program manager
Manufacturing
Marketing
Finance
R&D
Personnel
PM1
PM2
PM3
3
1
1 1/2
1/2
1/2
4
4
1/4
1/4
1/2
3
1
1/2
1 1/2
0
Figure 2-7   
Matrix project 
organization.

2.5 FITTING PROJECTS INTO THE PARENT ORGANIZATION
•  55
­coordinate the activities of several or all of the projects. These projects may or may not 
be related, but they all demand the parent’s resources and the use of resources must be 
coordinated, if not the projects themselves. This method of organizing the interface 
between projects and the parent organization succeeds in capturing the major advantages 
of both pure and functional projects. It does, however, create some problems that are 
unique to this matrix form. To understand both the advantages and disadvantages, we 
will examine matrix management more closely.
As the figure illustrates, there are two distinct levels of responsibility in a matrix 
organization. First, there is the normal functional hierarchy that runs vertically in the 
figure and consists of the regular departments such as marketing, finance, manufacturing, 
human resources, and so on. (We could have illustrated a bank or university or an enter-
prise organized on some other principle. The departmental names would differ, but the 
structure of the system would be the same.) Second, there are horizontal structures, the 
projects that overlay the functional departments and, presumably, have some access to 
the functional department’s competencies. Heading up these horizontal projects are the 
project managers.
A close examination of Figure  2-7 shows some interesting details. Project 1 has 
assigned to it three people from the Manufacturing division, one and one‐half from 
Marketing, a half‐time person from Finance, four from R&D, and one‐half from 
Personnel, plus an unknown number from other divisions not shown in the figure. Other 
projects have different make‐ups of people assigned. This is typical of projects that have 
different objectives. Project 2, for example, appears to be aimed at the development of a 
new product with its concentration of Marketing representation, plus significant assis-
tance from R&D, representation from Manufacturing, and staff assistance from Finance 
and Personnel. The PM controls what these people do and when they do it. The head of 
a functional group controls who from the group is assigned to the project and what tech-
nology is appropriate for use on the project.
Advantages  We can disregard the problems raised by the split authority for the 
moment and concentrate on the strong points of this arrangement. Because there are 
many possible combinations of the pure project and the functional project, the matrix 
project may have some characteristics of each organizational type. If the matrix project 
closely resembles the pure project with many individuals assigned full‐time to the pro-
ject, it is referred to as a “strong” matrix or a “project” matrix. If, on the other hand, 
functional departments assign resource capacity to the project rather than people, the 
matrix is referred to as a “weak” matrix or a “functional” matrix. The project might, of 
course, have some people and some capacity assigned to it, in which case it is sometimes 
referred to as a “balanced” matrix. (The Random House Unabridged Dictionary defines 
“balanced” as “being in harmonious or proper arrangement. . . .” In no way does the bal-
anced matrix qualify as “balanced.”) None of the terms—strong, weak, balanced—is 
precise, and matrix projects may be anywhere along the continuum from strong to weak. 
It may even be stronger or weaker at various times during the project’s life.
The primary reason for choosing a strong or weak matrix depends on the needs of 
both the project and the various functional groups. If the project is likely to require com-
plex technical problem solving, it will probably have the appropriate technical special-
ists assigned to it. If the project’s technology is less demanding, it will be a weaker matrix 
that is able to draw on a functional group’s capacity when needed. A firm manufacturing 
household oven cleaners might borrow chemists from the R&D department to develop 
cleaning compounds that could dissolve baked‐on grease. The project might also test 
whether such products were toxic to humans by using the capacity of the firm’s Toxicity 
Laboratory rather than having individual toxicity testers assigned to the project team.

56  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
One of the most important strengths of the matrix form is this flexibility in the way 
it can interface with the parent organization. Because it is, or can be, connected to any 
or all of the parent organization’s functional units, it has access to any or all of the parent 
organization’s technology. The way it utilizes the services of the several technical units 
need not be the same for each unit. This allows the functional departments to optimize 
their contributions to any project. They can meet a project’s needs in a way that is most 
efficient. Being able to share expertise with several projects during a limited time period 
makes the matrix arrangement far less expensive than the pure project with its duplica-
tion of competencies, and just as technologically “deep” as the functional project. The 
flexibility of the matrix is particularly useful for globalized projects that often require 
integrating knowledge and personnel coming from geographically dispersed independent 
business units, each of which may be organized quite differently than the others.
The matrix has a strong focus on the project itself, just as does the pure project. In 
this, it is clearly superior to the functional project that often is subordinate to the regular 
work of the functional group. In general, matrix organized projects have the advantages 
of both pure and functional projects. For the most part, they avoid the major disadvan-
tages of each. Close contact with functional groups tends to mitigate projectitis. 
Individuals involved with matrix projects are never far from their home department and 
do not develop the detached feelings that sometimes strike those involved with 
pure projects.
Disadvantages  With all their advantages, matrix projects have their own, unique 
problems. By far the most significant of these is the violation of an old dictum of the mili-
tary and of management theory, the Unity of Command principle: For each subordinate, 
there shall be one, and only one, superior. In matrix projects, the individual specialist 
borrowed from a function has two bosses. As we noted above, the project manager may 
control which tasks the specialist undertakes, but the specialist reports to a functional 
manager who makes decisions about the specialist’s performance evaluation, promotion, 
and salary. Thus, project workers are often faced with conflicting orders from the PM and 
the functional manager. The result is conflicting demands on their time and activities. 
The project manager is in charge of the project, but the functional manager is usually 
superior to the PM on the firm’s organizational chart, and may have far more political 
clout in the parent organization. Life on a matrix project is rarely comfortable for any-
one, PM or worker.
As we have said, in matrix organizations the PM controls administrative decisions 
and the functional heads control technological decisions. This distinction is simple 
enough when writing about project management, but for the operating PM the distinc-
tion, and partial division of authority and responsibility, is complex indeed. The ability 
of the PM to negotiate anything from resources to technical assistance to delivery dates 
is a key contributor to project success. As we have said before and will certainly say again, 
success is doubtful for a PM without strong negotiating skills.
While the ability to balance resources, schedules, and deliverables between several 
projects is an advantage of matrix organization, that ability has its dark side. The organiza-
tion’s full set of projects must be carefully monitored by the program manager, a tough job. 
Further, the movement of resources from project to project in order to satisfy the individual 
schedules of the multiple projects may foster political infighting among the several PMs. 
As usual, there are no winners in these battles. Naturally, each PM is more interested in 
ensuring success for his or her individual project than in maintaining general organization‐­ 
wide goals. Not only is this suboptimization injurious to the parent organization, it also 
raises serious ethical issues. In Chapter 1 we discussed some of the issues involved in aggre-
gate planning, and we will have much more to say on this matter in Chapter 6.

2.5 FITTING PROJECTS INTO THE PARENT ORGANIZATION
•  57
Intrateam conflict is a characteristic of all projects, but the conflicts seem to us to be 
particularly numerous and contentious in matrix projects. In addition to conflicts arising 
from the split authority and from the violation of Unity of Command, another major 
source of conflict appears to be inherent in the nature of the transdisciplinary teams in a 
matrix setting. Functional projects have such teams, but team members have a strong 
common interest, their common functional home. Pure projects have transdisciplinary 
teams, but the entire team is full‐time and committed to the project. Matrix project 
teams are transdisciplinary, but team members are often not full‐time, have different 
functional homes, and have other commitments than the project. They are often com-
mitted to their functional area or to their career specialty, rather than to the project. As 
we emphasize in the next section, high levels of trust between project team members is 
critical for optimum team performance. Conflicts do not necessarily lead to distrust on a 
project team, but unless matrix organized teams are focused on the project rather than on 
their individual contribution to it, distrust between team members is almost certain to 
affect project outcomes negatively.
A young man of our acquaintance works one‐quarter time on each of two projects 
and half‐time in his functional group, the mechanical engineering group in an R&D 
division. He estimates that approximately three‐quarters of the time he is expected to be 
in two or more places at the same time. He indicated that this is normal.
With all its problems, there is no real choice about project organization for most 
firms. Functional projects are too limited and too slow. Pure projects are far too expen-
sive. Matrix projects are both effective and efficient. They are here to stay, conflict and all.
Mixed Organizational Systems
Functional, matrix, and pure projects exist side by side in some organizations (see 
Figure 2-8). In reality, they are never quite as neatly defined as they appear here. For 
example, a management consulting firm that mostly follows a pure project structure may 
also have a central Human Resources department that completes projects housed entirely 
within the department.
The ability to organize projects to fit the needs of the parent firm has allowed pro-
jects to be used under conditions that might be quite difficult were project organization 
constrained to one or two specific forms. As the hybridization increases, though, the firm 
risks increasing the level of conflict in and between projects because of duplication, over-
lapping authority, and increased friction between project and functional management.
The Project Management Office and Project Maturity
There is another way of addressing some of the challenges associated with the alternative 
organizational forms for projects. The parent organization can set up a project manage-
ment office (PMO), more or less like a functional group or as a center of excellence with 
its own manager. This group may act as staff to some or to all projects (Block, 1998; 
Bolles, 1998). The project office may handle some or all of the budgeting, scheduling, 
President
Project M
Finance
Engineering
Project Z
Manufacturing
Legal
Figure 2-8  Mixed 
project organization

58  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
reporting, scope, compliance with corporate governance, and risk management activities 
while the functional units supply the technical work. The PMO often serves as a reposi-
tory for project documents and histories. However, the PMO must never replace the 
project manager as officer in charge of and accountable for the project.
At times the PMO is effective, and at times it is not. Based on limited observation, 
it appears to us that the system works well when the functional specialists have fairly 
routine projects. If this is not the case, the PMO might be involved in generating the 
project’s budget, schedule, and scope, and must be kept well informed about the progress 
of the project measured against its goals. Some years ago, a large pharmaceutical firm 
used a similar arrangement on R&D projects, the purpose being to “protect” their scien-
tists from having to deal with project schedules, budgets, and progress reports, all of 
which were handled by the PMO. The scientists were not even bothered with having to 
read the reports. The result was precisely what one might expect. All projects were late 
and over budget—very late and far over budget.
But in another case, the U.S. Federal Transportation Security Administration had 
only 3 months and $20 million to build a 13,500 square foot coordination center, involv-
ing the coordination of up to 300 tradespeople working simultaneously on various  
aspects of the center (PMI, May 2004). A strong Project Management Office was crucial 
to making the effort a success. The PMO accelerated the procurement and approval 
process, cutting times in half in some cases. They engaged a team leader, a master sched-
uler, a master financial manager, a procurement specialist, a civil engineer, and other 
specialists to manage the multiple facets of the construction project, finishing the entire 
project in 97 days and on budget, receiving an award from the National Assn. of Industrial 
and Office Properties for the quality of its project management and overall facility.
In general, however, the role of the PMO is much broader than this example, and it 
is now not uncommon to find several different types of PMOs existing at different levels 
of large firms with different, but sometimes overlapping, areas of operation. They have 
titles such as CPMO for Corporate Project Management Office, or EPMO for Enterprise 
Project Management Office, and many other variants. It is also common to find an 
EPMO (or CPMO) followed by a PMO for each unit of the parent organization that 
actually carries out the projects and reports to the senior EPMO.
Involvement of senior management in EPMOs allows the EPMO to provide some 
important functions. The EPMO (or PMO if there is only one in the firm) is in a unique 
position to oversee the practices of the firm’s portfolio of projects, checking the consist-
ency of the projects with the firm’s strategies, generating and insuring compliance with 
matters of corporate governance, maintaining project histories as well as composite data 
on project costs, schedules, and so on, setting project or program priorities across depart-
ments, helping projects to acquire resources, and similar issues. Project sponsors, senior 
managers who have a strong interest in a project or program and may use their political 
clout to help the project with priority issues or resource acquisition when such clout may 
be useful, are often appropriate members of the EPMOs. Again, care must be taken for 
the EPMO or its individual members to avoid usurping the PM as the accountable, 
officer‐in‐charge of the project.
While such activities are necessary and, indeed, helpful, EPMO actions sometimes 
may cause significant management problems. Because many senior managers have little 
or no training in project management, they tend to focus on assessment of project pro-
gress and evaluation by using planned cost versus actual cost as a primary measurement 
tool. (We will discuss the problems caused by this simplistic measure several times in the 
following chapters, and in some detail in Chapter 7 on Project Control.) As senior man-
agement has become aware of these and other problems, many EPMOs have taken on 
the task of assuring that the organization is following “best practices” for the management­ 
of its projects. The EPMO is expected to monitor and continuously improve the 
Risk
Best Practice

2.6 THE PROJECT TEAM
•  59
­organization’s project management skills. In the past few years, a number of different 
ways to measure this “project management maturity” (Pennypacker et al., 2003) have 
been suggested, such as basing the evaluation on PMI’s PMBOK Guide (Lubianiker, 2000; 
see also www.pmi.org) or the ISO 9001 standards of the International Organization for 
Standardization.
Quite a few consulting firms, as well as scholars, have devised formal maturity meas-
ures; one such, PM3, is described by R. Remy (1997). In this system, the final project 
management “maturity” of an organization is assessed as being at one of five levels:  
ad‐hoc (disorganized, accidental successes and failures); abbreviated (some processes 
exist, inconsistent management, unpredictable results); organized (standardized pro-
cesses, more predictable results); managed (controlled and measured processes, results 
more in line with plans); and adaptive (continuous improvement in processes, success is 
normal, performance keeps improving).
Another maturity model was applied to 38 organizations in four industries (Ibbs and 
Kwak, 2000). The survey included 148 questions covering six processes/life cycle phases 
(initiating, planning, executing, controlling, closing, and project‐driven organization 
environment) and ten PMBOK knowledge areas (integration, scope, time, cost, quality, 
human resources, communication, risk, procurement, and stakeholders). The model 
assesses project management maturity in terms of five stages called: ad hoc, planned, 
managed, integrated, and sustained.
Regardless of the model form, it appears that most organizations do not score very 
well in maturity tests. On one form, about three‐quarters are no higher than level 2 
(planned) and fewer than 6 percent are above level 3. Individual firms ranged from 1.8 
to 4.6 on the five‐point scale.
	 2.6	
THE PROJECT TEAM
We have mentioned the project team several times in the foregoing sections. Effective 
team members have some characteristics in common. Only the first of these is usually 
taken into account.
1.	 They must be technically competent. This is so obvious that it is often the only criterion 
applied. While the functional departments will always remain the ultimate source of 
technological problem solving for the project, it requires a technically competent per-
son to know exactly when additional technical knowledge may be required by the project.
PMBOK Guide
PMBOK Guide
Risk
The rapid growth in the use of projects has made the traditional ways of creating an 
interface between projects and the parent organization inadequate in many cases. 
Pure project organizations, unless very large, are too costly and lack technological 
depth. Functionally organized projects lack technological breadth, are slow to act, and 
have other faults. Linking the two forms into matrix organized projects combines the 
strengths of the traditional forms and avoids most of their weaknesses. It has severe 
problems of its own, however, caused by split responsibility for the project with the 
PM controlling what must be done and when, and the functional manager control-
ling who will do things and how. It also violates the principle of Unity of Command. 
Some organizations operate all three types of projects simultaneously. Project man-
agement offices may be set up to achieve consistent project administration when the 
firm is operating a number of differently organized projects. Project maturity measure-
ment models have been developed to measure the degree to which individual organi-
zations have mastered state‐of‐the‐art project management practices.

60  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
2.	 Senior members of the project team must be politically sensitive. It is rarely possible to 
complete a project of reasonable size and complexity without incurring problems that 
require aid from the upper echelons of executive row; that is, from a project sponsor (Pinto 
and Slevin, 1989). Getting such aid depends on the PM’s ability to proceed without 
threatening, insulting, or bullying important people in the functional groups. To ensure 
cooperation and assistance, there is a delicate balance of power that must be maintained 
between the project and the functional departments, and between one project and others.
3.	 Members of the project team need a strong problem orientation. This characteristic will 
be explained in more detail shortly. For now, take the phrase to mean that the team’s 
members should be concerned about solving any problems posed by the project, not 
merely about those subproblems that concern their individual academic or techni-
cal training.
4.	 Team members need a strong goal orientation. Projects are uncomfortable environ-
ments for people with a 9‐to‐5 view of work. In particular, neither project teams nor 
PMs can succeed if their focus is on activity rather than results. On the other hand, 
the project will not be successful if the project team dies from overwork. One project 
team member of our acquaintance was bemoaning a series of 60+ hour weeks. “They 
told me that I would work about 50 hours in an average week. I’ve been on this pro-
ject almost 18 months, and we haven’t had an average week yet.”
5.	 Project workers need high self‐esteem. Project members who hide mistakes and fail-
ure are disasters waiting to happen. Team members must be sufficiently self‐­ 
confident and have sufficient trust in their fellow team members (Lencioni, 2002) 
that they can immediately acknowledge their own errors and point out problems 
caused by the errors of others. PMs should note that “shooting the messenger” who 
brings bad news will instantly stop the flow of negative information. The result is that 
the golden rule we stated above, “Never let the boss be surprised,” will be violated, too.
Gathering such a team is a nontrivial job. If it is done well, motivation of team mem-
bers is rarely a problem. Remember that the functional managers control the pay and 
promotion of project workers in a matrix system. Fortunately, it has been shown that a 
sense of achievement, growth, learning, responsibility, and the work itself are strong 
motivators, and the project is a high‐visibility source of these.*
In a large project, the PM will have a number of “assistant managers” on the project 
team—a senior engineer, field manager, contract administrator, support services man-
ager, and several other individuals who can help the PM determine the project’s needs 
for staff and resources. (In the next chapter we will see precisely how the staff and 
resource requirements are determined.) They can also help to manage the project’s 
schedule, budget, and technical performance. For a large project, such assistance is nec-
essary. For a small project the PM will probably play all these roles.
As a final thought, the PM should expect conflict with the creation of a new project 
team where the individual team members do not know one another. To help navigate the 
conflict, it is helpful if the PM understands the way teams tend to develop. One of the 
more popular classic models of team development is one referred to as the “Tuckman 
ladder” (Tuckman, 1965), which suggests that teams progress through the following four 
development phases:
• Forming. Team members come together for the first time and begin learning 
about their roles and responsibilities.
*Herzberg (1968) is a classic article and still an outstanding discussion of motivation in the work place. It is one 
of the Harvard Business Review’s most widely reprinted articles. It is still available from the HBR.

2.6 THE PROJECT TEAM
•  61
• Storming. Work on the project begins, but initially the team members tend to 
work independently, which often leads to conflict.
• Norming. In this phase, the team members begin to establish team norms and 
team cohesiveness develops. Individual team members reconcile their behaviors 
to support the overall team and trust develops.
• Performing. With norms and trust established, teams function as a cohesive unit 
focused on accomplishing the goals of the project.
In addition to these four phases, a fifth phase, “adjourning,” has also been proposed. 
In the adjourning phase, the work of the project is completed and the team members 
return to their functional departments or move on to another project. While teams tend 
to progress through these phases in the order listed above, it is also important to point 
out that they can get stuck in one or more of the phases, backtrack to an earlier phase, or 
never make it to the later phases. Likewise, if the team members have worked together 
previously, it is possible that one or more phases may be skipped.
Matrix Team Problems
The smaller the project, the more likely it is to be organized as a weak (functional) 
matrix. In such projects the PM may have no direct reports. The PM contracts with 
functional managers for capacity, but often knows most of the individuals who are doing 
the actual work. Thus, the PM can usually communicate directly with project workers, 
even in the weakest of matrices. In the case of small projects, this ability to communicate 
directly with members of the project team (even though they are not officially a team at 
all) is important. It is the only way the PM can keep the project a coordinated effort and 
on course. Again, the ability to communicate with and direct functional specialists work-
ing on project tasks is dependent on the PM’s ability to negotiate with the functional 
manager. Actually, the negotiation is not too difficult because the PM is tacitly taking 
responsibility to direct the workers’ performance. If the PM is getting good performance 
from the functional specialists, this relieves the functional manager of some responsibil-
ity and accountability.
For matrix projects, it is particularly important to maintain good morale for the few 
project workers that may be assigned to the team. A project “war room” is helpful, ­serving 
as a control center, conference room for project meetings, a coffee shop, technical discus-
sion center, and crisis center. Earlier in this chapter, we noted the use of a project staff 
office with a purpose of supplying the project with administrative assistance. The war 
room may also provide such a purpose, but its ability to serve as a focal point for project 
team activity and heighten the project’s esprit de corps makes a significant contribution to 
matrix projects. The Walt Disney Co. sets up division‐wide project war rooms and 
expects the PMs, the functional managers, and the division executive team to use the 
war room to stay abreast of project timelines and to identify areas of organizational 
impact on the project or vice versa.
A number of factors make matrix project teams unusually difficult to manage. Such 
teams are seen by their members to be temporary, so the tendency to develop team loy-
alty is limited. The technical specialists working on the teams are often perfectionists 
and have a strong desire to keep tinkering with a project deliverable that already meets 
the client’s specifications and expectations. While project managers usually blame the 
client for scope creep, it is not uncommon for the project team to be the primary cause. 
The principal source of management problems for the PM, however, is the level of 
­conflict in project teams.

62  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
Intrateam Conflict
Conflict is no stranger to any workplace, but matrix projects seem to have far more than 
their share. The causes are many, but more than three decades ago Thamhain and 
Wilemon (1975) published their outstanding research on conflict in projects and this 
work remains absolutely relevant today. They identified several different sources of con-
flict and noted that the sources seemed to differ when the project was in different stages 
of its life cycle. They also made some recommendations for dealing with the conflicts. 
These are shown in Table 2-1. Table 2-2 shows the relative frequency of the various 
sources of conflict, and Figure 2-9 illustrates them.
Table 2.1  Major Sources of Conflict During Various Stages of the Project Life Cycle*
Major Conflict Source and Recommendations  
for Minimizing Dysfunctional Consequences
Life Cycle Phase
Conflict Source
Recommendations
Project formation
Priorities
Clearly defined plans. Joint decision making and/or consultation with affected 
parties. Stress importance of project to organization goals.
Procedures
Develop detailed administrative operating procedures to be followed in conduct 
of project.
Secure approval from key administrators.
Develop statement of understanding or charter.
Schedules
Develop schedule commitments in advance of actual project commencement.
Forecast other departmental priorities and possible impact on project.
Buildup phase
Priorities
Provide effective feedback to support areas on forecasted project plans and 
needs via status review sessions.
Schedules
Schedule work breakdown packages (project subunits) in cooperation with 
functional groups.
Procedures
Contingency planning on key administrative issues.
Main program
Schedules
Continually monitor work in progress.
Communicate results to affected parties.
Forecast problems and consider alternatives.
Identify potential trouble spots needing closer surveillance.
Technical
Early resolution of technical problems.
Communication of schedule and budget restraints to technical personnel.
Emphasize adequate, early technical testing.
Facilitate early agreement on final designs.
Labor
Forecast and communicate staffing requirements early.
Establish staffing requirements and priorities with functional and staff groups.
Phaseout
Schedules
Close schedule monitoring in project life cycle.
Consider reallocation of available staff to critical project areas prone to 
schedule slippages.
Attain prompt resolution of technical issues which may affect schedules.
Personality 
and labor
Develop plans for reallocation of people upon project completion. Maintain 
harmonious working relationships with project team and support groups. Try 
to loosen‐up high‐stress environment.
*Source: Thamhain and Wilemon, 1975.

2.6 THE PROJECT TEAM
•  63
Conﬂict intensity 
Schedules
Conﬂict over priorities
Conﬂict over labor
Conﬂict over tech trade-offs
Conﬂict over procedures
Conﬂict over cost
Personality conﬂict
Procedures
Personality
Schedules
Priorities
Labor
Technical
Program life
Finish
Start
0.4
0.3
Average
total conﬂict
0.2
At the project
formation
At the early
program phases
During the main
program
Toward the end
of the program
Time
0.1
0
Procedures
Cost
Personality
Schedules
Priorities
Labor
Technical
Procedures
Cost
Personality
Schedules
Priorities
Labor
Technical
Cost
Figure 2-9   
Conflict intensity 
over the project 
life cycle
Source: Thamhaun  
et al., 1975.
A reading of the recommendations Thamhain and Wilemon made for reducing or 
preventing these conflicts reveals four common threads: (1) many of the recommenda-
tions feature careful project planning; (2) many are based on the practice of participative 
management; (3) many require interaction and negotiation between the PM and the 
functional departments; and (4) there is great emphasis on communication between the 
PM and all parties‐at‐interest to the project. Our next chapter is devoted to careful pro-
ject planning, and we have already discussed the need for negotiation and communica-
tion. Participative management is a requirement for proper project planning, and it will 
be covered in the project‐planning chapter. We will continue to mention, if not belabor, 
these four themes throughout the rest of this book.
Certain aspects of the data in Table 2-2 seem significant. Schedules are a major 
source of conflict throughout the project’s life. Priorities are a close second, particularly 
in the first two stages of the project’s life. Because the distinction between the project’s 
Table 2.2  Number of Conflicts During a Sample Project*
Phase of Project
Sources of Conflict
Start
Early
Main
Late
Total
Project priorities
27
35
24
16
102
Admin. procedures
26
27
15
  9
  77
Technical trade‐offs
18
26
31
11
  86
Staffing
21
25
25
17
  88
Support cost estimates
20
13
15
11
  59
Schedules
25
29
36
30
120
Personalities
16
19
15
17
  67
Total
153
174
161
111
111
*Source: Thamhain and Wilemon, 1975.

64  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
“start” and the “early” phase of its life is probably unclear, we can lump them together for 
the observation that a lion’s share of the conflicts will come near the beginning of the 
project—and the PM must be prepared to deal with them.
One should not get the idea that conflict in the project team is all bad. Intrateam 
conflict often enhances team creativity. Out of arguments about competing good ideas 
come better ideas. For this to happen, however, parties to the conflict must be more 
interested in solving the problems at hand than they are about winning a victory for 
“their side.” As we have already noted, some people are discipline oriented and others are 
problem oriented. Discipline‐oriented individuals form what one writer calls a “NOT” 
(Name‐Only Team), which he defines as a group of individuals working independently 
(Dewhurst, 1998). The intrateam conflict caused by such people is usually perceived to 
be “interpersonal” or “political.” If such conflicts are the major force in project decisions, 
the project is apt to have problems. We strongly recommend Lencioni’s The Five 
Dysfunctions of a Team (2002) to the reader’s attention and we again emphasize our ear-
lier advice to the PM to recruit problem‐oriented team members whenever possible.
A great deal has been written about conflict resolution as well as about negotiation 
(see Afzalur, 1992, for example). Those two literatures have much in common. Both 
make it clear that the key to resolving conflict lies in the mediator’s ability to transform 
win‐lose situations into win‐win solutions. This is also true when the mediator (usually 
the PM) is one of the parties to the conflict. One of the most important things a PM can 
do is develop sensitivity for conflict and then intervene early, before the conflict has 
hardened into hostility. Conflict avoidance, while it may appear to provide short‐term 
comfort, is never a useful course of action for the PM.
Interpersonal conflict, unfortunately, never stays interpersonal. It impacts on the rela-
tionships between various groups and spills over to affect the ways in which these groups 
cooperate or fail to cooperate with each other. This, in turn, affects the ability of the PM 
to keep the project on course. The most difficult aspect of managing a project is the coor-
dination and integration of its various elements so that they meet their joint goals of per-
formance, schedule, and budget in such a way that the total project meets its goals.
When the project is complex, involving input and work from several departments or 
groups and possibly other contributions from several outside contractors, the intricate 
process of coordinating the work and timing of these inputs is difficult. When the groups 
are in conflict, the process is almost impossible. The task of bringing the work of all these 
groups together to make a harmonious whole is called integration management.
Integration Management
The problems of integration management are easily understood if we consider the tradi-
tional way in which products and services were designed and brought to market. The 
different groups involved in a product design project, for example, did not work together. 
They worked independently and sequentially. First, the product design group developed 
a design that seemed to meet the marketing group’s specifications. This design was sub-
mitted to top management for approval, and possible redesign if needed. When the 
design was accepted, a prototype was constructed. The project was then transferred to 
the engineering group who tested the prototype product for quality, reliability, manufac-
turability, and possibly altered the design to use less‐expensive materials. There were 
certain to be changes, and all changes were submitted for management approval, at 
which time a new prototype was constructed and subjected to testing.
After qualifying on all tests, the project moved to the manufacturing group who 
proceeded to plan the actual steps required to manufacture the product in the most 
cost‐effective way, given the machinery and equipment currently available. Again, 

2.6 THE PROJECT TEAM
•  65
changes were submitted for approval, often to speed up or improve the production pro-
cess. If the project proceeded to the production stage, distribution channels had to be 
arranged, packaging designed and produced, marketing strategies developed, advertising 
campaigns developed, and the product shipped to the distribution centers for sale 
and delivery.
Conflicts between the various functional groups were legendary. Each group tried to 
optimize its contribution, which led to suboptimization for the system. This process 
worked reasonably well, if haltingly, in the past, but was extremely time consuming and 
expensive—conditions not tolerable in today’s competitive environment.
To solve these problems, the entire project was changed from one that proceeded 
sequentially through each of the steps from design to sale, to one where the steps were 
carried out concurrently. Parallel tasking (a.k.a. fast tracking) was invented as a response 
to the time and cost associated with the traditional “waterfall” method. Parallel tasking 
has been widely used for a great diversity of projects. For example, parallel tasking was 
used in the design and marketing of services by a social agency; to design, manufacture, 
and distribute ladies’ sportswear; to design, plan, and carry out a campaign for political 
office; to plan the maintenance schedule for a public utility; and to design and construct 
the space shuttle. Parallel tasking has been generally adopted as the proper way to tackle 
problems that are multidisciplinary in nature.
Monte Peterson, CEO of Thermos (now a subsidiary of Nippon Sanso, Inc.), formed 
a flexible interdisciplinary team with representatives from marketing, manufacturing, 
engineering, and finance to develop a new grill that would stand out in the market. The 
interdisciplinary approach was used primarily to reduce the time required to complete 
the project. For example, by including the manufacturing people in the design process 
from the beginning, the team avoided some costly mistakes later on. Initially, for 
instance, the designers opted for tapered legs on the grill. However, after manufacturing 
explained at an early meeting that tapered legs would have to be custom made, the 
design engineers changed the design to straight legs. Under the previous system, manu-
facturing would not have known about the problem with the tapered legs until the 
design was completed. The output of this project was a revolutionary electric grill that 
used a new technology to give food a barbecued taste. The grill won four design awards 
in its first year.
If the team members are problem oriented, parallel tasking works very well. Some 
interesting research has shown that when problem‐oriented people with different back-
grounds enter conflicts about how to deal with a problem, they often produce very crea-
tive solutions—and without damage to project quality, cost, or schedule. The group itself 
typically resolves the conflicts arising in such cases when they recognize that they have 
solved the problem. For some highly effective teams, conflict becomes a favored style of 
problem solving (Lencioni, 2002).
When team members are both argumentative and oriented to their own discipline, 
parallel tasking appears to be no improvement on any other method of problem solving. 
The PM will have to use negotiation, persuasion, and conflict resolution skills, but there 
is no guarantee that these will be successful. Even when intragroup conflict is not a seri-
ous issue with discipline‐oriented team members, they often adopt suboptimization as 
the preferred approach to problem solving. They argue that experts should be allowed to 
exercise their specialties without interference from those who lack expertise. Successfully 
involving transfunctional teams in project planning requires that some structure be 
imposed on the planning process. The most common structure is simply to define the 
group’s responsibility as being the development of a plan to accomplish whatever is 
established as the project objective. There is considerable evidence, however, that this 
will not prevent conflict on complex projects.

66  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
REVIEW QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Why is it important for the project manager to adopt 
the systems approach?
	 2.	 What is micromanagement?
	 3.	 What is a virtual project?
	 4.	 Explain what is meant by the project manager having 
credibility.
	 5.	 Contrast pure project organizations, functional pro-
ject organizations, and matrix project organizations.
	 6.	 What are the advantages and disadvantages of a 
matrix project organization?
	 7.	 What is a project management office (PMO) and 
what purpose does it serve?
	 8.	 What are the important characteristics of project 
team members?
	 9.	 Explain why the systems approach is necessary to 
manage projects.
	10.	 Explain the meaning and implications of “projectitis.”
	11.	 Review the chapter and make a list of all the advan-
tages and disadvantages of matrix project organiza-
tion you can find.
	12.	 What is meant by “micromanagement?” Why is it 
such a managerial sin?
	13.	 List five reasons to organize a new product develop-
ment project as a functionally organized project in 
the parent firm’s Marketing department.
	14.	 List five reasons to organize a new product develop-
ment project as a transdisciplinary, matrix organized  
project.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
	 1.	 The chapter mentions that regular functional manag-
ers are moving from their classic authoritarian style 
to a facilitative, participatory style because it is more 
effective. Do you think it took managers 200 years to 
learn that, or is something else driving the change?
	 2.	 There is danger in letting the client “visit” the pro-
ject operation too frequently, not the least of which is 
“scope creep” or informal change to the project’s per-
formance specifications. What other dangers might 
arise? How might the danger of scope creep be moni-
tored and controlled?
	 3.	 How should a PM decide which problems (or poten-
tial problems) deserve being reported to management 
and which are not worth the trouble when attempt-
ing to “never surprise the boss?”
	 4.	 Discuss how you would go about getting competent 
staff from a functional department.
	 5.	 Another trade‐off PMs have to make is between team 
process and progress—the purpose being to keep the 
peace, give the team an occasional rest, protect the 
larger organization or other projects, and so on. What 
might happen if the PM does not anticipate these 
trade‐offs?
	 6.	 Usually projects involving high levels of technologi-
cal uncertainty are quite complex. Yet Shenhar says 
to use a flexible management style with high‐­ 
uncertainty projects, but a formal style with complex 
projects. Explain.
	 7.	 In many project‐oriented organizations, even routine 
processes are treated as projects. Why do you think 
this happened? How is it accomplished?
	 8.	 A matrix organization is difficult to manage all by 
itself. What do you think the problems would be in 
managing mixed organizational systems?
A PM should strive to acquire project team members who are technically compe-
tent, politically sensitive, problem‐ and goal oriented, and have high self‐esteem. On 
small projects with a matrix organization, the project may be supplied with functional 
capacity, rather than full‐ or part‐time people to do the work. It is important for the 
PM to establish good communication with the people doing the work. A project 
war room will help with coordination and morale. Intrateam conflict is common on 
matrix projects. Different sources of conflict occur at differing stages of the project’s 
life cycle. Careful planning, participative management, win‐win negotiation with 
functional groups, and open communication between all parties will help resolve 
conflict. When managing a transfunctional team that requires integrated activities, 
parallel tasking can reduce both the time and cost of a project and reduce mistakes.

incidents for discussion
•  67
	 9.	 Can you think of any circumstances where deferring 
conflict might be a wise course of action?
	10.	 Give an example of a case in which project manage-
ment could be important in your personal life. 
Explain why, as well as how and why you might 
organize such a project.
	11.	 Explain the reasons for the growth and decay of each 
source of conflict in Figure  2-9, and for the Total  
as well.
	12.	 What are the potential ramifications of not utilizing 
integration management techniques or parallel task-
ing while planning and implementing a project?
	13.	 Can you think of any other desirable characteristics 
for team members than those listed in Section 2.6?
	14.	 Exactly why were projects in the pharmaceutical 
company mentioned in Section 2.5 in the PMO sub-
section always late and over budget?
	15.	 Why would the members of a “NOT” work indepen-
dently if they were members of a designated team? 
What does “independently” mean in this context?
	16.	 Why do so many “self‐directed teams” perform 
poorly? What can be done to improve their 
performance?
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
Samuel’s Approach to Project Management
Joe Samuel was once again asked to be a project manager 
on a large project. This was the fourth time in the last  
14 months, and he was glad to add this type of work experi-
ence to his résumé, but he dreaded the interpersonal rela-
tionship issues that always came up on projects. He felt like 
he was the project’s babysitter, always checking on progress, 
making sure everyone on the team was happy and under-
stood each other’s roles, handing out assignments, and so 
on. Joe then remembered an article he had recently read 
about “tried and true project management practices.” He 
thought “tried and true” had to be more managerially com-
fortable than his past experiences. He decided to accept the 
new project so that he could try out the new ideas.
The project Joe accepted was to make a decision on 
whether or not to close one of the company’s distribution 
centers in order to improve responsiveness of their supply 
chain. Joe had been a manager of a supply chain service, so 
he felt very qualified to lead this effort. He defined the scope 
and deliverables of the project and detailed all of the major 
tasks of the project as well as most of the detail level steps in 
the project plan. At the first project team meeting, Joe felt 
very comfortable about the control and direction of the pro-
ject, much more than any of the previous projects he had 
managed. He had specifically defined objectives and tasks 
for each member of the project team. He even determined 
completion dates for each task. He wrote individual “con-
tracts” for each team member to sign as an indication of 
their commitment to completion of the designated tasks by 
the assigned schedule dates. The meeting went smoothly, 
with almost no comments or questions from the project 
team. Everyone picked up a copy of their “contract” and 
went off to work on the project. Joe felt great and was pleased 
with the success of his new approach to project management.
Questions: How do you think Joe will feel six weeks after 
the project is underway? Compare his new approach to pro-
ject management with his previous approach.
HardTech, Inc.
HardTech Inc. is a 2‐year‐old electronics firm that was cre-
ated by three friends who worked together as senior engi-
neers at a Fortune 500 electronics firm; Jake Tyler, Caroline 
Ryan, and Mike Preston. The three developed a high‐
speed‐processing chip that was designed for handheld 
scanning devices. Their startup became successful when 
they won a major contract from a large software company 
that wanted to integrate the chip into a handheld scanner 
for inventory management.
HardTech’s three founders structured their firm as a tra-
ditional functional organizational structure, as that was 
the environment they came from. After 2 years, in addi-
tion to their production people, HardTech employed 17 
development engineers including a manager, four design-
ers with a design department manager, three people in the 
sales and marketing department, and two administrative 
personnel as support.
Tyler, Ryan, and Preston now felt ready to take their 
“show on the road.” They wanted to launch three major 
initiatives: (1) to develop a chip that would work with gro-
cery store scanners; (2) to get into the hospital point‐of‐
care scanner market; and (3) to upgrade the chip they 
were using for their inventory management contract while 
maintaining their current commitments.
Tyler and Preston thought that the current organiza-
tional structure could handle the new initiatives. They 
wanted to assign each phase of the new development pro-
jects to a specific department. Ryan felt that the tradi-
tional approach would not support the need to be quick to 
market and that the current contract would always be the 
priority to each of the department managers. She wanted 
to set up project teams reporting directly to HardTech’s 
three senior officers.
Questions: What organizational structure would you 
­recommend HardTech use to complete the three initiatives 
outlined? Why?

68  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility—2
A few days after the executive team meeting, Fred decided 
that it was time to set up the committee that would take 
responsibility for what he called the ALF project. He 
quickly decided to include the following staff at the 
launch meeting:
• Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
• Vice President of Business Development and Marketing
• Rehab Services Medical Director
• Construction Project Manager for capital ­facilities  
projects
• Chief Operations Officer (COO) (nursing, facilities, 
food services, and housekeeping)
• Director of Information Services
• Director of Support Services (central supply, purchas-
ing, and security)
• Two members of the Board of Trustees, one with con-
struction experience and the other a probable electee to 
the city council.
Even though the department directors from Support 
Services and Information Services would not be involved 
until later, Fred decided to include them from the begin-
ning. Fred knew some members of his team had a tendency 
to become obstacles to progress if they felt left out. Fred 
named the group the ALF Project Steering Committee 
and held the first meeting. Fred presented his vision for 
the facility. He told the group that he personally would be 
managing this project.
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Comment on the pros and cons of the CEO,  
Dr. Splient, as the Project Manager.
	2.  	Who is the funder of the project? Who is the 
sponsor? Who is the project owner?
	3.  	List all the potential stakeholders in this project.
	4.  	This initiative consists of a variety of separate 
efforts from a lot of different groups and individuals. 
What are the advantages and disadvantages of struc-
turing it as a program consisting of a set of separate 
projects? Would you recommend this, under the 
circumstances?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
The Quantum Bank
Quantum Bank Inc. is a regional bank with branches 
throughout the southeast. In early 20X6 the bank launched 
an app for mobile devices that provided its customers with 
the ability to check account balances, obtain information 
about the bank’s various services, obtain contact informa-
tion and email questions, and link to a variety of other useful 
sources of information. Given the app’s tremendous success, 
competition from both traditional and nontraditional 
organizations, and the desire to expand its presence beyond 
its current geographical area, Quantum decided to signifi-
cantly enhance its app. More specifically, Quantum would 
like to enhance its app to include a mobile bill payment ser-
vice, allow customers to apply for credit cards and loans, 
open accounts, and manage their investment portfolios.
Vice‐President of Information Systems, Stacey Thomas, 
has been charged with overseeing the project. One of her 
first tasks was to select the project manager. Because of the 
strategic importance of the project, she had a strong pref-
erence for staffing the project internally as opposed to 
employing the services of one of the many consulting firms 
available that specialize in these types of projects. After 
developing a list of ten or so possible candidates to serve as 
project manager, she was finally able to pare the list down 
to the two finalists described below.
Bill Fence Bill joined Quantum in 20X0 after graduating 
from a well‐respected small private school with a degree in 
computer science. His first assignment as a member of the 
bank’s help desk provided him with exposure to a variety of 
areas in the bank. He quickly gained a reputation for being 
able to solve difficult technical problems. In addition, users 
of the bank’s various computer systems were often heard 
commenting on how service-oriented Bill was and on his 
ability to describe concepts in nontechnical terms.

CASE
•  69
Because of both his technical knowledge related to 
hardware and his ability to program, Bill was selected to 
develop the bank’s first mobile app in 20X5. Bill worked 
alone on this project and had frequent meetings with one 
of the bank’s directors of Information Systems, who super-
vised the project. Initially, the director did most of the 
design work and Bill did the programming. Bill often pro-
posed alternative ways for incorporating key features into 
the app, and the director would choose among the options 
Bill identified. Toward the end of the development pro-
ject, Bill began to take a more active role in proposing 
features to include in the app.
The development project was largely completed on 
time and on budget considering the changes in the scope 
of the project that were made as the project progressed. 
Several suggestions that would have extended the app’s 
functionality were tabled to be considered as updates after 
the app was officially launched.
In his current position as Webmaster, Bill is in charge 
of maintaining the bank’s website. Although Bill’s staff 
now includes a programmer and a hardware specialist, his 
approach is very much hands on, staying involved with all 
technical aspects of the site. Bill has developed an excel-
lent rapport with his two direct reports, and they have 
emulated much of Bill’s style, including working long 
hours and even competing to see who can accumulate the 
largest number of soft drink cans, empty candy wrappers, 
and computer printouts on one desk.
Andy Dover  Andy Dover also joined the bank in 20X0 
after completing his MBA at a large public university. 
Andy entered graduate school immediately after graduat-
ing with a Civil Engineering undergraduate degree at the 
same university.
Andy spent his first year rotating between various 
departments in the bank’s Leadership Development 
Program. After completing this training, Andy requested 
permanent assignment to the operations group. His initial 
assignment was to oversee the check encoding operation. 
After implementing several process improvements, Andy 
was eventually promoted to senior operations analyst and 
worked on several large process improvement projects.
Performance evaluations of Andy suggested that one of 
his greatest strengths was his ability to step back from a 
problem and understand how the various issues were inter-
related. His evaluations further recognized him as “a highly 
motivated self‐starter with very good organizational skills.” 
His organizational skills also helped him effectively pre-
sent information, and he was often requested to make 
short presentations related to a particular project’s status 
to senior management.
By almost all accounts, Andy was considered highly 
competent, completing assigned tasks in a timely fashion 
with little or no direct supervision. At the same time, Andy 
always made it a point to communicate regularly with other 
project team members to keep them abreast of his progress. 
He was often passionate about his ideas and was typically 
able to get buy‐in from other team members for his ideas.
Andy is almost always seen carrying his planner. As an 
avid stock investor, he makes it a point to stay abreast of 
trends in technology. He has a basic understanding of how 
mobile computing works and knows all the important buz-
zwords. While he has fooled around and created a couple 
of apps, he knows very little about more sophisticated pro-
gramming languages such as Java, and knows even less 
about computer hardware beyond its basic purpose.
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Who would you recommend Stacey Thomas select to 
serve as project manager? Why?
	2.  	How would you recommend this project be ­organi­zed? 
Functional project? Pure project? Matrix? Why?
	3.  	Do you agree with Ms. Thomas’s decision that 
the project should be staffed internally? What are the 
major advantages of staffing the project with 
Quantum employees? Are there any advantages to 
utilizing the services of an outside consulting firm?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Southern Care Hospital
Southern Care Hospital (SCH) is a large, nonprofit 
regional hospital located in the southeast. Several years 
ago it contracted with the healthcare division of a major 
medical equipment supplier to provide Six Sigma training 
to a group of its hospital employees. Since that time, 
numerous waves of Green Belts and Black Belts have been 
trained including people across all job ranks and repre-
senting most departments. Green Belt training entails two 

70  •
Chapter 2 / The Manager, the Organization, and the Team
weeks of formal in‐class training while Black Belt training 
entails the two weeks of Green Belt training plus 
an ­additional four weeks of training. Both Green Belt and 
Black Belt training require the completion of a Six Sigma 
project in addition to the in‐class training.
One challenge currently facing SCH is significant lev-
els of dissatisfaction from the medical staff regarding the 
three‐day lead time it currently averages the nuclear medi-
cine department to turn around the results of stress tests. 
In this case, “lead time” is defined as the elapsed time from 
when the stress test is ordered by a physician until the time 
when a radiologist from the nuclear medicine department 
signs off on the test results. Stress tests are used to deter-
mine the amount of stress the heart can endure before 
either an abnormal rhythm or insufficient flow of blood to 
the heart develops. Typically, the stress test is administered 
by increasing the level of difficulty as a patient walks on a 
treadmill or rides a stationary bike. During the stress test 
vital statistics are collected and monitored, including the 
patient’s heart rate and blood pressure. Discussions with 
the medical staff indicate that they desire maximum lead 
times of a day and a half.
You have been selected to manage a Six Sigma project 
focusing on reducing the lead times associated with receiv-
ing the results of stress tests. Based on your past experience 
with similar projects, you have identified 20 major activi-
ties. SSH’s steering committee has further granted you per-
mission to select up to four team members from the 
available resource pool to staff the project.
Table 1 provides relevant background information on 
the 12 people currently available for assignment to a Six 
Sigma project. All resources are available to the project on 
a part‐time basis and therefore support Six Sigma projects 
in addition to performing their normal job assignments. 
The table lists the employee name, job title, level of edu-
cation, years of work experience, Six Sigma rank (i.e., 
Green Belt or Black Belt), the number of Six Sigma pro-
jects the employee has worked on, the average amount of 
savings that resulted from the Six Sigma projects the 
employee has worked on, the employee’s hourly rate, and 
the percent of time the employee is available. The hourly 
rate represents what will be charged against your project’s 
budget for work performed by a given employee. The per-
cent available is based on a 40‐hour work week. Therefore, 
the number of hours you can utilize a resource during a 
given week cannot exceed the available percentage times 
40. To illustrate, Anna Frost can complete at most 8 hours 
(20%X40 hours/week) of project work per week.
To facilitate project planning, SSH uses an advanced 
Six Sigma database program to track the progress and per-
formance of all ongoing projects. Furthermore, the HR 
department has developed a process to estimate the profi-
ciency of employees completing various planned tasks in 
future Six Sigma projects based on the historical data con-
tained in the database. The proficiency numbers can range 
between zero and 100, with a zero indicating no ability to 
perform the task and 100 implying extensive expertise and 
experience performing the task. Table 2 summarizes this 
information for the 12 employees listed in Table 1 for the 
20 project tasks initially identified. Past experience with 
these estimates indicates they are fairly accurate over an 
entire project but that employee performance typically 
varies ±3 percentage points within a given week. Thus, an 
employee with an estimated proficiency of 90 on a particu-
lar task would be expected to perform in the 87–93 range 
on the task in any given week.
A final comment regarding the available resources is in 
order. Specifically, past experience with projects indicates 
that conflict occasionally arises when more than one 
Black Belt is assigned to the same task. When such con-
flict does arise, it tends to negatively impact both the time 
required to complete tasks that the Black Belts are jointly 
assigned to as well as the overall quality of the work 
performed.
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Explain how you would execute your roles as pro-
ject manager of this project.
	2.  	As the project manager, how would you manage 
trade‐offs?
	3.  	How would you recommend this project be organ-
ized? Functional project? Pure project? Matrix? Why?
	4.  	What criteria would you use in selecting resources 
to serve on your project team?
	5.  	From the available resource pool, who would you 
select to be on your project team? Why?

BIBLIOGRAPHY
•  71
Table 1  Background Information on Available Project Resources
First 
Name
Last 
Name
Job Title
Education
Years of 
Experience
SS 
Rank
SS 
Experience
# of SS 
Projects
Avg Proj 
Savings
Hourly 
Rate
Availability
Anna
Frost
Radiology 
Practice 
Administrator
MPH
11
GB
1
1
$50,000
$58
20%
Edward
Young
Radiology Office 
Administrator
B
7
GB
1
1
$62,000
$36
30%
Hazel
Vaughn
Radiology 
Supervisor
B
6
GB
2
1
$74,000
$40
30%
Howard
Payne
Radiology 
Supervisor
B
4
GB
1.5
1
$68,000
$30
35%
Joyce
Snyder
Radiology Info 
Sys Mgr
B
5
GB
3
3
$112,000
$35
50%
Ken
Inman
Radiology DB 
Mgr
B
3
GB
1.5
2
$95,000
$25
50%
Nick
Rogers
Adm of Special 
Projects
B
5
BB
3
6
$211,000
$33
50%
Peggy
Moss
Radiology Senior 
Bus Analyst
MBA
6
BB
3
6
$240,000
$40
50%
Peter
Foltz
Radiology Bus 
Analyst
B
3
GB
2
5
$187,000
$30
50%
Roberta
Jackson
Senior Nurse 
Manager
B
15
GB
1
1
$75,000
$42
20%
Susan
Osborne
Staff Nurse
B
8
GB
1
1
$35,000
$35
50%
Stephanie
Thomas
Staff Nurse
B
4
GB
1
1
$42,000
$30
50%
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Afzalur, R. M. Managing Conflict in Organizations. 
West‐port, CT: Praeger, 1992.
Block, T. R. “The Project Office Phenomenon.” PM 
Network, March 1998.
Bolles, D. “The Project Support Office.” PM Network, 
March 1998.
Bradberry, T., and J. Greaves. Emotional Intelligence 2.0. 
San Diego: TalentSmart, 2009.
Churchman, C. W. The Systems Approach, rev. ed.,  
New York: Delta, 1979.
Conger, J. A. “The Necessary Art of Persuasion.” Harvard 
Business Review, May–June 1998.
Dewhurst, H. D. “Project Teams: What Have We 
Learned?” PM Network, April 1998.
Flynn, J. “E‐Mail, Cellphones and Frequent‐Flier Miles 
Let ‘Virtual’ Expats Work Abroad but Live at Home.” 
The Wall Street Journal, New York: Dow Jones, October 25,  
1999.
Gagnon, R. J., and S. J. Mantel, Jr. “Strategies and 
Performance 
Improvement 
for 
Computer‐Assisted 
Design.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
November 1987.
Gale, S. F. “The Big Time.” PM Network, February 2009.
Giffin, S. D. “A Taxonomy of Internet Applications for 
Project Management Communication.” Project Manage­
ment Journal, December 2002. (This article provides an 
interesting overview related to the ways that the Inter­
net  can be used to enhance project management 
communication.)

Table 2  Estimated Resource Proficiencies
Resources
Task
Anna 
Frost
Edward 
Young
Hazel 
Vaughn
Howard 
Payne
Joyce 
Snyder
Ken 
Inman
Nick 
Rogers
Peggy 
Moss
Peter 
Foltz
Roberta 
Jackson
Susan 
Osborne
Stephanie 
Thomas
Define Phase
Establish Project Goals
98
91
86
83
90
83
92
95
91
85
82
78
Develop Project Charter
88
86
86
84
93
88
93
96
90
82
79
76
VOC Study
84
84
87
83
92
89
94
96
92
82
83
81
Develop CTQ Tree
75
75
85
80
88
94
94
97
95
78
78
78
Develop Process Map
78
78
85
80
90
88
92
94
96
75
76
74
Stakeholder Analysis
95
90
90
88
90
87
93
92
90
78
77
79
Measure Phase
Collect Process Data
70
80
85
82
90
88
92
90
95
75
77
78
Develop Run Chart
75
80
84
82
86
88
92
94
90
76
75
77
Calculate DPMO
75
78
80
78
85
87
96
94
90
72
72
72
Revise Project Charter
93
90
92
91
92
88
93
95
90
85
82
80
Analyze Phase
Cause and Effect Diagram
85
88
92
90
75
72
80
87
85
92
97
93
Summary Statistics and Test
65
65
68
65
70
72
85
88
80
64
63
65
Pareto Analysis
80
84
90
88
90
92
98
98
96
78
78
78
Regression Analysis
65
70
75
67
78
80
90
92
87
63
60
61
Improve Phase
Develop Payoff Matrix
96
90
90
88
91
85
92
92
90
83
80
77
Identify Improvements
88
86
90
90
82
80
88
90
88
93
96
93
Develop Training Material
80
85
95
90
91
88
90
86
88
83
75
72
Control
Develop Checklists
80
88
96
92
93
80
92
88
88
87
68
73
Develop SPC Charts
65
78
82
80
80
84
95
95
93
63
61
61
Develop Status Reports
90
95
92
93
87
80
88
89
86
86
76
72
72

BIBLIOGRAPHY
•  73
Goleman, D. Working with Emotional Intelligence. NY: 
Bantam Books, 1998.
Goldratt, E. M., and J. Cox. The Goal, 2nd rev. ed., 
Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1992. (One of 
the outstanding works in the entire literature of business. 
This novel is a powerful statement on the dangers of sub-
optimization. Many companies assign it as required read-
ing for their managers.)
Grant, K. P., C. R. Baumgardner, and G. S. Stone. 
“The Perceived Importance of Technical Competence to 
Project Managers in the Defense Acquisition Community.” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Engineering 
Management, 
February 1997.
Herzberg, F. H. “One More Time: How Do You  
Motivate Employees?” Harvard Business Review, January–
February 1968.
Hughes, T. P. Rescuing Prometheus. New York: Pantheon, 
1998. (A wonderful book written by a historian. It is full of 
fascinating stories and valuable insights about the nature of 
complex projects and the management problems they raise.)
Hunsberger, 
K. 
“Juggling 
Act.” 
PM 
Network, 
September 2008.
Ibbs, C. W., and Y. H. Kwak. “Assessing Project Management 
Maturity.” Project Management Journal. March 2000.
Jones, T. “Code of Conduct.” PM Network, October 2008.
Kent, S. “Stretched Thin.” PM Network, April 2008.
Kotha, S., D. E. Oleson, R. Nolan, and P. M. Condit. 
“Boeing 787: The Dreamliner.” Harvard Business School 
Publishing, Boston, MA, June 2005.
Kotter, J. P. “What Effective General Managers Really 
Do.” Harvard Business Review, November–December 1982. 
(An article that “tells it like it is.” Most people who have 
never served as a manager do not believe it. Those who 
have managed general or project management know it is 
accurate.)
Lencioni, P., The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A Leadership 
Fable. San Francisco, Jossey‐Bass, A Wiley Company, 
2002. (Much like Goldratt’s The Goal, this work is fic-
tional and tells the story of a new senior manager who 
takes over a team of subordinates. It is a quick and easy 
read and well worth the brief time.)
Lubianiker, S. “Opening the Book on the Open Maturity 
Model.” PM Network, March 2000.
Mackey, J., and R. Sisodia. Conscious Capitalism, Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2013.
Matson, E. “Congratulations, You’re Promoted” and 
“Project: You.” Fast Company, as reprinted in Engineering 
Management Review, Winter 1998. (Two excellent articles 
that report hard fact with wry humor.)
Mccarthy, J., and M. Mccarthy. Software for Your Head, 
Boston: Addison‐Wesley, 2002. (Subtitled “Core Protocols 
for Creating and Maintaining Shared Vision,” this book 
is  a unique approach to managing a project by team 
­building. Also see “McCarthy” in the bibliography to 
Chapter 4.)
Patterson, N. “Selecting Project Managers: An Integrated 
List of Predictors.” Project Management Journal, June 1991.
Pennypacker, J. S., and K. P. Grant. “Project Management 
Maturity: An Industry Benchmark.” Project Management 
Journal, March 2003.
Pinto, J. K., and D. P. Slevin. “The Project Champion: 
Key to Implementation Success.” Project Management 
Journal, December 1989. (See also Green, S. G., in the 
bibliography to Chapter 1.)
Pinto, J. K., and O. P. Kharbanda. “Lessons for an 
Accidental Profession.” Business Horizons, March–April 
1995. (An absolutely wonderful article on project 
­management, including “the vital dozen” rules for the 
­project manager.)
PMI, “PMO Speeds Success for Transportation Facility,” 
PM Network. May 2004.
PMI. “The Growing Gap Between Project Manager Supply 
and Demand.” PMI Today, Newtown Square, PA Project 
Management Institute, June, 2009.
Project Management Institute Standards Committee. A 
Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge.  
5th ed., Newtown Square, PA: Project Management 
Institute, 2013.
Remy, R. “Adding Focus to Improvement Efforts with 
PM3.” PM Network, July 1997.
Schoderbek, P. P., C. G. Schoderbek, and A. G. Kefalas. 
Management Systems: Conceptual Considerations. 4th ed., 
Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1990.
Shenhar, A. J. “From Theory to Practice: Toward a 
Typology 
of 
Project‐Management 
Styles.” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, February 1998.
Slevin, D. P., The Whole Manager, New York: AMACOM,  
1989.
Swanson, S. A. “On the Map.” PM Network, 
November 2009.
Swanson, S. A. “Measuring the Intangibles.” PM Network, 
July 2012.
Thamhain, H. J., and D. L. Wilemon. “Conflict 
Management in Project Life Cycles.” Sloan Management 
Review, Summer 1975.
Thomas, K., and R. Kilmann. The Handbook of Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology, edited by Marvin 
Dunnette, Chicago: Rand McNally, 1975.
Tuckman, B. “Developmental Sequence in Small Groups.” 
Psychological Bulletin 63(6), 384–399.

3
c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
74
3
If problems arise during the life of a project, our first hunch would be that the project was 
not properly planned. Most of the time our hunch would be correct. Inadequate planning 
is more the case than the exception. We can only guess why. Perhaps the reason is that 
senior management and/or the PM and/or the project team are impatient. They want 
“to get on with it.” Possibly some of the people who should be engaged in planning have 
heard Tom Peters, well‐known searcher‐for‐excellence and management guru, comment 
that good planning almost never cuts implementation time and that “Ready, Fire, Aim” 
is the way good businesses do it.
As a matter of fact, Peters is wrong. There is a ton of research that concludes that 
careful planning is strongly associated with project success—and to the best of our 
knowledge there is no research that supports the opposite position. Clearly, planning 
can be overdone, a condition often called “paralysis by analysis.” Somewhere in between 
the extremes is the happy medium that everyone would like to strike, but this chap-
ter does not seek to define the golden mean between no planning and over‐planning 
(Langley, 1995). We do, however, examine the nature of good planning, and we describe 
proven methods for generating plans that are adequate to the task of leading a project 
work force from the start of the project to its successful conclusion. We must start by 
deciding what things should be a part of a project plan.
	 3.1	
FROM THE PROJECT CHARTER TO THE PROJECT PLAN
Before considering how to plan, we should decide why we are planning and what infor-
mation the plan should contain. The project planning process begins with the develop-
ment of a project charter—a high-level description of the project. While the elements of 
the project charter vary from organization to organization, they should always include a 
statement of work and the business case for the project. The statement of work describes 
Project Activity and Risk Planning

3.1 FROM THE PROJECT CHARTER TO THE PROJECT PLAN
•  75
the major deliverables of the project while the business case provides the financial and 
strategic justification for the project (e.g., cost benefit analysis, analysis of market 
demand). It is strongly recommended that the PM be involved in crafting the project 
charter. Beyond the statement of work and the business case, the PMBOK suggests the 
following additional items also be included in a project charter:
• The business need for the project.
• The assumptions underlying the project (e.g., customer preferences, the state of 
the economy).
• Key constraints.
• Customer requirements.
• Identification of high‐level risks.
• Key project milestones.
• A high‐level budget.
• A list of key stakeholders.
• The PM assigned to the project.
• The boundaries of the project (i.e., what is in and out of the scope of the project).
Once the project charter is approved, the project is considered officially authorized 
and work on developing a more detailed project plan can commence. While the project 
charter provides a high‐level description of the project, the project plan defines in greater 
detail the project work that must be completed. More specifically, the project plan details 
how the work of the project will be executed, monitored, and controlled. As such, the 
project plan includes detailed descriptions of the work that needs to be completed, how 
the work will be executed, the approval process for changes to the plan, and plans for 
communicating with the stakeholders. In its final form, the project plan brings together 
all project‐related planning documents. According to PMBOK, a proper project plan 
includes the following:
• The process for managing change
• A plan for communicating with and managing stakeholders
• Specifying the process for setting key characteristics of the project deliverable 
(technically referred to as configuration management)
• Establishing the cost baseline for the project and developing a plan to manage 
project costs
• Developing a plan for managing the human resources assigned to the project
• Developing a plan for continuously monitoring and improving project 
work processes
• Developing guidelines for procuring project materials and resources
• Defining the project’s scope and establishing practices to manage the pro-
ject’s scope
• Developing the Work Breakdown Structure
• Developing practices to manage the quality of the project deliverables
PMBOK Guide
PMBOK Guide

76  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
• Defining how project requirements will be managed
• Establishing practices for managing risk
• Establishing the schedule baseline and developing a plan to manage the pro-
ject’s schedule
A bias toward reality requires us to note that different stakeholders have different 
levels of clout. If senior management and the client both favor a change in the scope of 
the project, the project manager and his or her team would be well advised to accept the 
change in good grace unless there is some overriding reason why such a change would be 
infeasible. Occasionally, stakeholders not directly connected to the organization con-
ducting the project or the client purchasing it can be so demanding that provision is 
made for them to sign off on specific changes. Consider, for example, People for the 
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) and their battles with cosmetic firms over the use 
of animal testing for cosmetic products.
One additional use for a careful, complete project plan is when the project may be 
small and routine, but it is also carried out frequently, as in some maintenance projects. 
The complete planning process may be conducted to form a template for such projects—
with particular emphasis on evaluation methods. With this template, planning similar 
projects is simple—just fill in the blanks. If changes in the plan are contemplated, the 
prescribed evaluation methods can be employed. This allows a “continuous improve-
ment” program, sometimes called “rolling wave” planning, to be implemented with 
ongoing evaluation of suggested changes.
	 3.2	
THE PLANNING PROCESS—OVERVIEW
A great deal has been written about planning. Some of the literature focuses on the stra-
tegic aspect of planning—(e.g., Webster, Reif, and Bracker, 1989) choosing and planning 
projects that contribute to the organization’s goals (cf., the introduction to Section 1.5). 
Another body of writing is directed at the techniques of how to plan rather than what to 
plan (e.g., Pells, 1993; Prentis, 1989). These techniques, if we are to believe what we 
read, differ from industry to industry, from subject to subject. Architecture has a planning 
process; so does software development, as does construction, as well as pharmaceutical 
R&D projects, and campaigns for raising funds for charity.
As far as we can determine, the way that planning techniques vary in these different 
cases has more to do with nomenclature than substance. Consider, for example, the fol-
lowing planning process that has been divided into eight distinct steps.
1.	 Develop and evaluate the concept of the project. Describe what it is you wish to 
develop, including its basic performance characteristics, and decide if getting such a 
deliverable is worthwhile. If so, continue.
2.	 Carefully identify and spell out the actual capabilities that the project’s deliverable 
must have to be successful. Design a system (product or service) that will have the 
requisite capabilities.
3.	 Create such a system (product or service), which is to say, build a prototype deliverable.
Risk
The project charter is a high‐level preliminary version of the project plan for all 
stakeholders to discuss and agree upon. When approved, the project plan can then be 
completed in detail.

3.3 THE PLANNING PROCESS—NUTS AND BOLTS
•  77
4.	 Test the prototype to see if it does, in fact, have the desired capabilities. If necessary, 
cycle back to step 3 to modify the prototype and retest it. Continue until the deliver-
able meets the preset requirements.
5.	 Integrate the deliverable into the system for which it was designed. In other words, 
install the deliverable in its required setting.
6.	 Validate the deliverable—which answers the question, “Now that we have installed 
the deliverable, does it still work properly?”
7.	 If the deliverable has been validated, let the client test it. Can the client operate the 
system? If not, instruct the client.
8.	 If the client can operate (and accepts) the deliverable, make sure that the client 
understands all standard operating and maintenance requirements. Then shake the 
client’s hand, present the client with a written copy of maintenance and operating 
instructions, give the client the bill, and leave.
Reread the eight steps. Are they not an adequate description of the planning process 
for the design of a new pick‐up truck, of a high‐end hotel room, of a restaurant kitchen, 
of a machine tool, of a line of toys, etc.? They would need a bit of tweaking for some 
projects. An R&D project would need a more extensive risk analysis. If the project is a 
new pharmaceutical, for example, it would need toxicity and efficacy testing, and clear-
ance from the FDA, but the general structure of the planning process is still adequate.
The eight steps above were originally written to describe the planning process for 
computer software (Aaron, Bratta, and Smith, 1993). There seem to be as many different 
planning sequences and steps as there are authors writing about planning. Almost all of 
them, regardless of the number of steps, meet the same criteria if they are meant to guide 
a project to a successful conclusion. The final plan must have the elements described in 
the previous section of this chapter.
	 3.3	
THE PLANNING PROCESS—NUTS AND BOLTS
This section deals with the problem of determining and listing the various tasks that 
must be accomplished in order to complete a project. The important matters of generat-
ing a project budget and developing a precise project schedule are left to succeeding 
chapters, though much of the raw material for doing those important things will come 
from the planning process described here.
The Launch Meeting—and Subsequent Meetings
Once senior management has decided to fund a major project, or a highly important 
small project, a project launch meeting should be called. Preparation for this meeting is 
required (Knutson, 1995; Martin and Tate, 1998).
When a PM is appointed to head a new project, the PM’s first job is to review the 
project objectives (project scope plus expected desirable outcomes that accrue to stakeholders 
Risk
There are many techniques for developing a project plan and Project Charter. They 
are fundamentally similar. All of them use a systematic analysis to identify and list 
the things that must be undertaken in order to achieve the project’s objectives, to test 
and validate the plan, and to deliver it to the user.
Best Practice

78  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
from matters beyond the project’s deliverables) with the senior manager who has fundamen-
tal responsibility for the project. The purpose of this interview is threefold: (1) to make 
sure that the PM understands the expectations that the organization, the client, and 
other stakeholders have for the project; (2) to identify those among the senior managers 
(in addition to the manager who is party to this interview) who have a major interest in 
the project; and (3) to determine if anything about the project is atypical for projects of 
the same general kind (e.g., a product/service development project undertaken in order 
to extend the firm’s market into a new area).
Armed with this background, the PM should briefly study the project with an eye to 
preparing an invitation list for the project launch meeting. At the top of the list should 
be at least one representative of senior management, a strong preference given to the 
individual with the strongest interest in the project, the probable project champion. 
(The champion is usually, but not necessarily, the senior manager with responsibility for 
the project.) Recall in Chapter 2 we noted that the project champion could lend the 
political clout that is occasionally needed to overcome obstacles to cooperation from 
functional managers—if such obstacles were not amenable to dissolution by the PM.
Next on the invitation list come the managers from the functional areas that will be 
called upon to contribute competencies or capacities to the project or the project team 
members if they have already been selected. If highly specialized technical experts will be 
needed, the PM can add individuals with the required expertise to the list, after clearing 
the invitation with their immediate bosses, of course.
The PM may chair the launch meeting, but the senior manager introduces the pro-
ject to the group, and discusses its contributions to the parent organization. If known and 
relevant, the project’s tentative priority may be announced, as should the tentative 
budget estimate used in the project selection process. If the due dates for deliverables 
have been contracted, this should also be made clear. The purpose of senior manage-
ment’s presence is to ensure that the group understands the firm’s commitment to the 
project. It is particularly important for the functional managers to understand that man-
agement is making a real commitment, not merely paying lip service.
At this point, the PM can take over the meeting and begin a group discussion of the 
project. It is, however, important for the senior manager(s) to remain for this discussion. 
The continuing presence of these august persons more or less assures cooperation from 
the functional units. The purpose of the discussion is to develop a general understanding 
of what functional inputs the project will need.
Some launch meetings are restricted to brainstorming a problem. The output of such 
a meeting is shown in Table 3‑1. In this case, the Director of Human Resources (HR) of 
a medium‐size firm was asked by the CEO to set up a program to improve employee 
retention. At the time, the firm had a turnover rate slightly above 60 percent per year 
among its technical employees. (A turnover rate of 50 percent was about average for the 
industry.) The HR Director held a launch meeting of all department heads. At this meet-
ing, the group developed a list of “action items,” each of which became a project.
When dealing with a single project, it is common for a preliminary plan to be gener-
ated at the launch meeting, but we question the advisability of this. For either functional 
managers or the PM to guess at budgets or schedules with no real study of the project’s 
deliverables is not prudent. First, the transition from a “tentative, wild guesstimate” 
made by senior managers or the EPMO to “but you promised” is instantaneous in these 
cases. Second, there is no foundation for mutual discussion or negotiation about different 
positions taken publicly and based on so little knowledge or thought. It is sufficient, in 
our judgment, to get a firm commitment from functional managers to study the proposed 
project and return for another meeting with a technically (and politically) feasible plan 
for their group’s input to the project.

3.3 THE PLANNING PROCESS—NUTS AND BOLTS
•  79
It has been said, “If this means many planning meetings and extensive use of partici-
patory decision making, then it is well worth the effort (Ford and McLaughlin, 1992, 
p. 316). If the emphasis is on “participative decision making,” we agree. Actual planning 
at the launch meeting should not go beyond the most aggregated level unless the deliv-
erables are well understood or the delivery date is cast in concrete and the organization 
has considerable experience with similar projects. Of course, if this is the case, a major 
launch meeting may not be required.
The results of the launch meeting should be that: (1) the project’s scope is under-
stood and temporarily fixed; (2) the various functional managers or team members 
understand their responsibilities and have committed to develop an initial task and 
resource plan; and (3) any potential benefits to the organization outside the scope of the 
project are noted. In the meetings that follow, the project plan will become more and 
more detailed and firmer. When the group has developed what appears to be a workable 
plan with a schedule and budget that seem feasible, the plan moves through the appro-
priate management levels where it is approved, or altered and approved. If altered, it 
must be checked with those who did the planning. The planners may accept the altera-
tions or a counterproposal may be made. The project plan may cycle up and down the 
managerial ladder several times before it receives final approval, at which time no further 
changes may be made without a formal change order (a procedure also described in 
the plan).
Table 3‑1  Program Launch Meeting Output: Human Resources Development
Goal of Program: Reduce employee turnover from 60 percent to 40 percent
Program Manager: Human Resources Director
Objective
Action Item
Improve employee morale
• Collect data from:
• Exit interviews
• Employee survey
• Cultural audit
• Interviewing “retained” employees
• Seminars for all staff on personality types and working styles
• Employee fitness center implemented
• New employee luncheons with department heads
• New hire “30‐day” reunions
• Complete pro forma for opening day care center
• Overhaul of employee orientation program
• Competitive salary analysis conducted and adjustments made
Broaden staff competencies
• Competencies for all positions completed and system 
established to maintain ongoing competencies
Attain stronger employee 
commitment to 
organizational standards for 
productivity, outcomes, and 
customer satisfaction
• Six‐week series on management and leadership for managers
• Leadership training for supervisors
• Performance‐based pay system developed
• Job descriptions format redesigned around organizational 
effectiveness standards
Improve recruitment efforts
• Increase recruitment efforts, additional advertising, three job 
fairs
• Hire recruiter
• Implement defined contribution pension plan for new hires
• Internet job hotline
• Radio spots

80  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
Irrespective of who alters (or suggests alterations to) the project plan during the 
process described above, it is imperative that everyone be kept fully informed. It is no 
more equitable for a senior manager to change a plan without consultation with the 
PM (and, hence, the project team) than it would be for the PM or the team to alter the 
plan without consultation and approval from senior management. If an arm’s‐length 
client is involved, the client’s approval is required for any changes that will have an 
effect on the schedule, cost, or deliverable. Clearly, the PMO (or EPMO) can facilitate 
this process.
A useful tool for facilitating the management of changes to a project’s scope is the 
Requirements Traceability Matrix. With this matrix, a table is created, which links the 
source of each project requirement to the project objectives, WBS deliverables, and so 
on intended to satisfy it. A variety of fields (columns) can be incorporated in the 
Requirements Traceability Matrix depending on the intended use of the matrix. A quick 
search of the Web will yield a variety of templates that are application‐ready for use. An 
example is shown in PMBOK, 5th ed., Fig. 5‐6 (p. 119).
Open, honest, and frequent communication between the interested parties is critical 
for successful planning. What emerges from this process is sometimes called the project 
baseline plan. It contains all the elements noted in Section 3.1 and all amendments to the 
plan adopted as the project is carried out.
Sorting Out the Project—The Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
Inadequate up‐front planning, especially failing to identify all important tasks, is a pri-
mary contributor to the failure of a project to achieve its cost and time objectives. 
Therefore, a primary purpose for developing a WBS is to ensure that any task required to 
produce a deliverable is not overlooked and thereby not accounted for and planned. 
PMBOK describes the construction of the WBS primarily in Chapter 5 on Scope, but it 
is also touched upon in Chapters 6 (Time), 7 (Cost), and 8 (Quality).
The previous subsection discussed the planning process as seen from the outside. 
The PM and the functional managers developed plans as if by magic. It is now time to be 
specific about how such plans may be generated. In order to develop a project plan that 
will take us from start to finish of a project, we need to know precisely what must be 
done, by whom, when, and with what resources. Every task, however small, that must be 
completed in order to complete the project should be listed together with any required 
material or human resources.
Making such a list is a nontrivial job. It requires a systematic procedure. While there 
are several systematic procedures that may be used, we advise a straightforward and con-
ceptually simple way to attack the problem—the hierarchical planning process—which is 
how to build a Work Breakdown Structure (WBS) for the project.
To use this process, one must start with the project’s objective(s). The planner, often 
the PM, makes a list of the major activities that must be completed to achieve the 
objective(s). The list may be as short as two or three activities, or as large as 20. Usually 
the number is between 5 and 15. We call these Level 1 activities. The planner now takes 
each Level 1 activity and delegates it to an individual or functional group. (The PM 
might delegate one or more Level 1 tasks to him‐ or herself.) The delegatee deals with the 
task as if it is itself a project and makes a plan to accomplish it; that is, he or she lists a 
specific set of Level 2 tasks required to complete each Level 1 task. Again, the breakdown 
typically runs between 5 and 15 tasks, but a few more or less does not matter. The process 
continues. For each Level 2 task, someone or some group is delegated responsibility to 
prepare an action plan of Level 3 subtasks. The procedure of successively decomposing 
larger tasks into their component parts continues until the lowest level subtasks are suf-
ficiently understood so that there is no reason to continue. As a rule of thumb, the lowest 
PMBOK Guide

3.3 THE PLANNING PROCESS—NUTS AND BOLTS
•  81
level tasks in a typical project will have a duration of a few hours to a few days. If the team 
is quite familiar with the work, longer durations are acceptable for the lowest level tasks.
Another simple approach to creating the WBS begins by gathering the project team 
together and providing each member with a pad of sticky‐notes. After defining the pro-
ject’s objectives, and Level 1 tasks, team members then write on the sticky‐notes all the 
tasks they can think of that are required to complete the project. The sticky‐notes can 
then be placed on the wall and arranged in various ways. One advantage of this approach 
is that it provides the entire team with a better understanding of the work needed to 
complete the project. The fact that it is a cooperative exercise also helps the project team 
to bond. Finally, this exercise can generate a WBS tree. Figure 3‑1 illustrates the tree. A 
colleague called this a “Gozinto chart.” (He said it was named after a famous Italian 
mathematician, Prof. Zepartzat Gozinto. The name has stuck.)
Microsoft Project (MSP) will make a WBS list (but not a tree‐chart) at the touch of 
a key. The task levels are appropriately identified; for example, the WBS number “7.5.4” 
refers to the “Level 3, task Number 4” that is needed for “Level 2, task 5” that is a part of 
“Level 1, task 7.” (The PM has the option of using any other identification system 
desired, but must enter the identifiers manually.)
Task levels are appropriately organized on the MSP printout, with Level 1 tasks to the 
left and others indented by level. If one uses a tree diagram and each task is represented 
by a box with the WBS identifier number, one can add any information one wishes—
given that it will fit in the box. Such an entry might be the proper account number to 
charge for work done on that task, or the name of the individual (or department) with 
task responsibility, or with a space for the responsible party’s signature denoting that the 
person has accepted accountability by “signing‐off.” As we will see, additional informa-
tion is often added by turning the “tree” into a list with columns for the additional data.
In doing hierarchical planning, only one rule appears to be mandatory. At any given 
level, the “generality” or “degree of detail” of the tasks should be roughly at the same 
level. One should not use highly detailed tasks for Level 1 plans, and one should not add 
very general tasks at Level 3 or more. This can best be done by finding all Level 2 subtasks 
Annual tribute dinner
6.0.0
Entertainment
5.0.0
Invitations
4.0.0
Event hosts
7.0.0
Food &
Drink
14.0.0
Thank
you
7.2.0
Wine
7.1.0
Menu
4.1.0
Honoree
4.2.0
M.C.
5.1.0
Mailing lists
5.2.0
Design
7.1.1
Options
7.1.1
Trial
7.1.3
Select
Figure 3‑1  A partial WBS (Gozinto chart) for an Annual Tribute Dinner project.

82  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
for each Level 1 task before moving one’s attention to the Level 3 subtasks. Similarly, 
break all Level 2 tasks into their respective Level 3 tasks before considering any Level 4 
subtasks, if the breakdown proceeds that far. A friend of ours who was an internationally 
known artist and teacher of industrial design explained why. When producing a painting 
or drawing, an artist first sketches‐in the main compositional lines in the scene. The 
­artist then adds detail, bit by bit, over the whole drawing, continuing this process until 
the work is completed. If this is done, the finished work will have “unity.” Unity is not 
achieved if individual areas of the picture are completed in detail before moving on to 
other areas. A young art student then made a pen‐and‐ink sketch of a fellow student, 
showing her progress at three different stages (see Figure 3‑2).
We have said that the breakdown of Level 1 tasks should be delegated to someone 
who will carry out the Level 2 tasks. It is the same with Level 2 tasks being delegated to 
someone who will design and carry out the required Level 3 tasks. A relevant question is 
“Who are all these delegatees?” Let’s assume that the project in question is of reasonable 
size, neither very large nor small. Assume further that the PM and the functional manag-
ers are reasonably experienced in dealing with similar projects. In such a case, the PM 
would probably start by working on Level 1. Based on her background, the PM might 
work on Level 2 of one or more of the Level 1 tasks. Where recent experience was miss-
ing, she would delegate to the proper functional manager the task of specifying the 
Level 2 tasks. In the same way, the latter would delegate Level 3 task specification to the 
people who have the appropriate knowledge.
In general, the job of planning should be delegated to the lowest competent level. At 
Level 1, this is usually the PM. At lower levels, functional managers and specialists are 
Figure 3‑2  Three 
levels of detail in 
hierarchical  
planning.

3.3 THE PLANNING PROCESS—NUTS AND BOLTS
•  83
the best planners. In Chapter 2 (Section 2.1) we described that strange bugbear, the 
micromanager. It is common for micromanagers to preempt the planning function from 
subordinates or, as an alternative, to allow the subordinate to develop an initial plan that 
the micromanager will amend with potentially disastrous results. The latter is an event 
reported with some frequency (and accuracy) in Dilbert©.
Extensions of the Everyday WBS
The WBS can be reshaped and buttressed with some additional data often not included 
in the project’s WBS. The WBS is generally oriented toward the project’s deliverables. 
The additions increase its orientation toward the planning and administration of the 
work. It does this by using available material, while adopting a format that is not typi-
cally used by the WBS. Figure 3‑3 illustrates a layout that helps to organize the required 
information. We refer to these layouts as “modified” WBSs. The additional data in the 
columns are: (1) estimates of the resources required for each task in the plan, (2) the 
estimated time required to accomplish each task, (3) information about who has respon-
sibility for the task, and (4) data that will allow tasks to be sequenced so that the set may 
be completed in the shortest possible time. Once the project starting date is known, 
item 2 in the preceding list may be changed from the time required for a subtask comple-
tion to the date on which the subtask is scheduled for completion.
To understand the importance of item 4 in the list, consider a set of subtasks, all of 
which must be completed to accomplish a parent task on a higher level. It is common in 
Modified WBS
Deliverables 
Start date 
 Due date 
 Project duration 
Key constraints and assumptions 
Tasks
Immediate 
Predecessor Tasks
Estimated Time 
Duration
Estimated 
Resources
Assigned To
Figure 3‑3  A form 
to assist hierarchi-
cal planning.

84  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
such a set that one or more subtasks (A) must be completed before one or more other 
subtasks (B) may be started. The former tasks (A) are said to be predecessors of the succes-
sor tasks (B). For instance, if our project is to paint the walls of a room, we know that 
before we apply paint to a wall, we must do a number of predecessor tasks. These prede-
cessors include: clear the floor area near the wall to be painted and cover with drop 
cloths; remove pictures from the wall; clean loose dirt, oil, grease, stains, and the like 
from the wall; fill and smooth any cracks or holes in the wall; lightly sand or score the 
wall if it has previously been painted with a high‐gloss paint; wipe with a damp cloth or 
sponge to remove dust from the sanding; and mask any surrounding areas where this 
paint is not wanted. All these tasks are predecessors to the task “Paint the walls.”
The predecessor tasks for “paint the walls” have been listed in the order in which 
they might be done if only one person was working. If several people are available, sev-
eral of these tasks might be done at the same time. Note that if three tasks can be done 
simultaneously, the total elapsed time required is the time needed for the longest of the 
three, not the sum of the three task times. This notion is critical for scheduling, so pre-
decessors must be listed in the WBS. One convention is important. When listing prede-
cessors, only the immediate predecessors are listed. If A precedes B and B precedes C, only 
B is a predecessor of C.
The WBS not only identifies the deliverable, but also may note the start date if it is 
known or other information one wishes to show. Once the subtasks and their predeces-
sors have been listed along with the estimated subtask activity times, the probable dura-
tion for the set of subtasks, and thus the task due date, can be determined as we will see 
in Chapter 5. If the estimates for the durations and resource requirements for accom-
plishing the subtasks are subject to constraints (e.g., no overtime work is allowed) or 
assumptions (e.g., there will be no work stoppage at our subcontractor’s plant), these 
should be noted in the WBS.
If one wishes, the information in the form shown in Figure 3‑3 can be entered directly 
into Microsoft Project® (MSP). Alternatively, one can produce a WBS using MSP, 
directly, as shown in Figure 3‑4. The project title can be entered in a header or footer to 
the form, as can other information such as a brief description of the deliverables, the 
name of the PM or the task manager, the project start and/or due dates, and the like.
Table 3‑2 shows a WBS generated on MSP with task durations, and start and finish 
times for the Level 1 tasks in an infection control project. The project begins on 
September 12 and ends on November 30. As is customary, people work a five‐day week 
so a three‐week task has 15 work days and 21 calendar days (three weeks), assuming that 
the individual or team is working full‐time on the task. As we will see in Chapter 5, one usu-
ally dares not make that assumption and should check carefully to determine whether or 
not it is a fact. If the one performing the task is working part‐time, a task that requires 5 
days of work, for example, may require several weeks of calendar time. We will revisit this 
problem in Chapter 5.
MSP makes the task of Level 1 planning of the broad project tasks quite straightfor-
ward. The same is true when the planners wish to generate a more detailed listing of all 
the steps involved in a project. The PM merely lists the overall tasks identified by the 
planning team as the activities required to produce the project deliverables—for example, 
the output of a brainstorming session. The PM and the planning team can then estimate 
task durations and use MSP to create a WBS. Table 3‑3 shows a planning template used 
by a software company when they have their initial project brainstorming meetings about 
delivering on a customer request.
MSP has a planning wizard that guides the PM through the process of identifying all 
that is necessary to take an idea for a project activity and turn it into a useful WBS.
A computer systems support company repeatedly performed the same steps when 
clients would ask for a local area network (LAN) installation. They treated each job as if 

3.3 THE PLANNING PROCESS—NUTS AND BOLTS
•  85
Table 3‑2  A WBS Showing Level 1 Tasks for an Infection Control Project (MSP)
Pulmonary Patient Infection Control Project
F. Nightingale, RN
ID
Task Name
Predecessors
Duration
Start
Finish
Resources
1
Form a task force to focus processes for 
pulmonary patients
2 wks
  9/12
  9/25
Infec. Control RN, 
Dr., Educator
2
Identify potential processes to decrease 
infection rate
1
3 wks
  9/26
10/16
Team
3
Develop a treatment team process
1, 2
3 wks
  9/26
10/16
Team
4
Education
3
1 wk
10/17
10/23
RNs, LPNs, CNAs
5
Implement processes on one unit as trial
4
3 wks
10/24
11/13
Unit staff
6
Evaluate
5
1 wk
11/14
11/20
Infec. Control RN
7
Make necessary adjustments
6
1 wk
11/21
11/27
Infec. Control RN
8
Implement hospital‐wide
7
3 days
11/28
11/30
Unit staffs
it were a new project, because costs and resource assignments varied with each assign-
ment. To improve efficiency, they developed a planning template using MSP. After 
meeting with a client, the project manager could add the agreed‐upon project start date, 
and any constraints on the schedule required by the client. The steps to install the LAN 
remained the same. The start and finish dates, and the number of resources needed to 
meet the schedule were adjusted for each individual client, but the adjustments were 
Project deliverables:
Project manager:
Project Title
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
Resource 
Names
Assigned To
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
10
Project start date:
Project due date:
Figure 3‑4  A WBS as an output of MSP.

86  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
usually small. Once the schedule of a specific job was decided, the PM could determine 
the resources needed to meet that schedule and find the cost of the project.
If the PM wishes to include other information in the project’s modified WBS, there 
is no reason not to do so. Some include a column to list the status of resource or person-
nel availability. Others list task start dates.
	 3.4	
MORE ON THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE AND OTHER AIDS
At times, PMs seem to forget that many of the conventional forms, charts, and tables 
that they must fill out are intended to serve as aids, not punishments. They also forget 
that the forms, charts, and tables are not cast in bronze, but, like Emeril’s recipes, may be 
changed to fit the PM’s taste. In addition to the matters just covered, there is more about 
the WBS and two other useful aids—the Responsible‐Accountable‐Consult‐Informed 
Matrix (RACI Matrix), and Mind Mapping—that merits discussion.
The process of building a WBS is meaningful. The PM and individual team members 
may differ on the technical approach to working on the task, the type and quantity of 
resources needed, or the duration for each subtask. If so, negotiation is apt to accompany 
the planning process. As usual, participatory management and negotiation often lead to 
improved project performance and better ways of meeting the project’s goals.
The RACI Matrix
Like the WBS, the RACI Matrix comes in a variety of sizes and shapes. Typically, the 
RACI matrix is in the form of a table with the project tasks derived from the WBS listed 
in the rows and departments or individuals in the columns. PMBOK describes the RACI 
matrix in Chapter 9 on Human Resources. The value of the RACI Matrix is that it helps 
The project launch meeting sets the project scope, elicits cooperation of others in 
the organization, demonstrates managerial commitment to the project, and initi-
ates the project plan. The plan itself is generated through a hierarchical planning 
process by which parts of the plan are sequentially broken down into finer levels of 
detail by the individuals or groups that will implement them. The result is a WBS 
that lists all the tasks required to carry out the plan together with task resource 
requirements, durations, predecessors, and identification of the people responsible 
for each task.
PMBOK Guide
Table 3‑3  Template for a Brainstorming Planning Meeting
ID
Potential Steps
Objective
Success Measure
Barriers
Notes
Contact
E‐mail Address
1
Idea 1
2
Idea 2
3
Idea 3
4
Idea 4
5
Idea 5
6
Idea 6

3.4 MORE ON THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE AND OTHER AIDS
•  87
organize the project team by clarifying the responsibilities of the project team members. 
For an example of a simple RACI Matrix, see Figure 3‑5.
In Figure 3‑5, letters are used to indicate the nature of the responsibility link between 
a person and a task. Note that there must be at least one A in every row, which means 
that someone must be accountable for completion of each task. For example, examine 
the row with the task “Solicit quotations.” In this case the Project Engineer is account-
able for the task being carried out while the Field Manager will be responsible for actually 
doing the work associated with soliciting quotations. The project’s Contract Administrator 
and the Compliance Officer/Risk Manager must be consulted about the solicitation pro-
cess. The PM must be informed before documents are sent to potential vendors. Note 
that a particular individual or department can be assigned multiple responsibility links. 
For example, it is common for a person to be both accountable and responsible for a 
particular task.
Standard RACI Matrix templates are available to facilitate their development. One 
can use symbols or numbers as opposed to letters to refer to different responsibility rela-
tionships, and the references may be to departments, job titles, or names. Only imagina-
tion and the needs of the project and PM bound the potential variety. Likewise, additional 
columns can be added to the RACI Matrix to capture the due dates of tasks, actual dates 
completed, the status of tasks, performance metrics, and so on.
A final observation is needed on this subject. When we speak to functional manag-
ers about project management, one comment we often hear is anger about changes in the 
project plan without notification to the people who are supposed to conduct the tasks or 
supply services to the project. One quote from the head of a statistics lab in a large con-
sulting firm is typical. The head of the lab was speaking of the manager of a consulting 
project for a governmental agency when he said, “I pulled three of my best people off 
other work to reserve them for data analysis on the XYZ Project. They sat for days wait-
ing for the data. That jerk [the PM] knew the data would be late and never bothered to 
let me know. Then the *%$#@% had the gall to come in here and ask me to speed up our 
analysis so he could make up lost time.”
Make sure to use the Inform category, not simply to report progress, but also to report 
changes in due dates, resource requirements, and the like.
WBS
Task
Project
Manager
Project Ofﬁce
Field Operator
Project
Engineer
Industrial
Engineer
Risk/Compliance
Manager
Field
Manager
Contract
Administrator
A1
A
A
R
R
C
C
C
C
C
C
I
I
I
I
I
I
R
R
R
R
A
A
A
A
A2
B1
C1
C2
C3
Subproject
Determine need
Solicit quotations
Write appropriate
request
Legend:
A = Accountable
R = Responsible
C = Consult
I = Inform
Figure 3‑5  An example RACI Matrix.

88  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
A Whole‐Brain Approach to Project Planning
In today’s fiercely competitive environment, project teams are facing increasing pressure 
to achieve project performance goals while at the same time completing their projects on 
time and on schedule. Typically project managers and project team members rely on the 
“left” side or the analytical part of the brain to address the challenges. Indeed, if you are 
a business or engineering student, the vast majority of techniques that you have been 
exposed to in your studies relies on the logical and analytical left side of your brain. On 
the other hand, art students and design students tend to be exposed to techniques that 
rely more on imagination and images which utilize the creative “right” side of the brain. 
Importantly, many activities associated with project management can be greatly facili-
tated through the use of a more balanced whole‐brain approach (Brown and Hyer, 2002).
One whole‐brain approach that is particularly applicable to project management in 
general, and project planning in particular, is mind mapping. Mind mapping is essentially 
a visual approach that closely mirrors how the human brain records and stores informa-
tion. In addition to its visual nature, another key advantage associated with mind map-
ping is that it helps tap the creative potential of the entire project team, which, in turn, 
helps increase both the quantity and quality of ideas generated. Because project team 
members tend to find mind mapping entertaining, it also helps generate enthusiasm, 
helps get buy‐in from team members, and often gets quieter team members more involved 
in the planning process.
To illustrate the creation of a mind map, consider a project launched at a graduate 
business school to improve its part‐time evening MBA program for working professionals. 
The mind mapping exercise is initiated by taping a large sheet of paper (e.g., 6 ft × 3 ft) 
on a wall. (One good source of such paper is a roll of butcher’s wrapping paper. Several 
sheets can be taped together to create a larger area if needed.) It is recommended that the 
paper be oriented in landscape mode to help stimulate the team’s creativity as people are 
used to working in portrait mode. In addition, team members should stand during the 
mind mapping exercise.
The process begins by writing the project goal in the center of the page. As is illus-
trated in Figure 3‑6, the part‐time MBA project team defined the goal for the project as 
generating ideas for breakthrough performance in the part‐time MBA program. In par-
ticular, notice the inspirational language used in defining the project goal which helps 
further motivate team members and stimulate their creativity.
Once the project goal is defined, team members can brainstorm to identify the major 
tasks that must be done to accomplish this goal. In developing the mind map for the 
project, the MBA team initially identified four major tasks: (1) define the role of working 
professional programs (WPPs), (2) generate ideas for improving current programs, 
(3) generate ideas for diversification, and (4) evaluate the ideas generated. As illustrated 
in Figure 3‑7, these major tasks branch off from the project goal.
Developing the mind map proceeds in this fashion whereby components in the mind 
map are continuously broken down into more detailed tasks. For example, Figure 3‑8 
Best Practice
GENERATE IDEAS FOR
BREAKTHROUGH
PERFORMANCE IN PART-
TIME PROGRAM
Figure 3‑6  Begin mind mapping with statement of project’s objective.

3.4 MORE ON THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE AND OTHER AIDS
•  89
GENERATE IDEAS FOR
BREAKTHROUGH
PERFORMANCE IN PART-
TIME PROGRAM
Generate Ideas
for Improving
Current Programs
Generate Ideas
for Diversiﬁcation
Deﬁne Role
of WPPs
Evaluate
Ideas
!
Figure 3‑7  Major tasks branch off from project goal.
Develop Perfor-
mance Measures
Deﬁne
Performance
Deﬁne How
We Win
Deﬁne Our
Output
Deﬁne Role
of WPPs
Generate Ideas
for Diversiﬁcation
Generate Ideas
for Improving
Current Programs
Evaluate
Ideas
GENERATE IDEAS FOR
BREAKTHROUGH
PERFORMANCE IN PART-
TIME PROGRAM
!
Figure 3‑8  Major tasks are further broken down into more detailed tasks.

90  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
illustrates how the define role of the WPPs task was broken down into more detailed 
tasks. Figure 3‑9 provides the final map for the MBA project.
A couple of comments regarding the process of mind mapping are in order. First, 
color, word size, word shape, and pictures should all be used to add emphasis. In fact, team 
members should be encouraged to use pictures and images in the mind map over using 
words. The brain processes and responds to symbols and pictures differently than it does 
to words. When using words, key words as opposed to full sentences should be used. Also, 
it should be noted that it is OK to be messy when developing the original mind map. 
Indeed, one should not expect the original mind map to resemble something as polished 
as the mind map shown in Figure 3‑9. Rather, the mind map will typically need to go 
through several iterations of polishing and refining. It should also be noted that the pol-
ishing and refining can be greatly facilitated with the use of a computer graphics program.
In addition, multiple team members can and should contribute to the mind map 
simultaneously. In fact, one team member should be formally designated as the facilitator 
to ensure that all team members are contributing, to keep team members focused on the 
project, and to ensure that team members are focusing on project tasks—not goals. 
Finally, at the most detailed level, tasks should be expressed using a noun and a verb (e.g., 
develop measures, generate ideas, define output).
$
Deﬁne
Customer Re-
quirements
Evaluate
Feasibility
Generate Ideas
for Improving
Current Programs
Reputation
Faculty
Evaluate
Ideas
Get
Data
Evaluate
What Competition
Is Doing
Develop Perfor-
mance Measures
Deﬁne
Performance
Deﬁne Role
of WPPs
 Discuss What 
Else We Are
Besides a Biz 
School
Generate
Ideas for
Partnerships
Generate
Blue Ocean
Ideas
Deﬁne How
We Win
GENERATE IDEAS FOR
BREAKTHROUGH
PERFORMANCE IN PART-
TIME PROGRAM
Deﬁne
Our
Customer
Rev and
Costs of
Programs
Develop
Strategy
Canvas
?
Consider
All Funding
Sources ?
Need for
Training ?
Generate Ideas
for Diversiﬁcation!
!
Deﬁne Our
Output
Figure 3‑9  Final mind map for part‐time MBA program project.

3.4 MORE ON THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE AND OTHER AIDS
•  91
Unfortunately, it is all too common for projects to go over budget and/or be ­completed 
late. In many cases insufficient upfront planning is the major culprit. With ­inadequate 
upfront planning, important tasks are overlooked, which in turn results in underestimat-
ing the project budget and duration. Mind mapping is a fast and effective tool that can 
greatly facilitate project planning and help minimize problems that result from inade-
quate upfront planning.
A polished and refined mind map facilitates a number of other project‐related activi-
ties. For example, the mind map can be easily converted into the traditional WBS. 
Furthermore, the mind map can be used to facilitate risk analysis, setting project team 
meeting agendas, allocating resources to project activities, and developing the project 
schedule (see Brown and Hyer, 2002, for additional details on the use of mind mapping 
for project management).
The Design Structure Matrix
The mind mapping approach just described is an excellent complement to traditional 
project management tools like the work breakdown structure for helping identify the tasks 
that need to be executed to complete a project. Other project management planning tools 
such as Gantt charts and precedence diagrams (both discussed in Chapter 5) were devel-
oped primarily to coordinate the execution of these tasks. These tools were originally 
developed to help manage large but relatively well‐structured projects such as construc-
tion projects and ship building. However, in some cases, such as new product development 
projects, the issue of information flows can be as important as the sequencing of tasks. In 
essence, traditional project management planning tools help identify which tasks have to 
be completed in order for other tasks to be started. Often, however, a more important issue 
is what information is needed from other tasks to complete a specific task?
To address the issue of information flows, Steven Eppinger (2001), a professor at 
MIT’s Sloan School of Management, proposes the development and use of a Design 
Structure Matrix (DSM). The first step in developing a DSM is to identify all the project’s 
tasks and list them in the order in which they are typically carried out. This list of tasks 
makes up both the rows and columns of the DSM. Next, moving across one row at a time, 
all tasks that supply information to the task being evaluated are noted. When the DSM 
is completed, all the tasks that provide information that is needed to complete a given 
task can be determined by looking across that particular task’s row. Likewise, moving 
down a particular task’s column shows all the other tasks that depend on it for information.
An example DSM corresponding to a project with six activities is shown in 
Figure 3‑10. According to the figure, completing activity c requires the gathering of 
information from activities b and f. Furthermore, the figure indicates that activities c and 
f both depend on information from activity b.
As the example illustrates, a key benefit of constructing a DSM is the ability to 
quickly identify and better understand how information is needed. It can also highlight 
potential information flow problems even before the project is started. For example, all 
the X’s above the diagonal in Figure 3‑10 are related to situations where information 
obtained from a subsequent task might require the rework of an earlier completed task. 
To illustrate, in the second row we observe that activity b requires information from 
activity e. Since activity e is completed after activity b, activity b may need to be revisited 
and reworked depending on what is learned after completing activity e.
The DSM also helps evaluate how well the need to coordinate information flows has 
been anticipated in the project’s planning stage. To make this assessment, a shaded box 
is added to the DSM around all tasks that are planned to be executed concurrently. For 
example, the DSM would appear as shown in Figure 3‑11 if it had been planned that 
Risk

92  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
tasks c, d, and e were to be done concurrently. Also notice that in Figure 3‑11, any 
remaining entries above the diagonal of the matrix are highlighted as potential rework 
by replacing each X with an O.
In examining Figure 3‑11, there are two potential rework situations. Fortunately, 
there are a couple of actions that can be taken to minimize or even eliminate potential 
rework situations. One option is to investigate whether the sequence of the project activ-
ities can be changed so that the potential rework situations are moved below the diago-
nal. Another option is to investigate ways to complete additional activities concurrently. 
This latter option is a bit more complex and may necessitate changing the physical loca-
tion of where the tasks are completed.
Agile Project Management
In an effort to lower costs, improve project outcomes, and reduce project completion 
times, a group of software developers in 2001 leveraged lean management principles and 
other continuous improvement methodologies to develop a new approach to project 
management. This new approach was spelled out in a document entitled the “Agile 
Manifesto” and from this document a set of 12 Agile Principles were developed to guide 
the implementation of Agile Project Management (APM).
With APM, a project is completed in stages that last from 1 to 4 weeks. These stages 
are commonly referred to as iterations, sprints, or milestones. During each stage, project 
team members are given detailed instructions on the work that is to be completed during 
the stage. Furthermore, a key element of APM is that the quality of the work for a given 
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
X
X
C
X
X
D
X
X
X
E
X
F
X
X
X
X - Information ﬂow
Figure 3‑10  Example DSM for project with six activities.
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
X
O
X
O
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
- Tasks to be completed concurrently
X
- Information ﬂow
O - Potential rework situation
Figure 3‑11  Modified DSM to show activities to be completed concurrently.

3.4 MORE ON THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE AND OTHER AIDS
•  93
stage must be approved before the next stage can be started. Verifying that the quality 
standards are met at the end of each stage well positions the project team to identify the 
causes of problems and make rapid adjustments. In more traditional approaches to pro-
ject management, long gaps between the creation and identification of problems can 
impede correcting the problems.
In contrast to the traditional waterfall approach to project management where pro-
gress flows from one stage to another, APM utilizes fixed length stages or iterations. Also, 
based on lean principles, APM emphasizes maximizing the value of the project as defined 
by the customer. Another key characteristic of APM is that it incorporates adaptive 
planning such that the project plan is updated as circumstances change. Table 3‑4 further 
contrasts APM from the traditional waterfall approach.
While APM was originally developed for software development, it has been applied 
to other areas including product development and engineering. A number of benefits are 
commonly attributed to APM including:
• Better project outcomes as a result of issues being identified earlier.
• Increased customer satisfaction as a result of receiving customer input and feed-
back throughout the project.
• Improved morale of project team members resulting from the use of self‐managed 
teams and having greater autonomy. Furthermore, the short iterations help miti-
gate employee burnout.
• Increased collaboration and project visibility resulting from daily sprint reviews.
Table 3‑4  Comparison of Agile Project Management with Traditional Waterfall Approach
Dimension
Agile Project Management
Traditional Waterfall Approach
Planning
Short‐term plans that are adjusted as project 
progresses
Attempts to stick to long‐term plans made in 
advance
Client Involvement
Throughout the project
Beginning and end of project
Project Execution
Broken down into incremental stages called 
iterations
Work completed based on comprehensive and 
highly structured plan
Communication
Open, frequent (daily) communication  
among stakeholders encouraged
Mainly for project control
Feedback on Results
At the end of each iteration
At the end of the project
Work Structure
Integrated cross‐functional team
Team members tend to work independently 
and rely on project manager to coordinate 
tasks
Project Leadership
Self‐managed teams
Project manager allocates work to team 
members
Team Member Feedback
Open communication encouraged by  
all team members
Feedback typically provided confidentially by 
project manager
Process Ownership
Team
Project manager
Experimentation
Encouraged to identify ways to best meet 
customer requirements
Discouraged in order to meet project deadline 
and stay on budget
Scope
Flexible
Rigid
Change
Welcome and expected part of project
Resisted and often requires formal change 
order request

94  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
With all the attention that APM is receiving, it is important to point out that many 
of its tenants can be easily incorporated in more traditional project management 
approaches. For example, there is nothing that prevents increasing customer involve-
ment in the traditional waterfall approach. Likewise, there is nothing inherent to tradi-
tional project management that prohibits greater experimentation. The point being 
that rather than viewing APM as an all or nothing approach to project management, 
there is nothing that precludes a project manager from adopting a subset of APM best 
practices. Finally, it is worth noting that related to the popularity of APM, the Project 
Management Institute offers a certification in APM‐the Agile Certified Practitioner 
(PMI‐ACP).
	 3.5	
RISK MANAGEMENT
It was noted in Chapter 1 that one of the primary roles of the project manager is manag-
ing trade‐offs between time, budget, and scope. As we discuss in this section, there are a 
host of activities that can be completed during the project planning phase that greatly 
facilitate managing project-related risks.
The field of risk management has grown considerably over the last decade. The 
Project Management Institute’s PMBOK (2013) devotes Chapter 11 to this topic. In 
general, risk management includes three areas: (1) risk identification, (2) risk analysis, 
and (3) response to risk. The process of accomplishing these three tasks is broken down 
into six subprocesses:
1.	 Risk Management Planning  Developing a plan for risk management activities.
2.	 Risk Identification  Finding those risks that might affect the project.
3.	 Qualitative Risk Analysis  Evaluating the seriousness of the risk and the likelihood 
it will affect the project.
4.	 Quantitative Risk Analysis  Developing measures for the probability of the risk and 
its impact on the project.
5.	 Risk Response Planning  Finding ways of reducing negative impacts on the project 
as well as enhancing positive impacts.
6.	 Risk Monitoring and Control  Maintaining records of and evaluating the subproc-
esses above in order to improve risk management.
1.  Risk Management Planning  This planning process is like any other planning 
process. First, a method for carrying out steps 2 through 5 for any project must be 
designed. Care must be exercised to ensure that the necessary resources can be applied 
Best Practice
From the Work Breakdown Structure, one can extract a list of all tasks arranged by 
task level. The WBS will show numeric identifiers for each task plus other informa-
tion as desired. The WBS may take a wide variety of forms. From the WBS one can 
also develop the RACI Matrix which details the nature of responsibility of each 
individual or group involved in the project to the specific tasks required to com-
plete the project. Mind mapping can greatly enrich the planning process and the 
design structure matrix can facilitate the flows of information needed to execute 
each of the project’s tasks. Agile Project Management breaks a project down into 
fixed length iterations and focuses on adaptive planning and providing value for 
the customer.
Trade-Offs
PMBOK Guide
Risk

3.5 RISK MANAGEMENT
•  95
in a timely and well‐organized manner. The planning process, just as the task of manag-
ing risk, is a continuous process. The factors that cause uncertainty appear, disappear, 
and change strength as time passes and the environment of a project changes. Note that 
planning how to deal with uncertainty is an organizational problem, not specifically a 
project problem. The result is that many firms create a formal, risk management group, 
whose job it is to aid the project management team in doing steps 2 through 5. The 
overall risk management group develops plans and maintains the database resulting 
from step 6.
Some of the inputs and outputs of steps 2 through 5 are unique to the project, and 
some are common for all projects. The overall group helps individual project risk teams 
with the necessary analytic techniques, information gathering, the development of 
options for response, and monitoring and evaluating the results.
2–3.  Risk Identification and Qualitative Risk Analysis  We list these steps 
together because in practice they are often carried out together. As a risk is identified, an 
attempt to measure its timing, likelihood, and impact is often made concurrently.
Risk identification consists of a thorough study of all sources of risk in the project. 
Common sources of risk include the organization of the project itself; senior manage-
ment of the project organization; the client; the skills and character of the project team 
members, including the PM; and acts of nature.
Scenario Analysis  Scenario analysis is a well‐known method for identifying seri-
ous risks. It involves envisioning likely scenarios that may have major repercussions on 
the organization and then identifying the possible resulting outcomes of events such as a 
hurricane in New Orleans, an extended labor strike, the freezing of a river, or the failure 
of an oil well head 5000 feet below the water surface in the gulf of Mexico. These types 
of risk can often be identified and evaluated by project stakeholders or outside parties 
with previous experience in similar projects. Beyond this, a close analysis of the project 
plan, the WBS, and the RACI Matrix, as well as the PERT chart (Chapter 5) will often 
identify highly probable risks, extremely serious risks, or highly vulnerable areas, should 
anything go wrong.
After major risks are identified, the following data should be obtained on each to 
facilitate further analysis: the probability of each risk event occurring, the range or dis-
tribution of possible outcomes if it does occur, the probabilities of each outcome, and the 
expected timing of each outcome. In most cases, good estimates will not be available, but 
getting as much data and as accurate estimates as possible will be crucial for the follow‐
on risk analysis. Above all, remember that a “best guess” is always better than no 
information.
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA)  FMEA is a structured approach 
similar to the scoring methods discussed in Chapter 1 to help identify, prioritize, and bet-
ter manage risk. Developed by the space program in the 1960s, FMEA can be applied to 
projects using the following six steps.
1.	 List ways the project might potentially fail.
2.	 List the consequences of each failure and evaluate its severity. Often severity, S, is 
ranked using a ten‐point scale, where “1” represents failures with no effect and “10” 
represents very severe and hazardous failures such as the loss of human life.
3.	 List the causes of each failure and estimate their likelihood of occurring. The likeli-
hood of a failure occurring, L, is also customarily ranked on a ten‐point scale, with a 
“1” indicating the failure is rather remote and not likely to occur and “10” indicating 
the failure is almost certain to occur.
Best Practice

96  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
4.	 Estimate the ability to detect each failure identified. Again, the detectability of fail-
ures, D, is customarily ranked using a ten‐point scale, where a “1” is used when moni-
toring and control systems are almost certain to detect the failure and “10” where it is 
virtually certain the failure will not be detected.
5.	 Calculate the Risk Priority Number (RPN) by multiplying S, L, and D together.
6.	 Sort the list of potential failures by their RPNs and consider ways for reducing the risk 
associated with failures with high RPNs.
Table 3‑5 illustrates the results of a FMEA conducted to assess the risk of a new 
drug development project at a pharmaceutical company. As shown in the table, five 
potential failures for the project were identified: (1) The new drug is not effective at 
treating the ailment in question, (2) the drug is not safe, (3) the drug interacts with 
other drugs, (4) another company beats it to the market with a similar drug, and (5) the 
company is not able to produce the drug in mass quantities. According to the results, 
the most significant risk is the risk of developing a new drug that is not effective. 
While it is unlikely that much can be done to reduce the severity of this outcome, steps 
can be taken to reduce the likelihood of this outcome as well as increase its detectabil-
ity. For example, advanced computer technologies can be utilized to generate ­chemicals 
with more predicable effects. Likewise, perhaps earlier human clinical and animal 
­trials can be used to help detect the effectiveness of new drugs sooner. In this case, if 
both L and D could each be reduced by one, the overall RPN would be reduced from 
240 to 160.
4.  Quantitative Risk Analysis  Hertz and Thomas (1983) and Nobel prize winner 
Herbert Simon (1997) have written two classic books on this topic. As we noted in 
Chapter 1, the essence of risk analysis is to state the various outcomes of a decision as 
probability distributions and to use these distributions to evaluate the desirability of cer-
tain managerial decisions. The objective is to illustrate to the manager the distribution 
or risk profile of the outcomes (e.g., profits, completion dates, return on investment) of 
investing in some project. These risk profiles are one factor to be considered when mak-
ing the decision, along with many others such as intangibles, strategic concerns, behav-
ioral issues, fit with the organization, and so on.
A case in point is Sydney, Australia’s M5 East Tunnel (PMI, March 2005). It was 
constructed under strict budgetary and schedule requirements, but given the massive 
traffic delays now hampering commuters, the requirements may have been seriously 
underestimated. Due to an inexpensive computer system with a high failure rate, the 
tunnel’s security cameras frequently fail, requiring the operators to close the tunnel due 
to inability to react to an accident, fire, or excessive pollution inside the tunnel. The 
Table 3‑5  FMEA for New Product Development Project at Pharmaceutical Company
Failure
S
L
D
RPN
Not effective
8
6
5
240
Not safe
8
4
5
160
Drug interacts with other drugs
6
3
8
144
Beat to market
7
3
2
  42
Can’t produce
6
4
4
  96

3.5 RISK MANAGEMENT
•  97
tunnel was built to handle 70,000 vehicles a day, but it carries 100,000 so any glitch can 
cause immediate traffic snarls. A risk analysis, including the risk of overuse, probably 
would have anticipated these problems and mandated a more reliable set of computers 
once the costs of failure had been included.
Estimates  Before discussing the risk analysis techniques, we need to discuss some 
issues concerning the input data coming out of the qualitative analysis of step 3. We 
assume here that estimating the range and timing of possible outcomes of a risky event is 
not a problem but that the probabilities of each may be harder to establish. Given no 
actual data on the probabilities, the best guesses of people familiar with the problem is a 
reasonable substitute. An example of such guesses (a.k.a. estimates) for a portion of the 
project can be seen in Table 3‑6.
Knowledgeable individuals are asked for three estimates of the cost of each activity, 
a normal estimate plus optimistic and pessimistic estimates of the cost for each. From 
these an expected value for the cost of an activity can be found, but we will delay discuss-
ing this calculation until Chapter 5 where we show such calculations for either cost or 
task durations.
If approximations cannot be made, there are other approaches that can be used. One 
approach is to assume that all outcomes are equally probable, though there is no more 
justification for this assumption than assuming any other arbitrarily chosen probability 
values. Bear in mind that when using the common expected‐value approach (see below) 
to help make a decision, the result can be misleading. For example, the probability of a 
disaster may be very low (resulting in a low expected value), but such risks must be care-
fully managed nonetheless, such as with insurance or extensive contingency planning. 
This is why it is as important, if not more important, to consider the distribution of out-
comes as we advocate in this book.
Expected Value  When probability information is available or can be estimated, 
many risk analysis techniques use the concept of expected value of an outcome—that is, 
the value of an outcome multiplied by the probability of that outcome occurring. For 
example, in a coin toss using a quarter, there are two possible outcomes and the expected 
value of the game is the sum of the expected values of all outcomes. It is easily calculated. 
Assume that if the coin comes up “head” you win a quarter, but if it is “tails” you lose a 
quarter. We also assume that the coin being flipped is a “fair” coin and has a .5 probability 
of coming up either heads or tails. The expected value of this game is
E coin toss
.
$.
.
$
.
5
25
5
25
0
A decision table (a.k.a. a payoff‐matrix), such as illustrated in Table 3‑7, is a tech-
nique commonly used for single‐period decision situations where there are a limited 
number of decision choices and a limited number of possible outcomes.
In the following decision table, there are four features:
1.	 Three decision choices or alternatives, Ai.
2.	 Four states of nature, Sj, that may occur.
3.	 Each state of nature has its own probability of occurring, pj, but the sum of the prob-
abilities must be 1.0.
4.	 The outcomes associated with each alternative and state of nature combination, Aij, 
are shown in the body of the table.

98  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
Table 3‑6  Optimistic, Normal, and Pessimistic Cost Estimates for the Annual Tribute Dinner
Budget Information Annual Tribute Dinner
Task Name
Optimistic 
Cost = a
Normal 
Cost = m
Pessimistic 
Cost = b
Expected 
Cost = (a + 
4m + b)/6
Begin preparations for tribute dinner
Select date & secure room
Obtain corporate sponsorships for event
$100.00
$150.00
$350.00
$175.00
Identify potential businesses to sponsor
Phone/write businesses
$100.00
$150.00
$350.00
$175.00
Event hosts/MC
Identify and secure honoree of event
Identify and secure master of ceremonies
Identify/secure person to introduce honoree
Identify/secure event hosts & hostesses
Invitations
Secure mailing lists
Design invitation with PR firm
$1,250.00
$1,500.00
$2,200.00
$1,575.00
Print invitation
$2,300.00
$2,500.00
$3,000.00
$2,550.00
Mail invitation
$250.00
$300.00
$410.00
$310.00
RSVP’s back
Event entertainment secured
$750.00
$1,000.00
$1,250.00
$1,000.00
Food and drink
Finalize menu
Identify menu options
Trial menus
Select final menu
$700.00
$750.00
$800.00
$750.00
Identify company to donate wine
Table decorations, gifts, cards, flowers, etc.
$2,200.00
$2,800.00
$3,250.00
$2,775.00
Identify and have made event gift to attendees
$2,000.00
$2,500.00
$3,000.00
$2,500.00
Find florist to donate table arrangements
Hire calligrapher to make seating cards
$200.00
$300.00
$400.00
$300.00
Develop PR exhibit to display at event
$75.00
$150.00
$225.00
$150.00
Event and honoree publicity
$200.00
$325.00
$450.00
$325.00
Hire event photographer
$400.00
$450.00
$500.00
$450.00
Finalize seating chart
Hold tribute dinner
Send out “thank you’s” to sponsors & donators
$75.00
$150.00
$225.00
$150.00
Each person responsible for a task in this project was asked to take the estimated costs and determine a more accurate budget. 
The spreadsheet includes the cost information. This project does not include any cost for staff time. Each member of the project team is 
considered part of General Salaries and Administration, and their associated time will not be expensed through this project.

3.5 RISK MANAGEMENT
•  99
If a particular alternative, Ai, is chosen, we calculate the expected value of that alter-
native as follows:
E
for all values of
A
p
O
p
O
p
O
j
i
il
i
i
1
2
2
3
3
For example, using the data from Table 3‑7 for alternative “Fast” we get
E Fast
0 1 14
0 4 10
0 3 6
0 2 1
7 4
.
.
.
.
.
The reader may recall that we used a similar payoff matrix in Chapter 1, when we 
considered the problem of selecting a vendor to design and print bumper stickers. In that 
example, the criteria weights played the same role as probabilities play in the 
example above.
Simulation  We will demonstrate simulation in the next chapter (4) and will dem-
onstrate it more in later chapters. In recent years, simulation software has made the 
process user friendly and far simpler than in the midtwentieth century. It has become one 
of the most powerful techniques for dealing with risks that can be described in numeric 
terms. The most difficult problems involved with the use of simulation are (1) explaining 
the power of using three point estimates (most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic) instead 
of the single point estimates decision makers have always used; and (2) explaining the 
notion of statistical distributions to people whose only acquaintance with statistical dis-
tributions is the (mistaken) notion that the grades in the classroom are, or should be, 
distributed by “the curve.” Once the fundamental ideas behind a Monte Carlo simula-
tion are understood, the power of the technique in dealing with risk is obvious. Even 
more potent is the notion that one can estimate the likelihood that certain risky out-
comes will actually occur, such as the probability that project costs will be at or below a 
given limit, or the chance that a project will be completed as scheduled.
There is another problem with using simulation, or any process involving estimates 
of project costs, schedules, etc. It is convincing anyone connected to a project to make 
honest estimates of durations, costs, or any other variables connected with a project. The 
problem is the same whether one asks for single point or three point estimates. Asking 
individuals to be accountable for their estimates is always difficult for the askee, and 
project managers are advised to use their best interpersonal communication styles when 
seeking to improve project cost and time estimates. The PMI’s code of ethics demands 
honesty, and PMs should strive to ensure it. Nevertheless, many people will commonly 
make a decision based on the worst possible outcome that could occur (called the pessi-
mistic decision) and in a few cases (“Ms. Lucky”) on the best possible outcome that could 
occur (called the optimistic decision). Some problems at the end of the chapter include 
these decision rules.
Best Practice
Table 3‑7  Decision Table (or payoff matrix) for Sample Problem
Probabilities
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.2
Expected  
Value
Alternatives
States of Nature
High
Med.
Low
None
Fast
14
10
6
1
7.4
Average
10
12
9
5
  9.5*
Slow
5
8
12
7
8.7
*Maximum

100  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
5.  Risk Response Planning  Risk response typically involves decisions about which 
risks to prepare for and which to ignore and simply accept as potential threats. The main 
preparation for a risk is the development of a risk response plan. Such a plan includes 
contingency plans and logic charts detailing exactly what to do depending on particular 
events (Mallak, Kurstedt, and Patzak, 1997). For example, Iceland is frequently sub-
jected to unexpected avalanches and has thus prepared a detailed response plan for such 
events, stating who is in charge, the tasks that various agencies are to do at particular 
times, and so on. Actually practicing those responses with dress rehearsals is particularly 
important if the risk is a potentially life‐or‐death emergency.
Contingency Plan  A contingency plan is a backup for some emergency or 
unplanned event, often referred to colloquially as “plan B,” and there may also need to 
be a plan C and a plan D as well, for an even deeper emergency such as an oil spill in the 
gulf of Mexico, to give a wildly improbable example. The contingency plan includes who 
is in charge, what resources are available to the person, where backup facilities may be 
located, who will be supporting the person in charge and in what manner, and so on.
In another example, when Hurricane Katrina hit Mississippi and New Orleans in 
August 2005, Melvin Wilson of Mississippi Power, a subsidiary of 1,250 employees, became 
“Director of Storm Logistics” for the duration. As a contingency, Mississippi Power sub-
scribes to three weather forecasting services and in this case decided the most severe 
forecast was the right one. Wilson called for a retreat from the company’s high‐rise head-
quarters on the beach to a backup contingency office at a power plant 5 miles inland. By 
noon, the backup power plant flooded and lost power, which was not in the plan, and the 
cars in the parking lot were floating. A company security van made it through to take the 
storm team to a third option for a storm center—a service office in North Gulfport that 
had survived Hurricane Camille in 1969—there was no fourth option. The office was dry 
but without electricity or running water. The phone lines were down, and cell phones 
were useless but the company’s own 1,100 cell phones plus 500 extras to lend out had a 
unique radio function, and that worked. They were the only working communications for 
the first 72 hours on the gulf coast. The company’s worst‐case contingency plans had 
never imagined managing a repair crew of over 4,000 from outside. But Wilson became 
responsible for directing and supporting 11,000 repairmen from 24 states and Canada, 
feeding and housing them in 30 staging areas including six full‐service tent cities that 
housed 1,800 each. He had to find 5,000 trucks and 140,000 gallons of gasoline a day to 
help restore power to 195,000 customers. Within 12 days of the storm, power had been 
restored to all customers except a few thousand whose lines were too damaged to receive 
electricity. Clearly, Mississippi Power had not made contingency plans for such an extreme 
event, but the plans they had made, and the backups to those plans, were sufficient to give 
a smart team of emergency responders the chance to successfully handle this crisis.
Logic Chart  Logic charts show the flow of activities once a backup plan is initi-
ated. They force managers to think through the critical steps that will need to be accom-
plished in a crisis, and provide an overview of the response events and recovery operations. 
They include decisions, tasks, notifications, support needs, information flows, and other 
such activities. They are time independent and illustrate the many tasks as well as 
dependencies and interdependencies that emerge out of the initial response steps, such 
as: “If X has happened, do this; otherwise, do that.”
6.  Risk Monitoring and Control  Like risk management planning, monitoring 
and control are tasks for the parent organization, as well as for the project. If the over-
all risk management group is not involved along with the project in performing the 
tasks of recording and maintaining records of what risks were identified, how they 

discussion questions
•  101
were analyzed and responded to, and what resulted from the responses, the records 
have a high probability of being lost forever when the project is completed (or aban-
doned). If records are lost or not easily available, the chance that other projects will 
“learn from the experiences of others” is very low.
It is the job of the risk management group to maintain records for how all projects 
deal with risks. The group, however, is not merely a passive record holder. It should be 
involved in the search for new risks, for developing new and better techniques of measur-
ing and handling risk, and estimating the impact of risks on projects. Thus, the group 
should become an advisor to project risk management teams. It should provide an ongo-
ing evaluation of current risk identification, measurement, analysis, and response tech-
niques. Fundamentally, the group is devoted to the improvement of the organization’s 
risk management activities.
In the next chapter, we use the project plan to develop a project budget. We discuss 
conflict surrounding the budgetary process. Then we deal with uncertainty, the project’s 
(and PM’s) constant companion.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
	 1.	 What are some benefits of setting up a project plan 
for similar, frequent projects?
	 2.	 Discuss the reasons for inviting the functional man-
agers to a project launch meeting rather than their 
subordinates who may actually be doing the work.
	 3.	 Discuss the pros and cons of identifying and includ-
ing the project team at the project launch meeting.
	 4.	 Why is participatory management beneficial to pro-
ject planning? How does the process of participatory 
management actually work in planning?
	 5.	 What is the difference between the Resource column 
on the WBS (that would include personnel needed 
by the project) and the Assigned To column?
	 6.	 Under what circumstances is it sensible to do without 
a project launch meeting?
	 7.	 Distinguish among highly probable risks, extremely 
serious risks, and highly vulnerable areas in risk 
identification.
	 8.	 What limitation associated with traditional project 
management techniques like Gantt charts and prec-
edence diagrams does the Design Structure Matrix  
overcome?
	 9.	 Contrast the traditional waterfall approach to project 
management with Agile Project Management.
	10.	 Contrast the Project Plan, and the Work Breakdown 
Structure.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Give several examples of a type of project that would 
benefit from a template project plan being developed.
	 2.	 Why is the hierarchical planning process useful for 
project planning? How might it influence the plan if 
the hierarchical planning process was not used?
	 3.	 Develop a WBS with at least two levels for a project 
you are personally familiar with (e.g., moving away to 
college, cleaning out a garage). (Hint: the plan will 
be more useful as a learning exercise if you have a 
subordinate or two, real or imaginary.) Be sure to 
Risk management consists of risk planning and identification, qualitative and quan-
titative risk analysis, risk response, and risk monitoring and control. We deal with 
risk primarily through such means as decision tables, simulation, and response, which 
entail identifying which risks will be prepared for and which will be ignored and 
simply accepted.

102  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
include precedences, task durations, resource require-
ments, and milestones.
	 4.	 Discuss the drawbacks of implementing a project plan 
without a RACI Matrix.
	 5.	 Assume that your class instructor appointed you pro-
ject manager to lead a dozen of your classmates in 
writing up the end‐of‐chapter pedagogy materials 
(i.e., Review Questions, Discussion Questions, 
Problems, Incidents for Discussion, and Cases) as an 
Instructor’s Guide for this book. You plan to form 
­subteams to work on each of these elements, each 
headed by a subteam leader. Of course, all the sub-
team materials will need to be integrated into the 
final Instructor’s Guide at the end. Construct a WBS 
and RACI Matrix for this project.
	 6.	 You and your family and friends are planning to host 
a graduation party at the end of the school year. 
Construct a WBS for this party.
	 7.	 Construct a WBS for the project in Question 5.
	 8.	 Consider one or more projects (from this course or 
elsewhere) that you understand reasonably well. 
Identify situations where information learned from a 
later task of the project becomes important to an 
earlier task.
	 9.	 Consider the differences between Agile Project 
Management and the traditional waterfall approach 
summarized in Table 3‑4. Which practices associated 
with the APM approach do you see as having the 
greatest potential to complement the traditional 
waterfall approach?
EXERCISES
	 1.	 Find the best alternative given the cost outcomes 
below. The probability of rain is 0.3, clouds is 0.2, and 
sun is 0.5.
Alternative
State
Rainy
Cloudy
Sunny
a
6
3
4
b
2
4
5
c
5
4
3
d
5
4
3
	2.	 In Exercise  1, base your decision instead on the 
worst possible outcome for each alternative. Now 
consider a decision based on the best possible out-
come. When might both of these give you the 
same decision?
	 3.	 Laptops‐R‐Me keeps detailed data on their laptop 
sales. In the last 300 days the number of laptops sold 
was as shown in the table below.
Number Sold
Number of Days
None
15
1
30
2
87
3
141
4
27
(a)	 Find the frequency distribution of sales.
(b)	 Find the average number of laptops sold daily.
(c)	 Find the yearly profit assuming the store is only 
open on weekdays 50 weeks a year and the aver-
age profit per laptop is $65.
	 4.	 You are offered the chance to play a dice game at $10 
per toss of 2 dice. If the sum of the two dice tossed is 
4, you will receive $100. Should you play or not?
	 5.	 A marketing firm is trying to win a major contract 
from a large retail company and is concerned with 
four major threats. (1) Competition: the probability 
of very competitive bids is high at 0.6, and the poten-
tial impact would be substantial at a value of 5 on a 
scale of 1–7 (where a 7 is a major negative impact and 
a 1 is slight). (2) Economy: probability of a recession 
is 0.4 and its impact would be 7 since the company 
would probably decide not to advertise. (3) Chance 
of a loss: a small probability of only 0.3 with a nega-
tive impact of 4. (4) Personnel loss (head of market-
ing is being courted by a competitor): probability of 
loss is 0.5 but negative impact is only 3. Use the 
FMEA technique to prioritize the risks.
	6.	 A marketing analyst has investigated each of the 
four threats in Exercise  5 in terms of NOT being 
able to ameliorate them and has come up with the 
following values (again, on a 7-point scale) for each 
of the threats: #1: 1, #2: 6, #3: 3, #4: 4. Recalculate 
the RPN and determine which risks are now critical 
and which can be ignored. How has this changed 
from before? Does this new ranking seem more 
realistic?
	 7.	 Vern Toney managed the small IT group of a growing 
business. Vern’s boss, the CFO, was on Vern’s back to 
cut costs in the IT group. The CFO felt Vern could 
cut a staff member or two and maintain their current 
service level. Vern was also receiving a steady flow of 
complaints about the response time to calls to the 
help desk. He had two people answering the help 

desk phones and three desktop support staff respond-
ing to the problems.
	
	   Vern had to do something. He thought that he 
might save money by outsourcing the group’s help 
desk function. He called a few vendors, all of whom 
claimed they could save him money.
	
	   Vern was not sure if this would shorten the group’s 
response time to help desk calls. He felt that he 
needed to do some research before he made a deci-
sion. He decided to construct a project plan for 
the research.
	
	   After closing the office door, he sat down at his 
computer using Microsoft Project software and started 
to identify all of the steps he needed to take before he 
phoned vendors for bids on taking over the help desk. 
The investigation would have to be a secret or his 
staff would worry about their job security.
	
	   First, Vern decided that he needed to identify the 
department’s current level of service. This required 
knowing the current volume of calls, the length of 
time until the call ticket is assigned to a desktop sup-
port person, and the time it took to close the ticket. 
He thought that he could accomplish all of this in 
one week by doing all three steps simultaneously.
	
	   After he determined the current service level, Vern 
thought that he should informally poll all company 
managers to see what improvements in IT group service 
they would like. He figured 2 days to make all the 
phone calls. He could then call the finance department 
to get up‐to‐date payroll information on his staff’s salary 
and overtime expenses. Vern thought that if he called 
right away, he would surely hear back in 1 day.
	
	   Vern also decided to call other IT managers in the 
city to try to establish a benchmark service level. He 
thought that step would take a week and he could 
start after finding the current service levels. Last, 
after every other step was completed, Vern could pre-
pare a request for proposals to send to IT outsourcing 
vendors. He thought that the preparation of an RFP 
would take a week. He decided to start this planning 
project right away.
Question: Prepare a WBS using MSP with the steps 
that must be completed before Vern Toney can contact 
outsourcing vendors. If Vern starts on August 1, 2016, 
how  long will it take to get ready to contact outsourc-
ing vendors?
	 8.	 Develop a mind map to identify the tasks that need to 
be completed for a nonprofit organization’s annual 
casino night charity event.
	 9.	 In addition to your regular responsibilities, your super-
visor has just assigned you to be in charge of your 
organization’s annual golf tournament. It is expected 
that 100 to 150 employees will enter the tournament. 
In addition to organizing the event, you are also 
responsible for promoting it. Your budget for the event 
is $25,000. Develop a mind map to identify the tasks 
that need to be completed for the golf tourna-
ment project.
	10.	 *JR and Mike are preparing to revise their project 
management textbook. The Textbook Revision 
Project begins with developing a revision plan. 
Developing a revision plan includes four activities 
that each take one week to complete: going over the 
reviews provided by a sample of current adopters of 
the book, benchmarking other project management 
books, deciding on the changes to make to the book, 
and allocating the work to each author. After the 
revision plan has been developed, JR and Mike 
revise the book which is expected to take 24 weeks. 
Once all the chapters have been revised, the page 
proofs are reviewed which is expected to take 
8 weeks. After the page proofs have been reviewed 
the index for the book can be created which takes 
2 weeks. Finally, after the book has been revised, the 
supplements that accompany the book can be 
updated which takes 8 weeks. Enter the tasks and 
task durations into the Gantt Chart View in 
Microsoft Project. Don’t worry for now about the 
precedence relationships among the tasks or which 
author will be working on which task. Assume the 
project begins on March 7, 2016.
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
Plymouth Zoo’s Re‐engineering Project
The Chief Operating Officer of the Plymouth Zoo, Avery 
Mitchell, was put in charge after the CEO unexpectedly 
died. Avery was named acting CEO and told by the zoo’s 
Board of Directors that he would be considered for the 
position permanently if the next few months went 
smoothly. Avery was very nervous because he knew that 
the zoo was on the verge of financial troubles. He was not 
expecting to make the profits that had been ­projected 
forthe next few months. He knew that admissions 
incidents for discussion
•  103
* This problem is included for instructors who supplement their course with additional content on Microsoft Project.

104  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
were  down as a result of recent unrest in the city and 
nationally.
The deceased CEO had hired a consulting group to 
help identify cost savings for the zoo. The firm hired was 
unfamiliar to Avery, and there were rumors around the zoo 
that the lead consultant was a friend of the now 
deceased CEO.
The consulting group had been interviewing staff at the 
zoo for the last two weeks in order to prepare a proposal for 
work re‐design to cut costs. Avery met with the consult-
ants, and they presented him with their proposal. The pro-
posal outlined the cost of the consultants and the projected 
savings the zoo could expect after the consultants’ work 
was finished. Avery was unclear about precisely how the 
savings were determined and what would be the redesign 
project’s specific deliverables.
Questions: What should Avery Mitchell do next? What 
information should he ask the consultants for before accept-
ing their proposal? What project planning tools would you 
suggest Avery ask the consultants to use to outline the project 
more specifically and address his concerns?
Time Is Fleeting
A large privately owned retail discount store was having 
problems with their time clocks. There were six freestand-
ing time clocks in the store for staff use. They were located 
conveniently at points where staff entered and exited the 
store. The staff could also clock in and out on the com-
puter terminals that controlled the cash registers.
The time clocks were old and often in need of 
repair.  The Information Technology (IT) department was 
­responsible for the maintenance of the machines. The IT 
department could make minor repairs but had to call the 
clock vendor for the not infrequent major repairs.
The head of Human Resources (HR) wanted to launch 
a project to purchase and install new time clocks. He felt 
that because the current time clocks could not be counted 
on to work, the accuracy of the staff’s working hours and 
the store’s payroll was in question. This bothered him, and 
he felt the problem was getting worse as the clocks aged.
The head of the IT department wanted to launch a pro-
ject to get rid of all the time clocks and have everyone 
clock in and out using the current computer terminals 
located at each register. This would greatly decrease the 
costs the department was incurring to maintain the cur-
rent time clocks. The head of IT knew that the computer 
terminals were not conveniently located for anyone except 
the sales clerks, but he thought that he could add some 
terminals in other locations for less money than maintain-
ing the current clocks. He also felt very confident in his 
staff’s ability to maintain the computer terminals them-
selves, so the expense of calling in a vendor would disap-
pear completely.
The head of HR did not like IT’s idea at all. He had 
problems already with people clocking in for other staff 
and knew this would only get worse if every staff had to go 
to a designated computer terminal to clock in and out. 
The head of HR also knew he had several staff members 
who were not computer literate and would have trouble 
clocking in and out.
The two department heads went to the President, and 
each asked to set up and supervise a project to take care of 
the time clock problem.
Question: If you were the President how would you handle 
this problem?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility—3
Continuing with the ALF Steering Committee meeting, 
Fred led a discussion of all the major steps that must be 
included in the project plan, and asked each team member 
to identify the areas for which they would accept responsi-
bility. The hospital’s Construction Project Manager took 
responsibility for the construction of the facility, and the 
COO volunteered to oversee the building design, as well 
as define the needs for food services, housekeeping, staff-
ing, and policy and procedure development. The CFO 
agreed to develop the budgets for each area of the project 
as well as the operating budget for the facility. The CFO 
also agreed to create the payroll and accounting systems 
necessary to operate the facility.
The IS director accepted responsibility to define and 
set up all the telecommunications and information sys-
tem needs of the facility. The VP of Business Development 
agreed to create a preliminary marketing plan, and a 
communication package for the community and hospital 
staff. In addition, she discussed organizing a major ground 
breaking event. The Medical Director said that he would 
design an assessment tool for determining residents’ level 
of medical needs upon moving in to the facility. He felt 

this was the first step in defining what clinical services 
should be offered to residents. Fred told the team that he 
would develop the management structure for the new 
facility and work with in‐house counsel to identify all 
governmental regulations as well as all industry standards 
that pertain to an assisted living facility and govern the 
facility’s practices. Splient gave the team 2 months to 
come back with their detailed plans for their areas of 
responsibility.
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Define project deliverables.
	2.  	Define project constraints and assumptions.
	3.  	Develop a preliminary Level 1 WBS.
	4.  	Develop the RACI matrix for this project based 
on the Level 1 WBS.
	5.  	Would a Project Charter have been useful here?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
John Wiley & Sons
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. publishes books, journals, and 
electronic products for the educational, professional, sci-
entific, technical, and consumer markets. The oldest inde-
pendent publisher in North America, Wiley is in the 
forefront of electronic publishing, with more than 200 
products and services on disk, on CD‐ROM, or available 
by network. Wiley has more than 11,000 active book titles 
and 400 journals. The company publishes 1500 new titles 
in a variety of formats each year. The company has approx-
imately 2000 employees worldwide.
Wiley has U.S. publishing, marketing, and distribution 
centers in New York, Colorado, Maryland, New Jersey, 
and Illinois. A substantial portion of Wiley’s business 
comes from international markets. In addition to offices in 
the United States, it has operations in Europe (England 
and Germany), Canada, Asia, and Australia to serve the 
needs of the local markets and explore opportunities for 
expanding its publishing programs.
In the early years, Wiley was best known for the works 
of Washington Irving, Edgar Allan Poe, Herman Melville, 
Nathaniel Hawthorne, and other nineteenth‐century 
American literary giants. But by the turn of the century, 
the company was established as a leading publisher of 
works on science and technology.
Today its areas of specialization include the sciences, 
engineering, technology, mathematics, accounting, and 
business management, with a growing presence in general 
interest titles. Wiley is committed to providing informa-
tion in those formats most accessible to its readers and is 
taking advantage of the rapid advances in digital informa-
tion technology to enhance the speed and flexibility with 
which it delivers print publications as well as to develop a 
range of offerings in electronic formats.
The consulting firm you work for has been contacted 
by Wiley to support its textbook Project Management in 
Practice. Specifically, John Wiley and Sons is interested 
in contracting your consulting firm to develop the 
state‐of‐the‐art website described above. Furthermore, 
Wiley would also like your firm to benchmark website 
state‐of‐the‐art in terms of content, capabilities, and 
functionality prior to designing and developing 
this website.
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Develop a mind map for this project.
	2.  	Convert your mind map into a WBS.
	3.  	Discuss how your mind map might be used to facilitate 
other project planning activities such as resource allo-
cation, schedule development, and risk analysis.
questions
•  105

106  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Samson University
Samson University is a small liberal arts university located 
in the northeast of the country. Recently, QBS Inc., a large 
multinational corporation headquartered in the same city, 
made a large gift to the university to develop a 1‐year 
Master of Science program in Project Management. To 
develop the new Project Management program, Samson’s 
business school dean, Dr. Ryan, asked Professor Scott to 
chair a taskforce to develop the new degree program. 
Together, Dean Ryan and Professor Scott decided that 
Professors Samuelson, Kacy, Regan, and Lee should also 
serve on the taskforce.
At the taskforce launch meeting, Dean Ryan acknowl-
edged how much she appreciated everyone’s willingness to 
serve on the taskforce given all their other responsibilities. 
She went on to explain how developing this program 
would significantly enhance the university’s relationships 
with QBS, lead to important job opportunities for its grad-
uates, and ultimately enhance the university’s reputation. 
She then turned the meeting over to Professor Scott.
Professor Scott began:
I would also like to echo Dean Ryan’s appreciation for 
your willingness to serve on this taskforce. Personally, I 
am very excited about this opportunity and I truly 
believe we can develop a program that is unique and will 
attract great students and major employers. Today, my 
goal is to have us brainstorm about what work we need 
to undertake to complete our charge. I will record the 
ideas you come up with on the flip chart and then use 
this to develop a draft project schedule for your review. 
So without further delay, what ideas come to mind 
regarding the work we need to do to complete our charge?
Professor Lee was the first to respond:
In my view, the first thing we need to do is benchmark 
other Project Management programs and find out what 
courses these programs offer. Also, I think we need to 
decide what our goal is. In particular, are we trying to 
develop a program that achieves parity with other pro-
grams or are we trying to reinvent the way project man-
agement is taught?
Professor Kacy next chimed in:
I agree with Dr. Lee that benchmarking is an important 
step. Based on what we learn from benchmarking other 
programs, we will then need to develop the curriculum 
for our program.
Dean Ryan added:
From an administrative perspective, as you develop 
the curriculum you will need to consider faculty 
related issues. For example, does our current faculty 
have the background to teach the new courses? And 
if so, is there sufficient slack that we can accommo-
date the new courses in the faculty’s current 
teaching loads?
Professor Samuelson suggested:
In addition to benchmarking other programs, I think it 
is important to solicit input from key stakeholder groups 
including potential students, our faculty, and compa-
nies that would recruit graduates of the program.
Dr. Lee agreed:
I completely agree with Dr. Samuelson. My sugges-
tion is we create an online survey to solicit 
recruiter opinions.
Dean Ryan added:
Speaking of recruiters, we also need to evaluate whether 
we have sufficient resources in our Career Management 
Center to handle the coaching and placement needs of 
this new group of students.
Professor Scott next suggested:
There are a lot of issues that come to mind regarding 
the curriculum. For example, should we develop a skills 
matrix? How much hands‐on experience should be 
emphasized? Should the program be organized around 
modules or should we have standard semester 
length courses?
Building on Professor Scott’s comments, Professor 
Kacy remarked:
Yes, getting the curriculum right is critical. Also, we 
need to determine the split between hard analytical 
skills and softer skills. And if we were to go with mod-
ules, would there be themes for each module?
Professor Regan then commented:
Another issue we need to address is what would be the 
admissions criteria for the program? For example, would 
students need to have some number of years of work 
experience?

BIBLIOGRAPHY
•  107
As the discussion died down, Professor Scott 
wrapped up the meeting:
This has been a productive meeting. I think we have 
done an excellent job identifying the work ahead of us. 
I greatly appreciate the passion each of you has demon-
strated and the contributions all of you have made. I 
will take the list we generated, organize it a bit, and 
then develop a tentative schedule for your review. I will 
also have my staff assistant send out a poll to identify a 
weekly meeting time.
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Critique the launch meeting. Are there aspects 
you think are worth emulating? Are there aspects you 
would do differently?
	2.  	Develop a mind map for this project using the 
ideas shared in the meeting and other ideas that 
occur to you to identify the work that needs to be 
done to complete the project.
	3.  	Convert your mind map into a WBS.
	4.  	Review your mind map and identify risky poten-
tial failure points. Which are the most serious? Which 
are the most likely? Determine the most critical fail-
ure points by calculating all their RPNs. Develop a 
contingency plan for each of the most critical failure 
points you identify.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Aaron, J. M., C. P. Bratta, and D. P. Smith. “Achieving 
Total Project Control Using the Quality Gate Method.” 
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium of the Project 
Management Institute, San Diego, October 4, 1993.
Bailetti, A. J., J. R. Callahan, and P. DiPietro. “A 
Coordination Structure Approach to the Management of 
Projects.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
November 1994.
Bailey, D. E. “Comparison of Manufacturing Per­
formance of Three Team Structures in Semiconductor 
Plants.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
February 1998.
Bowen, H. K. Project Management Manual. Cambridge, 
MA: 
Harvard 
Business 
School, 
9–697–034, 
October 6, 1997.
Brown, K. A., and N. L. Hyer. “Whole‐Brain Thinking 
for Project Management.” Business Horizons, May–
June 2003.
Browning, T. R. “Design Structure Matrix Extensions 
and Innovations: A Survey and New Opportunities,” 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 2015.
Eppinger, S. D. “Innovation at the Speed of Information.” 
Harvard Business Review, January 2001.
Eppinger, S. D. and T. R. Browning. Design Structure 
Matrix Methods and Applications, Cambridge: MA: MIT 
Press, 2012.
Ford, R. C., and F. S. McLaughlin. “Successful Project 
Teams: A Study of MIS Managers.” IEEE Transactions on 
Engineering Management, November 1992.
Hambleton, L. Treasure Chest of Six Sigma Growth 
Methods, Tools, and Best Practice. Prentice Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ, 2008.
Hauptman, O., and K. K. Hirji. “The Influence of Process 
Concurrency on Project Outcomes in Product Development: 
An Empirical Study of Cross‐Functional Teams.” IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, May 1996.
Holt, C. J., Agile Project Management. Blue Fox 
Publishing, 2015.
Knutson, J. “How to Manage a Project Launch Meeting.” 
PM Network, July 1995.
Langley, A. “Between ‘Paralysis by Analysis’ and ‘Extinction 
by Instinct.’ ” IEEE Engineering Management Review, Fall 
1995, reprinted from Sloan Management Review, Spring 
1995. (This is a thoughtful article that speaks to both sides of 
the “How much planning should we do?” issue.)
Layton, M. C. Agile Project Management for Dummies. 
John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2012.
Lencioni, P., The Five Dysfunctions of a Team: A 
Leadership Fable. San Francisco, Jossey‐Bass, A Wiley 
Company, 2002. (Much like Goldratt’s The Goal, this 
work is fictional and tells the story of a new senior man-
ager who takes over a team of subordinates. It is a quick 
and easy read and well worth the brief time.)
Martin, P. K., and K. Tate. “Kick Off the Smart Way.” 
PM Network, October 1998.
O’Brien, H., Agile Project Management. CreateSpace 
Independent Publishing Platform, 2015.

108  •
Chapter 3 / Project Activity and Risk Planning
Pells, D. L. “Project Management Plans: An Approach to 
Comprehensive Planning for Complex Projects,” in P. C. 
Dinsmore, ed., The AMA Handbook of Project Management, 
New York: Amacom, 1993.
PMI, “Mutual Disagreement,” PM Network, February 2005.
PMI, “A Derailed Vision,” PM Network, April 2004.
Prentis, E. L. “Master Project Planning: Scope, Time and 
Cost.” Project Management Journal, March 1989.
Webster, J. L., W. E. Reif, and J. S. Bracker. “The 
Manager’s Guide to Strategic Planning Tools and 
Techniques,” Planning Review, November/December 1989. 
Reprinted in IEEE Engineering Management Review, 
December 1990. (A fascinating compilation of planning 
techniques including such methods as the Delphi method, 
stakeholder analysis, benchmarking, critical success fac-
tors, focus group, and many others—30 in all. It also has a 
short history of strategic planning.)

c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
  109
4
Having finished the planning for the technical aspects of the project, there is one more 
important element of planning to finish that will then result in the final go‐ahead from 
top management to initiate the project. A budget must be developed in order to obtain 
the resources needed to accomplish the project’s objectives. A budget is simply a plan for 
allocating organizational resources to the project activities. PMBOK covers the topic of 
budgeting in Chapter 7 on Cost.
But the budget also serves another purpose: It ties the project to the organiza-
tion’s aims and objectives through organizational policy. For example, NASA’s Mars 
Pathfinder‐Rover mission embedded a new NASA policy—to achieve a set of limited 
exploration opportunities at extremely limited cost. In 1976, NASA’s two Viking‐Mars 
Lander missions cost $3 billion to develop. In 1997, however, the Pathfinder‐Rover mis-
sion cost only $175 million to develop, a whopping 94 percent reduction. The difference 
was the change in organizational policy from a design‐to‐performance orientation to a 
design‐to‐cost orientation.
In Chapter 3, we described the project planning process as a set of steps that began 
with the overall project plan and then divided and subdivided the plan’s elements into 
smaller and smaller pieces that could finally be sequenced, assigned, scheduled, and 
budgeted. Hence, the project budget is nothing more than the project plan, based on the 
WBS, expressed in monetary terms.
Once the budget is developed, it acts as a tool for upper management to monitor 
and guide the project. As we will see later in this chapter, it is a necessary managerial 
tool, but it is not sufficient. Appropriate data must be collected and accurately reported 
in a timely manner or the value of the budget to identify current financial problems or 
anticipate upcoming ones will be lost. This collection and reporting system must be as 
carefully designed as the initial project plans because late reporting, inaccurate report-
ing, or reporting to the wrong person will negate the main purpose of the budget. In one 
instance, the regional managers of a large computer company were supposed to receive 
PMBOK Guide
Budgeting the Project

110  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
quarterly results for the purpose of correcting problems in the following quarter. The 
results took 4 months to reach them, however, completely negating the value of the 
budgeting‐reporting system.
In this chapter, we will first examine some different methods of budgeting and cost 
estimating, as used for projects. Then we will consider some ways to improve the cost esti-
mation process, including some technical approaches such as learning curves. We will also 
discuss some ways to misuse the budget that are, unfortunately, common. Last, we discuss 
the problem of budget uncertainty and the role of risk management when planning budgets.
	 4.1	
METHODS OF BUDGETING
Budgeting is simply the process of forecasting what resources the project will require, 
what quantities of each will be needed, when they will be needed, and how much they 
will cost. Tables 4-1 and 4-2 depict the direct costs involved in making a short documen-
tary film. Table 4-1 shows the cost per unit of usage (cost/hour) of seven different person-
nel categories and one facility. Note that the facility does not charge by the hour, but has 
a flat rate charge. Table 4-2 shows the resource categories and amounts used for each 
activity required to make the film. The resource costs shown become part of the budget 
for producing the documentary film. As you will see below, overhead charges may be 
added to these direct charges.
Most businesses and professions employ experienced estimators who can forecast 
resource usage with amazingly small errors. For instance, a bricklayer can usually estimate 
within 1 or 2 percent the number of bricks required to construct a brick wall of given 
dimensions. In many fields, the methods of cost estimation are well documented based 
on the experience of estimators gathered over many years. The cost of a building, or 
house, is usually estimated by the square feet of floor area multiplied by an appropriate 
dollar value per square foot and then adjusted for any unusual factors.
Budgeting a project such as the development of a new mobile app, however, is often 
more difficult than budgeting more routine activities—and even more difficult than 
regular departmental budgeting which can always be estimated as: “Same as last year plus 
X percent.” But project budgeters do not usually have tradition to guide them. Projects 
are, after all, unique activities. Of course, there may be somewhat similar past projects 
that can serve as a model, but these are rough guides at best. Forecasting a budget for a 
multiyear project such as a large product line or service development project is even 
Risk
Table 4-1  Resource Cost per Unit for Producing a Short Documentary Film
Producing a DVD Resource Cost
ID
Resource 
Name
Max. Units
Std. Rate
Ovt. Rate
Cost/Use
Accrue At
1
Scriptwriter
1   
  $75.00/hr
$100.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
2
Producer
1   
$100.00/hr
$150.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
3
Client
0.2
    $0.00/hr
    $0.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
4
Secretary
1   
  $25.00/hr
  $40.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
5
Editor
1   
  $50.00/hr
  $85.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
6
Production staff
1   
  $40.00/hr
  $70.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
7
Editing staff
1   
  $40.00/hr
  $70.00/hr
    $0.00
Prorated
8
Editing room
1   
    $0.00/hr
    $0.00/hr
$250.00
Start   

4.1 METHODS OF BUDGETING
•  111
Table 4-2  Budget by Resource for Producing a Short Documentary Film
Producing a film Budget by Resource
ID
Task Name
Resource Work 
Hours
Cost
Task Duration
  1
Project approval
    0 hr
        $0.00
  0 days
  2
Scriptwriting
112 hr
$8,400.00
14 days
Scriptwriter
112 hr
$8,400.00
  3
Schedule shoots
240 hr
$5,400.00
15 days
  4
Begin scheduling
    0 hr
        $0.00
  0 days
  5
Propose shoots
120 hr
      $7,000
  5 days
Scriptwriter
  40 hr
$3,000.00
Producer
  40 hr
$4,000.00
Client
  40 hr
        $0.00
  6
Hire secretary
  40 hr
$4,000.00
  5 days
Producer
  40 hr
$4,000.00
  7
Schedule shoots
  80 hr
$2,000.00
10 days
Secretary
  80 hr
$2,000.00
  8
Scheduling comp
    0 hr
        $0.00
  0 days
  9
Script approval
  80 hr
$4,000.00
  5 days
Producer
  40 hr
$4,000.00
Client
  40 hr
        $0.00
10
Revise script
  80 hr
$7,000.00
  5 days
Scriptwriter
  40 hr
$3,000.00
Producer
  40 hr
$4,000.00
11
Shooting
160 hr
$7,200.00
10 days
Editor
  80 hr
$4,000.00
Production staff
  80 hr
$3,200.00
12
Editing
168 hr
$5,290.00
  7 days
Editor
  56 hr
$2,800.00
Editing staff
  56 hr
$2,240.00
Editing room
  56 hr
  $250.00
13
Final approval
160 hr
$6,250.00
  5 days
Producer
  40 hr
$4,000.00
Client
  40 hr
        $0.00
Editor
  40 hr
$2,000.00
Editing room
  40 hr
  $250.00
14
Deliver film to client
    0 hr
        $0.00
  0 days

112  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
more hazardous because the unknowns can escalate quickly with changes in technology, 
materials, prices, and even the findings of the project up to that point.
Organizational tradition also impacts project budgeting. Every firm has its own rules 
about how overhead and other indirect costs are charged against projects. Every firm has 
its ethical codes. Most firms must comply with the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act (SOX) and the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Most firms have their 
own accounting idiosyncrasies, and the PM cannot expect the accounting department to 
make special allowances for his or her individual project. Although accounting will charge 
normal expenditures against a particular activity’s account number, as identified in the 
WBS, unexpected overhead charges, indirect expenses, and usage or price variances may 
suddenly appear when the PM least expects it, and probably at the worst possible time. 
(Price variances due to procurement, and the entire procurement process, are discussed in 
Chapter 12 of PMBOK, 2013.) There is no alternative—the PM must simply become 
completely familiar with the organization’s accounting system, as painful as that may be.
In the process of gaining this familiarity, the PM will discover that cost may be 
viewed from three different perspectives (Hamburger, 1986). The PM recognizes a cost 
once a commitment is made to pay someone for resources or services, for example when 
a machine is ordered. The accountant recognizes an expense when an invoice is 
received—not, as most people believe, when the invoice is paid. The controller per-
ceives an expense when the check for the invoice is mailed. The PM is concerned with 
commitments made against the project budget. The accountant is concerned with costs 
when they are actually incurred. The controller is concerned with managing the organi-
zation’s cash flows. Because the PM must manage the project, it is advisable for the PM 
to set up a system that will allow him or her to track the project’s commitments.
Another aspect of accounting that will become important to the unaware PM is that 
accountants live in a linear world. When a project activity has an $8,000 charge and runs 
over a four‐month period, the accounting department (or worse, their software) some-
times simply spreads the $8,000 evenly over the time period, resulting in a $2,000 alloca-
tion per month. If expenditures for this activity are planned to be $5,000, $1,000, $1,000, 
and $1,000, the PM should not be surprised when the organization’s controller storms 
into the project office after the first month screaming about the unanticipated and unac-
ceptable cash flow demands of the project!
Next, we look at two different approaches for gathering the data for budgeting a 
project: top‐down and bottom‐up.
Top‐Down Budgeting
The top‐down approach to budgeting is based on the collective judgments and experi-
ences of top and middle managers concerning similar past projects. These managers esti-
mate the overall project cost by estimating the costs of the major tasks, which estimates 
are then given to the next lower level of managers to split up among the tasks under their 
control, and so on, until all the work is budgeted.
The advantage of this approach is that overall budget costs can be estimated with 
fair accuracy, though individual elements may be in substantial error. Another advantage 
is that errors in funding small tasks need not be individually identified because the over-
all budget allows for such exceptions. Similarly, the good chance that some small but 
important task was overlooked does not usually cause a serious budgetary problem. The 
experience and judgment of top management are presumed to include all such elements 
in the overall estimate. In the next section, we will note that the assumptions on which 
these advantages are based are not always true.
PMBOK Guide

4.2 COST ESTIMATING
•  113
Bottom‐Up Budgeting
In bottom‐up budgeting, the WBS identifies the elemental tasks, whose resource require-
ments are estimated by those responsible for executing them (e.g., programmer‐hours in 
a software project). This can result in much more accurate estimates, but it often does 
not do so for reasons we will soon discuss. The resources, such as labor and materials, are 
then converted to costs and aggregated to different levels of the project, eventually 
resulting in an overall direct cost for the project. The PM then adds, according to organi-
zational policy, indirect costs such as general and administrative, a reserve for contingen-
cies, and a profit figure to arrive at a final project budget.
Bottom‐up budgets are usually more accurate in the detailed tasks, but risk the 
chance of overlooking some small but costly tasks. Such an approach, however, is com-
mon in organizations with a participative management philosophy and leads to better 
morale, greater acceptance of the resulting budget, and heightened commitment by the 
project team. It is also a good managerial training technique for aspiring project and 
general managers.
Unfortunately, true bottom‐up budgeting is rare. Upper level managers are reluctant 
to let the workers develop the budget, fearing the natural tendency to overstate costs, 
and fearing complaints if the budget must later be reduced to meet organizational resource 
limitations. Moreover, the budget is upper management’s primary tool for control of the 
project, and they are reluctant to let others set the control limits. Again, we will see that 
the budget is not a sufficient tool for controlling a project. Top‐down budgeting allows 
the budget to be controlled by people who play little role in designing and doing the 
work required by the project. It should be obvious that this will cause problems—
and it does.
We recommend that organizations employ both forms of developing budgets. 
They both have advantages, and the use of one does not preclude the use of the other. 
Making a single budget by combining the two depends on setting up a specific system 
to negotiate the differences. We discuss just such a system below. The only disadvan-
tage of this approach is that it requires some extra time and trouble, a small price to 
pay for the advantages. A final warning is relevant. Any budgeting system will be 
useful only to the extent that all cost/revenue estimates are made with scrupu-
lous honesty.
	 4.2	
COST ESTIMATING
In this section, we look at the details of the process of estimating costs and some dangers 
of arbitrary cuts in the project budget. We also describe and illustrate the difference 
between activity budgeting and program budgeting.
Best Practice
Project budgeting is a difficult task due to the lack of precedent and experience with 
unique project undertakings. Yet, understanding the organization’s accounting sys-
tem is mandatory for a PM. The two major ways of generating a project budget are 
top‐down and bottom‐up. The former is usually accurate overall but possibly includes 
significant error for low‐level tasks. The latter is usually accurate for low‐level tasks 
but risks overlooking some small but potentially costly tasks. Most organizations use 
top‐down budgeting in spite of the fact that bottom‐up results in better acceptance 
and commitment to the budget.

114  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Work Element Costing
The task of building a budget is relatively straightforward but tedious. Each work element 
is evaluated for its resource requirements, and its costs are then determined. For example, 
suppose a certain task is expected to require 16 hours of labor at $10 per hour, and the 
required materials cost $235. In addition, the organization charges overhead for the use 
of utilities, indirect labor, and so forth at a rate of 50 percent of direct labor. Then, the 
total task cost will be
$
$
.
$
235
16
10
1 5
475
+
=
/
hr
hr
In some organizations, the PM adds the overhead charges to the budget. In others, 
the labor time and materials are just sent to the accounting department and they run the 
numbers, add the appropriate overhead, and total the costs. Although overhead was 
charged here against direct labor, more recent accounting practices such as activity‐based 
costing may charge portions of the overhead against other cost drivers such as machine 
time, weight of raw materials, or total time to project completion.
Direct resource costs such as for materials and machinery needed solely for a particu-
lar project are usually charged to the project without an overhead add‐on. If machinery 
from elsewhere in the organization is used, this may be charged to the project at a certain 
rate (e.g., $/hr) that will include depreciation charges, and then will be credited to the 
budget of the department owning and paying for the machine. On top of this, there is 
often a charge for GS&A (general, sales, and administrative) costs that includes upper 
management, staff functions, sales and marketing, plus any other costs not included in 
the overhead charge. GS&A may be charged as a percentage of direct costs, all direct 
and indirect costs, or on other bases including total time to completion.
Thus, the fully costed task will include direct costs for labor, machinery, and resources 
such as materials, plus overhead charges, and finally, GS&A charges. The full cost budget 
is then used by accounting to estimate the benefits (e.g., cost savings, profits) to be 
earned by the project. The wise PM, however, will also construct a budget of direct costs 
for his or her own use. This budget provides the information required to manage the 
project without being confounded with costs over which he or she has no control.
Note that the overhead and GS&A effect can result in a severe penalty when a project 
runs late, adding significant additional and possibly unexpected costs to the project. Again, 
we stress the importance of the PM thoroughly understanding the organization’s account-
ing system, and especially how overhead and other such costs are charged to the project.
Of course, this process can also be reversed to the benefit of the PM by minimizing the 
use of drivers of high cost. Sometimes clients will even put clauses in contracts to foster 
such behavior. For example, when the state of Pennsylvania contracted for the construc-
tion of the Limerick nuclear power generating facility in the late 1980s, they included such 
an incentive fee provision in the contract. This provision stated that any savings that 
resulted from finishing the project early would be split between the state and the contrac-
tor. As a result, the contractor went to extra expense and trouble to make sure the project 
was completed early. The project came in 8 months ahead of its 49‐month due date and the 
state and the contractor split the $400 million savings out of the total $3.2 billion budget.
The Impact of Budget Cuts
In the previous chapter on planning, we described a process in which the PM plans Level 1 
activities, setting a tentative budget and duration for each. Subordinates (and this term 
refers to anyone working on the project even though such individuals may not officially 
report to the PM and may be “above” the PM on the firm’s organizational chart) then take 

4.2 COST ESTIMATING
•  115
responsibility for specifying the Level 2 activities required to produce the Level 1 task. As 
a part of the Level 2 specifications, tentative budgets and durations are noted for each 
Level 2 activity. The PM’s initial budget and duration estimates are examples of top‐down 
budgeting. The subordinate’s estimates of the Level 2 task budgets and durations are 
­bottom‐up budgeting. As we promised, we now deal with combining the two budgets.
We will label the Level 1 task estimate of duration of the ith task as ti, and the respec-
tive cost estimate as ri, the t standing for “time” and the r for “resources.” In the mean-
time, the subordinate has estimated task costs and durations for each of the Level 2 tasks 
that comprise Level 1 task i. We label the aggregate cost and duration of these Level 2 
activities as ri  and ti, respectively. It would be nice if ri equaled ri  but the reality is rarely 
that neat. In general, r
r
i
i
≪
. (The same is true of the time estimates, ti and ti.) There are 
three reasons why this happens. First, jobs always look easier, faster, and cheaper to the 
boss than to the person who has to do them (Gagnon and Mantel, 1987). Second, bosses 
are usually optimistic and never admit that details have been forgotten or that anything 
can or will go wrong. Third, subordinates are naturally pessimistic and want to build in 
protection for everything that might possibly go wrong.
It is important that we make an assumption for the following discussion. We assume 
that both boss and subordinate are reasonably honest. What follows is a win‐win negotia-
tion, and it will fail if either party is dishonest. (We feel it is critically important to 
remind readers that it is never smart to view the other party in a negotiation as either 
stupid or ignorant. Almost without fail, such thoughts are obvious to the other party and 
the possibility of a win‐win solution is dead.) The first step in reducing the difference 
between the superior’s and subordinate’s estimates occurs when the worker explains the 
reality of the task to the boss, and ri rises. Encouraged by the fact that the boss seems to 
understand some of the problems, the subordinate responds to the boss’s request to 
remove some of the protective padding. The result is that ri  falls.
The conversation now shifts to the technology involved in the subordinate’s work 
and the two parties search for efficiencies in the Level 2 work plan. If they find some, the 
two estimates get closer still, or, possibly, the need for resources may even drop below 
either party’s estimate.
To complete our discussion, let’s assume that after all improvements have been made, 
ri  is still somewhat higher than ri. Should the boss accept the subordinate’s cost estimate 
or insist that the subordinate accept the boss’s estimate? To answer this question, we must 
recall the discussion of project life cycles from Chapter 1. We discussed two different com-
mon forms of life cycles, and these are illustrated again, for convenience, in Figure 4-1. 
One curve is S‐shaped, and the other is J‐shaped. As it happens, the shapes of these curves 
hold the key to our decision.
If the project life cycle is S‐shaped, then with a somewhat reduced level of resources, 
a smaller than proportional cut will be made in the project’s objectives or performance, 
likely not a big problem. If the project’s life cycle is J‐shaped, the impact of inadequate 
Time/Resource
100
S-Shaped
J-Shaped
Project completion
Figure 4-1  Two project life cycles (cf. Figures 1-2 and 1-3).

116  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
resources will be serious, a larger than proportional cut will be made in the project’s per-
formance. The same effect occurs during an “economy drive” when a senior manager 
decrees an across‐the‐board budget cut for all projects of, say, 5 or 10 percent. For a pro-
ject with a J‐shaped life cycle, the result is disaster. It is not necessary to know the actual 
shape of a project’s life cycle with any precision. One needs merely to know the probable 
curvature (concave or convex to the baseline) of the last stage of the cycle for the project 
being considered.
The message here is that for projects with S‐shaped life cycles, the top‐down budget-
ing process is probably acceptable. For J‐shaped life‐cycle projects, it is dangerous for 
upper management not to accept the bottom‐up budget estimates. At the very least, 
management should pay attention when the PM complains that the budget is insuffi-
cient to complete the project. An example of this problem is NASA’s Space Shuttle 
Program, projected by NASA to cost $10–13 billion but cut by Congress to $5.2 billion. 
Fearing a cancellation of the entire program if they pointed out the overwhelming devel-
opmental problems they faced, NASA acquiesced to the inadequate budget. As a result, 
portions of the program fell 3 years behind schedule and had cost overruns of 60 percent. 
As the program moved into the operational flight stage, problems stemming from the 
inadequate budget surfaced in multiple areas, culminating in the Challenger explosion in 
January 1986.
Finally, in these days of increasing budget cuts and great stress on delivering project 
value, cuts to the organization’s project portfolio must be made with care. Wheatley 
(2009) warns against the danger of focusing solely on ROI when making decisions about 
which projects will be kept and which will be terminated. We will have considerably 
more to say about this subject in Chapter 8.
An Aside
Here and elsewhere, we have preached the importance of managers and workers who are 
willing to communicate with one another frequently and honestly when developing 
budgets and schedules for projects. Such communication is the exception, not the rule. 
The fact that only a small fraction of software development projects are completed even 
approximately on time and on budget is so well known as to be legend, as is the record of 
any number of high technology industries. Sometimes the cause is scope creep, but top‐
down budgeting and scheduling are also prime causes. Rather than deliver another ser-
mon on the subject, we simply reprint Rule #25 from an excellent book by Jim McCarthy, 
Dynamics of Software Development (1995).
Don’t Accept Dictation
I am amazed at the extent to which the software development community accepts 
bogus dictates, especially when it comes to scheduling. This astonishing passivity is 
emblematic of Old World behavior applied to New World problems. Given that it’s 
extremely difficult (probably impossible) for a team of committed professionals to cre-
ate a schedule that even approximates the rate at which the product ultimately mate-
rializes, it’s utter madness that in many organizations the dates, the features, and the 
resources—the holy triangle—of a software development project are dictated by peo-
ple unfamiliar with developing software. Too often people like “Upper Management” 
or “Marketing” or some other bogeymen conjure up the date. What’s worse, by some 
malignant and pervasive twist of illogic, otherwise competent development managers 
accept this sort of folly as standard operating procedure.

4.2 COST ESTIMATING
•  117
I have polled dozens of groups of development managers, and my informal data 
gathering suggests that somewhere in the neighborhood of 30 to 40 percent of all devel-
opment efforts suffer from dictated features, resources, and schedules. It should be a fun-
damental dogma that the person who has to do the work should predict the amount of 
time it will take. Of course, if accuracy isn’t a goal, anybody can make foolish predictions.
In some ways, the root of all scheduling evil is that software developers and their 
managers abdicate their responsibility to determine the probable effort required to 
achieve a given set of results. The ultimate act of disempowerment is to take away 
the responsibility for the schedule from those who must live by it. To accept this 
treatment under any circumstances is no less heinous an act than imposing a bogus 
scheduling imperative on a team to begin with.
It’s easy to sympathize with the urge for control and predictability that this phe-
nomenon manifests, but why on earth should such organizational goofiness persist in 
the face of what always follows, repeated software calamity?
Often people and organizations have a hard time learning from their mistakes. We 
tend to be a bit thick sometimes. Our diagnosis of what went wrong the last time can 
be utterly erroneous, and so we gear up to do it all again—without ever even begin-
ning to experience the core insights required for successful software development.
This blindness is especially likely after a disastrously late software project. Many 
team members want desperately never to repeat such a death march, so they leave the 
group. As evidenced by their urge to survive, these people are often the most vital mem-
bers of the team. The remnant is left lurching about in a fog of blame. Like the Angel of 
Death, Guilt visits every cubicle. The managers are choking on their own failure, so their 
ability to lead is smothered. The marketing people have been made to look foolish, their 
promises just so much gas, and cynicism creeps into their messages. The executives are 
bewildered, embarrassed, and angry. The customers have been betrayed yet another time.
Slowly the fog dissipates, and a modicum of hope materializes. New team mem-
bers re‐inject a measure of the lost vitality into the team, and new (or forgetful) 
managers take the helm. The technological siren seduces the group once again. The 
executives, chastened but unlearning, plunk down enough dough and tell the team 
when the new project must be done. The cycle repeats.
How is a person to cope with such folly? If you find yourself in such an organiza-
tional situation, how should you respond? Keep in mind that in an asylum, the sane are 
crazy. And in an organization in which irrationality prevails, the irrationality tends to 
concentrate the further up you go. Your situation might be hopeless because the extent 
to which you are viewed as crazy will tend to intensify in direct proportion to the power 
of the observer. You might be able to cope with irrational and self‐destructive organi-
zational values, but you’re unlikely to prosper in such a setting. A situation this gravely 
out of whack must be resolved, however. So you steel yourself and inform your dictators 
that, much as you would like to accept their dictates, you are unable to do so because 
reality requires otherwise. You remind them (tactfully) that their power is not magic, 
that their wishes don’t make software. You help them envision a future in which people 
are striving to meet their own goals, things they’ve proposed to do over a certain interval 
and things that have a chance of being done even sooner than anticipated.
You need to build schedules meticulously from the bottom up. Each person who 
has a task to do must own the design and execution of that task and must be held 
accountable for its timely achievement. Accountability is the twin of empowerment. 
The two together can create a reasonable software development plan.
Reprinted with the kind permission of Jim McCarthy, copyright holder, from Dynamics of Software 
Development by Jim McCarthy, Microsoft Press, Redmond, WA, 1995, pp. 88–89.

118  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Activity versus Program Budgeting
Traditional organizational budgets are typically activity oriented and based on historical 
data accumulated through an activity‐based accounting system. Individual expenses are 
classified and assigned to basic budget lines such as phone, materials, fixed personnel 
types (salaried, exempt, etc.), or to production centers or processes. These lines are then 
aggregated and reported by organizational units such as departments or divisions.
Project budgets can also be presented as activity budgets, such as in Table 4-3 where 
one page of a six‐page monthly budget report for a real estate management project is 
Table 4-3  Typical Monthly Budget for a Real Estate Project (page 1 of 6)
Current
Actual
Budget
Variance
Pct.
Corporate—Income Statement
Revenue
8430 Management fees
.00
.00
.00 
.0
8491 Prtnsp. reimb.—property 
mgmt.
7,410.00
6,222.00
1,188.00 
119.0
8492 Prtnsp. reimb.—owner 
acquisition
.00
3,750.00
3,750.00—
.0
8493 Prtnsp. reimb.—rehab
.00
.00
.00 
.0
8494 Other income
.00
.00
.00 
.0
8495 Reimbursements—others
.00
.00
.00 
.0
Total revenue
  7,410.00
  9,972.00   2,562.00—
    74.3
Operating expenses
Payroll & P/R benefits
8511 Salaries
29,425.75
34,583.00
5,157.25 
85.0
8512 Payroll taxes
1,789.88
3,458.00
1,668.12 
51.7
8513 Group ins. & med. 
reimb.
1,407.45
1,040.00
387.45—
135.3
8515 Workers’ compensation
43.04
43.00
.04—
100.0
8516 Staff apartments
.00
.00
.00 
.0
8517 Bonus
.00
.00
.00 
.0
Total payroll & P/R benefits
  32,668.12
  39,124.00   6,457.88 
    83.5
Travel & entertainment expenses
8512 Travel
456.65
300.00
156.65—
152.2
8522 Promotion, 
entertainment & gift
69.52
500.00
430.48 
13.9
8523 Auto
1,295.90
1,729.00
433.10 
75.0
Total travel & entertainment exp.
    1,822.07
    2,529.00
    706.93 
    72.1
Professional fees
8531 Legal fees
419.00
50.00
369.00—
838.0
8532 Accounting fees
289.00
.00
289.00—
.0
8534 Temporary help
234.58
    200.00        34.58—
  117.2

4.3 IMPROVING COST ESTIMATES
•  119
Cost estimating is more tedious than complex except where overhead and GS&A 
expenses are concerned. Thus, the wise PM will learn the organization’s accounting 
system thoroughly. Low budget estimates or budget cuts will not usually be too seri-
ous for S‐shaped life‐cycle projects but can be disastrous for exponential life‐cycle 
projects. Two kinds of project budget exist, usually depending on where projects 
report in the organization. Activity budgets show lines of standard activity by actual 
and budget for given time periods. Program budgets show expenses by task and time 
period. Program budgets are then aggregated by reporting unit.
illustrated. When multiple projects draw resources from several different organizational 
units, the budget may be divided between these multiple units in some arbitrary fashion, 
thereby losing the ability to control project resources as well as the reporting of individ-
ual project expenditures against the budget.
This difficulty gave rise to program budgeting, illustrated in Table 4-4. Here the ­program‐
oriented project budget is divided by task and expected time of expenditure, thereby allow-
ing aggregation across projects. Budget reports are shown both aggregated and disaggregated 
by “regular operations,” and each of the projects has its own budget. For example, Table 4-3 
would have a set of columns for regular operations as well as for each project.
	 4.3	
IMPROVING COST ESTIMATES
At the end of his “Don’t Accept Dictation,” reprinted above, McCarthy wrote “Each per-
son who has a task to do must own the design and execution of that task and must be held 
accountable for its timely achievement. Accountability is the twin of empowerment.” If 
empowerment is to be trusted, it must be accompanied by accountability. Fortunately, it 
is not difficult to do this. This section deals with a number of ways for improving the 
process of cost estimating. These improvements are not restricted to cost estimates, but 
can be applied to almost all of the areas in project management that call for estimating 
or forecasting any aspect of a project that is measured numerically; for example, task 
durations, the time for which specialized personnel will be required, or the losses associ-
ated with specific types of risks should they occur. These improvements range from better 
formalization of the estimating/forecasting process, using forms and other simple proce-
dures, to straightforward quantitative techniques involving learning curves. We ­conclude 
with some miscellaneous topics, including behavioral issues that often lead to incorrect 
budget estimates.
Forms
The use of simple forms such as that in Figure 4-2 can be of considerable help to the PM 
in obtaining accurate estimates, not only of direct costs, but also when the resource is 
needed, how many are needed, who should be contacted, and if it will be available when 
needed. The information can be collected for each task on an individual form and then 
aggregated for the project as a whole.
Learning Curves
Suppose a firm wins a contract to supply 25 units of a complex electronic device to a 
customer. Although the firm is competent to produce this device, it has never produced 
one as complex as this. Based on the firm’s experience, it estimates that if it were to build 
Risk

120  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Project name
Date
Task number
RESOURCES NEEDED
Resources
Person to 
Contact
How Many/
Much Needed
When Needed
Check (✓) 
If Available
People:
    Managers, Supervisors
    Professional & 
Technical
    Nontechnical
Money
Materials:
    Facilities
    Equipment
    Tools
    Power
    Space
Special Services:
    Research & Test
    Typing/clerical
    Reproduction
Others
Figure 4-2  Form 
for gathering data 
on project 
resource needs.
Table 4-4  Project Budget by Task and Month
Task
Start 
Node (I)
End Node 
(J)
Estimate (£)
Monthly Budget (£)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
A
1
2
  7,000
5,600
  1,400
B
2
3
  9,000
  3,857
  5,143
C
2
4
10,000
  3,750
  5,000
  1,250
D
2
5
  6,000
  3,600
  2,400
E
3
7
12,000
  4,800
4,800
2,400
F
4
7
  3,000
  3,000
G
5
6
  9,000
  2,571
  5,143
1,286
H
6
7
  5,000
3,750
1,250
I
7
8
  8,000
2,667
5,333
J
8
9
  6,000
6,000
75,000
5,600
12,607
15,114
14,193
9,836
6,317
5,333
6,000

4.3 IMPROVING COST ESTIMATES
•  121
many such devices it would take about 4 hours of direct labor per unit produced. With 
this estimate, and the wage and benefit rates the firm is paying, the PM can derive an 
estimate of the direct labor cost to complete the contract.
Unfortunately, the estimate will be in considerable error because the PM is underes-
timating the labor costs to produce the initial units that will take much longer than 
4 hours each. Likewise, if the firm built a prototype of the device and recorded the direct 
labor hours, which may run as high as 10 hours for this device, this estimate applied to 
the contract of 25 units would give a result that is much too high.
In both cases, the reason for the error is the learning exhibited by humans when they 
repeat a task. In general, it has been found that unit performance improves by a fixed 
percent each time the total production quantity doubles. More specifically, each time the 
output doubles, the worker hours per unit decrease by a fixed percentage of their previous value. 
This percentage is called the learning rate, and typical values run between 70 and  
95 percent. The higher values are for more mechanical tasks, while the lower, faster‐­
learning values are for more mental tasks such as solving problems. A common rate in 
manufacturing is 80 percent. For example, if the device described in the earlier example 
required 10 hours to produce the first unit and this firm generally followed a typical  
80 percent learning curve, then the second unit would require .80 × 10 = 8 hours, the 
fourth unit would require 6.4 hours, the eighth unit 5.12 hours, and so on. Of course, 
after a certain number of repetitions, say 100 or 200, the time per unit levels out and 
­little further improvement occurs.
Mathematically, this relationship we just described follows a negative exponential 
function. Using this function, the time required to produce the nth unit can be calculated as
T
T n
n
r
1
where Tn is the time required to complete the nth unit, T1 is time required to complete the 
first unit, and r is the exponent of the learning curve and is calculated as the log(learning 
rate)/log(2). Tables are widely available for calculating the completion time of unit n and 
the cumulative time to produce units one through n for various learning rates. The impact 
of learning can also be incorporated into spreadsheets developed to help prepare the 
budget for a project as is illustrated in the example at the end of this section.
The use of learning curves in project management has increased greatly in recent 
years. For instance, methods have been developed to approximate composite learning 
curves for entire projects (Amor and Teplitz, 1998), for approximating total costs from 
the unit learning curve (Camm, Evans, and Womer, 1987), and for including learning 
curve effects in critical resource diagramming (Badiru, 1995). The conclusion is that the 
effects of learning, even in “one‐time” projects, should not be ignored. If costs are under-
estimated, the result will be an unprofitable project and senior management will be 
unhappy. If costs are overestimated, the bid will be lost to a savvier firm and senior man-
agement will be unhappy.
Best Practice
Media One Consultants
Media One Consultants is a small consulting firm that specializes in developing the 
electronic media that accompany major textbooks. A typical project requires the 
development of an electronic testbank, PowerPoint lecture slides, and a website to 
support the textbook.
A team consisting of three of the firm’s consultants just completed the content for 
the first of eighteen chapters of an operations management textbook for a major col-
lege textbook publisher. In total, it took the team 21 hours to complete this content. 

122  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
The consultants are each billed out at $65/hour plus 20 percent to cover overhead. 
Past experience indicates that projects of this type follow a 78 percent learning curve.
The publisher’s developmental editor recently sent an email message to the team 
leader inquiring into when the project will be complete and what the cost will be. 
Should the team leader attempt to account for the impact of learning in answering 
these questions? How big a difference does incorporating learning into the budget 
make? What are the managerial implications of not incorporating learning into the 
time and cost estimates?
The team leader developed the spreadsheet below to estimate the budget and 
completion time for this project. The top of the spreadsheet contains key param-
eters such as the learning rate, the consultants’ hourly billout rate, the overhead rate, 
and the time required to complete the first chapter. The middle of the spreadsheet 
contains formulas to calculate both the unit cost and time of each chapter and the 
cumulative cost and time.
According to the spreadsheet, the cost of the project is $14,910 and will require 
in total 191.2 hours. Had the impact of learning not been considered, the team leader 
would have likely grossly overestimated the project’s cost to be $29,484 (1,638 × 18) and 
its duration to be 378 (21 × 18) hours. Clearly, several negative consequences could be 
incurred if these inflated time and cost estimates were used. For example, the publisher 
might decide to reevaluate its decision to award the contract to Media One. Furthermore, 
the time when the team members would be able to start on their next assignment would 
be incorrectly estimated. At a minimum, this would complicate the start of future projects. 
Perhaps more damaging, however, is that it could lead to lost business if potential clients 
were not willing to wait for their project to begin based on the inflated time estimates.
A
B
C
D
E
F
  1
Learning Rate
78.0%
  2
Hourly Rate
$65
  3
Overhead Rate
20.0%
  4
Time for First Unit
21
  5
  6
Cumulative
Chapter
Cumulative
  7
Chapter Number
Unit Time
Time
Cost
Cost
  8
  1
21.0
  21.0
$1,638
  $1,638
  9
  2
16.4
  37.4
$1,278
  $2,916
10
  3
14.2
  51.5
$1,105
  $4,020
11
  4
12.8
  64.3
  $997
  $5,017
12
  5
11.8
  76.1
  $920
  $5,937
13
  6
11.0
  87.2
  $862
  $6,799
14
  7
10.5
  97.6
  $815
  $7,614
15
  8
10.0
107.6
  $777
  $8,391
16
  9
  9.6
117.1
  $745
  $9,137
17
10
  9.2
126.3
  $718
  $9,854
18
11
  8.9
135.2
  $693
$10,548
19
12
  8.6
143.8
  $672
$11,220

4.3 IMPROVING COST ESTIMATES
•  123
Other Factors
Studies consistently show that between 60 and 85 percent of projects fail to meet their 
time, cost, and/or performance objectives. The record for information technology (IT) 
projects is particularly poor, it seems. For example, there are at least 45 estimating models 
available for IT projects but few IT managers use any of them (Lawrence,  1994; 
Martin, 1994). While the variety of problems that can plague project cost estimates seem 
to be unlimited, there are some that occur with high frequency; we will discuss each of 
these in turn.
Changes in resource prices, for example, are a common problem. The most common 
managerial approach to this problem is to increase all cost estimates by some fixed per-
centage. A better approach, however, is to identify each input that has a significant 
impact on the costs and to estimate the rate of price change for each one. The Bureau of 
Labor Statistics (BLS) in the U.S. Department of Commerce publishes price data and 
“inflators” (or “deflators”) for a wide range of commodities, machinery, equipment, and 
personnel specialities. (For more information on the BLS, visit http://stats.bls.gov or 
www.bls.gov.)
Another problem is overlooking the need to factor into the estimated costs an ade-
quate allowance for waste and spoilage. Again, the best approach is to determine the 
individual rates of waste and spoilage for each task rather than to use some fixed 
percentage.
A similar problem is not adding an allowance for increased personnel costs due to 
loss and replacement of skilled project team members. Not only will new members go 
through a learning period, which increases the time and cost of the relevant tasks, but 
professional salaries usually increase faster than the general average. Thus, it may cost 
substantially more to replace a team member with a newcomer who has about the same 
level of experience.
A
B
C
D
E
F
20
13
  8.4
152.2
  $653
$11,873
21
14
  8.2
160.4
  $636
$12,509
22
15
  8.0
168.3
  $620
$13,130
23
16
  7.8
176.1
  $606
$13,736
24
17
  7.6
183.7
  $593
$14,329
25
18
  7.5
191.2
  $581
$14,910
26
27
Key Formulas:
28
B8
= B4
29
B9
= B$8*(A9^(LOG(B$1)/LOG(2))) {copy to cells B10:B25}
30
C8
= B8
31
C9
= B9 + C8 {copy to cells C10:C25}
32
D8
= B8*B$2*(1 + B$3)
33
D9
= (B9*B$2)*(1 + B$3) {copy to cells D10:D25}
34
E8
= D8
35
E9
= D9 + E8 {copy to cells E10:E25}

124  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Then there is also the Brooks’s “mythical man‐month” effect* which was discovered 
in the IT field but applies just as well in projects. As workers are hired, either for addi-
tional capacity or to replace those who leave, they require training in the project envi-
ronment before they become productive. The training is, of course, informal on‐the‐job 
training conducted by their coworkers who must take time from their own project tasks, 
thus resulting in ever more reduced capacity as more workers are hired.
And there is the behavioral possibility that, in the excitement to get a project 
approved, or to win a bid, or perhaps even due to pressure from upper management, the 
project cost estimator gives a more “optimistic” picture than reality warrants. Inevitably, 
the estimate understates the cost. This is a clear violation of the PMI’s Code of Ethics. It 
is also stupid. When the project is finally executed, the actual costs result in a project 
that misses its profit goals, or worse, fails to make a profit at all—hardly a welcome entry 
on the estimator’s résumé.
Even organizational climate factors influence cost estimates. If the penalty for over-
estimating costs is much more severe than underestimating, almost all costs will be 
underestimated, and vice versa. A major manufacturer of airplane landing gear parts 
wondered why the firm was no longer successful, over several years, in winning competi-
tive bids. An investigation was conducted and revealed that, 3 years earlier, the firm was 
late on a major delivery to an important customer and paid a huge penalty as well as 
being threatened with the loss of future business. The reason the firm was late was because 
an insufficient number of expensive, hard to obtain parts was purchased for the project 
and more could not be obtained without a long delay. The purchasing manager was 
demoted and replaced by his assistant. The assistant’s solution to this problem was to 
include a 10 percent allowance for additional, hard to obtain parts in every cost proposal. 
This resulted in every proposal from the firm being significantly higher than their com-
petitors’ proposals in this narrow margin business.
There is also a probabilistic element in most projects. For example, projects such as 
writing software require that every element work 100 percent correctly for the final prod-
uct to perform to specifications. In programming software, if there are 1000 lines of code 
and each line has a .999 probability of being accurate, the likelihood of the final program 
working is only about 37 percent!
Sometimes, there is plain bad luck. What is indestructible, breaks. What is impen-
etrable, leaks. What is certified, guaranteed, and warranteed, fails. The wise PM includes 
allowances for “unexpected contingencies.”
There are many ways of estimating project costs; we suggest trying all of them and 
then using those that “work best” for your situation. The PM should take into considera-
tion as many known influences as can be predicted, and those that cannot be predicted 
must then simply be “allowed for.”
Finally, a serious source of inaccurate estimates of time and cost is the all too common 
practice of some managers arbitrarily to cut carefully prepared time and cost estimates. 
Managers rationalize their actions by such statements as “I know they have built a lot of slop 
in those estimates,” or “I want to give them a more challenging target to shoot at.” This is 
not effective management. It is not even good common sense. (Reread the excerpt from 
McCarthy, 1995 appearing above.) Cost and time estimates should be made by the people 
who designed the work and are responsible for doing it. As we argued earlier in this chapter, 
the PM and the team members may negotiate different estimates of resources needs and task 
durations, but managerially dictated arbitrary cuts in budgets and schedules almost always 
lead to projects that are late and over budget. We will say more about this later.
*This is from another classic work, Brooks (1975), that had a major impact on managers, particularly in the 
Information Systems area.

4.4 BUDGET UNCERTAINTY AND PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
•  125
Boston’s Big Dig highway/tunnel project is one of the largest, most complex, and 
technologically challenging highway projects in U.S. history. The “Big Dig,” originally 
expected to cost less than $3 billion, was declared complete after two decades and $14.6 
billion for planning and construction, almost a 500 percent cost overrun (Abrams, 2003 
and PMI, August 2004). With an estimated benefit of $500 million per year in reduced 
congestion, pollution, accidents, fuel costs, and lateness, the project has an undiscounted 
payback of almost 30 years. This project was clearly one that offered little value to the 
city if it wasn’t completed, and so it continued far past what planners thought was a 
worthwhile investment, primarily because the federal government was paying 85 percent 
of its cost. One clear lesson from the project has been that unless the state and local 
governments are required to pay at least half the cost of these megaprojects, there won’t 
be serious local deliberation of their pros and cons. The overrun is attributed to two 
major factors: (1) underestimates of the initial project scope, typical of government pro-
jects; and (2) lack of control, particularly costs, including conflicts of interest between 
the public and private sectors.
	 4.4	
BUDGET UNCERTAINTY AND PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
In spite of the care and effort expended to create an accurate and fair budget, it is still 
only an estimate made under conditions of uncertainty. Because projects are unique, risk 
pervades all elements of the project, and particularly the project’s goals of performance, 
schedule, and budget. We will discuss these issues of uncertainty and risk here, and 
offer  some suggestions for dealing with them. PMBOK covers the topic of risk in 
Chapter 11 on Risk.
Budget Uncertainty
Perceptually, the PM sees the uncertainty of the budget like the shaded portion of 
Figure 4-3, where the actual project costs may be either higher or lower than the esti-
mates the PM has derived. As we will describe later, however, it seems that more things 
can go wrong in a project and drive up the cost than can go right to keep down the cost. 
As the project unfolds, the cost uncertainty decreases as the project moves toward com-
pletion. Figures 4-4 (a), (b), and (c) illustrate this. An estimate at the beginning of the 
project as in Figure 4-3 is shown as the t0 estimate in Figure 4‐4(a). As work on the pro-
ject progresses, the uncertainty decreases as the project moves toward completion. At 
time t1 the cost to date is known and another estimate is made of the cost to complete 
the project, Figure 4‐4(b). This is repeated at t2, Figure 4‐4(c). Each estimate, of course, 
begins at the actual cost to date and estimates only the remaining cost to completion. 
The further the project progresses, the less the uncertainty in the final project cost. It is 
common in project management to make new forecasts about project completion time 
and cost at fixed points in the project life cycle, or at special milestones.
Risk
PMBOK Guide
There are numerous ways to improve the process of cost estimation ranging from 
simple but useful forms and procedures to special techniques such as learning curves. 
Most estimates are in error, however, because of simpler reasons such as not using 
available tools, common sense, or failing to allow for problems and contingencies, 
such as having to replace workers midstream. In addition, there are behavioral and 
organizational reasons, such as informal incentive systems that reward inaccurate 
estimates.

126  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
The reasons for cost uncertainty in the project are many: prices may escalate, different 
resources may be required, the project may take a different amount of time than we expected, 
thereby impacting overhead and indirect costs, and on and on. Earlier, we discussed ways to 
improve cost estimates, to anticipate such uncertainty, but change is a fact of life, including 
life on the project, and change invariably alters our previous budget estimates.
Three Causes for Change  There are three basic causes for change in projects and 
their budgets and/or schedules. Some changes are due to errors the cost estimator made 
about how to achieve the tasks identified in the project plan. Such changes are due to 
technological uncertainty: a building’s foundation must be reinforced due to a fault in 
the ground that wasn’t identified beforehand; a new innovation allows a project task to 
be completed easier than was anticipated, and so on.
Other changes result because the project team or client learns more about the nature 
of the scope of the project or the setting in which it is to be used. This derives from an 
increase in the team’s or client’s knowledge or sophistication about the project delivera-
bles. The medical team plans to use a device in the field as well as in the hospital. The 
chemists find another application of the granulated bed process if it is altered to include 
additional minerals.
The third source of change is the mandate: A new law is passed, a trade association 
sets a new standard, a governmental regulatory agency adopts a new policy. These 
changes alter the previous “rules of conduct” under which the project had been operat-
ing, usually to the detriment of the budget.
Handling Changes  There are different ways to handle such changes. The least pre-
ferred way is simply to accept a negative change and take a loss on the project. The best 
approach is to prepare for change ahead of time by including provisions in the original 
contract for such changes. The easiest change to handle is when the change is the result 
of an increased specification by the client, yet even these kinds of changes are often 
mishandled by the project organization. The best practice is to include in the contract a 
formal change control procedure that allows for renegotiation of price and schedule for 
client‐ordered changes in performance.
More difficult changes are those resulting from misunderstood assumptions, techno-
logical uncertainty, and mandates. Assumptions and some technological uncertainties 
are most easily handled by carefully listing all the assumptions, including those regarding 
technology, in the contract and stating that if these assumptions fail to hold, the project’s 
cost and schedule may have to be adjusted.
Best Practice
Time
Project cost
Figure 4-3  Estimate of project 
cost: estimate made at 
­project start.

4.4 BUDGET UNCERTAINTY AND PROJECT RISK MANAGEMENT
•  127
Time
(a)
t0
Project cost
Time
(b)
t1
t0
Project cost
Time
(c)
t2
t1
t0
Project cost
Figure 4-4 (a), (b), and (c)  Estimates of 
project cost: estimates made at time t0, 
t1, and t2.

128  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Mandates are the most difficult to accommodate because they can affect anything 
about the project and usually come without warning. The shorter the project duration, 
however, the less likely an unexpected mandate will impact the project. Thus, when 
contracting for a project of extended duration, it is best to divide it into shorter segments 
and contract for only one segment at a time. Of course, this also gives clients the oppor-
tunity to reconsider whether they want to complete the full project, as well as giving the 
competition an opportunity to steal the remainder of the project from you. Nevertheless, 
if a client wants to cancel a contract and is locked into a long‐term agreement, the pro-
ject will not have a happy ending anyway. At least with shorter segments the client may 
be willing to finish a segment before dropping the project. In any event, if the client is 
pleased with your performance on one segment of the contract, it is unlikely that a com-
petitor will have the experience and cost efficiencies that you have gained and will be 
able to steal the next segment. At the least, the client would be obligated to give you an 
opportunity to match their bid.
As changes impact the project’s costs, the budget for the remainder of the project 
will certainly have to be revised. There are three ways to revise a budget during the 
course of a project, each depending on the nature of the changes that have been experi-
enced. If the changes are confined to early elements of the project and are not seen to 
impact the rest of the project, then the new budget can be estimated as the old budget 
plus the changes from the early elements.
More frequently, something systemic has changed that will impact the costs of the 
rest of the project tasks as well, such as a higher rate of inflation. In this case, the new 
budget estimate will be the accumulated costs to date plus the previous estimates of the 
rest of the budget multiplied by some correction factor for the systemic change. Recall 
that the BLS is an excellent source for such historical data that will aid the PM in esti-
mating an appropriate correction factor.
Last, there may be some individual changes now perceived to impact specific ele-
ments of the remaining project tasks. The new budget estimate will then be the actual 
costs to date plus the expected costs for the remaining project tasks. Generally, both 
systematic and individual changes in the project will be revised in all three ways at once.
Project Budgeting in Practice
According to the Oxford Review of Economic Policy, a study of 258 projects in 20 countries 
showed that nine out of ten projects experience cost overruns, and sometimes by over 
100 percent! You might wonder how this can possibly happen, but it turns out that it 
happens quite easily, primarily due to the dynamics of people and groups making deci-
sions in an organization over some period of time. Let’s go through what happens in a 
typical project to see how this occurs.
To determine a project budget,* the project manager (PM) starts with the project 
plan or WBS to determine the various steps required in the project, the resource needs, 
labor hours, and associated costs. This cost estimate, plus a “contingency” of up to  
25 percent added to either the labor hours or total cost, is then used as the project budget 
for both obtaining approval for the project and as a placeholder in the department’s 
budget so the funds will be encumbered and unavailable for other purposes. (The addi-
tion of a contingency is standard practice and expected.)
However, top management is also responsible for constructing a budget for the com-
pany and may have also calculated some cost for this project, or the department that will 
be funding it. In the process, they will be using their own methods, such as the budget or 
*A useful reference for estimating the costs for a project budget is the Project Management Institute’s 2010 
publication: The Practice Standard for Project Estimating.

4.5 PROJECT RISK SIMULATION WITH CRYSTAL BALL ®
•  129
cost of a previous but similar project, the amount of money the department was budgeted 
for last year, the amount of monies available for them to spend, the amount the project 
manager or department spent last year, gut‐feel, and other such approaches. When this is 
aggregated by department, the totals are compared to what each department spent the 
previous year, what the company’s departmental priorities are for this year, how the total 
budget compares with the total money available, and then the department is given an 
appropriate lump sum budget for the year. The department then allocates their depart-
mental budget according to their priorities, and increments or decrements the project 
budgets by an amount to meet the department’s budget. Thereupon the project’s plan is 
adjusted, if possible, by the assigned budget rather than vice‐versa, but typically the scope 
cannot be reduced so the PM tries to adjust the plan to suit.
But the dynamics are still not over. At some point(s) in the future, the department’s 
budget may well be cut further, so all the projects’ placeholder budgets are decremented 
even more, requiring additional “adjustments” to the project plan (but again without 
allowing a reduction in scope). According to one expert in project management 
(Swanson, 2011), due to natural optimism at project start most PMs underestimate their 
projects’ costs by 30 percent or more. Given that their expense contingency was less than 
25 percent even before these factors impacted the budget, it is no wonder that the great 
majority of projects have cost overruns.
	 4.5	
PROJECT RISK SIMULATION WITH CRYSTAL BALL®
At this point, we will deal with one of the more quantitative methods of dealing with risk 
as it applies to the task of simulating budgets and cash flows. The essence of risk analysis 
is to make estimates or assumptions about the probability distributions associated with 
key parameters and variables and to use analytic decision models or Monte Carlo simula-
tion models based on these distributions to evaluate the desirability of certain managerial 
decisions. Real‐world problems are usually large enough that the use of analytic models 
is very difficult and time consuming. With modern computer software, simulation is not 
difficult. PMBOK describes the simulation process in Chapter 11 on Risk.
A mathematical model of the situation is constructed, and a simulation is run to 
determine the outcomes of key performance measures under various scenarios. The 
model is run (or replicated) repeatedly, starting from a different point each time based on 
random choices of values from the probability distributions of the input variables. 
Outputs of the model are used to construct statistical distributions of items of interest to 
decision makers, such as costs, profits, completion dates, or return on investment. These 
distributions are the risk profiles of the outcomes associated with a decision. Risk profiles 
can be considered by the manager when considering a decision, along with many other 
factors such as strategic concerns, behavioral issues, fit with the organization, cost and 
scheduling issues, and so on.
In the following section, using an example we have examined earlier in Chapter 1, 
we illustrate how Oracle Crystal Ball® 11.1.2.2 (CB), a widely used Excel® Add‐In that 
is available with this book, can be used to improve the PM’s understanding of the risks 
associated with managing projects.
Reconsider the Ceramic Sciences example we solved in Chapter 1 in the section 
devoted to finding the discounted cash flows associated with a project. Setting this prob-
lem up in Excel® is straightforward, and the earlier analytic solution is shown here for 
convenience as Table 4-5. We found that the project cleared the barrier of a 13 percent 
hurdle rate for acceptance. The net cash flow over the project’s life is just under $400,000, 
and discounted at the hurdle rate plus 2 percent annual inflation, the net present value 
of the cash flow is about $18,000.
Risk
PMBOK Guide

130  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Table 4-6  Pessimistic (Minimum), Most Likely, and Optimistic (Maximum) 
Estimates for Cash Inflows for Ceramic Sciences, Inc.
A
B
C
D
  1
Minimum
Most Likely
Maximum
  2
Year
Inflow
Inflow
Inflow
  3
20X2
  $35,000
  $50,000
  $60,000
  4
20X3
    95,000
  120,000
  136,000
  5
20X4
  100,000
  115,000
  125,000
  6
20X5
    88,000
  105,000
  116,000
  7
20X6
    80,000
    97,000
  108,000
  8
20X7
    75,000
    90,000
  100,000
  9
20X8
    67,000
    82,000
    91,000
10
20X9
    81,000
  100,000
  111,000
11
12
Total
$621,000
$759,000
$847,000
Table 4-5  Single‐Point Estimates of the Cash Flows for Ceramic Sciences, Inc.
A
B
C
D
  1
Year
Inflow
Outflow
Net Flow
  2
20X0*
$0
$125,000
−$125,000
  3
20X0
$0
$100,000
−$100,000
  4
20X1
$0
$90,000
−$90,000
  5
20X2
$50,000
$0
$50,000
  6
20X3
$120,000
$15,000
$105,000
  7
20X4
$115,000
$0
$115,000
  8
20X5
$105,000
$15,000
$90,000
  9
20X6
$97,000
$0
$97,000
10
20X7
$90,000
$15,000
$75,000
11
20X8
$82,000
$0
$82,000
12
20X9
$100,000
$0
$100,000
13
Total
$759,000
$360,000
$399,000
14
NPV
$17,997
15
Hurdle Rate
13.0%
16
Inflation Rate
2.0%
*t = 0 at the beginning of 20X0
Assume that the expenditures in this example are fixed by contract with an outside 
vendor so that there is no uncertainty about the outflows; there is, of course, uncertainty 
about the inflows. Suppose that the estimated inflows are as shown in Table  4-6 
and include a minimum (pessimistic) estimate, a most likely estimate, and a maximum 
(optimistic) estimate. (In Chapter 5, “Scheduling the Project,” we will deal in more 

4.5 PROJECT RISK SIMULATION WITH CRYSTAL BALL ®
•  131
detail with the methods and meaning of making such estimates. Shortly, we will deal 
with the importance of ensuring the honesty of such estimates.) Both the beta and the 
triangular statistical distributions are well suited for modeling variables with these three 
parameters. In earlier versions of CB the beta distribution was complicated and not par-
ticularly intuitive to use, so the triangular distribution was used as a reasonably good 
approximation of the beta. Use of a new beta distribution, labeled “BetaPERT” by CB in 
its Distribution Gallery, has been simplified in version CB 11.1.2.2; we will use it in this 
example, and the simulations run elsewhere in this book.*
The hurdle rate of return is typically fixed by the firm, so the only remaining variable 
is the rate of inflation that is included in finding the discount factor. We have assumed a 
2 percent rate of inflation with a normal distribution, plus or minus 1 percent (i.e., 1 per-
cent represents ± 3 standard deviations).
It is important to point out that approaches in which only the most likely estimate 
of each variable is used are equivalent to assuming that the input data are known with 
certainty. The major benefit of simulation is that it allows all possible values for each 
variable to be considered. Just as the distribution of possible values for a variable is a 
better reflection of reality than the single “most likely” value, the distribution of out-
comes developed by simulation is a better forecast of an uncertain future reality than is 
a forecast of a single outcome. In general, precise forecasts will be “precisely wrong.”
Using CB to run a Monte Carlo simulation requires us to define two types of cells in 
the Excel® spreadsheet.** The cells that contain variables or parameters that we make 
assumptions about are defined as assumption cells. For the Ceramic Sciences case, these 
are the cells in Table 4-5, column B and cell B16, the cash inflows and the rate of infla-
tion, respectively. As noted above, we assume that the rate of inflation is normally dis-
tributed with a mean of 2 percent and a standard deviation of .33 percent. Likewise, we 
assume that yearly inflows can be modeled with a BetaPERT (or a triangular) distribution.
The cells that contain the outcomes (or results) we are interested in forecasting are 
called forecast cells. In Ceramic’s case we want to predict the NPV of the project. Hence, 
cell D14 in Table 4-5 is defined as a forecast cell. Each forecast cell typically contains a 
formula that is dependent on one or more of the assumption cells. Simulations may have 
many assumption and forecast cells, but they must have at least one of each. Before pro-
ceeding, open Crystal Ball® and make an Excel® spreadsheet copy of Table 4-5.
To illustrate the process of defining an assumption cell, consider cell B5, the cash 
inflow estimate for 20X2. We can see from Table 4-6 that the minimum expected cash 
inflow is $35,000, the most likely cash flow is $50,000, and the maximum is $60,000.
If you have not already done so, load the Excel program on your computer. If 
prompted, click on “Use Crystal Ball” and then open the spreadsheet you made of Table 
A in Chapter 1 (also shown in Table 4-5). Given the information in Table 4-6, the pro-
cess of defining the assumption cells and entering the pessimistic and optimistic data is 
straightforward and involves six steps:***
1.	 Click on cell B5 to select it as the relevant assumption cell.
2.	 Select the Crystal Ball tab in Excel and from the Crystal Ball ribbon, select “Define 
Assumption” at the very left of the Crystal Ball ribbon. CB’s Distribution Gallery is 
now displayed as shown in Figure 4-5.
*The instructions for its use are the same for either the beta or triangular distributions, so the reader (or 
teacher) may select either.
**For those who wish to access additional instruction on the use of CB, you may use the following link to the 
CB Users Group (CBUG): http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/cbug2/.
***It is generally helpful for the reader to work the problem as we explain it.

132  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Figure 4-5  Crystal 
Ball® Distribution  
Gallery.
3.	 CB allows you to choose from a wide variety of probability distributions. Click on the 
BetaPERT box and then click “OK” button to select it.
4.	 CB’s BetaPERT Distribution dialog box is displayed as in Figure 4-6. It may have 
numbers in the boxes but ignore them. If it does not otherwise appear exactly like 
Figure 4-6, click “Parameters” on the menu at the top of the BetaPERT Distribution 
dialog box, and then select “Minimum, Most Likely, Maximum” at the top of the 
drop‐down menu.
5.	 In the Name: textbox at the top of the dialog box enter a descriptive label, for exam-
ple, Cash Inflow 20X2. Then, enter the pessimistic, most likely, and optimistic esti-
mates from Table 4-6 in the appropriate cells below the distribution.
6.	 Click on the “Enter” button and then on the “OK” button.
Now repeat steps 1 through 6 for the remaining cash inflow assumption cells (cells 
B6:B12), using the information in Table 4-6.

When finished with the cash inflow cells, an assumption cell for the inflation rates in 
cell B16 needs to be defined. For this cell, select the Normal distribution. We decided 
­earlier to use a 2 percent inflation rate, plus or minus 1 percent. Recall that the normal 
distribution is bell‐shaped and that the mean of the distribution is its center point. Also 
recall that the mean, plus or minus three standard deviations, includes 99+ percent of the 
data. The Normal Distribution dialog box, Figure 4-7, calls for the distribution’s mean and 
its standard deviation. The mean will be 0.02 (2 percent) for all cells. The standard 
­deviation will be .0033 (one‐third of the ± percent range). (Note that Figure 4-7 displays 
Figure 4-7  Crystal 
Ball® dialog box for 
model inputs 
assuming the 
normal distribution.
Figure 4-6  Crystal 
Ball® dialog box for 
model inputs 
assuming the 
BetaPERT 
distribution.
4.5 PROJECT RISK SIMULATION WITH CRYSTAL BALL ®
•  133

134  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Assumption Cells for 
Inflows
only the first two decimal places of the standard deviation. The actual standard deviation 
of .0033 is used by the program, but if you wish to see the .0033 you may click on 
“Preferences” at the top of the box. Then click on “Chart,” “Axis,” “Cell format,” 
“Number,” and change the “2” to “4.” “OK” your way back to the input data sheet.) As 
you enter these data, the distribution will show a mean of 2 percent and a range from 
1 percent to 3 percent. Thus in cell B16 in the Name: textbox enter Inflation Rate. Then 
enter .02 in the Mean textbox and .0033 in the Std. Dev. textbox.*
The process of defining a forecast cell involves four steps.
1.	 Click on the cell D14 to select it as containing an outcome that interests us.
2.	 Select the menu option Define Forecast from the Crystal Ball ribbon at the top of 
the screen.
3.	 CB’s Define Forecast dialog box is now displayed. In the Name: textbox, enter a 
descriptive name such as Net Present Value of Project. Then enter a descriptive label 
such as Dollars in the Units: textbox.
4.	 Click OK. There is only one Forecast cell in this example, but in other situations 
there may be several. Use the same four steps to define each of them.
When you have completed all entries, what was Table  4-5 is now changed and 
appears as Table 4-7.
Table 4-7  Three‐Point Estimate of Cash Flows and 
Inflation Rate for Ceramic Sciences, Inc. All Assumption 
and Forecast Cells Defined
A
B
C
D
  1
Year
Inflow
Outflow
Net Flow
  2
20X0*
$0
$125,000
−$125,000
  3
20X0
$0
$100,000
−$100,000
  4
20X1
$0
$90,000
−$90,000
  5
20X2
$50,000
$0
$50,000
  6
20X3
$120,000
$15,000
$105,000
  7
20X4
$115,000
$0
$115,000
  8
20X5
$105,000
$15,000
$90,000
  9
20X6
$97,000
$0
$97,000
10
20X7
$90,000
$15,000
$75,000
11
20X8
$82,000
$0
$82,000
12
20X9
$100,000
$0
$100,000
Total
$759,000
$360,000
$399,000
NPV
$17,997
Hurdle Rate
13.0%
Inflation Rate
2.0%
*t = 0 at the beginning of 20X0.
Forecast Cell for NPV
Assumption Cell 
for Inflation
*Note that while it would be more accurate to generate a separate inflation rate for each year, we have chosen 
to randomly generate an average inflation rate for the entire planning period. The model could be extended to 
generate individual inflation rates for each year, but doing so would require calculating the discount factor for each 
year separately and would preclude the use of Excel’s NPV function.

We are ready to simulate. CB randomly selects a value for each assumption cell based 
on the probability distributions which we specified and then calculates the net present 
value of the cell values selected. By repeating this process many times, we can get a sense 
of the distribution of possible outcomes, or in this case the distribution of NPVs for 
this project.
Approximately in the center of the CB ribbon, you will see the Run Preferences. 
Below it is the “Trials” box. It should be set to “1000.” If not, simply enter 1000 in the 
box. To run the simulation, click the green Start Arrow in the CB ribbon.
The distribution of NPVs resulting from simulating this project 1,000 times is dis-
played in Figure 4-8. Statistical information on the distribution is shown in Figure 4-9. 
The NPVs had a mean of $14,817 and a standard deviation of $8,095. We can use this 
information to make probabilistic inferences about the NPV of the project such as what 
is the probability the project will have a positive NPV, what is the probability the pro-
ject’s NPV will exceed $10,000, or what is the probability the project’s NPV will be 
between $5,000 and $10,000?
CB provides considerable information about the forecast cell in addition to the fre-
quency chart including percentile information, summary statistics, a cumulative chart, 
and a reverse cumulative chart. For example, to see the summary statistics for a forecast 
cell, click on the view menu item at the top of the Frequency Chart dialog box (see 
Figure 4-8), and then check Statistics from the drop down menu. The Statistics view for 
the frequency chart (Figure 4-8) is illustrated in Figure 4-9.
Figure 4-9 contains some interesting information. There are, however, several ques-
tions that are more easily answered by using Figure 4-8, the distribution of the simulation’s 
outcomes. What is the likelihood that this project will achieve an NPV at least $10,000 
above the hurdle rate including inflation? It is easy to answer this question. Note that 
there are black triangles at either end of the baseline of the distribution in Figure 4-8. By 
placing the cursor on the triangle on the left end of the simulation distribution baseline 
and sliding it to the $10,000 mark, the probability of a $10,000 or greater outcome can be 
read in the “Certainty” box. One can also find the same answer by deleting the “–Infinity” 
in the box in the lower left corner of the Frequency View and entering $10,000 in it.
Figure 4-8   
Frequency chart of 
the simulation 
output for net 
present value of 
Ceramic Sciences, 
Inc. Project.
4.5 PROJECT RISK SIMULATION WITH CRYSTAL BALL ®
•  135

136  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
Even in this simple example, the power of including uncertainty in project budgets 
should be obvious. Because a manager is always uncertain about the amount of uncer-
tainty, it is also possible to examine various levels of uncertainty quite easily using CB. 
We could, for instance, alter the degree to which the inflow estimates are uncertain by 
expanding or contracting the degree to which optimistic and pessimistic estimates vary 
around the most likely estimate. We could increase or decrease the level of inflation. 
Simulation runs made with these changes provide us with the ability to examine just 
how sensitive the outcomes (forecasts) are to possible errors in the input data. This 
allows us to focus on the important risks and to ignore those that have little effect on 
our decisions. While the focus of our discussion in this chapter is on budgeting, in the 
next chapter on scheduling we take the simulation analysis a step further and develop a 
model that incorporates uncertainty about both costs and the time to complete project 
activities.
Considering Disaster
In our consideration of risk management in the Ceramic Sciences example, we based our 
analysis on an “expected value” approach to risk. The expected cost of a risk is the esti-
mated cost of the risk if it does occur times the probability that it will occur. How should 
we consider an event that may have an extraordinarily high cost if it occurs, but has a 
very low probability of occurring? Examples come readily to mind: the World Trade 
Center destruction of 9/11, Hurricane Katrina, the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, the 
Hurricane Sandy floods of 2012 (a supposedly 500‐year event!). The probability of such 
events occurring is so low that their expected value may be much less than some com-
paratively minor misfortunes with a far higher probability of happening.
If you are operating a business that uses a “just in time” input inventory system, how 
do you feel about a major fire at the plant of your sole supplier of a critical input to your 
product? The supplier reports that their plant has never had a major fire, and has the 
latest in fire prevention equipment. Does that mean that a major plant fire is impossible? 
Might some other disaster close the plant—a strike, an al Qaeda bomb? Insurance comes 
immediately to mind, but getting a monetary pay‐back is of little use when you are con-
cerned with the loss of your customer base or the death of your firm.
In an excellent book, The Resilient Enterprise, Yossi Sheffi (Sheffi, 2005) deals with 
the risk management of many different types of disasters. He details the methods that 
creative businesses have used to cope with disasters that struck their facilities, supply 
chains, customers, and threatened the future of their firms. The subject is more complex 
Risk
Figure 4-9   
Summary statistics 
of the Ceramic 
Sciences, Inc. 
simulation.

than we can deal with in these pages, but we strongly recommend the book, a “good 
read,” to use a reviewer’s cliché.
We are now ready to consider the scheduling problem. Because durations, like costs, 
are uncertain, we will continue our discussion of the matter, adding some powerful but 
reasonably simple techniques for dealing with the uncertainty surrounding both project 
schedule and cost.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Contrast the disadvantages of top‐down budgeting 
and bottom‐up budgeting.
	 2.	 What is the logic in charging administrative costs 
based on total time to project completion?
	3.	 Would you expect a task in a manufacturing plant 
that uses lots of complex equipment to have a 
learning curve rate closer to 70 percent or 
95 percent?
	 4.	 Are there other kinds of changes in a project in addi-
tion to the three basic types described in Section 4.4? 
Might a change be the result of two types at the 
same time?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Given the tendency of accountants to allocate a pro-
ject’s estimated costs evenly over the duration of the 
task, what danger might this pose for a project man-
ager who faces the following situation? The major 
task for a $5 million project is budgeted at $3 million, 
mostly for highly complex and expensive equipment. 
The task has a six‐month duration, and requires the 
purchase of the equipment at the beginning of the 
task to enable the project team to conduct the activi-
ties required to complete the task. The task begins 
December 1.
	 2.	 The chapter describes the problems of budgeting pro-
jects with S‐shaped and J‐shaped life‐cycle curves. 
What might be the budget problems if the life cycle 
of a project was just a straight diagonal line from 0 at 
project start to 100 percent at project completion?
	 3.	 If a firm uses program budgeting for its projects, is an 
activity budget not needed? If it is, then of what value 
is the program budget?
	 4.	 As a senior manager, you oversee a project with a 
total estimated cost of 245 engineer‐months of effort. 
Three  months ago, however, the project had fallen 
behind by about 25 engineer‐months so you authorized 
the hiring of three additional engineers, which you felt 
should more than make up for the delay in the remain-
ing year of the project (3 × 12 months = 36 ­engineer‐
months). You have just received the latest quarterly 
project status report and are surprised to learn that the 
project is now 40 engineer‐months behind schedule! 
Your first reaction is to calculate how many more engi-
neers need to be hired to make up for the increased 
delay. Using Brooks’s concept of the “mythical man 
month,” explain what might be happening here.
	 5.	 So what was wrong with the purchasing manager’s 
assistant’s solution (outlined in Section 4.3) to the 
problem of having an inadequate supply of hard‐to‐
obtain parts?
	 6.	 Contrast simulation to other risk analysis tools dis-
cussed in Chapter 3 such as decision tables, FMEA, 
logic charts, and contingency planning. What are its 
advantages and disadvantages? If you were to do an 
important risk analysis, which tool would you prefer?
In spite of the effort taken to make realistic budget estimates, it can still be useful to 
prepare for changes in the budget as the project unfolds. Such changes derive from 
multiple sources, including technology, economics, improved project understanding, 
and mandates. To the extent possible, it is best to include these contingencies in the 
contract in case they come to pass. Simulation is one excellent approach for deter-
mining the distribution of various possible outcomes occurring when risk is present 
in a project.
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
•  137

138  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
EXERCISES
	 1.	 Your firm designs PowerPoint slides for computer 
training classes, and you have just received a request 
to bid on a special project to produce the slides for an 
8‐session class. From previous experience, you know 
that your firm follows an 85 percent learning rate. For 
this contract it appears the effort will be substantial, 
running 50 hours for the first session. Your firm bills at 
the rate of $100/hour and the overhead is expected to 
run a fixed $600 per session. The customer will pay 
you a flat fixed rate per session. If your nominal profit 
margin is 20 percent, what will be the total bid price, 
the per session price, and at what session will you 
break even?
	 2.	 If unit 1 requires 200 hours to produce and the labor 
records for an Air Force project contract of 50 units 
indicates an average labor content of 63.1 hours per 
unit, what was the learning rate? What total addi-
tional number of labor hours would be required for a 
follow‐on Air Force contract of 50 units? What would 
be the average labor content of this second contract? 
Of both contracts combined? If labor costs the vendor 
$10/hour on this second contract and the price to the 
Air Force is fixed at $550 each, what can you say 
about the profitability of the first and second con-
tracts, and hence the bidding process in general?
	 3.	 The IT unit of a company has been asked to prepare a 
budget for a special software package project. The 
group has considerable experience with similar tasks 
and submits the costs in the following table. The 
group also thinks that the distribution of the hours 
worked for each phase is normal. The wage rate for the 
software engineers employed on each phase is $60 per 
hour. Using simulation, find the distribution of total 
engineering costs for all the phases. What is the aver-
age engineering cost? Also, find the probability that 
the total engineering cost will be less than $85,000.
Phase
Average Time 
(hours)
Standard 
Deviation
Requirements  
  Planning
  80
  15
Design
160
  25
Prototype 
Development
320
  70
Final Development
640
100
Test
120
  20
	 4.	 Reconsider the following problem from Chapter 1: A 
4‐year financial project is forecast to have net cash 
inflows of $20,000; $25,000; $30,000; and $50,000 in 
the next 4 years. It will cost $75,000 to implement the 
project, payable at the beginning of the project. If the 
required rate of return is 0.2, conduct a discounted 
cash flow calculation to determine the NPV. Now, 
however, assume that the net cash inflows are proba-
bilistic variables. Further assume that each forecast 
net cash inflow is normally distributed with standard 
deviations of $1,000, $1,500, $2,000, and $3,500, 
respectively. Given a required rate of return of 0.2, 
find the mean forecast NPV using Crystal Ball®. What 
is the probability that the actual NPV will be positive?
	 5.	 What would happen to the NPV of the above project 
if the inflation rate was expected to be 4 percent in 
each of the next 4 years? You may use either Excel® or 
Crystal Ball® to determine your answer.
	 6.	 Information about the cash flows for a 4‐year financial 
project is listed in the following table. The cash flows 
are assumed to follow a triangular distribution. The 
cost of implementing the project is expected to be 
between $60,000 and $70,000, with all values in this 
range being equally likely. Analysis of changes in the 
Consumer Price Index suggests that the annual rate of 
inflation can be approximated with a normal distribu-
tion with a mean of 4 percent and standard deviation 
of 1.5 percent. The organization’s required rate of 
return is 20 percent. Develop a model in Crystal Ball® 
to analyze this situation and answer the following 
questions.
Year
Minimum 
Inflow
Most Likely 
Inflow
Maximum 
Inflow
1
$15,000
$20,000
$30,000
2
$20,000
$25,000
$35,000
3
$20,000
$30,000
$35,000
4
$40,000
$50,000
$60,000
(a)	 What is the expected NPV of this project?
(b)	 What is the range of NPVs?
(c)	 How would you characterize the level of risk asso-
ciated with this project?
(d)	 Would you recommend undertaking the project? 
Why or why not?
	 7.	 Server Farm Inc. (SFI) needs to upgrade its server 
computers. Company management has identified the 
following two options: (1) shift to a Windows‐based 
platform from its current Unix‐based platform, or 
(2) stick with a Unix‐based platform. It is standard 
practice at SFI to use a triangular distribution to model 
uncertain costs.
	
	   Along these lines, the company estimates that if it 
migrates to Windows, the new server hardware could 
cost as little as $100,000 or as much as $200,000. The 
technical group’s best estimate is that the hardware 

costs will be $125,000 if the Window’s option is pur-
sued. Likewise, the company’s best guess regarding the 
cost to upgrade and convert its software to Windows is 
$300,000 with a range of $275,000 to $500,000. 
Finally, if the company converts to Windows, employee 
training costs are estimated to range between $9,000 
and $15,000, with the best guess being $10,000. If the 
company sticks with Unix, the new server hardware 
will most likely cost $100,000, but could cost as little as 
$80,000 or as much as $210,000. Software conversion 
and upgrade costs are expected to be $300,000 but 
could be as low as $250,000 and as high as $525,000. 
Employee training costs should fall between $8,000 
and $17,500, with a best guess of $10,000. Develop a 
model to simulate this situation using Crystal Ball® and 
answer the following questions.
(a)	 What is the expected cost of each project?
(b)	 What is the probability that each project’s cost 
will exceed $575,000?
(c)	 Which project would you consider to be the 
most risky?
(d)	 Which project would you recommend SFI 
undertake? Why?
	8.	 A light manufacturing firm has set up a project for 
developing a new machine for one of its production 
lines. The most likely estimated cost of the project 
itself is $1,000,000, but the most optimistic estimate 
is $900,000 while the pessimists predict a project cost 
of $1,200,000. The real problem is that even if the 
project costs are within those limits, if the project 
itself plus its implementation costs exceed $1,425,000, 
the project will not meet the firm’s NPV hurdle. 
There are four cost categories involved in adding the 
prospective new machine to the production line: 
(1) engineering labor cost, (2) nonengineering labor 
cost, (3) assorted material cost, and (4) production 
line down‐time cost.
	
	   The engineering labor requirement has been esti-
mated to be 600 hours, plus or minus 15 percent at 
a cost of $80 per hour. The nonengineering labor 
requirement is estimated to be 1500 hours, but 
could be as low as 1200 hours or as high as 2200 
hours at a cost of $35 per hour. Assorted material 
may run as high as $155,000 or as low as $100,000, 
but is most likely to be about $135,000. The best 
guess of time lost on the production line is 110 
hours, possibly as low as 105 hours and as high as 
120 hours. The line contributes about $500 per 
hour to the firm’s profit and overhead. What is the 
probability that the new machine project will meet 
the firm’s NPV hurdle?
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
A Budgeting Novice
Alexander Jones was an experienced project manager of a 
small machine shop. He had always had complete author-
ity when working with the clients on specifications of the 
projects as well as when working with the project team on 
the schedule. His boss, however, did not feel comfortable 
letting Alex determine project budgets. The boss always 
did that himself.
A client approached Alex about designing a piece of 
surgical equipment. Alex was excited about this project 
because his usual job was to design and make parts of 
factory equipment. He was delighted to have a chance 
to do something that might directly affect humankind. 
Alex knew what the surgical tool was intended to do 
and had figured out what had to be done to design 
and manufacture it. He had even estimated the labor‐
hour requirement. He wanted to do all the planning 
discussions with the client, including discussions on 
the budget.
Questions:  What do you think Alex should show to his 
boss so that the boss would feel more comfortable letting Alex 
determine and monitor the project’s budget? What should 
Alex say to persuade the boss?
Stealth Electronics
Stealth Electronics manufactures secret electronic weapon 
systems. They have just engineered a new system. They 
bid for and won a contract with DARPA (Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency). Stealth Electronics 
negotiated a cost plus contract for development of the pro-
totype. The prototype project was approximately on time 
and on budget. They are about to submit a bid to produce 
the first 25 electronic weapon systems. The production 
contract will be a fixed fee. The CFO of Stealth Electronics 
has examined the costs associated with building the proto-
type and thinks the proposed bid for production of the first 
25 systems is significantly too low.
Questions:  What should the CFO do?
General Sensor Company
Justin Jordan has been named Project Manager of the 
General Sensor Company’s new sensor manufacturing pro-
cess project. Sensors are extremely price sensitive. General 
has done a great deal of quantitative work to be able to 
accurately forecast changes in sales volume relative to 
changes in pricing.
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
•  139

140  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
The company president, Guy General, has faith in the 
sensitivity model that the company uses. He insists that all 
projects affecting the manufacturing costs of sensors be 
run against the sensitivity model to generate data to calcu-
late the return on investment. The net result is that pro-
ject managers, like Justin, are under a great deal of pressure 
to submit realistic budgets so go/no‐go project decisions 
can be made quickly. Guy has canceled several projects 
that appeared marginal during their feasibility stages and 
recently fired a project manager for overestimating project 
costs on a new model sensor. The project was killed early 
in the design stages, and 6 months later a competitor 
introduced a similar sensor that proved to be highly 
successful.
Justin’s dilemma is how to construct a budget that accu-
rately reflects the costs of the proposed new process. Justin 
is an experienced executive and feels comfortable with his 
ability in estimating costs of projects. However, the recent 
firing of his colleague has made him a little gun‐shy. Only 
one stage of the four‐stage sensor manufacturing process is 
being changed. Justin has detailed cost information about 
the majority of the process. Unfortunately the costs and 
tasks involved in the new modified process stage are 
unclear at this point. Justin also believes that the new 
modifications will cause some minor changes in the other 
three stages, but these potential changes have not yet been 
clearly identified. The stage being addressed by the project 
represents almost 50 percent of the manufacturing cost.
Questions:  Under these circumstances, would Justin be 
wise to pursue a top‐down or a bottom‐up budgeting approach? 
Why? What factors are most relevant here?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility Project Budget 
Development—4
Fred Splient gave his ALF Project Steering Committee  
2 months to develop a project plan for their area of respon-
sibility in the project. Each member was told to include 
the tasks, predecessors and successors, resources needed, 
responsible person, and an estimated cost. He asked that 
these be presented to the steering team on August 31.
All through July the ALF project team scrambled to 
identify the steps required to open the facility and to deter-
mine what it would cost. Each team member met with his or 
her departmental staff to get help in identifying what was 
needed. For example, the COO spoke with the Dietary 
Department head and asked that she develop a plan to meet 
all requirements to set up the facility to feed the residents. 
The COO then asked the Facilities Manager to develop an 
action plan to prepare the building and maintain it. The 
COO also met with the Rehab Services Medical Director 
and his clinical staff to identify the residents’ probable med-
ical needs based on the projected population, and to develop 
an action plan to prepare to meet the residents’ health 
needs. The COO asked the therapy manager to prepare a 
plan to develop social activities for the residents.
Everyone on the team called the Chief Financial 
Officer for help in determining the budgets for their action 
plans. The CFO also had to validate the estimates of cost 
and revenue from facility operations, and to project earn-
ings and return on the investment. Like any good admin-
istrator, when the CFO realized he had no expertise in this 
area, he hired a consultant to help him determine the pro-
ject costs and budget. Dr. Sara Sharf was chosen as the 
consultant—she had over 5 years’ experience in develop-
ing business plans for assisted living facilities.
Dr. Sharf recommended that Friendly Medical Center 
target the middle income geriatric population since there 
were many up‐scale facilities in the area. Dr. Sharf and the 
market researchers determined what level of rent people 
in that population could and would pay. They then looked 
at what needed to be in the facility to meet the needs of 
their targeted population. After additional site visits of 
facilities and meetings with the selected construction con-
tractor, they finalized the layout of units and common 
space areas that would be included in the design. The 
Construction Project Manager requested and received an 
action plan and cost estimate from the construction con-
tractor. The contractor had estimated that construction 
cost would probably run about $70 per square foot with a 
standard deviation of $3.67. He could not be absolutely 
sure because of potential change orders. He emphasized 
that the estimates assumed that the project would be com-
pleted without further changes in its design concept.
While the CFO was haggling with the construction 
contractor about determining a more accurate cost esti-
mate, he received a phone call from Dr. Zen Link, the 
Head of Geriatric Medicine at Friendly Medical Center. 
Dr. Link’s secretary had seen men measuring the land 
behind the parking lot and she wanted to know what was 
going on; so did Dr. Link. Since Dr. Link was one of the 
hospital’s best referrers, the CFO told him about the poten-
tial project. Dr. Link felt that his input was needed up front 
as he was the only person on staff who would know the 
health needs of the facility’s residents and appropriate 
equipment needs and staffing models that should be set up. 

With Dr. Link’s input, the CFO estimated the operating 
costs to run the facility and projected the occupancy rates 
needed to cover those costs. The Rehab Services Medical 
Director, who was a member of the original project team, 
was quite upset when he saw Dr. Link’s budget for the medi-
cal equipment that was to be purchased for the facility. The 
Medical Director felt that Dr. Link wanted to purchase too 
much expensive equipment, which was not necessary to 
have on site. The hospital had the majority of the equip-
ment that was necessary and there was no need to duplicate 
it, thus inflating that portion of the budget. The CFO did 
not want to get in the middle of their argument so he left 
Link’s budget just as Link submitted it and hoped someone 
would raise the issue at the next Steering Team Meeting. 
The CFO was quite concerned about the lack of experience 
of the team in developing such a budget, and he felt that 
there was far more uncertainty in the budget than the esti-
mates reflected.
With the construction cost estimate and an outline of 
the services to be provided, the following projected capital 
expenditure was developed.
Preliminary Project Budget
Apartment Type
Net 
Sq Ft
Units
Total Sq Ft
Studio units
450
20
  9,000
1 BR/bath units
600
 80
48,000
100
57,000
Apartment Type
Net 
Sq Ft
Units
Total Sq Ft
Common space
0.3
17,000
Net to gross
1.3
22,230
Total gross sq ft
96,330
Square feet
96,330
Est cost per sq ft
$70.00
Construction Costs
Building
$6,743,000
Contingency
        674,300
Land
        600,000
Program development & 
equipment costs
        405,000
Furniture
        400,000(see below)
A&E fees @ 5%
        347,000
Financing costs
        202,000
Capitalized interest
        135,000
Site improvements
        125,000
Phone & IS system
          30,000
Kitchen equipment
          30,000
Total
  $ 9,991,300
Organizational costs:
Legal and accounting
        25,000
Initial marketing
        250,000 $2,500/unit
Project consultant
        80,000
Follow‐up market survey
        20,000
Total organizational costs         375,000       
Total
        $10,066,300
*
Heavy Asst.
Light Asst.
Studio
5 units
15 units
$4,160/unit
$3,280/unit
1 BR/bath
20 units
60 units
$5,460/unit
$3,780/unit
The CFO developed an income statement for the next 20 
years. The first 3 years are shown below.
Friendly Assisted Living Pro Forma
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Service Revenues
Studios
$ 256,662
$ 414,012
$ 430,572
One bedroom
408,564
1,398,197
2,077,321
Additional person 
revenue
30,866
72,291
98,841
Ancillary revenue
28,969
67,656
92,417
Total service revenues
725,061
1,952,155
2,699,151
Operating Expenses
Salaries and wages
376,657
649,606
692,734
Employee benefits
82,865
142,913
152,401
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Supplies
69,571
55,910
73,434
Purchased services
76,177
50,000
50,000
Utilities
217,516
—
—
Insurance
48,000
—
—
Other
29,002
78,086
107,966
Total operating 
expenses
899,788
976,515
1,076,535
Income (Loss) 
Before Other 
Expenses
(174,727)
975,640
1,622,616
Other Expenses 
(Income)
Depreciation and 
amortization
560,200
560,700
561,200
Interest expense
—
—
—
Interest income
(1,226)
11,321
47,451
Total other 
expenses 
(income)
558,974
572,021
608,651
Net Income (Loss)
$(733,701)
$ 403,619
$1,013,965
CASE
•  141

142  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
QUESTIONS
	1.	 The cost per square foot for the units is given in the 
text together with its standard deviation. What 
other areas of cost or revenue are likely to have cost 
uncertainty? How should these uncertainties 
be handled?
	 2.	 How would you suggest the team handle the issue 
of  Dr. Link’s supposedly inflated medical equip-
ment costs?
	 3.	 Once the overall budget is agreed upon, what will 
need to be changed in it for the project to commence?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Photstat Inc.
Photstat Inc. is contemplating the formation of a project 
team to develop a new service. Briefly, the service would 
allow customers to order customized mouse pads over the 
Internet based on photographs or other artwork sent elec-
tronically to the firm.
The company estimates that the price of the mouse 
pad will be between $10 and $15 per unit, with all prices 
in this range equally likely. Based on historical data, 
Photstat estimates that the total market size for these 
types of products in their first year follows a normal dis-
tribution with a mean of 100,000 units and a standard 
deviation of 10,000. Again, according to historical data, 
Photstat’s market share tends to be normally distributed 
with a mean of 30 percent and standard deviation of 3 
percent. Market growth tends to follow a normal 
­distribution growing an average of 10 percent per year 
with a standard deviation of 3 percent. Estimates from 
the equipment manufacturer selected to design and pro-
duce the required equipment indicate that the cost of the 
equipment is normally distributed with a mean of 
$500,000 and a standard deviation of 60,000. Historical 
data indicate there is a 10 percent chance that the equip-
ment will last for only 3 years. Similarly, there is a 60 
percent chance the equipment will last 6 years, a 20 per-
cent chance it will last 8 years, and a 10 percent chance 
the equipment will last 10 years. The variable costs of 
similar products were found to be normally distributed 
with a mean of $3 and a standard deviation of $0.25. 
Finally, an economic analysis undertaken by the firm sug-
gests that the rate of inflation in any given year is nor-
mally distributed with a mean of 3 percent and a standard 
deviation of 0.5 percent.
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Internal Rate of 
Return
10.1
Average Occupied 
Units
20 units
12.3
19.0
19.0
80 units
19.6
52.6
75.0
46.0
Total
31.9
71.6
94.0
Resident Days
20 units
4,488
6,935
6,935
80 units
7,146
19,191
27,380
Total
11,634
26,126
34,315
Full‐time 
Equivalents
21.8
37.8
38.8
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Cash Flow:
Net income (loss)
$ (733,701)
$ 403,619
$1,013,965
Minus: capital 
investment
(10,079,000)
(5,000)
(5,500)
Add: depreciation 
and amortization
560,200
560,700
561,200
Add: working 
capital change
130,656
82,500
18,638
Net cash flow
$(10,121,845) $1,041,819
$1,588,302
The CFO, Dr. Sharf, and the Project Steering Team 
were ready to combine their individual plans and costs into 
a composite plan and budget.

QUESTIONS
	1.  	What is the expected value of the project?
	2.  	Simulate this project 1,000 times and compute 
the average profit over the 1,000 replications. Plot a 
histogram of the outcomes of the 1,000 replications.
	3.  	How does the average of the simulation compare 
to the expected value you calculated? What are the 
managerial implications of this difference?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Building the Geddy’s dream house
Neil and Alexis Geddy graduated from college 5 years ago. 
Since graduating, Neil has been working as an engineer 
while Alexis has been working in marketing. Initially, the 
young couple focused on paying off their student loans 
which they were able do in a little more than 2 years. 
Since paying off their student loans, the couple have been 
diligently saving for the downpayment on a house which 
they would like to build. Neil and Alexis feel they cur-
rently have ample savings for the downpayment and are 
excited to start building their dream house.
Based on their current incomes and the amount they 
have saved for the down payment, Neil and Alexis would 
like to spend no more than $350,000 on the construction of 
their house, but believe they could swing spending as much 
as $375,000. For the past couple of months the couple have 
been talking to people they know who have built houses, 
researching homebuilding websites, and visiting building 
supply stores to better understand the costs and process asso-
ciated with building a custom home. Table A summarizes 
the couple’s cost estimates based on what they have learned.
As shown in the table, Neil and Alexis developed three 
cost estimates for each expense category. The most likely 
estimate corresponds to the option they would choose 
(e.g., doors, cabinets) or what the expected costs of an 
activity would be baring unforeseen difficulties. The pes-
simistic cost estimates represent the cost if they decided to 
splurge or if particular challenges were encountered. 
Finally, the optimistic costs represent opportunities for 
them to go with lower cost options or in cases where the 
progress on the activity goes better than expected.
Table a  Construction Cost Estimates
Expense
Optimistic 
Cost 
Estimate
Most 
Likely Cost 
Estimate
Pessimistic 
Cost 
Estimate
Architect
$27,000
$40,000
$51,000
Bath Fixtures
$7,000
$8,000
$12,000
Built‐in 
Appliances
$1,600
$2,000
$3,500
Cabinets
$5,000
$6,000
$10,000
Carpeting
$4,000
$5,000
$7,000
Countertops
$4,000
$6,000
$9,000
Doors
$3,500
$4,000
$8,000
Excavation
$2,500
$2,500
$5,000
Finish Carpentry
$7,000
$7,500
$10,000
Finish Hardware
$1,250
$1,500
$2,000
Flooring
$9,000
$10,000
$13,000
Foundation
$22,000
$25,000
$30,000
Garage Doors
$2,700
$3,000
$4,500
Gas Fireplaces
$1,700
$2,000
$3,000
General 
Contractor
$30,000
$40,000
$55,000
Heating and 
Cooling
$10,000
$12,000
$15,000
Insulation
$3,750
$4,000
$5,500
Lighting Fixtures
$2,750
$3,000
$6,000
Painting
$2,750
$3,000
$4,500
Plumbing
$6,200
$7,000
$8,500
Roofing
$11,500
$12,000
$15,000
Rough 
Carpentry
$110,000
$120,000
$150,000
Windows
$18,500
$20,000
$27,000
Wiring
$6,000
$6,500
$8,500
CASE
•  143

144  •
Chapter 4 / Budgeting the Project
QUESTIONS
	1.  	Based on only the couple’s most likely cost esti-
mates, what would you estimate the cost of building 
the house to be? How does this value compare to 
what the Geddys budgeted?
	2.  	Simulate this project 10,000 times assuming the 
expenses follow a triangular distribution. Based on sim-
ulation analysis, what is the expected cost of building 
the house? How does the expected value from the simu-
lation compare to your answer in the previous question? 
How do you reconcile any differences between the two? 
Which estimate do you have more confidence in?
	3.  	What are the maximum and minimum amounts 
the couple can expect to spend on the house?
	4.  	What is the probability that constructing the 
house will exceed $350,000? What is the probability 
the costs will be less $375,000? What is the probabil-
ity that constructing the house will cost between 
$350,000 and $375,000? Based on your analysis how 
concerned should the couple be?
	5.  	Assume that 2 months into the construction of 
the house, the couple decide they need the services of 
an interior designer to help them with making the 
right choices. After making a few calls, the couple 
estimate that, most likely, hiring an interior designer 
will cost $2,500. However, if they use the interior 
designer minimally, they could reduce the cost to 
$1,500 while if they need to rely on the interior 
designer more than they expect, the cost could reach 
$5,000. Modify your simulation model to incorporate 
the cost of an interior designer. What impact does 
this change have on the construction budget?
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abrams, S. “The Big Dig,” Kennedy School Bulletin, 
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA Spring 2003.
Amor, J. P., and C. J. Teplitz. “An Efficient Approximation 
for 
Project 
Composite 
Learning 
Curves.” 
Project 
Management Journal, September 1998.
Badiru, A. B. “Incorporating Learning Curve Effects into 
Critical Resource Diagramming.” Project Management 
Journal, June 1995.
Breyfogle, F. W., III. Implementing Six Sigma: Smarter 
Solutions Using Statistical Methods. 2nd ed., Hoboken: John 
Wiley, 2003.
Brooks, F. P. The Mythical Man‐Month. Reading, MA: 
Addison‐Wesley, 1975.
Camm, J. D., J. R. Evans, and N. K. Womer. “The Unit 
Learning Curve Approximation of Total Cost.” Computers 
in Industrial Engineering. Vol. 12, No. 3, 1987.
Evans, J. R., and D. L. Olson. Introduction to Simulation 
and Risk Analysis. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1998. (An excellent book using Crystal Ball® software.)
Gagnon, R. J., and S. J. Mantel, Jr. “Strategies and 
Performance 
Improvement 
for 
Computer‐Assisted 
Design.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
November 1987.
Hamburger, D. H. “Three Perceptions of Project Cost—
Cost Is More Than a Four Letter Word.” Project Management 
Journal, June 1986. (Recommended reading for any project 
manager who is not familiar with accounting.)
Hertz, D. B., and H. Thomas. Risk Analysis and Its 
Applications. New York: Wiley, 1983. (The name “Hertz” is 
almost synonymous with risk analysis, particularly strong 
in the area of financial risk.)
Lawrence, A. O. “Using Automated Estimating Tools to 
Improve Project Estimating.” PM Network, December 1994.
Liberatore, M. J., and G. J. Titus. “The Practice of 
Management Science in R & D Project Management.” 
Management Science, August 1983.
Mallak, L. M., H. A. Kurstedt, Jr., and G. A. Patzak. 
“Planning for Crises in Project Management.” Project 
Management Journal, June 1997.
Martin, J. E. “Selecting an Automated Estimating Tool for 
IS Development Projects.” PM Network, December 1994.
McCarthy, J. Dynamics of Software Development. 
Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 1995. (An excellent 
read‐and‐enjoy book that is not just for software projects. 
It is packed with irreverent good sense.)
PMI. “Digging Deep,” PM Network, August 2004.
PMI. “Polluted Progress,” PM Network, March 2005.
PMI Standards Committee. A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge, 5th ed. Newtown Square, 
PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
Pyzdek, T. The Six Sigmas Handbook, Revised and Expanded: 
The Complete Guide for Greenbelts, Blackbelts, and Managers 
at All Levels. New York: McGraw Hill, 2003.
Rath & Strong’s Six Sigma Pocket Guide. Rath & Strong 
Management Consultants, Lexington, MA: 2000.
Simon, H. The New Science of Management Decisions, rev. 
ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997. (An excel-
lent and readable classic on management science with a 
particularly good introduction to risk analysis.)
Swanson, S. A. “Estimating Errors,” PM Network, 
October 2011.
Wheatley, M. “Making the Cut.” PM Network, June 2009.

c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
  145
5
Consider the job of planning a project, developing a budget for it, and scheduling all of 
the many tasks involved. It should be obvious that these three activities are not actu-
ally separable. Because a budget must include both the amounts and timing of resources 
received or expended, one cannot prepare a budget without knowing the specifics of each 
task and the time period(s) during which the task must be undertaken. Similarly, the 
project plan implies a schedule just as a schedule implies a plan. It is useful to begin study 
of these interdependent, partial descriptions of a project with an examination of the plan-
ning process because this process is the foundation of all that follows. The decision about 
whether to turn our attention first to the budget or the schedule is arbitrary. We chose the 
budget largely because most readers have some familiarity with the subject. The problem 
is that planning, budgeting, and scheduling are parts of the same basic process. They are 
considered separately only because we cannot write about all three at the same time.
The project schedule is simply the project plan in an altered format. It is a conveni-
ent form for monitoring and controlling project activities. Actually, the schedule itself 
can be prepared in several formats. PMBOK covers some of these in Chapter 6 on Project 
Time Management. In this chapter, we describe the most common formats—Gantt charts 
and PERT/CPM networks—and demonstrate how to convert a project plan or WBS into 
these formats. We also note some of the strengths and weaknesses of the different dis-
plays. In addition, we apply risk management directly to the project schedule. From this 
analysis we show how to estimate the likelihood that a project can be completed on or 
before a specific time. (In Chapter 6, we explore what to do if it appears that the project 
will not be completed on schedule.) In addition to standard analytic methods for risk 
management, we once again demonstrate simulation methods.
We start with simple plans and schedule them manually. After scheduling by hand, 
we turn to the computer and use MSP to do our scheduling and many other tasks for us. 
The same approach is used for risk management. First, problems involving risk will be 
solved by hand. Once the theory is understood, we use the computer to handle the same 
problems without so much arithmetic.
PMBOK Guide
Risk
Scheduling the Project

146  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
	 5.1	
PERT AND CPM NETWORKS
In the late 1950s, the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) and the 
Critical Path Method (CPM) were independently developed. PERT was developed by 
the U.S. Navy, Booz‐Allen Hamilton (a business consulting firm), and Lockheed Aircraft 
(now Lockheed Martin Corp.); and CPM was developed by Dupont De Nemours Inc. 
When they were developed, there were significant differences in the methods. For exam-
ple, PERT used probabilistic (or uncertain) estimates of activity durations and CPM used 
deterministic (or certain) estimates but included both time and cost estimates to allow 
time/cost trade‐offs to be used. Both methods employed networks to schedule and display 
task sequences. (Throughout this chapter, we will use the words “activity” and “task” as 
synonyms to avoid constant repetition of one or the other.) Both methods identified a 
critical path of tasks that could not be delayed without delaying the project. Both methods 
identified activities with slack (or float) that could be somewhat delayed without extend-
ing the time required to complete the project. While PERT and CPM used slightly dif-
ferent ways of drawing the network of activities, anything one could do with PERT, one 
could also do with CPM and vice versa. When writing about the history of project man-
agement, differentiating PERT and CPM is important and interesting. When managing 
projects, the distinction is merely academic. Traditional PERT is used less often than 
CPM; but CPM can be used with three‐time estimates, and we can do things with PERT 
that were restricted to CPM in “olden times.” We use both names because users in the 
real world are apt to use either.
The Language of PERT/CPM
Several terms used in discussing PERT/CPM analysis have been adopted from everyday 
language but have quite different meanings than in common usage. These terms are 
defined here as used in PERT/CPM.
Activity—A task or set of tasks required by the project. Activities use resources and time.
Event—An identifiable state resulting from the completion of one or more activi-
ties. Events consume no resources or time. Before an event can be achieved or realized, all 
its predecessor activities must be completed.
Milestones—Identifiable and noteworthy events marking significant progress on 
the project.
Network—A diagram of nodes (may represent activities or events) connected by 
directional arcs (may represent activities or simply show technological dependence) that 
defines the project and illustrates the technological relationships of all activities. 
Networks are usually drawn with a “Start” node on the left and a “Finish” node on the 
right. Arcs are always tipped with an arrowhead to show the direction of precedence, 
that is, from predecessors to successors.
Path—A series of connected activities (or intermediate events) between any two 
events in a network.
Critical path—The set of activities on a path from the project’s start event to its 
finish event that, if delayed, will delay the completion date of the project.
Critical time—The time required to complete all activities on the critical path.
In Chapter 3, on planning, we noted that tasks may be divided into subtasks and each 
of the subtasks may be further divided. To carry out this process, it is necessary to know 
which tasks are immediate predecessors or successors of which others. The predecessor/
successor relationship defines technological dependence. (See Chapter 3, Section 3.3.)

5.1 PERT AND CPM NETWORKS
•  147
Building the Network
There are two ways of displaying a project network. In one we depict the activities as 
arrows and events as nodes. This gives an activity‐on‐arrow (AOA) network, usually 
associated with PERT. Alternatively, we can create an activity‐on‐node (AON) network 
by showing each task as a node and linking the nodes with arrows that show their tech-
nological relationship. The AON network is often associated with CPM. To understand 
the distinction, let us assume a small project represented by the tasks and precedences 
shown in Table 5-1.
Because it is easiest to draw, we start with the AON network. Because tasks a and b 
have no predecessors, they follow the Start node. We connect them to the starting node 
with arrows as in Figure 5-1.
Note that task c has a as a predecessor and that tasks d and e have b as their common 
predecessor as shown in Figure 5-2.
The network is easily completed. Task f has both c and d as predecessors, while g 
follows e. Because there are no more tasks, we can tie all loose ends to a node labeled 
Finish as in Figure 5-3.
The AOA network is generally more difficult to draw, but depicts the technical 
relationships of the activities quite well. Beginning the same way, we create a Start 
node from which flow all activities that have no predecessors, in this case a and b. The 
completion of these activities results in events (nodes, often drawn as circles) numbered 
1 and 2 for easy identification as in Figure 5-4.
Table 5-1  A Sample Set 
of Project Activities and 
Precedences
Task
Predecessor
a
—
b
—
c
a
d
b
e
b
f
    c, d
g
e
S
t
a
r
t
a
b
Figure 5-1  Stage 1 of a 
sample AON network 
from Table 5.1.
d
c
e
S
t
a
r
t
a
b
Figure 5-2  Stage 2 of a sample AON 
network from Table 5-1.
d
c
f
g
e
S
t
a
r
t
F
i
n
i
s
h
a
b
Figure 5-3  A completed sample AON network from Table 5-1.

148  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
Table 5-1 indicates that task a precedes task c, and that task b precedes both tasks d 
and e. Figure 5-5 shows these additions with event nodes 3, 4, and 5, as indicated.
We are left with two activities, f and g. Task f has two predecessors, c and d. This 
means that tasks c and d actually finish at the same node (or event) and that f cannot start 
until this event is achieved, that is, until both c and d are completed. Task g is preceded 
by e. Table 5-1 shows no more tasks, and as in the case of the AON network this means 
that all tasks with no successors should go to a node labeled Finish. See Figure 5-6(a) in 
which the nodes have been renumbered and some combined for viewing simplicity.
We can handle f in a simpler though equivalent way by connecting the nodes follow-
ing c and d in Figure 5-5 with an arrow drawn with a dashed line, see Figure 5-6(b). This 
is called a dummy activity and merely shows a technological linkage. Generally speaking, 
dummy tasks are used in situations where two activities have the same starting and fin-
ishing nodes or where a single activity connects to two or more nodes. The problem with 
two activities sharing the same starting and finishing nodes is that it becomes difficult to 
distinguish the tasks from one another. One solution to this problem is to add an extra 
ending node for one of the tasks and then draw a dummy task from the new node to the 
previously shared node. Adding a dummy task in this situation ensures that the tasks 
have unique identities while at the same time maintaining the correct technological 
precedence relationships. Dummy tasks require no time and no resources.
With occasional exceptions for clarity, we will use AON networks throughout this 
book because they are used by most of the popular project management software. An 
important advantage of AON notation is that the networks are easy to draw. AOA net-
works, particularly when they have more than 15 or 20 activities, are difficult to draw by 
hand. With modern software this is not a serious problem, but the software that generates 
AOA networks is quite expensive. AON networks often do not show events, but it is 
simple enough to add them by showing the event (usually a milestone) exactly as if it 
S
t
a
r
t
a
b
1
2
Figure 5-4  Stage 1 of sample 
AOA network from Table 5-1.
5
4
3
S
t
a
r
t
a
b
e
d
c
1
2
Figure 5-5  Stage 2 of a 
sample AOA network 
from Table 5-1.
3
S
t
a
r
t
F
i
n
i
s
h
a
b
d
g
f
c
4
e
1
2
Figure 5-6(a)  A completed sample 
AOA network from Table 5-1.
F
i
n
i
s
h
5
4
3
S
t
a
r
t
a
b
e
d
c
1
2
g
f
Figure 5-6(b)  A completed sample 
AOA network showing the use of a 
dummy task, Table 5-1.

5.1 PERT AND CPM NETWORKS
•  149
were an activity but with zero time duration and no resources. The PM should be familiar 
with both types of networks.
Finding the Critical Path and Critical Time
Let us now consider a more complicated example. Given the data in Table 5-2, we can 
start drawing the associated AON network as in Figure 5-7. The activity names and 
durations are shown in the appropriate nodes.
Note that activity f follows both b and c. If we redraw Figure 5-7 and place the c 
node below the d and e nodes, we will avoid having several of the arrows crossing one 
another; see Figure 5-8 for the complete network. This kind of rearrangement is quite 
common when drawing networks, and most software will allow the user to click and drag 
nodes around to avoid the confusion of too many crossing arrows.
We can add information to the nodes in the network. Just above each node it is com-
mon practice to show what is called the earliest start time (ES) and earliest finish time (EF) 
for the associated activity. Just below each node is shown the latest start time (LS) and 
latest finish time (LF) for the activity. The node would appear as in Figure 5-9. The cor-
responding information for Figure  5-8 is shown in Figure  5-10 and its derivation is 
described in detail just below.
Activities a and b may start on Day 0, their ESs. Their EFs will be equal to their 
durations, 5 and 4 days, respectively. Tasks c, d, and e cannot start before a is completed 
Table 5-2  A Sample Problem for Finding the 
Critical Path and Critical Time
Activity
Predecessor
Duration
a
—
    5 days
b
—
    4
c
a
    3
d
a
    4
e
a
    6
f
    b, c
    4
g
d
    5
h
    d, e
    6
i
f
    6
j
    g, h
    4
d   4
c   3
e   6
S
t
a
r
t
a   5
b   4
Figure 5-7  Stage 1 of a sample 
network from Table 5-2.

150  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
on Day 5. Adding their respective durations to their ESs gives us their EFs, c finishing on 
Day 8, d on Day 9, and e on Day 11. Task f cannot start before both b and c are finished 
on Day 8, resulting in the EF for f on Day 12. Similarly, we find EFs for tasks g (9 + 5 = 
14) and h (11 + 6 = 17). Recall that a successor cannot be started until all predecessors 
are completed. Thus, h cannot start until Day 11 when both d and e are finished—Days 
9 and 11, respectively. The same situation is true for task j. It cannot be started until both 
g and h are completed on Day 17, giving an EF of 17 + 4 = 21. Task i, following f, has an 
EF of 12 + 6 = 18. No tasks follow i and j, completed on Days 18 and 21, respectively. 
When they are both finished, the project is finished. That event occurs on Day 21.
All activities, and thus all paths, must be completed to finish the project. The shortest 
time for completion of the network is equal to the longest path through the network, in this case 
a‐e‐h‐j. If any activity on the a‐e‐h‐j path is even slightly delayed, the project will be 
delayed and that identifies a‐e‐h‐j as the critical path and 21 days as the critical time. In 
Figure 5-10 the critical path is depicted by thick lines—a common practice with PERT/
e    6
d    4
h    6
f    4
j    4
g    5
c    3
i    6
S
t
a
r
t
F
i
n
i
s
h
a    5
b    4
Figure 5-8  A complete network from Table 5-2.
0
4
7
11
0
5
0
5
8
12
11
15
11
17
5
9
7
11
5
11
9
14
12
17
11
17
5
11
5
8
12
18
15
21
17
21
17
21
S
t
a
r
t
F
i
n
i
s
h
11
8
a    5
b    4
d    4
e    6
c    3
g    5
h    6
f    4
j    4
i    6
Figure 5-10  The critical path and time for sample project in Table 5.2.
Activity
name
Activity
duration
ES
EF
ES—Earliest start time
EF—Earliest ﬁnish time
LS—Latest start time
LF—Latest ﬁnish time
LS
LF
Figure 5-9  Information contents in 
an AON node.

5.1 PERT AND CPM NETWORKS
•  151
CPM networks. We found the ES and EF for each activity quite easily by beginning at 
the start node and moving from left to right through the network, calculating as we go 
from node to node. This is called a “forward pass” (or “left‐to‐right pass”) and makes it 
simple to find the critical path and time for PERT/CPM networks.
In a similar fashion, we can perform a “backward pass” (or “right‐to‐left pass”) to 
calculate the LS and LF values for each activity. Referring to Figure 5-10, we begin by 
assuming that we would like to complete the project within the critical time identified 
in the forward pass, 21 days in our example. Clearly, activities i and j must be completed 
no later than Day 21 in order not to delay the entire project. Therefore, these activities 
both have LFs of 21.
Given a task time of 4 days, j must be started no later than Day 17 in order to be 
completed by Day 21. Likewise, task i can be started as late as Day 15 and still finished 
by Day 21 given its 6‐day task time. Because task j cannot be started any later than Day 17,  
tasks g and h must be completed by Day 17. In a similar fashion, task f must be completed 
by Day 15 so as not to delay task i beyond its LS. Subtracting the task times from the LF 
for each of the tasks yields LSs of 11, 11, and 12 for tasks f, h, and g, respectively.
Now consider task d. Task d precedes both tasks g (LS = 12) and h (LS = 11). The 
question is, should d’s LF be 11 or 12? The correct answer is 11. The reason being, if task 
d were completed on Day 12, task h could not start on its LS of Day 11. Therefore we 
note that in situations where a particular activity precedes more than one task, its LF is 
equal to the minimum LSs of all activities it precedes.
The LFs and LSs for tasks b, c, and e are easily calculated since each of these tasks 
precedes a single task. Task a precedes tasks c, d, and e. Because task e has the lowest LS 
of 5 days, the LF for task a is calculated to be 5 days.
Calculating Activity Slack
If activities on the critical path cannot be delayed without causing the entire project to 
be delayed, does it follow that activities not on the critical path can be delayed without 
delaying the project? As a matter of fact, it does—within limits. The amount of time a 
noncritical task can be delayed without delaying the project is called slack or float. The 
slack for any activity is easily calculated as LS − ES = LF − EF = slack.
It should be clear that for any task on the critical path, its LF must be the same as its 
EF. It therefore has zero slack. If it finishes later than its EF, the activity will be late, caus-
ing a delay in the project. (Of course, the statement is equally true for its LS and ES.) 
This rule holds for activities a, e, h, and j, all on the critical path. But for activities not 
on the critical path the LF and EF (or the LS and ES) will differ and this difference is the 
activity slack. Take activity i, for example. It could be completed as early as Day 18 
because its ES is Day 12 and it has a 6‐day duration. It must, however, be completed by 
Day 21 or the project will be delayed. Because i has a duration of 6 days, it cannot be 
started later than Day 15 (21 − 6). Given an LS of 15 and an ES of 12, task i could be 
delayed up to 3 days (LS − ES or LF − EF) without affecting project completion time. 
Thus, activity i has 3 days of slack.
For another example, consider task g. It is a predecessor to task j that is on the criti-
cal path. Task j must start on Day 17, which gives task g an LF of 17. It has an EF of Day 
14 and thus has 3 days of slack.
Now consider a more complex situation: task d. First, task d must be completed by 
Day 12 so as not to make g late and thus j late and thereby the whole project late! Thus, 
along this path task d has 3 days of slack in the role as a predecessor of task g. But d is also 
a predecessor of critical activity h, and along this path task d must be completed by Day 
11 or h will be late to start. Task d, therefore, has only 2 days of slack, not 3.

152  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
Slack for other tasks are determined in the same way. Task f precedes i, and the 
latter has an LS of Day 15. Given an LF of 15, f must start no later than Day 11. Its ES 
of Day 8 means that f has 3 days of slack. Task c is a predecessor of f, and because the 
latter’s LS is Day 11, c must be completed by then. With an LF of 11 and an EF of 8, c 
has 3 days of slack. The only remaining task to be considered is b. This task is linked 
to f and, like c, must be complete by f’s LS, Day 11. With an EF of Day 4, b has 
7 days of slack.
Throughout this discussion of calculating slack, we have made two assumptions that 
are standard in these analyses. First, when calculating slack for a set of activities on a 
noncritical path, the calculation for any given activity assumes that no other activity on 
the path will use any of the slack. Once a project is underway, if a predecessor activity 
uses some of its slack, its EF is adjusted accordingly and the ESs of successor activities 
must also be corrected. We have also assumed that the critical time for the project is also 
the project’s due date, but it is not uncommon for a project to have “project slack” (or 
“network slack”). Our 21‐day project might be started 23 days before its promised deliv-
ery date, in which case activities on the “critical path” would have 2 days of slack and 
noncritical activities would have an additional 2 days of slack.
Milestones may be added to the display quite easily: Add the desired milestone event 
as a node with zero duration. Its ES will equal its EF, and its LS and LF will be equal. 
Milestones should, of course, be immediate successors of the activities that result in the 
milestone events. Finally, if a starting date has been selected for the project, it is common 
to show ES, EF, LS, and LF as actual dates.
Before continuing, a pause is in order to consider the managerial implications of 
the critical path and slack. The PM’s primary attention must be paid to activities on the criti-
cal path. If anything delays one of these activities, the project will be late. At the start 
of the project, the PM correctly notes that activity a is on the critical path and b is not. 
This raises an interesting question. Can any resources reserved for use on b be bor-
rowed for a few days to work on a and thereby shorten its duration? The nature of b’s 
resources and a’s technology will dictate whether or not this is possible. If a, for exam-
ple, could be shortened a day by using b’s resources for 4 days, the critical path would 
be shortened by a day. This would cause no problem for b, which had 7 days of slack. If 
the delivery date for the project remains the same, the entire project would then have 
a day of slack. The presence of project slack tends to lower the PM’s pulse rate and 
blood pressure.
Doing It the Easy Way—Microsoft Project (MSP)
As promised, once the reader understands how to build a network by hand, we can intro-
duce tools provided through project management software. The first task is transferring 
information from the project plan into the software, MSP in this case. This is not diffi-
cult. MSP presents a tab entry table much like the project plan template shown in 
Table 5-3. It has spaces where the tasks can be identified, plus spaces for activity dura-
tions and predecessors. The software automatically numbers each activity that is entered. 
MSP offers a great number of options for viewing the data once it is entered into the 
project plan or entry view. If a specific start date or finish date is already determined for 
an activity, MSP allows you to enter it as well.
Once the project plan data are entered, MSP will automatically draw an AON 
PERT/CPM network as shown in Figure 5-11. Note that the figure lacks start and fin-
ish nodes because they were not entered on the activity list. Note also that the tasks 
in the network appear with ID numbers in order, flowing from left to right and from 
the top to the bottom. In Figure 5-11 two arrows cross, which may be confusing. The 

5.1 PERT AND CPM NETWORKS
•  153
nodes show the activity name, ID number, duration, and start and finish times. These 
nodes are easily customized to show many different things concerning each spe-
cific activity.
It is simple to add Start and Finish nodes as milestones to make the network easier 
to understand. An activity named “Start” is entered at the top of the list, and an activity 
named “Finish” at the bottom. We want these activities to appear as milestones, signifi-
cant events in the life of the project. In MSP a milestone is an activity with a duration 
of 0. Because we want the Start and Finish milestones to be linked to the beginning and 
ending activities of the project, all predecessors will have to be changed in light of these 
additions. For example, a and b will now have Start as a predecessor, and the last two 
activities, i and j, are predecessors to Finish. (In MSP, predecessors are indicated by task 
ID numbers rather than the task names used here for clarity.)
Table 5-3  An MSP Version of Sample Problem in Table 5-2
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
  1
a
5 days
  2
b
4 days
  3
c
3 days
1
  4
d
4 days
1
  5
e
6 days
1
  6
f
4 days
    2, 3
  7
g
5 days
4
  8
h
6 days
    4, 5
  9
i
6 days
6
10
j
4 days
    7, 8
a
1
Thu 02/03
5 days
Wed 02/09
b
2
Thu 02/03
4 days
Tue 02/08
d
4
Thu 02/10
4 days
Tue 02/15
h
8
Fri 02/18
6 days
Fri 02/25
g
7
Wed 02/16
5 days
Tue 02/22
f
6
Tue 02/15
4 days
Fri 02/18
j
10
Mon 02/28
4 days
Thu 03/02
i
9
Mon 02/21
6 days
Mon 02/28
c
3
Thu 02/10
3 days
Mon 02/14
e
5
Thu 02/10
6 days
Thu 02/17
Figure 5-11  An MSP version of PERT/CPM network from Table 5-3.

154  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
Redrawing the network to get rid of the crossing arrows is also simple. As we noted 
when drawing the network manually, this is corrected by moving the c, f, and i nodes 
down to the bottom of the network. In MSP, that is easily done by simply dragging the 
nodes to whatever location you wish. See Figure 5-12 for the results of both changes. 
Notice in Figure 5-12 that because we added Start and Finish to the activity list, the 
other activities have been renumbered to conform to the changed list.
MSP will also calculate slack. (For details, click on MSP’s “Help,” type “Slack,” and 
follow the directions.) MSP, and some writers, differentiate between “total slack” and 
“free slack.” Total slack is LF − EF or LS − ES as we explained in the section just above. 
Free slack is defined as the time an activity can be delayed without affecting the start 
time of any successor activity. Take activity b for example. Its EF is 4 days, but it could 
be finished as late as 8 days without affecting task f in any way. It is thus said to have 4 
days of free slack. Using b as an example, the rule for calculating free slack for an 
activity is
Free slack for b
of earlier successor
b s
b s duration
ES
ES
’
’
4
8
0
4.
The total slack for b is seven days, as we calculated in the section on finding slack.
These same calculations can be done by using the Solver in Excel®. To see how this 
is accomplished, refer to Lawrence and Pasternak (1998, Chapters 5 and 6). Finding the 
critical path is a fairly straightforward problem in linear programming, but it often takes 
more time than doing the same problem by hand, and certainly much more time (enter-
ing the required information) than letting MSP solve the problem.
Following the definition of some terms commonly used in PERT/CPM analysis, both 
AON and AOA networks are illustrated. ES and EF are found for all network activi-
ties, and the critical time and critical path are identified by the forward‐pass method. 
LS and LF are calculated for all activities by the backward‐pass method, and slack 
is defined as either LS − ES or LF − EF. The managerial implications of the critical 
path and of project slack are briefly discussed. The same problem used for illustrating 
networks is entered into MSP and shown as an output of the software.
a
2
Thu 02/03
5 days
Wed 02/09
e
6
Thu 02/10
6 days
Thu 02/17
c
4
Thu 02/10
3 days
Mon 02/14
h
9
Fri 02/18
6 days
Fri 02/25
d
5
Thu 02/10
4 days
Wed 02/15
g
8
Wed 02/16
5 days
Tue 02/22
j
11
Mon 02/28
4 days
Thu 03/02
b
3
Thu 02/03
4 days
Tue 02/08
f
7
Tue 02/15
4 days
Fri 02/18
i
10
Mon 02/21
6 days
Mon 02/28
Finish
12
Thu 03/02
0 days
Thu 03/02
Start
1
Thu 02/03
0 days
Thu 02/03
Figure 5-12  A modified version of MSP network from Figure 5-11.

5.2 PROJECT UNCERTAINTY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
•  155
	 5.2	
PROJECT UNCERTAINTY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
In Chapter 4, Section 4.5 on risk analysis mentioned making most likely (or normal), 
optimistic, and pessimistic cost estimates for project tasks. Such estimates were shown in 
Table 4-6, and we promised to illustrate how to use these and similar estimates of task 
duration to determine the likelihood that a project can be completed by some predeter-
mined time or cost. It is now time to keep that promise.
Calculating Probabilistic Activity Times
First, it is necessary to define what is meant by the terms “pessimistic,” “optimistic,” and 
“most likely” (or “normal”). Assume that all possible durations (or all possible costs) for 
some task can be represented by a statistical distribution as shown in Figure 5-13. The 
individual or group making the estimates is asked for a task duration, a, such that the 
actual duration of the task will be a or lower approximately 3 times out of 1,000 times. 
Thus a is an optimistic estimate. The pessimistic estimate, b, is an estimated duration for 
the same task such that the actual finish time will be b or greater approximately 3 times 
out of 1,000 times. (These estimates are often referred to as the “almost never level.”) 
The most likely or normal duration is m, which is the mode of the distribution shown in 
Figure 5-13.
The mean of this distribution, also referred to as the “expected time,” TE, can easily 
be found in the following way:*
TE
a
m
b
4
6/
For the statisticians among our readers, this calculation gives an approximation of the 
mean of a beta distribution. The beta distribution is used because it is far more flexible 
than the more common normal distribution and because it more accurately reflects 
actual time and cost outcomes. (For the derivation of the approximation, see 
Kamburowski,  1997; Keefer and Verdini,  1993).** The calculation itself is merely a 
weighted average of the three-time estimates, a, m, and b using weights of 1‐4‐1, respec-
tively. (For those favoring the triangular distribution, its true mean is (a + m + b)/3 
which is another weighted average but with equal weights for the three estimates.)
We can also approximate the standard deviation, σ, of the beta distribution as
= b
a /6
Risk
a
m
b
TE
Figure 5-13  The statistical 
distribution of all possible times 
for an activity.
* MSP refers to the typical or “most likely” time as the “expected” time. After one has entered the optimistic, 
pessimistic, and “expected” times in MSP, it will calculate the “duration,” which is TE in our notation. In most works 
on project management, TE is denoted as the expected time or the mean time.
** For readers who have never studied statistics or who have forgotten what they learned, there is a brief appen-
dix on statistics and probability at the end of this book.

156  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
In this case, the “6” is not a weighted average but rather an assumption that the range of 
the distribution covers six standard deviations (6σ). It follows that the variance of this 
distribution is estimated as
Var
b
a
2
2
6
/
The assumption that the range of the distribution, b − a, covers six standard devia-
tions is important. It assumes that the estimator actually attempted to judge a and b so 
that 99.7 percent of all cases were greater than a and less than b; that is, approximately 3 
out of 1,000 cases lay outside of these estimates. We have never met a PM who was com-
fortable with such extreme levels of likelihood. 99.7 percent translates to “almost never 
outside the range,” (three standard deviations) leading to estimates of a and b that are so 
small and large, respectively, as to be nearly useless.
But estimators are not so uncomfortable making estimates at the 95 (or 90) percent 
levels where a is estimated so that 5 (or 10) percent of all cases are less than a, and 5 (or 
10) percent are greater than b. These estimates are within the range of everyday experi-
ence. These levels, however, do not cover 6σ, so using the above formula for finding the 
standard deviation will result in a significant underestimation of the uncertainty associ-
ated with activity durations and cost estimates. Correcting for such errors is simple. If a 
and b estimates are made at the 95 percent level, the following should be used to find σ 
(and squared to find the variance):
b
a / .3 3
If estimates of a and b are made at the 90 percent level
b
a / .2 6
The Probabilistic Network, an Example
Table 5-4 shows a set of tasks, their predecessors, and optimistic, most likely, and pessi-
mistic durations for each activity, plus the expected time and activity duration variance. 
(If the project had been more realistic, that is, much larger, we would have used an 
Excel® spreadsheet to handle all the calculations.)
The expected time for each activity was calculated by using the previously noted 
weighted average of the three time estimates. (The fractional remainders for these calcu-
lations are left in sixths for convenience because each TE will be added to others.) For 
example, to find TE for activity a, we have
TE =
+
+
=
+
+
=
=
a
m
b
4
6
8
4 10
16
6
64 6
10 4
/
days
/
/
.
The variance for a is also easily found as
Var
b
a /
/
/
.
.
6
16
8
6
8 6
1 33
1 78
2
2
2
2

5.2 PROJECT UNCERTAINTY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
•  157
(The traditional ((b − a)/6)2 was used to calculate the variance, solely because it is tradi-
tional. A problem at the end of this chapter will ask the reader to recalculate the vari-
ance assuming 95 and 90 percent estimations, thereby repeating some of the calculations 
shown in this section.)
The network associated with the data in Table 5-4 appears in Figure 5-14. Note that 
the entries inside the nodes are the activity identifier, TE, and variance, in that order. Some 
activities are known with certainty (i.e., a = m = b), as in task d that takes 6 days in this 
example. (A real‐world example of such an activity would be a 60‐day toxicity test of a new 
drug. In that case, a = m = b = 60 days, not more and not less.) Once in a great while the 
test may get fouled up and the estimate will be wrong, but our drug manufacturing friends 
tell us this is quite rare. In some cases, the optimistic and most likely times are the same,  
a = m. We might, for instance, allow a specific time for paint to dry, a time that is usually 
sufficient, but may not be if the weather is very humid. Occasionally, the most likely and 
the pessimistic times may be the same, m = b, as in f. Sometimes the range may be sym-
metric, (m − a) = (b − m), but more often it is not. Some activities have little uncertainty 
in duration, which is to say, low variance. Some have high uncertainty, high variance.
The expected time for each activity can be used to find the path with the longest 
expected time. A forward pass is made, and the “critical path” is found to be a‐b‐d‐g‐h. 
The critical time is 47 days. Because the mean time (TE) is used for all activities, there is 
a 50–50 probability of completing the project in 47 days or less—and also, 47 days or 
more. Activity slack is calculated by using a backward pass, exactly as we did in the previ-
ous section.
There are several problems with conducting the risk analysis in the way that we are 
demonstrating. For example, given the uncertainty in path durations, we cannot be sure 
that a‐b‐d‐g‐h is actually the critical path. One of the other paths, a‐b‐c‐f, for example, 
may turn out to be longer when the project is actually carried out. Remember that a, m, 
and b are estimates, and remember also that the durations are ranges, not point estimates. 
We refer to a‐b‐d‐g‐h as the critical path solely because it is customary to call the path 
with the longest expected time the “critical path.” Again, only after the fact do we know 
which path was actually the critical path. The managerial implication of this caveat is that 
the PM must carefully manage all paths that have a reasonable chance of being the 
actual critical path. It is also well to remember that in reality all projects are character-
ized by uncertainty. Sometimes, with routine maintenance projects, for example, activity 
variances are quite small, but they are rarely zero.
Table 5-4  A Sample Set of Project Activities with Uncertain Durations
Opt.
M. Likely
Pess.
Activity
Pred
a
m
b
TE  
(a + 4m + b)/6
Var.  
((b − a)/6)2
a
—
  8
10
16
10 4/6
1.78
b
a
11
12
14
12 1/6
  .25
c
b
  7
12
19
12 2/6
4.00
d
b
  6
  6
  6
6
  .00
e
b
10
14
20
14 2/6
2.78
f
c, d
  6
10
10
  9 2/6
  .44
g
d
  5
10
17
10 2/6
4.00
h
e, g
  4
  8
11
  7 5/6
1.36

158  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
There are also problems with conducting the same type analysis by use of simulation. 
We will delay discussions of the assumptions behind these methods and a comparison of 
the pros and cons of such analyses until we have completed descriptions of both meth-
ods. In the meantime, it is helpful to bear in mind that the analysis started in Table 5-4, 
and continued in Table 5-5, and the simulation methods we then discuss are simply two 
different methods of accomplishing essentially the same thing.
Once More the Easy Way
Just as it did for the deterministic sample network, MSP can easily handle the probabil-
istic network, though as we will see, it does not do some of the calculations that we 
demonstrate. Those can be done easily enough in Excel®. The stochastic (a fancy syno-
nym for “probabilistic,” from the Greek word for “conjectural” and pronounced “sta kas’ 
tic” or “sto kas’ tic”) network used for the preceding discussion is shown as a product of 
MSP. Table 5-4 becomes MSP Table 5-5, and Figure 5-14 becomes MSP Figure 5-15.
While Figure 5-14 shows the total elapsed time from Day 0 to Day 47 as one proceeds 
from left to right, the MSP equivalent, Figure 5-15, shows time as start and finish calen-
dar dates. The project starts on February 4 and is completed on April 10. That is a total 
22 5/6
12 2/6
4.00
35 1/6
25 2/6
37 4/6
S
t
a
r
t
F
i
n
i
s
h
c
22 5/6
6
0.00
28 5/6
22 5/6
28 5/6
d
10 4/6
12 1/6
.25
22 5/6
10 4/6
22 5/6
b
22 5/6
14 2/6
2.78
37 1/6
24 5/6
39 1/6
e
35 1/6
9 2/6
.44
44 3/6
37 4/6
47
f
28 5/6
10 2/6
4.00
39 1/6
28 5/6
39 1/6
g
39 1/6
7 5/6
1.36
47
39 1/6
47
h
0
10 4/6
1.78
10 4/6
0
10 4/6
a
Figure 5-14  An AON network from Table 5-4.
Table 5-5  An MSP Version of a Sample Problem from Table 5-4
ID
Task 
Name
Predecessors
Expected 
Duration
Optimistic 
Duration
Most Likely 
Duration
Pessimistic 
Duration
  1
Start
        0 days
  0 days
  0 days
  0 days
  2
a
1
10.67 days
  8 days
10 days
16 days
  3
b
2
12.17 days
11 days
12 days
14 days
  4
c
3
12.33 days
  7 days
12 days
19 days
  5
d
3
        6 days
  6 days
  6 days
  6 days
  6
e
3
14.33 days
10 days
14 days
20 days
  7
f
4, 5
  9.33 days
  6 days
10 days
10 days
  8
g
5
10.33 days
  5 days
10 days
17 days
  9
h
6, 8
  7.83 days
  4 days
  8 days
11 days
10
Finish
7, 9
        0 days
  0 days
  0 days
  0 days

5.2 PROJECT UNCERTAINTY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
•  159
elapsed calendar time of 67 days. The time appears significantly different from the 47 
days that we determined above as being the expected time for the project. The difference 
is caused by the fact that MSP assumes (defaults to) a 5‐day workweek. If you count out 
the work days on a calendar, you may find that the project seems to take 48 or even 49 
days, not 47. That anomaly results from the fact that MSP operates on a real‐world cal-
endar. It remembers that February has a national holiday, President’s Day. It also remem-
bers that February has 29 days on leap years, and it was on a leap year that we created this 
example. (It is not difficult to change the workweek assumption or to add or delete holi-
days.) Not counting Saturdays, Sundays, holidays, and remembering the leap year, the 
project has an expected duration of 47 days, as we thought it should.
The Probability of Completing the Project on Time
Let us now return to our sample problem of Table 5-4 and Figure 5-14. Recall that the 
project has an expected critical time of 47 days (i.e., path a‐b‐d‐g‐h). How would you 
respond if your boss said, “The client just called and wants to know if we can deliver the 
project on April 30, 51 working days from today. I’ve checked, and we can start tomor-
row morning.”
You know that path a‐b‐d‐g‐h has an expected duration of 47 days, but if you promise 
delivery in 47 days there is a 50 percent chance that this path will be late, not to mention 
the possibility that one of the other three paths will take longer than 47 days to com-
plete. That seems to you to be too risky. Tomorrow morning will be 50 working days 
before April 30, so you wonder: What is the probability that the project will be com-
pleted in 50 days or less?
This question can be answered with the information available concerning the level of 
uncertainty for the various project activities. First, there is an assumption that should be 
noted. The individual variances of the activities in a series of activities (such as a path 
through a network) may be summed to find the variance of the set of activities on the path 
itself, if the various activities in the set are statistically independent. In effect, statistical 
independence means the following in this example: If a is a predecessor of b, and if a is 
Start
1
Fri 02/04
0 days
Fri 02/04
a
2
Fri 02/04
10.67 days
Fri 02/18
c
4
Tue 03/07
12.33 days
Fri 03/24
Name
Project: Project 1
Date: Fri 02/04/00
ID
Start
Duration
Critical
Noncritical
Milestone
Summary
Subproject
Marked
Finish
b
3
Fri 02/18
12.17 days
Tue 03/07
d
5
Tue 03/07
6 days
Wed 03/15
e
6
Tue 03/07
14.33 days
Tue 03/28
f
7
Fri 03/24
9.33 days
Thu 04/06
g
8
Wed 03/15
10.33 days
Thu 03/30
h
9
Thu 03/30
7.83 days
Mon 04/10
Finish
10
Mon 04/10
0 days
Mon 04/10
Figure 5-15  An MSP version of a sample problem network in Figure 5-14.

160  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
early or late, it will not affect the duration of b. Note what this does not say. It does not say 
that the date when b is completed will not be affected. If a is late, b is also likely to be late, 
but the time required to accomplish b, its duration, will not be affected. This may be a 
subtle distinction, but it is important because the condition of statistical independence is 
often met by project activities, and this allows us to answer the boss’s question seriously.
There are times when the assumption of statistical independence is not met. For 
example, assume two activities require some software code to be written. If during the 
project the code writer originally assigned to the project becomes unavailable and a less 
experienced code writer is assigned to the tasks, the times to complete these two tasks are 
clearly not independent of one another. If the lack of experience increases the task time 
and/or variance of one task, it is likely to impact other tasks in the same fashion. In this 
case, one should deal with the problem by reestimating the duration of both tasks. In 
general, this should be done anytime the resources supplied to a project are different from 
those presumed when the duration of project activities was originally estimated.
To complete a project by a specified time requires that all the paths in the project’s 
network be completed by the specified time. Therefore, determining the probability that 
a project is completed by a specified time requires calculating the probability that all 
paths are finished by the specified time. Then based on our assumption that the paths are 
independent of one another, we can calculate the probability that the entire project is 
completed within the specified time by multiplying these probabilities together. Again, 
recall from basic statistics that the probability of multiple independent events all occur-
ring is equal to the product of each event’s individual probability of occurrence.
To begin, let’s evaluate the probability that path a‐b‐d‐g‐h, which is apparently the 
critical path, will be completed on or before 50 days after the project is started. We can 
find the probability by finding z in the following equation:
z
D
/
2
where:
D
the desired project completion time.
the sum of the T ac
E
tivities on the path being investigated.
the variance 
2
of the path being considered (the sum of the variances 
of tthe activities on the path).
The exact nature of z will become clear shortly. Using the problem at hand, μ = 47 days, 
D = 50 days, and 
2
1.78
.25
.00
4.00
1.36
7.39. (The square root of 7.39 = 
2.719.) Using these numbers, we find
z
50
47
2 719
1 10
/ .
.
Because the square root of the variance of a statistical distribution equals the stand-
ard deviation of that distribution, z is the number of standard deviations separating  
D and μ. The distribution in question is the distribution of the time required to complete 
the path a‐b‐d‐g‐h. Consider all possible combinations of the activity times of the tasks 
on this path. This would include all possibilities from a combination of all optimistic 
times to a combination of all pessimistic times and everything in between. And even this 
does not include the highest and lowest project duration outcomes because the estimates 
do not cover 100 percent of all possible activity times; they cover only 99 + percent. 
We can illustrate the frequency distribution of the critical path completion times in 
Figure 5-16. (The Central Limit theorem allows the use of a normal distribution.)

5.2 PROJECT UNCERTAINTY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
•  161
The calculation of z made above shows the desired date, D, to be approximately 1.1 
standard deviations above the expected critical time, μ, for the project. If we define the 
total area under the curve as 1.0 (100 percent of all times), then the area under the curve 
to the left of 50 days is equivalent to the probability that the path a‐b‐d‐g‐h will be com-
pleted in 50 days or less.
The table with the cumulative probabilities for the normal distribution on the 
inside back cover of the book shows the probability associated with a wide range of 
values of z. For z = 1.10, the probability is .8643 or about 86 percent that this path will 
be finished on or before Day 50. Again, we remind you that because of uncertainty, 
other paths may turn out to be critical, possibly delaying the project. Therefore, calcu-
lating the probability that the entire project is completed by some specified date requires 
calculating the probability that all paths that comprise the project are finished by the 
specified time.
Similar calculations are next done for paths a‐b‐c‐f, a‐b‐e‐h, and a‐b‐d‐f. The prob-
abilities of each of these paths being completed by Day 50 are 98.5 percent, 97.8 percent, 
and virtually 100 percent, respectively. Based on this, the probability that the entire 
project is completed by Day 50 is calculated as .864 × .985 × .978 × 1.000 = .832 or 
83.2 percent.
A few comments are relevant at this point. First, to simplify the task of calculating 
the probability that a project is completed by a specified time, for practical purposes it 
is reasonable to consider only those paths whose expected completion times have a 
reasonable chance of being greater than the specified time. For example, if the sum of a 
path’s expected time and 2.33 of its standard deviations is less than the specified time, 
then the probability of this path taking longer than the specified time is quite small, less 
than 1 percent (2.06 standard deviations would be less than 2 percent). We simply 
assume that there is a negligible probability that the path will cause the project to be 
late. For example, path a‐b‐d‐f’s expected time and standard deviation are 38.2 and 
1.57, respectively. Using this rule of thumb, we get 38.2 + (2.33 × 1.57) = 41.9, which 
is much less than 50. Since there is less than a 1 percent chance this path will take 
longer than 41.9 days, there is no need to consider the possibility that it will take longer 
than 50 days.
Second, to calculate the probability that a project will take longer than any specified 
time, we must first calculate the probability that it will take less than the specified time. 
Subtracting that probability from 1 gives us the probability that it will take longer than 
the specified time.
Finally, Excel®’s NORM.DIST function can be used as an alternative to tables of 
cumulative probabilities for the normal distribution for calculating the probability that a 
path finishes by a specified time, D. The syntax of this function is as follows:
NORM DIST
TRUE
.
, ,
,
D
To illustrate, the probability that path a‐b‐d‐g‐h is completed on or before 50 days can be 
calculated with Excel® as = NORM.DIST (50, 47 , 2.719, TRUE).
Area = Prob. = 0.8643
47
Time (days)
50
Figure 5-16  The statistical distribution 
of completion times of the path a‐b‐d‐g‐h 
in Table 5-4.

162  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
Selecting Risk and Finding D
We can also work this problem backwards. Assume that a client is very important, very 
demanding, and will be very upset if the project is late. The client has asked when the 
project output will be available. The client insists on a firm date. How sure do you wish 
to be about being on time? (Don’t say 100 percent because that implies a time so long 
that no one will believe you.) Carefully considering the matter, you decide that you want 
a 95 percent probability of meeting your promised completion date. When should you 
tell the client to expect delivery?
This is the same problem solved just above, but now D, the desired date, is the 
unknown while the probability associated with z is preset at .95. Referring to the table 
with cumulative probabilities for the normal distribution on the inside back cover we can 
see that for a .95 probability, z will have a value of 1.645. Therefore,
z
D
D
D
D
/
.
/ .
.
.
.
2
1 645
47
2 719
47
1 645 2 719
51 5 days
Say, noon of the 52nd day. Note, this result indicates that there is a 95 percent chance of 
completing path a‐b‐d‐g‐h in 51.5 days. Remember that this does not mean that there is 
a 95 percent chance of completing the entire project in 51.5 days.
We can arrive at the same answer using the Excel® NORM.INV function. The syn-
tax of this function is
NORM INV
.
, ,
probability
In our example, this function would be used as follows:
NORM INV
.
.
,
, .
95 47 2 719
The Case of the Unreasonable Boss
What happens if your boss is unreasonable, a “pointy‐hair” type who insists that he wants 
the project we have been discussing delivered in 45 days instead of the later delivery times 
we have considered thus far? To find the likelihood that you can deliver, we return to z.
In this case,
z
45
47
7 39
2 2 719
74
/
.
/ .
.
Reference to the cumulative probability table displayed on the inside cover of the 
book reveals that there are no negative zs. This merely indicates that D is less than μ. 
A glance at Figure 5-16 will show this because 45 is to the left of μ. To find the probabil-
ity associated with a negative z, we find the probability of z as if it were a positive num-
ber—for z = .74. Because the table with cumulative probabilities on the inside back 
cover is based on a normal distribution which is symmetric, the negative z will be as far 
below m as the positive z is above it. Therefore, for a negative number the probability 
will be 1 minus the probability for the same positive number, p(− z) = 1−p(z). 
Risk

5.2 PROJECT UNCERTAINTY AND RISK MANAGEMENT
•  163
The ­probability for z = .74 is .77 and thus the probability of z = −.74 is (1 − .77) = .23. 
(With Excel®’s NORM.DIST and NORM.INV functions, this transformation is not 
required.) As the PM—other things being the same—you have between a 1 in 4 and a 
1 in 5 chance of completing the project on time, not very good odds. The weasel words 
“other things being the same” will be removed in the next chapter when we reconsider 
the problem of the pointy‐haired boss.
A Potential Problem: Path Mergers
When two or more paths through a network join, even at the end of the network, paths 
that have little slack and/or high variance may become critical simply by chance. For 
example, examine path a‐b‐c‐f in Figure 5-14, a path with an expected duration of 44.5 
days and a path variance of 6.47 days. What is the chance that this path could be longer 
than our expected project completion time of 47 days?
As we noted earlier, elementary probability theory (see Appendix ) states that if the 
probability of event A occurring is P(A) and the probability of event B occurring is P(B), 
then the probability of both events A and B occurring is P(A) × P(B), assuming the 
events are independent. Tasks a and b are common to both paths, so we ignore them. 
Tasks d, g, and h have an expected duration of 24.17 days, and their path has a variance 
of 5.36. Tasks c and f have an expected duration of 21.67 days, and that path has a 4.44 
variance. Because d, g, and h have an expected completion time of 24.17 days, there is .5 
chance these activities will take longer than 24.17 days. Therefore, we can ask: What is 
the probability that the c‐f path will exceed 24.17 days? Back to z.
z
D
/
.
.
/
.
. / .
.
2
24 17
21 67
4 44
2 5 2 11
1 18
An examination of the cumulative probability table displayed on the inside cover of the 
book shows that for z equal to 1.18 the probability that the path c‐f will be 24.17 days 
or less is .88. Using Excel® we can write = NORM.DIST (24.17, 21.67, 2.11, TRUE). 
The probability that both paths will be 24.17 days or less is .5 × .88 = .44.
As we see, the probability of completing the project by 47 days has now dropped 
from 50 percent to 44 percent. Are there any other paths that may further reduce our 
expectations of finishing in 47 days? Indeed, path a‐b‐e‐h could also delay the project 
and, as it happens, reduces the probability further to 38 percent. So we see that prob-
abilities based solely on the apparent critical path may be quite optimistic, depending 
on the slack and variance of other paths in the project. Hence it is important to 
examine the network closely to see if any other paths might threaten our estimates of 
completion. In this case, the original due date was set high enough that these alterna-
tive paths are not a problem and the chance that all three will be completed by Day 
50, the boss’s original due date, is still well above 80 percent. The reason for introduc-
ing some slack for the entire project is now clear. It should also be clear that given a 
large project with considerable uncertainty and many paths from start to finish, this 
manner of dealing with risk is lengthy and probably tedious. More important than 
tedium, at times the assumption of statistical independence of the paths is not met. 
There is an alternative way to deal with risk, but it is based firmly on the concepts and 
issues we have just discussed, so they must be understood before tackling the alterna-
tive, simulation.

164  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
	 5.3	
SIMULATION
In this section we can take a different approach to managing risk. Specifically, we build 
on the probabilistic foundation established in the previous section and use simulation to 
handle the arithmetic as well as help us to understand the consequences of uncertainty. 
Simulation analysis can provide insight into the range and distribution of project com-
pletion times. To illustrate this, once again we use the project activities listed in Table 5-4 
 and the corresponding network diagram shown in Figure 5-14.
For the purpose of this example, we will make one simplifying assumption. As in 
Chapter 4, we will assume that the activity times may be reasonably represented by a beta 
distribution. The spreadsheet shown in Table 5-6 was created to simulate the project.
Having opened Excel® and Crystal Ball® (CB), we devoted a column to each activity 
(i.e., columns A through H) and these will be our assumption variables. We then devoted 
one column (columns I through L) to each path through the network. Finally, we calculate 
the network Completion Time in column M by taking the maximum value of columns I–L, 
and this cell becomes our forecast cell. This gives us a very simple model for a complex 
problem. The hardest part of constructing this model is to identify all paths through the 
network. On small networks like our example, this is easy. On large networks it may be 
quite difficult.* Using an MSP PERT network to identify paths can be very helpful.
Reminding the reader that it is easier to follow our instructions if you have the soft-
ware running, we can now enter data into what becomes Table 5-6.
1.	 First enter the proper column labels in the first two rows of the spreadsheet, and then 
enter the most likely time for activity a (from Table 5-4) in cell A3—10 days. CB 
won’t let you define an assumption cell for an empty cell.
2.	 Click on Define Assumption in the CB ribbon.
Risk
Best Practice
Uncertainty and risk management are introduced. Optimistic, most likely, and pes-
simistic estimates of task duration are made and expected activity times are calculated 
as well as the standard deviation and variance of task time distributions. From this 
data the mean times for all paths are calculated, and the probability of the paths being 
completed on or before a predetermined date can be found. In addition, the probabil-
ity of completion can be set in advance and the path delivery date consistent with 
that probability can be determined. The problem of path mergers is then investigated.
Risk
Table 5-6  Data from Table 5-4 Entered into a CB Spreadsheet with Assumption and Forecast Cells
* If there are too many paths, then only those that appear likely to be close to the critical path due to their 
completion times and variances need be simulated.

5.3 SIMULATION
•  165
3.	 Click on BetaPERT in the Distribution Gallery and then the OK button.
4.	 In the BetaPERT Distribution Minimum and Maximum text boxes enter the pessi-
mistic and optimistic times. Note that when you entered the most likely time in step 1, 
that time already appeared in the BetaPERT Distribution Likeliest text box when 
it was displayed. Note also that the distribution box assumed pessimistic and optimis-
tic times. Simply click on those boxes and change the times to the ones shown in 
Table 5-4. When you have done this, click Enter and then OK.
5.	 Enter the rest of the activity times. Note that activity time for d is a constant. Simply 
enter “6” in cell D3 and do not use any distribution for the cell.
6.	 We trust you found the four paths through the network. Identify each path as shown 
in Figure 5-14 or Figure 5-15, and enter the path duration formulas that simply sum 
the activity times for each path. (Caution: Recall that the Excel® copy/paste com-
mand will not work, though may appear to do so. Enter the data manually for best 
results or use the CB copy/paste command.)
7.	 Now enter the project duration formula in cell M3, that is, = MAX(I3:L3). Click on 
the cell and then on Define Forecast in the CB ribbon. Label the forecast textbox 
“Project Completion Time” or whatever you fancy. The Units are “Days.” Click OK. 
Save the spreadsheet you have created before proceeding with the next step. We will 
use this spreadsheet again in Chapter 6.
8.	 If the “Trials” box is not set to 1000, adjust it and then click on the “Start” green 
arrow. After the run, you will see a statistical distribution similar to Figure 5-17. To 
view summary statistics, click on the “View” menu option in the Forecast dialog box 
(see Figure 5-17) and the click on “Statistics” to see a table similar to Table 5-7.
Table 5-7 shows that we made 1000 trials and that the mean project completion time 
was 47.83 days (in the run made for this writing), the shortest completion time was 41.02 
days, and the longest was 55.59 days. Recall that the mean completion time with the 
analytic approach using the beta distribution was 47 days. The different assumptions 
Figure 5-17  CB frequency chart for project completion time.

166  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
about the distribution of the activity times may account for some of the difference 
between the two estimates of completion time, but some of the difference is also due to 
randomness. As usual, you can determine the probability that the actual result of the 
project will have a duration above or below any given time by entering those times in the 
plus or minus Infinity boxes of the distribution of times; see Figure 5-17.
Incorporating Costs into the Simulation Analysis
In the previous chapter we addressed the topic of budgeting. As you can likely imagine, 
the cost to complete a project is driven in large part by the time required to complete the 
project. The longer it takes to complete a task the more resources that are required which 
in turn leads to greater costs. Furthermore, in a similar fashion to activity durations being 
uncertain, the cost to complete an activity can be uncertain. For example, the cost to 
complete an activity may depend on which resources as well as how many resources are 
assigned to it. Therefore, it stands to reason that we can get a better understanding of the 
uncertainty surrounding the project’s budget by incorporating both schedule and cost 
uncertainty into our analysis. This is perhaps best illustrated with an example.
For the purpose of our discussion, we extend the analysis conducted in the previous 
example. More specifically, we supplement the information provided in Table 5-4, with 
the cost information shown in Table 5-8. As shown in Table 5-8, optimistic, most likely, 
and pessimistic cost rates have been estimated for each activity. These cost rates are 
multiplied by the activity duration to determine the cost of the activity. For example, 
activity A’s most likely duration is 10 days (see Table 5-4). At a normal cost rate then, we 
expect activity A to cost $750 (10 day × $75/day).
Based on the cost estimates provided in Table 5-8, the simulation model shown in 
Table 5-6 can be enhanced to develop a distribution of potential project costs in addition 
to the distribution of project completion times as shown in Table 5-9. To develop the 
enhanced model shown in Table 5-9, the same steps discussed earlier were used to define 
new Assumption Cells and a new Forecast Cell. More specifically, Assumption Cells for 
the cost rate of each activity were added in row 7. For the purpose of this example, the 
cost rates were assumed to follow a triangular distribution. Next, formulas to calculate 
the cost of each activity were added in row 11. Again, the cost of completing an activity 
Risk
Table 5-7  CB summary Statistics for Project 
Completion Time
Forecast Name
Completion Time
Trials
1,000
Mean
47.83
Median
47.74
Mode
‐‐‐
Standard Deviation
2.64
Variance
6.99
Skewness
0.143
Kurtosis
2.79
Coeff. of Variability
0.0553
Minimum
41.02
Maximum
55.59
Mean Std. Error
0.08

5.3 SIMULATION
•  167
was computed by multiplying its duration in row 3 by its cost rate in row 7. Note that in 
our enhanced model, we have two sources of uncertainty, namely, the activity durations 
and cost rates for the activities (except for Activity D, the duration of which is known 
with certainty). To complete the simulation model, a formula that calculates the cost of 
the project was added as the sum of activity costs A through H in Cell I11, and then this 
cell was specified to be a Forecast Cell.
The distribution of the total cost of the project based on simulating the project 1,000 
times is shown in Figure 5-18. Likewise, summary statistics for the total cost of the pro-
ject are shown in Table 5-10. As can be observed from Table 5-10, the analysis suggests 
that the project is expected to cost $3,606.76 with a range of $2,646.95 to $4,338.51.
Traditional Statistics versus Simulation
At many conferences and in the literature of project management, there are sessions 
devoted to risk management. The participants at one recent conference, all highly expe-
rienced PMs from several different industrial sectors, were not of a single mind about the 
optimum way to handle the problems we have discussed in this chapter. Some favored 
the traditional statistical approach, some favored simulation, and some favored adding 
Risk
Table 5-8  Sample Set of Project Activities with Uncertain Cost Rates
Cost Rates ($/Day)
Activity
Optimistic
Most Likely
Pessimistic
a
50
75
100
b
35
40
50
c
20
30
45
d
15
25
30
e
25
30
35
f
40
50
75
g
20
25
35
h
60
70
85
Table 5-9  Simulation Model from Table 5-6 Extended to Analyze Cost of Completing the Project

168  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
sizable contingency allowances in both the budget and the schedule, and then ignoring 
uncertainty. A decade ago, the group that ignored uncertainty would have been in the 
majority, but they were the smallest of the three groups at this discussion. Dealing with 
risk is no longer the esoteric interest of a few statisticians, but as we discuss throughout 
this book, one of the primary roles of the PM.
The major difficulty is making sure that the risk analyst understands risk analysis. 
Irrespective of how the arithmetic is performed, by human or machine, the analyst must 
understand the nature of the calculations, what they mean and what they do not mean. 
Table 5-10  CB Summary Statistics for the Total Cost of the Project
Figure 5-18  CB Frequency Chart for Project Total Cost.

5.3 SIMULATION
•  169
Conducting a risk analysis by examining the many paths through a large network, and 
finding those that may turn out to be critical or near‐critical, can be an overwhelming 
task. There may be hundreds or thousands of activities and dozens of paths to be exam-
ined. Simply identifying the paths is a daunting job.
Some Common Issues  There are a number of issues associated with either the sta-
tistical approach or simulation. With an important exception we note just below, both 
procedures assume that task durations are statistically independent. As we noted above, 
this might not be the case when resources are shared across the tasks, but the problem 
can be handled by re‐estimating task durations based on the altered resource. Second, 
with the same exception, both procedures assume that the paths are independent.* Even 
when paths have tasks in common, the common task durations (and variances) are the 
same for every path in which they are an element during any given estimate of path dura-
tion by whatever procedure. It is as if a constant is being added to each path.
The exception we mention is that simulation has a direct way of circumventing the 
assumption of statistical independence if the assumption is not realistic. With simula-
tion, one simply includes the activity or path dependencies as a part of the model. The 
dependencies are modeled by expressing the functional relationship between the activi-
ties or paths along with its distribution, mean, and variance so that it may become a vari-
able in the simulation. While this can be done in the statistical approach also, it is much 
more difficult to handle.
Using the statistical process, the analyst must find the TE and variance for each path. 
Using simulation, the computer selects a sample from the distribution of activity times 
for each activity and then calculates the path duration for each path enumerated.
On the other hand, no matter which method is used, it is rarely necessary to evaluate 
every path carefully. In a large network, many paths will have both short duration and 
low variance when compared to high duration paths. Even when it is technically possible 
for one of the short paths to be critical, it is often very unlikely. For example, consider 
the path a‐b‐d‐f in our example. It shares activities a, b, and d with a‐b‐d‐g‐h, the path 
with the longest TE. Activity f has a pessimistic time of 10 days. Activities g and h have 
optimistic times of 5 + 4 = 9 days. What is the probability that f will take on its maxi-
mum value at the same time that both g and h take on their minimum values so that 
a‐b‐d‐f will be longer than a‐b‐d‐g‐h, not to mention simultaneously longer than the 
remaining two paths? Given that these estimates were made at the ±3σ limit, the prob-
ability of g or h being at or below their optimistic estimates is (1 − .9987) = .0013 for 
each. It is the same for f being at or above its pessimistic estimate. These three things 
must happen at the same time for a‐b‐d‐f to be longer than a‐b‐d‐g‐h. The probability is 
.00133 = .000000002. That probability is not zero, but most PMs will not spend time and 
effort worrying about it. Even when estimates of the optimistic and pessimistic times,  
a and b, are made at the 90 percent level, the chance that the activities on these particu-
lar paths will simultaneously take on their high or low extreme values is about one in 
a thousand.
The PM will discover the duration of each activity when, and only when, the activ-
ity is completed, which is to say after the fact, regardless of the method used to estimate 
and calculate project duration. Dealing with activity duration as certain does not make 
it so. We cannot know which of the paths will take the longest time to complete until 
the project is actually completed. And because we cannot determine before the start of 
the project which path will be critical, we cannot determine how much slack the other 
* Calculating the probability of the project being completed by a specific time by multiplying the individual 
path probabilities is dependent on the assumption that the paths are statistically independent. In the case of simula-
tion, this assumption is automatically met unless the analyst has modeled path dependency as a part of the simulation.

170  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
paths will have. We can, however, often make reasonable estimates. We can put our 
managerial efforts on the activities and paths most likely to require our efforts.
Simulation  Because of the computational effort required by the statistical method, we 
recommend simulation as the preferred tool for risk analysis—after, and only after, the 
analyst understands the underlying theory of the analysis.
We have included Crystal Ball® with this book because it is user‐friendly software 
that can be used to facilitate and enhance the simulation of the project networks as well 
as simulate a wide variety of other types of problems. In addition to the uses we have 
demonstrated, CB can also facilitate the task of selecting the best distributions to be 
used to model alternative activities if historical data are available for these activities. 
Likewise, CB can determine the best distribution to use to characterize project comple-
tion times and other outputs of the simulation analysis. Furthermore, it has a compre-
hensive set of probability distributions available and the selection of these distributions 
is facilitated by graphically showing the analyst the shape of the distribution based on 
the parameters specified. This capability allows the user to interact with the software 
when specifying the parameters of a distribution. The analyst can immediately assess 
the impact that alternative parameter settings have on the shape of the distribution. 
Another powerful feature of Crystal Ball® is its ability to quickly calculate the probabil-
ity associated with various outcomes such as the probability that the project can be 
completed by a specified time. In addition, CB can display the results in a variety of 
formats including frequency charts, cumulative frequency charts, and reverse cumula-
tive frequency charts. It also provides all relevant descriptive statistics as was illus-
trated earlier.
	 5.4	
THE GANTT CHART
Henry Gantt, a major figure in the “scientific management” movement of the early 
twentieth century, developed the Gantt chart around 1917. A Gantt chart displays pro-
ject activities as bars measured against a horizontal time scale. It is the most popular way 
of exhibiting sets of related activities in the form of schedules.
The Chart
Figure 5-19 shows a Gantt chart of the sample project in Table 5-4. The expected times 
are used in this illustration. Clearly, Gantt charts are easy to draw. Because task names 
are usually descriptive, each task shows its name, WBS number, or ID number in order to 
identify predecessors. Any activity that has no predecessors starts at the beginning of Day 
1 and extends to its duration (as in task a). An activity with predecessors begins when its 
latest predecessor has been completed (as in task f or h).
Problems in understanding the chart can arise, however, when several tasks begin at 
the same time and have the same duration. If one such task is on the critical path and the 
others are not, it may be difficult to find the critical path on a Gantt chart. For instance, 
Best Practice
Risk
Using the sample problem, risk analysis is carried out by a simulation using Crystal 
Ball®. Each step in the process is described. Conclusions similar to those reached in 
the statistical procedure of Section 5.2 are reached through simulation. The two pro-
cedures are compared by examining the assumptions on which they are based as well 
as the problems encountered in using them. The computational effort and assump-
tions required by the traditional statistical approach lead us to the conclusion that 
simulation is the preferred technique for carrying out risk analysis.
Risk

5.4 THE GANTT CHART
•  171
had c and d both been the same duration, it would not have been possible to tell which 
was predecessor to f and which to g, just by looking at the chart. This is only a problem 
when the Gantt chart is prepared manually. Most software, MSP included, will use 
arrows, bolded bar outlines, colored boxes, or some other visible means of marking the 
critical path on a Gantt chart as in Figure 5-20.
Even with software aid, the technical dependencies are harder to see on a Gantt 
chart than on a PERT/CPM network. On the network, technical dependencies are the 
focus of the model. As can be seen in Figure 5-20, information can easily be added to the 
chart to show such things as ES, EF, LS, LF, and slack.
Software such as MSP makes it easy to use a Gantt chart or network to view critical 
tasks and paths of a project. One can even experiment with adjustments to the project—
play “what if” with the project schedule, immediately observing results of the experi-
ments on the screen. At times the PM may question an estimate of task duration, or of 
WBS
Task
Duration
Predecessors
Month 1
Month 2
Month 3
a
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
a
10.67 days
12.17 days
12.33 days
6 days
14.33 days
9.33 days
10.33 days
7.83 days
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
2
2
3, 4
4
5, 7
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
Figure 5-19  A Gantt chart of a sample project in Table 5-4 (MSP).
WBS
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Task
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
Critical path and slack shown
Critical task
Task
Slack
Estimate dur
10.67 days
12.17 days
12.33 days
6 days
14.33 days
9.33 days
10.33 days
7.83 days
Start
01/14
01/28
02/15
02/15
02/15
03/03
02/23
03/09
Finish
01/28
02/15
03/03
02/23
03/07
03/16
03/09
03/20
01/28
02/15
03/07
02/23
03/09
03/20
03/09
03/20
Late start
Late ﬁnish
09
16
23
30
06
February
March
2 days
2.5
13
20
27
05
12
19
01/14
01/28
02/18
02/15
02/17
03/07
02/23
03/09
Figure 5-20  A Gantt chart of the sample project in Table 5-4 showing critical path, path connections, slack, 
ES, LS, EF, and LF (MSP).

172  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
the a, m, and b time estimates, submitted by a member of the project team. It is simple to 
enter alternate time estimates and instantly see the impact on project duration. Of 
course, this can also easily be done using MSP’s PERT network and using simulation.
A great deal of information can be added to Gantt charts without making them dif-
ficult to read. A construction firm of our acquaintance added the following symbol to 
activities that were slowed or stopped because of stormy weather 
. They used other 
symbols to indicate late deliveries from vendors, the failure of local government to issue 
building permits promptly, and other reasons why tasks might be delayed. Milestone 
symbols—diamonds, , in MSP—are added to the charts, with different shading or color 
to differentiate between “scheduled” and “completed” milestones. MSP is limited only by 
the PM’s imagination in what can be shown on a network, Gantt chart, or in a project plan.
The major advantage of the Gantt chart is that it is easy to read. Such charts com-
monly decorate the walls of the project office (or “war room”). They can be updated 
easily. This is both the strength and the weakness of the Gantt chart. Anyone interested 
in the project can read a Gantt chart with little or no training—and with little or no 
technical knowledge of the project. This is the chart’s strength. Its weakness is that to 
interpret beyond a simplistic level what appears on the chart or to alter the project’s 
course may require an intimate knowledge of the project’s technology—not necessarily 
visible on the chart, but available on the network or the project plan. Not uncommonly, 
the Gantt chart is deceptive in its apparent simplicity.
We should add that one must be cautious about publicly displaying Gantt charts that 
include activity slack, or LSs and LFs. Some members of the project team may be tempted 
to procrastinate and tackle the work based on the LS or LF. If done, this makes a critical 
path out of a noncritical path and becomes an immediate source of headaches for the PM 
who, among other things, loses the ability to reschedule the resources used by tasks that 
once had slack. Senior managers have even been known to view activity slack as an 
invitation to shorten an entire project’s due date. We recommend caution and careful 
education of the boss.
At base, the Gantt chart is an excellent device to aid in monitoring a project and/or 
in communicating information on its current state to others. Gantt charts, however, are 
not adequate replacements for networks. They are complementary scheduling and con-
trol devices.
	 5.5	
EXTENSIONS TO PERT/CPM
There have been several extensions to both network and chart forms of project schedul-
ing. At times these extensions are quite sophisticated; for example, the application of fuzzy  
set theory to aid in estimating activity durations in cases where activity durations are 
difficult to estimate because project activities cannot be well defined (McMahon, 1993). 
In this section we briefly discuss one significant extension of traditional scheduling 
The Gantt chart is a useful complement to a project network. It is easily constructed 
and read. It can contain a considerable amount of information and is an excellent 
communication device about the state of a project. Its major weakness is that it 
does not easily expose the project’s technology, that is, the technical relationships 
between a project’s many activities. Even with predecessors marked on a Gantt chart, 
it is difficult to see the project technology and, thus, to use the Gantt chart alone  
to manage a complex project. PERT/CPM networks are often used as complements to  
Gantt charts.

5.5 EXTENSIONS TO PERT/CPM
•  173
methods, precedence diagramming. (Elihu Goldratt’s Critical Chain (1997) is also a sig-
nificant addition to traditional scheduling methods. It uses networks that combine pro-
ject scheduling with resource allocation. It is discussed in Chapter  6 on resource 
allocation.)
Precedence Diagramming
One shortcoming of the PERT/CPM network method is that it does not allow for leads 
and lags between two activities without greatly increasing the number of subactivities to 
account for this. That is, our regular network methods described earlier assume that an 
activity can start as soon as its predecessor activities are completed. Sometimes, however, 
the restrictions are more complex—for example, when a follow‐on activity cannot begin 
until a certain amount of time after (or even before) its predecessor is completed (or 
sometimes started). For instance, a successor may have to wait for paint to dry or cement 
to harden. In this case, we might add a fictitious activity after painting or pouring the 
cement that takes the required time (but no resources) and then let the follow‐on begin. 
For a leading activity, we might break the predecessor activity into two activities a fol-
lowed by b and let the follow‐on start after a is completed and operate in parallel with b, 
the remainder of the predecessor activity. In construction projects, in particular, it is 
quite common for the following restrictions to occur. (Node designations are shown in 
the Predecessors column in Figure 5-21.)
• Finish to Start  Activity 2 must not start before Activity 1 has been completed. 
This is the typical arrangement of an activity and its predecessor. Other finish‐start 
arrangements are also possible. If the predecessor information had been written  
“1 FS + 2 day,” Activity 2 would be scheduled to start at least 2 days after the com-
pletion of Activity 1, as shown in Figure 5-21. For instance, if Activity 1 was the 
pouring of a concrete sidewalk, Activity 2 might be any activity that used the sidewalk.
• Start to Start  Activity 5 cannot begin until Activity 4 has been underway for 
at least 2 days. Setting electrical wires in place cannot begin until 2 days after 
framing has begun.
• Finish to Finish  Activity 7 must be complete at least 1 day before Activity 8 is 
completed. If Activity 7 is priming the walls of a house, Activity 8 might be the 
activities involved in selecting, purchasing, and finally delivering the wallpaper. 
It is important not to hang the paper until the wall primer has dried for 24 hours.
Task Name Duration
W
W
T
T
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
F
Feb 03
Project: Project 1
Task
Progress
Milestone
Summary
Rolled Up Task
Rolled Up Milestone
Rolled Up Progress
Split
Page 1
External Tasks
Project Summary
Group By Summary
02
Feb 10
02
S
S
M
Predecessors
1
ID
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1
2
4
5
7
8
10
11
5 days
2 days
5 days
4 days
5 days
4 days
5 days
4 days
1 FS + 2 days
4 SS + 2 days
7 FF + 1 day
10 SF + 7 days
Figure 5-21  Precedence diagramming conventions.

174  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
• Start to Finish  Activity 11 cannot be completed before 7 days after the start of 
Activity 10. If Activities 10 and 11 are the two major cruising activities in a pre-
paid weeklong ocean cruise, the total time cannot be less than the promised 
week. The S–F relationship is rare because there are usually simpler ways to map 
the required relationship.
Precedence diagramming is an AON network method that easily allows for these 
leads and lags within the network. MSP handles leads and lags without problems. 
Network node times are calculated in a manner similar to PERT/CPM times. Because of 
the lead and lag restrictions, it is often helpful to lay out a Gantt chart to see what is 
actually happening. Most current project management software will allow leads, lags, 
delays, and other constraints in the context of their standard AON network and Gantt 
chart programs.
Final Thoughts on the Use of These Tools
Three decades ago it was common to hear, “No one uses PERT or CPM.” It was not true. 
One decade ago we heard, “No one uses that probability stuff.” It was not true. We even 
heard, “No one uses _____ computer package,” which was also untrue. These statements 
were not true a decade ago—and they are even less true (if that is semantically possible) 
today. Current software makes it easy to use networks and Gantt charts. Current software 
handles three‐time estimates of duration and can do all the calculations almost instantly. 
Current software makes simulation a straightforward procedure.
Excel® and other popular spreadsheets can calculate variances and find expected times. 
MSP can do some of these calculations, but not others. MSP does not find the standard 
deviation or variance of three‐time duration estimates and cannot find the probability of 
completing a task or the entire project within a given time limit. Probability calculations 
are, however, easily handled by simulation. The analyst, of course, must examine the paths, 
and select those for further analysis. The software can do the arithmetic, but the analyst 
must enter the appropriate numbers and ask for the appropriate calculations for each path 
to be analyzed, and then find the probabilities. With large networks, this will probably be a 
massive and tedious task. On the other hand, it is almost never required to enumerate and 
evaluate all paths in a simulation—even if simulation could do so rapidly.
As we have noted several times, the same arguments and methods are appropriate for 
managing uncertainty in resource usage and preparing project budgets. The calculations 
and simulations are the same as those used with task and project duration.
When struggling with risk analysis and management, it is well to remember why the 
PM must engage the struggle. The PM is responsible for keeping the project within its 
budget and on time. This chapter is devoted to developing the information the PM 
requires to meet these responsibilities. The PM does not manage the project as a totality; 
rather he or she manages the specific tasks and subtasks that make up the project. The 
methods introduced above are intended to help the PM understand precisely where man-
agement effort is needed.
As we noted briefly above, it is relevant to point out that identifying one or more 
paths as critical might actually be detrimental to project performance—if the PM is not 
managing the project team as well as the project. If the PM is not alert to the possibility, 
activity slack may lead to neglect of noncritical activities. As Parkinson teaches us, work 
tends to fill the time allowed, and activities lose their slacks. For example, noncritical 
paths may slip far enough behind schedule that they become critical—simply because 
the project team perceives them to be of low priority. At the same time, the apparently 
critical path may finish ahead of schedule because of the extra management attention 
it receives.
Risk

Goldratt (1997, Ch.13) refers to other causes of project delay resulting from “human 
nature.” There is, for instance, the “student syndrome.” Given the deadline for a home-
work assignment, students often plead for more time. Given more time, many simply 
postpone starting the assignment. Goldratt also reminds us that if a task is finished early, 
its successor tasks are still started when they were originally scheduled. The result is that 
delays resulting from tasks finishing late are not offset by the potential gains from those 
that finish early. There is also the fact that “five plus five equals thirteen.” If one team 
member estimates that one task will require 5 days and a second team member estimates 
that a successor task will require 5 days, the boss then estimates that the pair will require 
13 days—just to be safe. The work, of course, will expand to require at least 13 days.
If the PM becomes entranced with the technology of the project and fails to man-
age the project team, the team itself can become confused and frustrated as the reality 
of the project unfolds. Today’s path‐slack disappears and a new critical path is born—
only to change tomorrow when some other path becomes critical. In such cases, and 
they are common in reality, it is not easy to remind oneself that recognizing and analyz-
ing uncertainty does not cause uncertainty—nor does it cause uncertainty to disappear. The 
PM’s job includes teaching project team members enough about risk that they can 
understand its nature and, thereby, cooperate in developing ways to deal with it.
At this point, it is helpful to remember that there are problems for which risk analy-
sis, by whatever method, is probably not required. Routine maintenance and routine 
construction projects are among such cases—unless the projects are quite large or have 
not been performed recently. In most such projects the routine character of the work 
means that the variances of task durations are quite small and the cost of carrying out a 
careful risk analysis is rarely justified.
In the next chapter, we turn our attention to resource allocation and the problems 
of controlling the use and flow of resources. We also deal with the issue of integrating 
schedule and budget by examining the nature of time‐resource trade‐offs.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
Risk
The section discusses a significant extension of Gantt charts and PERT/CPM. 
Precedence diagramming, developed as a convenient way to include leads and lags 
between activities, is explained. Finally, we consider some of the managerial problems 
often associated with risk analysis.
1.	 	 What is a critical path?
2.	 	 How is slack determined?
3.	 	 How do you determine the ES for an activity with two 
predecessors? How do you determine the LF for an 
activity with two successors?
4.	 	 Will all the activities on a noncritical path have the 
same slack? Why or why not?
5.	 	 For the following project,
(a)	 List all predecessors of task 5.
(b)	 List all predecessors of task 4.
(c)	 List all predecessors of the network finish (F).
S
1
2
3
4
5
F
6.	 	 What is a “dummy” activity?
7.	 	 Consider Figure 5.14. Paths a‐b‐c and a‐b‐d converge 
at activity f, but we ignored this potential merger 
problem in the text. Why?
8.	 	 What is meant by “project slack?”
REVIEW QUESTIONS
•  175

176  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
  9.	 When using AON networks, how does one indicate 
an event such as a project milestone?
10.	 A probabilistic network has a critical path of 21 days 
and a .95 probability of completing this path in 24 
days. Therefore, the project has a .95 chance of being 
finished by the end of the 24th day. True or False? 
Briefly explain your answer.
11.	 “Not uncommonly, the Gantt chart is deceptive in its 
apparent simplicity.” Briefly explain.
12.	 When activity times are known with certainty, the 
critical path is defined as the set of activities on a 
path from the project’s start event to its finish event 
that, if delayed, will delay the completion date of the 
project. Why must this definition be modified in situ-
ations where the activity times are not known with 
certainty? Are there any dangers associated with not 
modifying the definition?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
  1.	 Should a PM manage critical path tasks differently 
than noncritical path tasks?
  2.	 How might you use the network approach to help 
prepare cost estimates?
  3.	 When would it be accurate to determine the proba-
bility of project completion by multiplying the prob-
abilities of all the paths through the network together? 
When would it not be accurate?
  4.	 Reconsider Question 3. If this approach is not accu-
rate, would the probability of completion considering 
the critical path alone be more accurate? How might 
you estimate the correct probability without resorting 
to simulation?
  5.	 Why do you think most PMs use MSP’s Gantt chart 
format (see Figure  5-20) more commonly than the 
network format?
  6.	 Which of the linkages in precedence diagramming do 
you think is most commonly used? Why?
  7.	 In the calculation of variance for optimistic and 
­pessimistic activity duration estimates made at the 
95 or 90 percent level, the denominator of the frac-
tion that approximates the standard deviation of the 
time ­distribution changes from the traditional 
(b − a)/6 to (b − a)/3.3 for 95 percent and to (b − 
a)/2.6 for 90 percent. Where did the 3.3 and the 2.6 
come from?
  8.	 Given all the estimating done to determine the dura-
tion of project activities, what does it mean to say 
that “only after the fact do we know which path was 
actually the critical path?”
  9.	 It was noted that “the PM must manage the project 
team as well as the project.” Explain why.
10.	 Why do you think scheduling has been the major 
focus of effort throughout the history of project man-
agement rather than performance or budgeting?
EXERCISES
1.	 	 Refer to the network in Figure 5-14. What is the prob-
ability that path a‐b‐c‐f will interfere with the prom-
ised project completion of 50 days? Recall that the 
critical path, a‐b‐d‐g‐h, had a probability of .86 for a 
50‐day completion. What is the probability that both 
paths will be complete in 50 days?
2.		 Refer to Table 5-4 and Figure 5-14. Recalculate the 
variance for each activity on the assumption that 
the optimistic and pessimistic estimates were made 
with a 95 percent probability. Recalculate the prob-
ability that the critical path will be completed 
in 50 days.
3.		 Refer to Table 5-4 and Figure 5-14. Recalculate the 
variance for each activity on the assumption that 
the optimistic and pessimistic estimates were made 
with a 90 percent probability. Again, recalculate the 
likelihood that the critical path will be finished 
in 50 days.
4.	 	 Given the information in the following table:
Activity
Duration
Predecessor
a
4
None
b
6
a
c
4
a
d
2
c
e
4
b
f
5
b, d
g
3
c
h
4
f, g
i
2
e, h
(a)	 Construct the network diagram.
(b)	 Find each activity’s ES, EF, LS, and LF.
(c)	 Identify all paths. Which path is the critical path?
(d)	 Calculate the slack for each activity.
(e)	 How long will it take to complete the project?

5.	 	 In the following table, task durations are given in 
weeks. The estimates were made at the 95 percent 
level (see Section  5.2, Calculating Probabilistic 
Activity Times subsection).
Activity
Predec.
Opt.
Normal
Pess.
a
—
2
4
  6
b
—
3
5
  9
c
a
4
5
  7
d
a
4
6
10
e
b, c
4
5
  7
f
d
3
4
  8
g
e
3
5
  8
(a)	 Find the expected time and variance for each task.
(b)	 Draw the network (either AOA or AON) and 
find the path with the longest expected time. 
What is the expected time to complete this path?
(c)	 Find the probability using the analytical approach 
that the path with the longest expected time will 
be completed in 23 weeks.
(d)	 Find the probability that the other paths will be 
completed in 23 weeks.
(e)	 Using simulation, what is the probability that the 
entire network will be completed in 23 weeks?
6.	 	 Given an auditing project with the following activities:
Activity
Std. Dev.
Critical
Duration 
(wks)
a. Add
2
Yes
2
b. Balance
1
3
c. Count
0
Yes
4
d. Deduct
3
2
e. Edit
1
Yes
1
f. Finance
2
6
g. Group
2
Yes
4
h. Hold
0
Yes
2
	
	 Using the analytical approach find:
(a)	 The probability of completing this project in 12 
weeks or less, as the client desires.
(b)	 The probability of completing this project in 13 
weeks or less.
(c)	 The probability of completing this project in 16 
weeks or less, the client’s drop‐dead date.
(d)	 The number of weeks required to assure a 92.5 
percent chance of completion, as guaranteed by 
the auditing firm.
7.	 	 Resolve the previous exercise using computer simula-
tion and compare your answers. Explain any differ-
ences you observe. Which methodology do you have 
more confidence in and why?
8.	 	 Referring to the previous two questions, modify your 
simulation model to develop distributions for the slack 
time of each path. What do these distributions tell 
you?
9.	 	 Given the following information regarding a project 
involving an initial public offering (IPO):
Activity
Duration 
(weeks)
Preceding 
Activities
a. Check feasibility
3
—
b. Determine funding
1
—
c. Find possible banks
3
a
d. Select two possibles
4
a
e. Interview two banks
4
b
f. Analyze funding costs
5
b
g. Determine chance of 
success
2
c, e
h. Sign contract
3
f
(a)	 Draw the network.
(b)	 What is the critical path?
(c)	 When will the offering be available (end of 
the project)?
(d)	 What is the effect on the project if activity e 
(approvals) takes an extra week? Two extra weeks? 
Three extra weeks?
10.	 Enter the following information into an Excel® spread-
sheet. The time estimates were made at the 90 percent 
level (see Section  5.2, Calculating Probabilistic 
Activity Times subsection). All activity times 
are in days.
Activity
Predec.
Opt.
Normal
Pess.
a
—
  5
  6
  9
b
—
  4
  4
  6
c
—
  7
  9
15
d
a
  6
  6
  6
e
b
  4
  5
  7
f
b
12
16
17
g
c
  8
12
20
h
c
  7
  9
16
i
d, e
10
14
18
j
f, g
  6
12
20
k
h
  7
  9
14
(a)	 Draw the network. (You may use MSP, or draw an 
AOA or AON network by hand.)
(b)	 Using Excel®, calculate the expected time (TE) 
and variance for each activity.
(c)	 Using the expected times, find the path with the 
longest expected time. What is the expected 
time to complete this path? (Use the ana-
lytic method.)
EXERCISES
•  177

178  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
(d)	 Find the probability that the critical path will be 
completed in 38 days or less.
(e)	 Are there any serious sources of merger problems? 
What are they? Calculate the probability of fin-
ishing the project on or before day 38 when 
merger considerations are included.
(f)	 Assume that the times in the table were made on 
the 99+ percent level. Recalculate the activity 
variances with this assumption and find the prob-
ability that the critical path will be complete in 
38 days. (Note, the altered assumption will 
change activity variance, but not the expected 
activity durations.) Briefly explain the difference 
in probabilities.
(g)	 How many days are required for the critical path 
to have a .9 probability of completion?
11.	 Given the project in Exercise 5, simulate the comple-
tion of the project 1,000 times, assuming that the 
activity times follow a normal distribution and that 
the time estimates are made at the 95 percent level.
(a)	 Determine the probability of each path becoming 
the critical path.
(b)	 What is the probability that the project is com-
pleted in 23 weeks?
(c)	 How do your answers compare with your answers 
in Exercise 6?
12.	 The project referred to in Exercise  11 has been  
partially completed. Task a required 4 weeks, task b 
9 weeks, task c 4 weeks, and task d 5 weeks. Update 
the simulation model you developed for Exercise 11 
and calculate the probability that the project  
will be finished in 23 weeks. Explain why the prob-
ability of completing the project in 23 weeks 
has changed.
13.	 Given the project in Exercise 11, simulate the com-
pletion of the project 1,000 times, assuming that the 
activity times are at the 99+ percent level and follow 
a triangular distribution.
(a)	 Determine the probability of each path becoming 
the critical path.
(b)	 What is the probability that the project is com-
pleted in 32 days? In 34 days? In 38 days?
(c)	 How do your answers compare with your answers 
in Exercise 11?
14.	 *Additional task precedence information about the 
Textbook Revision Project described in Exercise 10 
in Chapter 3 is now available. JR and Mike are pre-
paring to revise their project management textbook. 
The project of revising the book begins with devel-
oping a revision plan. Developing a revision plan 
includes four activities that each take 1 week to 
complete. First the authors go over the reviews pro-
vided by a sample of current adopters of the book. 
The second task involves benchmarking other pro-
ject management books. Benchmarking other books 
can either be done in parallel with going over the 
reviews or done after the reviews have been studied. 
After both the reviews have been gone over and the 
benchmarking is completed, the changes to make to 
the book are decided on. The final step in develop-
ing the plan is allocating the work between the 
authors. The work can be allocated once the authors 
finalize the changes to be made to the book. After 
the plan has been developed, the book is revised 
which is expected to take 24 weeks. Once all the 
chapters have been revised, the page proofs are 
reviewed which is expected to take 8 weeks. After 
the page proofs have been reviewed, the index for 
the book is created which takes 2 weeks. Finally, 
after the book has been revised, the supplements to 
the book can be updated which takes 8 weeks. 
Update the information previously entered to 
include the precedence relationships among the 
tasks. Assuming the project begins on March 7, 
2016, when is its expected completion date?
15.	 *Given the information in the following table, draw 
the AOA network. Using the same information, 
enter the data into MSP assuming a 7‐day work-
week. (To change the calendar in MSP from its  
5‐day week default, click “Help,” type “calendar 
change,” and follow directions.) Develop the appro-
priate AON network and Gantt chart. Using any 
method you wish, find the critical path and critical 
time for the network. Then find the slack for all 
activities.
Activity
Predecessor
Duration
a
—
    5 days
b
—
    7
c
—
    4
d
a
    6
e
b
    9
f
b
    6
g
c
    4
h
d, e
    6
i
d, e
    8
j
f, g, h
    9
k
i
  10
l
j
    9
* This problem is included for instructors who supplement their course with additional content on Microsoft Project.

DISCUSSION EXERCISE
1.	 	 The following activities were listed during a brain-
storming session on product development. Find the 
appropriate predecessor‐successor relationships and 
then construct an AON network to reflect the pro-
ject using the activity duration times given in the 
information table. Assume a 5‐day workweek. Find 
the critical path and time for the project. Find the 
slack for all activities.
1.	Organize the sales office: Hire sales man-
ager. (6 weeks)
2.	Hire sales personnel: The sales manager will 
recruit and hire the salespeople needed. (4 weeks)
3.	Train sales personnel: Train the salespeople hired 
to sell the product to the distributors. (7 weeks)
4.	Select advertising agency: The sales manager 
will select the agency best suited to promote the 
new product. (2 weeks)
5.	Plan advertising campaign: The sales office and 
advertising agency will jointly plan the advertis-
ing campaign to introduce the product to the 
public. (4 weeks)
6.	Conduct advertising campaign: The advertising 
agency will conduct a “watch for” campaign for 
potential customers. (10 weeks)
7.	Design package: Have packaging engineer 
design the package most likely to “sell.” (2 weeks)
8.	Set up packaging facility: Prepare to package the 
products when they are received from the manu-
facturer. (10 weeks)
9.	Package initial stocks: Package stocks received 
from the manufacturer. (6 weeks)
10.	Order and receive stock from the manufacturer: 
Order the stock from the manufacturer. The time 
given includes the time for delivery. (13 weeks)
11.	Select distributors: The sales manager will select 
the distributors whom the salespeople will con-
tact to make sales. (9 weeks)
12.	Sell to distributors: Take orders from the dis-
tributors for the new product, with delivery 
promised for the product‐introduction date. If 
orders exceed stock, assign stock on a quota 
basis. (6 weeks)
13.	Ship stock to distributors: Ship the packaged 
stock to distributors in accord with their orders or 
quota. (6 weeks)
Question: What managerial problems and opportunities 
do you see as a result of your work?
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
Springville Fire Department
The city of Springville is building a new fire station in 
their city. The city is expanding and is in need of a sec-
ond fire station closer to the newer areas of the city to 
ensure shorter response times. The project manager and 
the project team have been selected for the project. The 
team is very interested in selecting the scheduling tech-
nique that will be used to follow the project through to 
completion.
The project manager, city manager, and chief of the fire 
department have set the following criteria for the process 
of selecting the scheduling technique: easy to use, shows 
durations of tasks, shows milestones, can see the flow of 
work, can see the sequence of events, can depict which 
tasks can be undertaken at the same time, and can tell how 
far tasks are from completion. The city manager favors the 
Gantt chart, the chief likes PERT, and the project man-
ager prefers CPM.
Question: If you were the project manager, which 
method would you use, and why?
Attack of the Killer Worm
Lee Antoinio was the CIO of a large publishing house. Her 
network administrator, Andy McPester, came to her one 
sunny September afternoon and informed her that a worm 
had attacked their network. It had shut down two of their 
45 servers and had potential to harm the other servers as 
well as the 323 personal workstations throughout the 
enterprise. Andy knew that he could not report this prob-
lem to Lee without a recommended project plan for a solu-
tion. Andy and Lee had a good, trusting relationship, but 
Lee insisted that Andy investigate all options and come to 
her with the most viable solution to any problem.
Andy’s project plan outlined that it would take 30 to 45 
minutes to touch each PC to protect them from the worm, 
and longer if they were already infected. It would take 
almost an hour to check the other servers and repair them. 
Andy discussed the time estimates with his desktop staff. 
Andy proposed paying six staff members overtime to work 
4 hours after their normal business day for the next week 
or two to check each personal workstation. He did not 
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
•  179

180  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
want to affect productivity of the company’s staff during 
the day. Andy proposed repairing the servers the same way 
with two additional staff members in the evenings. Lee felt 
that the time estimates and costs were too high. She did 
not think it would take that amount of time for each 
machine to get repaired. She was concerned that some of 
Andy’s staff may have overestimated the time needed. She 
also was not sold on the notion that all the work would be 
done at night, paying staff overtime.
Question:  How would you recommend they reach a 
consensus on the project plan?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility 
Program Plan—5
The steering team meeting held August 31 went quite 
well. Fred felt that his team members had worked well 
together at determining the steps and the associated costs 
of the program. The CFO presented the program budget 
first, and then project team members presented their draft 
project plans.
The COO presented the following project plan:
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
Resource Names
  1
Operational Implementation Plan
  2
Management/Organization structure
87 days
CFO, Legal, VP Mktg
  3
Recruit & hire Executive Director
17.4 wks
Splient
  4
Interior design issues decided (furnishings, etc.)
20 days
COO
  5
Determine what was provided with lease and what was 
furnished in some units
2 wks
  6
Determine budget for interior
10 days
  7
Carpet and wall finish determined
2 wks
59
  8
Furniture and room layout
2 wks
59
  9
Facility and equipment needs defined
4 wks
COO
10
Staffing determined
2 wks
COO, Dr. Link
11
Office space for physicians
4 wks
Dr. Link
12
Medical staffing needs determined & Director appointed
4 wks
Dr. Link
13
Food service
45 days
14
Menus selected
8 wks
15
Waiting and service staffing needs determined
4 wks
16
Additional equipment needs
4 wks
68FS—3wks
17
Telecommunications services
45 days
18
Investigate phone service options
45 days
Chief Engineer
19
Certification/Accreditation requirements
42 days
20
Investigate requirements & timing of applicants with Dept. 
of Health to open facility
0 days
Legal
21
Develop clinical and operational quality monitoring systems
0 days
22
Develop financial systems (billing, etc.)
6 wks
CFO
23
Human resources
79 days
HR Director
24
Work force management recommendations
6 wks
HR Director
25
Project plan for recruitment developed
2 wks
78
26
Policies and procedures developed
60 days
27
Obtain ‘samples’ of assisted living policies & procedures 
from other institutions
4 wks
Legal
28
Investigate assisted living laws proposed in other states/
federal
12 wks
Legal
29
Technology & information systems
344 days
CIO
30
Develop plan for technology access for residents (TV, 
Cable, PC’s)
3 wks
31
Investigate software/technology options for residents
12 wks
CIO

The Chief Legal Counsel for the medical center pre-
sented his project plan. Fred had asked him to join the 
team when it became apparent that there were significant 
compliance and legal issues associated with this project.
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
Resource Names
  1
Legal and Licensing Requirements
154 days
  2
Research licensing requirements for residential care facility
38 days
Legal
  3
Uniform accessibility standard compliance (# hndcp 
accessible beds)
2 wks
  4
Investigate law firm and outline services
4 wks
  5
Prepare project plan for license
2 wks
39
  6
File license—by opening date
0 days
40
  7
Curb‐cut approval from county (access to County Rd.)
53 days
Legal
  8
Investigate corporate structure for assisted living
115 days
Legal, CFO
  9
Determine Board of Trustee membership
3 wks
10
Appoint Board of Trustees
4 wks
44
11
Prepare draft Code of Regulation
4 wks
45
12
Prepare document and filing of governance structure
12 wks
46
13
Draft service agreement with Friendly Medical Center for 
services provided
4 wks
47
Legal
14
Lease issues
110 days
48
Legal
15
Research Long Term Care insurance requirements
12 wks
16
Facility “rules” defined (i.e., smoking, firearms, pets, 
financial planning)
4 wks
50
17
Spell out changes for residents in moving from “light” to 
“heavy” assisted
6 wks
18
Lease template prepared
6 wks
52, 50, 51
19
Review all marketing materials for compliance
154 days
Legal
The Vice President of Marketing presented her project 
plan and stated that she and her staff were responsible 
for every step in the plan. She was still working with her 
staff to determine who does what. The Marketing VP 
made it clear to the team that she needed 5 months for the 
­marketing plan implementation to be able to meet the 
occupancy requirements at start‐up. She restated that her 
team must have this lead time to the completion of the 
construction and furnishing phase of the Program.
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
  1
Marketing
270 days
  2
Community mailing about construction project
0 days
  3
Initial informational meetings
16 days
  4
Friendly Medical Center volunteers
1 day
  5
Community groups
4 days
  6
Friendly Medical Center staff (all shifts)
3 days
  7
Presentation prepared for Speaker’s Bureau
0 days
88
  8
Provide updates to community
0 days
92
  9
Inquiry log established
0 days
88
10
Groundbreaking ceremony—during National Hospital Week
0 days
11
Marketing plan developed and implemented
180 days
12
PR firm contracted
4 wks
13
Marketing plan developed
8 wks
97
14
Determine name and signage for facility
0 days
98
15
Hire Marketing Director
4 wks
98
16
Marketing plan ready to implement
0 days
98, 100
17
Implementation of marketing plan—5 months before facility ready, then ongoing
20 wks
101
case
•  181

182  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
As Fred was explaining that the next job of the group 
was to complete a final version of all project plans and firm 
up the schedule of the Program, the Construction Project 
Manager stated that it was his turn to present his broad 
project plan for construction of the facility. He also added 
that he had a major scheduling issue to bring to the team. 
The Construction Project Manager presented the follow-
ing broad project plan for facility construction.
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
  1
Construction & Furnishing
369 days
  2
Facility construction
329 days
  3
Phase 1 ‐ Foundation & excavation (basement/1st floor slab)
95 days
  4
Phase 2 ‐ Structure (steel/framing)
113 days
3FS—60 days
  5
Phase 3 ‐ Enclosure (masonry/windows/roof)
134 days
3
  6
Phase 4 ‐ Interiors (drywall/ceiling/flooring/case goods)
234 days
3
  7
First 45 (light assisted) units ready to prepare for occupancy
0 days
6FS—5 wks
  8
First 45 units ready for residents
8 wks
7
  9
Remaining 57 units (light & heavy) ready to prepare for occupancy
0 days
6
10
Construction complete
0 days
9
11
Building ready for residents
8 wks
10
The construction PM proceeded to explain that the 
scheduling constraints that the Board of Trustees gave the 
team were not feasible. The Board wanted construction to 
begin immediately after the elections in November and to 
be ready for occupants by June. The contractor did not 
want to begin the project at the beginning of winter. The 
first phases of the project plan detailed work that needed 
to be completed outside. If the weather was bad, the con-
struction PM knew the schedule would be affected. The 
construction project manager also pointed out that the 
schedule created by the contractor was designed around a 
40‐hour, 5‐day workweek. If the building project began in 
November, the estimated project duration would be 
increased by 1 to 2 months, during which time some con-
struction crewmen would have to be paid, thereby increas-
ing the building cost.
The PM recommended that construction begin in 
February or March of the following year, which would give 
the facility a shorter build time and a lower cost. The 
budget and project duration submitted were based on a 
March 1 start date. He stated that the construction phase 
of the project did not need to hold up the other members 
of the Program team—they could begin their work on 
their projects anytime.
QUESTIONS
1.	 	 Draw a Gantt chart for the construction phase of the 
program. What is the completion date if construction 
starts in March? What is the completion date of the 
project if construction is started in November?
2.	 	 Why is it not possible to meet the scheduling con-
straints set by the Board? What is your recommenda-
tion to handle the scheduling problem?
3.	 	 When will the program be completed based on your 
recommendation?
4.	 	 Develop a Gantt Chart of the Marketing Plan and 
Implementation Phase of the Program. Determine the 
start date of the Marketing Plan project in order to meet 
your recommended facility ready for occupancy date.
5.	 	 What is the next step the team members must take in 
order to complete their project plans?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
NutriStar
NutriStar produces a line of vitamins and nutritional supple-
ments. It recently introduced its Nutri‐Sports Energy Bar, 
which is based on new scientific findings about the proper 
balance of macronutrients. The energy bar has become 
extremely popular among elite athletes and other people 
who follow the diet. One distinguishing feature of the Nutri‐
Sports Energy Bar is that each bar contains 50 milligrams of 

eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), a substance strongly linked to 
reducing the risk of cancer but found in only a few foods, 
such as salmon. NutriStar was able to include EPA in its 
sports bars because it had previously developed and patented 
a process to refine EPA for its line of fish‐oil capsules.
Because of the success of the Nutri‐Sports Energy Bar 
in the United States, NutriStar is considering offering it in 
Latin America. With its domestic facility currently operat-
ing at capacity, the President of NutriStar has decided to 
investigate the option of adding approximately 10,000 
square feet of production space to its facility in Latin 
America at a cost of $5 million.
The project to expand the Latin American facility 
involves four major phases: (1) concept development,  
(2) definition of the plan, (3) design and construction, 
and (4) start‐up and turnover. During the concept devel-
opment phase, a program manager is chosen to oversee all 
four phases of the project and the manager is given a 
budget to develop a plan. The outcome of the concept 
development phase is a rough plan, feasibility estimates for 
the project, and a rough schedule. Also, a justification for 
the project and a budget for the next phase are developed.
In the plan definition phase, the program manager selects 
a project manager to oversee the activities associated with 
this phase. Plan definition consists of four major activities 
that are completed more or less concurrently: (1) defining 
the project scope, (2) developing a broad schedule of 
­activities, (3) developing detailed cost estimates, and 
(4) ­developing a plan for staffing. The outputs of this phase 
are combined into a detailed plan and proposal for manage-
ment specifying how much the project will cost, how long it 
will take, and what the deliverables are.
If the project gets management’s approval and manage-
ment provides the appropriations, the project progresses  
to the third phase, design and construction. This phase  
consists of four major activities: (1) detailed engineering,  
(2) mobilization of the construction employees, (3) pro-
curement of production equipment, and (4) construction 
of the facility. Typically, the detailed engineering and the 
mobilization of the construction employees are done con-
currently. Once these activities are completed, construc-
tion of the facility and procurement of the production 
equipment are done concurrently. The outcome of this 
phase is the physical construction of the facility.
The final phase, start‐up and turnover, consists of four 
major activities: pre‐start‐up inspection of the facility, 
recruiting and training the workforce, solving start‐up prob-
lems, and determining optimal operating parameters (called 
centerlining). Once the pre‐start‐up inspection is completed, 
the workforce is recruited and trained at the same time that 
start‐up problems are solved. Centerlining is initiated upon 
the completion of these activities. The desired outcome of 
this phase is a facility operating at design requirements.
The following table provides optimistic, most likely, 
and pessimistic time estimates for the major activities.
Activity
Optimistic Time 
(months)
Most Likely Time 
(months)
Pessimistic Time 
(months)
A: Concept Development
3     
12   
24   
Plan Definition
B. Define project scope
1     
  2   
12   
C. Develop broad schedule
0.25
  0.5
  1   
D. Detailed cost estimates
0.2 
  0.3
  0.5
E. Develop staffing plan
0.2 
  0.3
  0.6
Design and Construction
F. Detailed engineering
2     
  3   
  6   
G. Facility construction
8     
12   
24   
H. Mobilization of employees
0.5 
  2   
  4   
I. Procurement of equipment
1     
  3   
12   
Start‐up and Turnover
J. Pre‐start‐up inspection
0.25
  0.5
  1   
K. Recruiting and training
0.25
  0.5
  1   
L. Solving start‐up problems
0     
  1   
  2   
M. Centerlining
0     
  1   
  4   
QUESTIONS
1.	 	 Draw a network diagram for this project. Identify all 
paths through the network diagram.
2.	 	 Simulate the completion of this project 1,000 times, 
assuming that activity times follow a betaPERT 
­distribution. Estimate the mean and standard devia-
tion of the project completion time.
3.	 	 Develop a histogram to summarize the results of your 
simulation.
QUESTIONS
•  183

184  •
Chapter 5 / Scheduling the Project
4.	 	 Calculate the probability that the project can be 
completed within 30 months. What is the probability 
that the project will take longer than 40 months? 
What is the probability that the project will take 
between 30 and 40 months?
5.		 What path has the longest expected time? What 
is  the probability that this path will be the 
critical path?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Launching E‐Collar
Pet Technologies Inc. has completed the development of a 
revolutionary pet collar code named e‐collar. E‐collar is 
designed for dogs and allows pet owners to identify the 
location of their dog using their smartphones. In addition 
to purchasing the e‐collar, the pet owners must download 
a free app for their smartphone and pay a small monthly 
fee that is yet to be determined in order to connect the e‐
collar to a cellular network.
In the past, Pet Technologies has used the services of 
Ad Jungle to develop its advertising campaigns. Ad Jungle 
is located in the same city as Pet Technologies and is a 
boutique advertising agency with 25 full‐time employees 
and a similar number of people it contracts with on an ad 
hoc basis. Pet Technologies has reached out to Ad Jungle 
and has requested an estimate for the cost of developing an 
advertising campaign for the e‐collar.
Ad Jungle begins the process of developing an ad cam-
paign by first meeting with the client to learn about the 
product to be advertised. Based on what is learned, Ad 
Jungle works with the client to define the target audience 
for the advertising campaign. Because the target audience 
may be different than its current customer base, market 
research is often required. Historical data suggests that 
defining the target market typically takes 80 hours (2 weeks). 
In some cases, determining the target audience is fairly 
routine and can be done in as little as a day and a half  
(12 hours in total) while in other cases much less is known 
about who will use the product and defining the target 
market can take as long as 4 weeks (160 hours). Also, the 
number of people working on the task at any one time var-
ies as does their hourly bill rate. Given this, the average 
amount the customer is billed for the work to determine 
the target audience typically averages $170 per hour. In 
some cases, however, the hourly rate was as low as $100 per 
hour and in other cases as high as $450 per hour.
Once the target audience has been defined, alternative 
concepts for the advertising campaign are developed. A 
key aspect of developing the concept is deciding on the 
tone the campaign will use such as humorous, dramatic, or 
informative. Concept development is a highly creative 
process and often requires several iterations between Ad 
Jungle and its clients. On average, concept development 
takes 2 weeks (80 hours) but has been completed in as lit-
tle as 1 week (40 hours) or as long as 5 weeks (200 hours). 
Only one person from Ad Jungle works on concept devel-
opment, and typically these employees are billed out at 
$125 per hour. However, the least experienced employee is 
billed out at $75 per hour and the most experienced per-
son is billed out at $200 per hour.
Once the client signs off on the concept, the develop-
ment of the creative collateral (brochures, print ads, 
scripts for TV commercials, and so on) and determining 
the mix of media are done concurrently. The amount of 
time it takes to develop the creative collateral depends on 
how many media channels will be used (e.g., print, TV, 
online), how many people are assigned to work on devel-
oping the creative collateral, and how much involvement 
the client wants to have in the process. Typically, develop-
ing the creative collateral requires 3 weeks (120 hours) but 
has been done in as little as 1 week (40 hours) and on 
other occasions required 6 weeks (240 hours). Furthermore, 
the number of people and their bill rates varies from pro-
ject to project. On average, the hourly bill rate for devel-
oping the collateral is $275 but has been as low as $145 
and as high as $425.
Determining the mix of media is almost always done by 
the same person at Ad Jungle. This person is currently 
billed out at $150 per hour. The amount of time it takes to 
determine the mix of media that will be used ranges from 
half a day (4 hours) to 2 days (16 hours), but it typically 
takes 1 day (8 hours).
Once the collateral has been developed and the mix of 
media determined, the final step is production where the 
advertising materials are developed. The production of 
the advertising materials is outsourced to firms, and Ad 
Jungle assigns one account manager to oversee the work. 
The account managers are billed out at an hourly rate of 
$200. On average, 80 hours of the account manager’s time 
is needed to oversee production. In some cases, as little as 
30 hours of the account manager’s time was required, 
while in other cases as many as 160 hours were needed.

QUESTIONS
1.	 	 Draw a network diagram for this project. Identify all 
the paths through the network diagram.
2.	 	 Simulate the completion of this project 1,000 times, 
assuming that activity times and costs follow a trian-
gular distribution. Estimate the mean and standard 
deviation of the project completion time. Also, esti-
mate the mean and standard deviation of the amount 
the client would be billed for the project.
3.	 	 What is the probability the project can be done for 
less than $100,000? What is the probability the pro-
ject will take between 350 and 450 hours?
4.	 	 Based on the results of your simulation analysis, how 
would you respond to Pet Technologies’ request for 
an estimate of the project costs and duration?
BIBLIOGRAPHY
De Meyer, A., C. H. Loch, and M. T. Pich. “Managing 
Project Uncertainty: From Variation to Chaos.” MIT 
Sloan Management Review, Winter 2002. (This article pro-
vides a useful classification of uncertainty faced in projects 
and provides specific suggestions for managing each type 
of uncertainty.)
Goldratt, E. M. Critical Chain, Great Barrington, MA, 
North River, 1997.
Hulett, D. T. “Project Schedule Risk: Monte Carlo 
Simulation or PERT?” PM Network, February 2000. 
(Hulett comes to the same general conclusion that we do. 
Simulation is superior to the statistical methods of PERT 
for complex problems. In stating his case, however, he fails 
to note that for a PM to use simulation effectively, the PM 
should understand the statistics of simulation.)
Kamburowski, J. “New Validations of PERT Times.” 
Omega, International Journal of Management Science, Vol. 
25, No. 3, 1997.
Keefer, D. L., and W. A. Verdini. “Better Estimation of 
PERT Activity Time Parameter.” Management Science, 
September 1993.
Lawrence, J. A., Jr., and B. A. Pasternak. Applied 
Management Science, New York: Wiley, 1998. (This book 
has solution techniques for finding the critical path and 
time for a network using Excel’s® Solver.)
Leach, L. “Schedule and Cost Buffer Sizing: How to 
Account for the Bias between Project Performance and 
Your Model.” Project Management Journal, June 2003. (This 
article identifies a variety of sources of schedule and cost 
biases and provides recommendations for coping with them.)
Liberatore, M. J. “Project Schedule Uncertainty Analysis 
Using Fuzzy Logic.” Project Management Journal, December 
2002. (Our discussion in this chapter addresses schedule 
uncertainty from both a probability theory approach and 
using computer simulation. This article demonstrates the 
use of fuzzy logic for assessing project schedule uncertainty.)
McMahon, C. S. “Using PERT as an Approximation of 
the Fuzzy‐Project Network Analysis.” IEEE Transactions 
on Engineering Management, May 1993.
Mantel, J. R., and S. J. Mantel, Jr. Project Management: 
A Managerial Approach, 8th ed., Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2012.
Pritsker, A. A. B. “Gert Networks.” The Production 
Engineer, October 1968.
Ruskin, A. M. “Using Unders to Offset Overs.” PM 
Network, February 2000.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
•  185

c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
186
In this chapter we consider the problem of allocating physical and human resources to 
projects.* The physical and human resources are granted to and used by the project in 
order to meet the project’s objectives. The amount of resources that can be allocated, of 
course, depends on the timing of the allocation as well as on the total supply of resources 
available for allocation. Mainly, resource allocation concerns how we allocate specific, 
limited resources to specific activities (or projects) when there are competing demands 
for the same limited resources.
Projects compete with each other for the same resources in two different ways. First, 
consider a resource that is limited but is not consumed when used, the services of a 
specific technical specialist for instance. The problem here is which project gets to use 
the resource first and which must wait. Second, consider a resource that is limited and is 
consumed when used, a specific chemical reagent for instance. In this case, the second 
project may have to wait until more of the reagent can be purchased and delivered. In 
both cases, the project that must wait may suffer a schedule delay that makes it late. Just 
as projects may compete for resources, different activities of the same project may com‑
pete. Two or more concurrent activities might require the same personnel, or equipment, 
or even work space. One activity will be given priority, and the other(s) must wait.
In order to manage resources in such a way as to optimize the use of a limited supply, 
trade‐offs must be made. The interaction of project scheduling and resource scheduling 
is clear, but we will examine several different solutions to the allocation problem. Those 
include the Critical Path Method (CPM), Goldratt’s “critical chain” (1997), and many dif‑
ferent priority rules for allocating scarce resources. The primary cause of concern is resource 
scarcity. If some resources (including time) were not scarce, the resource allocation prob‑
lem would be concerned solely with profit maximization—a relatively easy problem.
Trade-Offs
Allocating Resources to the Project
6
*With few exceptions, we will not make a distinction between human and nonhuman resources in this chap‑
ter. We need not distinguish between them in order to consider the allocation problem. The tasks of administering 
the human and nonhuman resources are quite different, of course.

6.1 EXPEDITING A PROJECT
•  187
In Chapter 5 we evaluated project durations solely in terms of time. A project was 
either on time or not. Now we must also consider when and for what purposes scarce 
people, equipment, material, and facilities are used. The PM’s performance is judged 
by the skill with which the trade‐offs of time, resources, and scope are managed, so the 
PM must make constant use of cost/benefit analysis. There are countless questions to 
be answered. “If we come in late on this project, we face a $1,000 per day penalty. How 
much project slack do we need and what resources at what costs are required to get it?” 
“If I hire Cheatham Engineering Associates as design consultants, can I improve project 
performance by 3 percent without extending the project’s due date?” “Adding project 
slack and hiring a consultant require monetary resources that could be used for other 
things. Are these the best uses for the dollars?”
At times, the PM is asked to take on a project in which there are the usual time, 
budget, and scope goals, but which also constrain the trade‐offs that the PM may wish to 
make if required to help the project meet its most important goals. For example, some pro‑
jects are time constrained and must be completed by a fixed time. In such cases, resources 
(and possibly performance) are variable. Some projects are resource constrained and cannot 
go over budget or use more than a fixed amount of a specific resource. In these cases, time 
(and possibly performance) is variable. Occasionally, a senior manager suffers from a case 
of the micromanagement virus and fixes time, cost, and scope, thereby leaving the PM 
with no flexibility whatsoever. Such projects are certain to fail unless the micromanager 
has been profligate with the firm’s resources, which is highly unlikely for micromanagers. 
The fault actually lies with the PM who accepts command of such a project. (For those 
who are thinking that such a PM may find him‐or herself without a job following a refusal 
of an assignment, we would note the senior manager in question is insuring that the PM 
will fail. Do you want to work for someone who will not allow you to succeed?)
We will start our tour through the wilds of resource allocation by reconsidering the 
problem of dealing with a pointy‐haired boss who insists that a project be completed in 
much less time than its expected duration.
	 6.1	
EXPEDITING A PROJECT
The unreasonable boss problem in Chapter 5, Section 5.2 could be used as our example 
here, but a smaller problem will help avoid unnecessary arithmetic. Our problem is set in 
a deterministic world rather than in a probabilistic one, for the same reason. (Please 
remember that in reality all projects are carried out under conditions of uncertainty.) 
Finally, we must also take note of an assumption usually adopted when activities are 
scheduled, as we did in Chapter 5. That assumption is that all estimates of task duration, 
whether deterministic or probabilistic, are based on normal or standard resource loadings.
The Critical Path Method
In traditional PERT/CPM, the rules of “standard practice” apply and the normal task 
duration estimate is made with the normal or standard‐practice resource usage. Then a 
second estimate, referred to as the crash duration, is made based on the resources required 
to expedite the task. More resources of the type already used might be added; more work‑
ers and shovels if there is a ditch to be dug. On the other hand, the technology used to 
dig the ditch might be totally altered, utilizing a backhoe or a Ditch Witch®, for example. 
When making estimates for crashing, it is important to make sure that the resources 
required to crash the project are, in fact, available. Using a machine to dig the ditch in 
three hours instead of the 3 days required for a worker with a shovel is dependent on 
Trade-Offs

188  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
the fact that the machine is available and can be on site when needed. (Of course, the 
warning about resource availability applies equally to normal resource requirements as 
well as to crash requirements.) There are times when the PM may expedite activities that 
have little or no impact on the network’s critical time, such as when the resources used 
must be made available to another project. It is important to remember that when we 
change technology, we may also be changing the level of risk in carrying out the activity. 
Finally, we must remind ourselves that some tasks cannot be crashed. One must not 
assume that because it takes one woman 9 months to carry and bear a child that nine 
women can accomplish the same result in 1 month.
Consider the project described in Table 6‑1. There is a set of activities, predeces‑
sors, normal task duration estimates, crash duration estimates, and estimates for nor‑
mal cost and crash cost. One crash duration is marked with a single asterisk. For this 
activity, the task may be carried out in normal time or crashed 1 day at a time. Another 
activity is marked with a double asterisk. In this case, the duration must be one or the 
other; it cannot be broken down to 1‐day segments. Activities are charged at the “cost 
per day” (activity slope) increments shown in the last column. A given activity may 
have only two or three technically feasible durations. If an activity cannot be split into 
1‐day segments, the cost is as indicated. The “slope” information for non‐or‐partially 
segmented activities is normally given in the slope chart. Activity slope is computed 
as follows:
slope
crash cost
normal cost
crash time
normal time
When crashing a project, starting with the normal schedule for all project activities, 
crash selected activities, one at a time, to decrease project duration at the minimum 
additional cost. To crash a project, follow two simple principles: First, focus on the criti‑
cal path(s) when trying to shorten the duration of a project. Crashing a noncritical activ‑
ity will not influence project duration. Second, when shortening a project’s duration, 
select the least expensive way to do it.
Given these guides, consider the network shown in Figure  6‑1(a) that was con‑
structed from the data in Table 6‑1. It is easier to illustrate the impact of crashing on an 
activity‐on‐arrow (AOA) network than on an activity‐on‐node (AON) network, so we 
use that approach here. Also, we use dummy activities in this case not to illustrate prec‑
edence but to show time durations and slack on the time axis.
As indicated in Table 6‑1, activity d can be partially crashed for $30, but it is not on 
the critical path and will not shorten the project. Activity e involves a technological 
discontinuity and must take either 3 days to complete at $10 or 1 day at $80. In general, 
the impact of having such a technological discontinuity is that the best solution for 
Risk
Table 6-1  An Example of a Normal/Crash Project
Activity
Precedence
Duration, Days 
(norm, crash)
Cost (norm, 
crash)
Slope ($/day)
a
—
3, 2
$ 40, 80
40/−1 = −40
b
a
2, 1
    20, 80
60/−1 = −60
c
a
2, 2
    20, 20
—
 d*
a
4, 1
      30, 120
90/−3 = −30
  e**
b
3, 1
    10, 80
−70 (2 days)
* Partial crashing allowed
**Partial crashing not allowed

6.1 EXPEDITING A PROJECT
•  189
crashing n days might not be part of the best solution for crashing n + 1 days. Rather, it 
may be best to crash the activity with the technological discontinuity at n + 1 days and 
not crash another activity that could be crashed for n days. This situation is illustrated in 
the discussion that follows.
Normal Schedule
8 Days, $120
6-Day Schedule,
$220
5-Day Schedule,
$260
4-Day Schedule,
$350
7-Day Schedule,
$160
a
c
b
e
d
a
c
b
e
d
a
c
b
e
d
a
c
b
e
d
a
c
b
e
d
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 Days
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 6-1  A PERT/CPM example of crashing a project, AOA network.

190  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
The network’s critical path is a‐b‐e, the project duration is 8 days, and the normal 
total cost is $120, as illustrated in the network of Figure 6‑1(a). The decision about 
which activities to crash depends on how much we need to reduce the duration of the 
project. To reduce the total network duration by 1 day, we must reduce the time required 
by one of the activities along the critical path. Inspecting Table 6‑1 to see which critical 
activity can be reduced at the least cost, we find it is activity a, which adds $40 to the 
project’s current cost of $120. Activity b could be crashed at an added cost of $60 or we 
could even crash e 2 days for an additional cost of $70. Of course, crashing e would only 
shorten the project duration by 1 day because when e is shortened, the path a‐d‐dummy, 
7 days long, becomes the critical path and does not allow the project to be shortened to 
6 days. Of the three options, crashing a is the lowest cost and therefore preferable, see 
Figure 6‑1(b). Notice that crashing a also shortens a‐d‐dummy and a‐c‐dummy by 1 day.
Suppose the project must be crashed by 2 days. What are the options? Reconsidering 
Table 6‑1 and Figure 6‑1(a), we see that we could crash activity e for 2 days ($70), but 
path a‐d‐dummy (7‐days’ duration) must also be crashed at least 1 day. We choose d 
($30/day) because it is cheaper than a ($40). The total cost of crashing is $100, and the 
total project cost is $120 + $100 = $220. Alternatively, we could crash a and b, also for a 
cost of $100 ($40 + $60). Arbitrarily, we choose the latter option [Figure 6‑1(c)].
Now suppose we wanted to crash the project by 3 days, from the original 8 days down 
to 5 days. Clearly e must be crashed by 2 days, costing $70, and a or b by a day. We choose 
a, the cheapest, for an additional $40. This leaves d to be crashed by 1 day for another 
$30, resulting in a total crashing cost of $140 and a project cost of $120 + $140 = $260 
[Figure 6‑1(d)]. Note that we did not crash b this time, as we did for 6 days. This is due 
to the technological discontinuity in activity e.
Last, let us consider crashing the project by 4 days down to a project duration of 
4 days. Since we crashed e, the technological discontinuity, to reach a 5‐day duration, all 
the remaining activities can be incrementally crashed. Thus, we can simply inspect 
Figure 6‑1(d) to see what else needs incremental crashing to reduce the project by another 
day. Notice in Figure 6‑1(d) that a‐b‐e and a‐d‐dummy are both critical paths. Only b and 
d can still be crashed so we crash each by 1 day for an additional cost beyond the 5‐day 
schedule of Figure 6‑1(d) of $60 + $30 = $90 for a total project cost of $260 + $90 = $350 
[Figure 6‑1(e)]. Note that c is now critical; therefore, all paths are critical. Since the criti‑
cal paths a‐b‐e and a‐c are at their full extent of crashing, the project duration cannot be 
further reduced, even though activity d could be crashed another day. Thus, Figure 6‑1(e) 
is not the all‐crash network, although it equals the all‐crash time schedule of 4 days.
Whether all this crashing is worthwhile is another matter. On the cost side, Figure 6‑2 
shows the time/cost relationship of crashing the project. On the benefit side, some pro‑
jects have penalty clauses that make the parent organization liable for late delivery—and 
sometimes bonuses for early delivery. Starting at the right (all‐normal) side of Figure 6‑2, 
note that it becomes increasingly costly to squeeze additional time out of the project. 
Charts such as the one shown in Figure 6‑2 are useful to the PM in exercising control 
over project duration and cost. They are particularly helpful in dealing with senior man‑
agers who may argue for early project completion dates with little understanding of the 
costs involved. Similarly, such data are of great benefit when clients plead for early deliv‑
ery. If the client is willing to pay the cost of crashing, or if the firm is willing to subsidize 
the client, the PM can afford to listen with a sympathetic ear. (While we advise the PM 
to ignore overhead costs over which he or she has no control, it should be noted that 
indirect costs are often altered when a project is crashed.)
One final note on crashing projects. The same method is used when the task dura‑
tions are probabilistic, that is, using three-time estimates. In this case, optimistic, most 
likely, and pessimistic activity duration estimates are made for the “normal” resource 
loading and new optimistic, most likely, and pessimistic duration estimates must be made 

6.1 EXPEDITING A PROJECT
•  191
for crash resource loading. The PM should remember that the variance of both the nor‑
mal and crash activity times largely depends on the technology used to accomplish the 
activity in question. Thus the variance of the normal activity time may be quite different 
from the variance of the crash time. The project budget can be determined in exactly the 
same way. The solution to project duration and resource cost levels can be reached by 
using the standard analytical method used in the last chapter, or by simulation, also 
described in Chapter 5.
Crashing a Project with Excel
* In this section we demonstrate how spreadsheets can greatly facilitate the task of choos‑
ing which activities to crash such that the project can be completed by a specified time. 
To illustrate this, we use the previous example with one minor change. Namely, we 
assume that partial crashing is allowed for all activities that can be crashed. The network 
for the example and the spreadsheet developed to solve the problem are shown in 
Figures 6‑3 and 6‑4, respectively.
300
200
Cost ($)
100
0
2
4
Total Duration (Days)
All normal
a
a + b 
All crash
a + b +2d + 2e
a + d +2e – b
6
8
10
400
Figure 6-2  CPM crash cost‐duration history.
1
2
a
c
e
b
d
5
3
4
Figure 6-3  AOA network from Figure 6‐1(e) with node labels added.
*This section is intended for readers that have a background in linear programming and Excel’s Solver. This 
section can be skipped without loss of continuity.

192  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
At the top of the spreadsheet shown in Figure 6‑4, columns A through F contain the 
information given in the problem. In column G, the crash cost per day (slope) is calcu‑
lated by dividing the incremental cost of crashing the activity as much as possible by the 
maximum number of days the activity can be shortened. For example, the formula =(E2‐
F2)/(C2‐D2) was entered in cell G2 and then copied to other cells in column G (except 
for activity c which cannot be shortened).
Column H contains a formula to calculate the maximum number of days an activ‑
ity can be crashed by subtracting the crash time from the normal time. For example, 
the formula =C2‐D2 was entered in cell H2 and then copied to the other cells 
in column H.
Column I corresponds to one of our decision variables, namely, the amount to crash 
each activity. In column J, the cost of partially crashing an activity is calculated on the 
basis of the amount of time the activity is to be crashed as determined in column I. For 
example, the formula =I2*G2 was entered in cell J2 and copied to the other cells in 
column J. The total crashing cost is calculated in cell J7 as the sum of the cost of crashing 
the individual activities in cells J2:J6.
In column K, the actual time to complete each activity is calculated by subtracting 
the amount the activity is crashed (column I) from its normal time (column C). For 
example, the formula =C2‐I2 was entered in cell K2 and then copied to the other cells 
in the column.
The middle of the spreadsheet shown in Figure 6‑4 (cells B11:B14) are for the other 
decision variables needed. More specifically, cells B11:B14 correspond to the event times 
for each of the nodes in the network diagram. (Node 1 is excluded because we assume it 
occurs at time zero.) As you will see, we need these decision variables to preserve the 
precedence relationships shown in the network. For example, we need to make sure that 
node 4 does not occur until after node 2 occurs, plus the time it take to complete activity d.
We now demonstrate how Excel’s Solver can be used to determine which activities 
to crash so that the entire project is completed with 5 days at the minimum cost. To 
begin, we select Solver from the Data ribbon (note that Solver is an Excel add‐in and 
must be added before it can be used). The Solver Parameters dialog box is now displayed 
(see Figure 6‑5). Our objective is to minimize the total crash cost which is calculated in 
cell J7. To specify this, we enter cell J7 in the Target Cell box and then select the Min 
Figure 6-4  Spreadsheet model to find optimal crashing plan.

6.1 EXPEDITING A PROJECT
•  193
option button. Next, we tell Excel which cells it can change in order to find the ­solution 
with the least total crashing cost. In the spreadsheet shown in Figure 6‑4, the values 
that can be changed are the amount of time each activity is crashed (cells I2:I6) and the 
time when each event occurs (cells B11:B14). Thus, these ranges are entered in the By 
Changing Variable Cells box. Note that these two separate ranges are separated by a 
comma in the By Changing Variable Cells box (see Figure 6‑5).
The last task is to enter the constraints for the problem. Perhaps the most obvious 
constraint is that we want to complete the project within 5 days. Since node 5 (cell B14) 
corresponds to the event of the project being completed, we can specify this constraint 
as follows:
B14
5
Another important set of constrains that needed is to make sure that we don’t crash an 
activity more than the maximum number of days that is can be crashed. For example, to 
ensure activity a is not crashed more than it can be physically crashed, we could enter the 
constraint I2 <= H2. Taking advantage of Excel’s ability to work with ranges, the con‑
straints to ensure all activities are not crashed more than their crash limit can be entered as:
I
I
H
H
2
6
2
6
:
:
Another set of constraints are needed to make sure that the precedence relationships 
specified in the network are not violated. We do this by keeping track of the event times 
of the nodes. For example, the event time of node 2 cannot occur until after activity a 
Figure 6-5  Completed Solver Parameters dialog box.

194  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
has been completed (assuming the project begins at time zero). The time to complete 
activity a is its normal time less the amount of time it is crashed (which is calculated in 
column K). Since cell B11 corresponds to the event time for node 2, mathematically we 
could enter this constraint as follows:
B
K
11
2
This constraint says that the event corresponding to node 2 cannot occur until after 
activity a has been completed.
Constraints for the other nodes are developed in a similar fashion. For example, the 
constraints for nodes 3 and 4 would be:
B
B
K
B
B
K
12
11
3
13
11
5
Moving on to node 5, note that this node has three arrows leading to it. A node with 
more than one arrow pointing to it will need a separate constraint for each such arrow. 
Thus, we need the following three constraints for node 5:
B
B
K
B
B
K
B
B
14
12
6
14
11
4
14
13
The entire set of constraints as well as the other information entered into the 
Parameters Dialog box is shown in Figure 6‑5. Note by checking the checkbox Make 
Unconstrained Variables Non‐Negative, we do not need to add constraints to ensure 
each decision variable is greater‐than‐or‐equal‐to zero.
After filling in the Solver Parameters dialog box as shown in Figure 6‑5, the lowest 
cost plan to complete the project in 5 days can be found by clicking on the Solve button. 
This plan is shown in Figure 6‑6. According to the plan activities a and b are crashed 1 
day, activity d 3 days, and activity e 2 days (refer to column I). The extra cost of reducing 
the project to 5 days is $260 (cell J7).
Figure 6-6  Optimal solution to crash project to 5 days.

6.1 EXPEDITING A PROJECT
•  195
Fast‐Tracking a Project
In addition to crashing a project in order to expedite it, a project may also be fast‐tracked. 
Used primarily in the construction industry, the term refers to an expediting technique 
in which the design and planning phases of a project are not actually completed before 
the building phase is started. Usually design and plan are finished before the building is 
started (referred to as the “waterfall” approach), so letting them overlap reduces project 
duration—if the fact that design and planning are incomplete does not result in a signifi‑
cant amount of rework and change orders during the building phase.
For many projects in construction, maintenance, and similar areas, a large propor‑
tion of the work is routine. In these cases, fast‐tracking rarely causes serious problems. 
The number of change orders in fast‐tracked construction projects is not significantly 
different from that for similar projects that were not fast‐tracked (Kurtulus and 
Narula, 1985).
Project Expediting in Practice
Expediting can occur in three different ways. First, the PM may know ahead of time that 
this is a time‐critical project and will need to take steps to finish the project as early as 
possible. Second, the PM may get the word during the execution of the project that the 
due date has had to be moved up. Or finally, something happens during the project to 
delay some activities so that the due date is going to be missed. In all cases, the sooner the 
PM knows that the project needs to be expedited, the more opportunities there will be to 
bring the project in ahead of time, or on time if a delay occurred. Whenever it appears 
that the project may be later than the stakeholders expected, it is imperative that the 
stakeholders be informed immediately and kept apprised of the follow‐on developments as 
they occur. We can divide the opportunities for expediting a project into those that occur 
before the project begins and those that are available once the project is under way.
Opportunities Before the Project Begins  First, it is worth noting that most of the 
time in practice, projects are not planned using the three‐time method of estimating (i.e., 
optimistic, most likely, pessimistic). Instead, PMs simply try to get a reasonably accurate 
estimate of each activity time from those who will be responsible for the activity or, failing 
that, estimate the time themselves. Then, after they determine the critical path, they 
often add a cushion or “buffer” to the critical activities’ times in case they turn out to be 
too optimistic (i.e., short). Next, to account for the possibility that other paths may turn 
out to be critical instead, a project time contingency, which is noted as such, is added as well.
Also, they may try to identify the “key” activities and deliverables (that is, those that 
have the biggest effect on the schedule or success) and plan to monitor those especially 
closely. To be safe, they may even order the long‐lead time items early, or arrange for pos‑
sible airlifting of those items if expediting is later deemed necessary.
Opportunities When the Project Is Underway  If the need to expedite occurs 
once the project is underway, there are many actions PMs may try in order to expedite 
the project, as follows:
• First, they will focus on the critical path and see if there is any way to shorten it. 
If they haven’t already, they will identify the key activities that would help expe‑
dite the project and manage those extremely closely, making sure that they don’t 
use up their activity time cushions/buffers.
• In a similar vein, they may request permission to use some of the contingency 
time they budgeted for the project.

196  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
• They may pull resources from less critical activities, activities with a surplus, or 
just chronologically later activities, to apply to more critical, earlier activities.
• Similarly, they may move later activity time cushions/buffers up to earlier, more 
critical activities.
• They may try to shorten, or even skip, certain steps like testing, documentation, 
or training.
• They may postpone activities that involve non‐core team members, or other 
stakeholders.
• They may move some activities to a post‐project phase, such as installation, 
implementation, or service.
• They may see what activities they can “fast‐track” (run in parallel), or even what 
activities can be done early or ahead of time (e.g., on weekends), which most 
commonly are those that do not involve the user or other stakeholders.
• They will try various forms of “compression” such as pressuring the team to work 
harder or faster, or get permission for overtime.
• They may attempt to get additional resources, either money for overtime or addi‑
tional people to work on the project.
• They may seek permission to reduce the scope of the project, so the critical deliv‑
erables can occur on time.
• Finally, for PMs with lots of experience with projects such as these, they may 
simply choose to wait and see if something comes up later that allows them to 
make up the time. (Less‐experienced or younger PMs are typically too risk averse 
and have less self‐confidence to try this.)
	 6.2	
RESOURCE LOADING
From the first day on the job, the PM is concerned with resource loading. Resource load‑
ing refers to the amounts of specific resources that are scheduled for use on specific activ‑
ities or projects at specific times. It usually takes the form of a list or table. Figure 6‑7 is 
an MSP‐generated project plan and Gantt chart of a project aimed at producing a short 
documentary film. Task names, WBS numbers, durations, finish dates, and the resource 
requirements for each step in the process are shown. (Precedences are not listed, but they 
are illustrated on the Gantt chart.)
After the project plan was developed, the PM confirmed the availability of each 
required resource, and obtained schedules for each. MSP allows the PM to create an 
individual availability calendar for each resource on the project. From these calendars, 
resource schedules are automatically generated, and Table 6‑2 shows the schedules for 
Risk
When task durations are estimated, an assumption is made that task resources are set 
at “normal” levels. This is the “standard practice” assumption. Traditionally, CPM 
project duration estimates also include a “crash” estimate together with estimates of 
the crash time and the resources required to shorten the duration of project activities. 
By selectively choosing which activities to crash and by how much, we can determine 
the minimum cost for all possible project completion times.

WBS
1
2
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
4
5
6
7
8
9
Deliver ﬁlm to client
Start date: 3/29
Finish date: 5/31
Task
Milestone
Summary
Final approval
Editing
Shooting
Revise script
Script approval
Scheduling completed
Schedule shoots
Schedule shoots
Scriptwriting
Scriptwriter
Scriptwriter, Producer, Client
Scriptwriter, Producer
Editor, Production Staff
Editor, Editing staff, Editing room
Producer
Producer, Client
Producer, Client, Editing room, Editor
Secretary
Project approval
Task Name
Duration
Resource Names
Producing a Documentary Film
A. J. Lucas
April
May
June
3/21
3/28
4/4
4/15
4/2
4/2
4/16
4/16
4/22
4/29
5/13
5/24
5/31
5/31
3/29
4/11
4/18
4/25
5/2
5/9
5/16
5/23
5/30
6/6
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
5 days
5 days
5 days
5 days
5 days
10 days
10 days
7 days
14 days
15 days
Propose shoots
Begin scheduling
Hire secretary
3/29
Figure 6-7  Project plan and Gantt chart for production of a short documentary film (MSP).
  197

Table 6-2  Resource Availability Calendars for Selected Resources for Documentary Film Production (MSP)
Project: Producing a Film
Resource Availability Calendars
Name
Standard Rate
Overtime Rate
Work
Scriptwriter
$75.00/hr
$100.00/hr
192 hr
RESOURCE CALENDAR
(modified Standard)
Day
Hours
Monday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 6:00 pm
Tuesday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 6:00 pm
Wednesday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 6:00 pm
Thursday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 6:00 pm
Friday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 6:00 pm
Saturday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 6:00 pm
Sunday
Nonworking
Exceptions:
None
Producer
$100.00/hr
$150.00/hr
200 hr
RESOURCE CALENDAR
(unmodified Standard)
Day
Hours
Monday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Tuesday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Wednesday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Thursday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Friday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Saturday
Nonworking
Sunday
Nonworking
Exceptions:
None
Client
$0.00/hr
$0.00/hr
120 hr
RESOURCE CALENDAR
(modified Standard)
Day
Hours
Monday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Tuesday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Wednesday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Thursday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Friday
8:00 am ‐ 12:00 pm, 1:00 pm ‐ 5:00 pm
Saturday
Nonworking
Sunday
Nonworking
Exceptions:
Date
Hours
04/13–04/20
Nonworking
Editing room
$250/use
$0.00/hr
  96 hr
RESOURCE CALENDAR
(modified Standard)
Day
Hours
Monday
9:30 am ‐ 3:00 pm
Tuesday
9:30 am ‐ 3:00 pm
Wednesday
9:30 am ‐ 3:00 pm
Thursday
9:30 am ‐ 3:00 pm
Friday
9:30 am ‐ 3:00 pm
Saturday
Nonworking
Sunday
Nonworking
Exceptions:
None
198  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project

6.2 RESOURCE LOADING
•  199
several of the required resources. (Any resource not shown in Table 6‑2 works a 5‐day 
week, 8:00 am to 5:00 pm with an hour off for lunch, usually 12 pm–1 pm, without excep‑
tions during the period of the project.) Among other things, the PM noted the following:
• The scriptwriter is available to work 6 days per week, and 9 hours per day.
• The editing room has limited availability, 9:30 am to 3:00 pm each day.
• The client, whose input is required for several activities, will be on vacation 
between April 13 and April 20.
When the calendars for each resource were entered into MSP’s database for the pro‑
ject, the project schedule was recalculated. The revised plan is shown in Figure 6‑8. Note 
that the project completion date has been extended from May 31 to June 11. The client’s 
vacation and the availability of the editing room are major contributors to the extension.
From the project plan, the new schedule, and the list of resources required, a resource‐
loading table was derived by MSP; see Table 6‑3. As we noted earlier, a project’s resource 
loading is a list of the amounts of various specific resources that are scheduled for use on 
specific activities at specific times during the life of the project. A brief study of the data 
in Table 6‑3 reveals that in the first week of the project [Wednesday through Saturday 
(March 1–4)] the scriptwriter is overallocated. During the first 6 days of the project this 
person is scheduled to work 94 hours. That seems a bit much, not allowing time for eat‑
ing, sleeping, and all of life’s other activities. The scriptwriter’s first full week is overal‑
located by 40 hours. The producer’s first week is also overallocated at 40 hours. Something 
must be done, and it will be discussed in the next section.
An examination of this table reveals an interesting anomaly in MSP and most other 
project management software. Unless specified otherwise, MSP assumes that any resource 
assigned to an activity will work on that activity 100 percent of the time available on the 
resource calendar. For example, Figure 6‑7, WBS 3.2, “Propose shoots” lists the client as 
a resource (in addition to the producer and scriptwriter). The activity is scheduled to 
take 5 days. The PM is aware that in all likelihood the client will only be needed to 
attend one or two meetings (an hour or two each) to approve or amend the shoots pro‑
posed by the producer and scriptwriter. Nonetheless, the resource‐loading table 
(Table 6‑3) indicates that the client will spend 40 hours (5 days at 8 hours/day) on 
the activity.
Were this a large project with a large number and variety of resources, it might be 
necessary to correct this “error.” MSP and other software packages have several ways to 
do this. The PM could allocate a specific percentage of a resource’s time for work on the 
project, or could restrict the availability of the resource on the calendar, for example. In 
this case, however, because the client has no cost per hour, and because everyone involved 
in the project, including the client, understands the nature of the client’s work, the mat‑
ter can be ignored.
Quite apart from problems in scheduling the activities, there are other resource‐
loading issues that may face the PM. For instance, there are cost and management issues 
that must be considered. It is easy to overutilize resources, particularly human resources; 
note the hours required of the scriptwriter and producer during the first days of the pro‑
ject. For hourly workers, overtime work is usually quite expensive. In the case of the 
scriptwriter, overtime hours are not sufficient, and another writer may be needed for the 
first 1 or 2 weeks. On the other hand, it is common to find middle managers consistently 
working 45–60 hours per week—if they have a desire for upward mobility. In the software 
industry or in architecture, to pick two typical examples, individuals often work 60–80 
hours per week or more in order to complete specific projects on time. Because we usually 
overload our best people, they are the ones most apt to quit and go elsewhere—and they 

WBS
1
2
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
4
5
6
7
8
9
Adjusted
Duration
Start
Finish
Late Start
Producing a Documentary Film
Late Finish
3/21 3/28
3/29
39.5 days
39.5 days
6/11
4/4
4/11 4/18 4/25
5/2
5/9
5/16 5/23 5/30
6/6
6/13
June
May
April
3/29
3/29
3/29
3/29
3/29
3/29
4/5
4/16
4/16
4/28
5/5
5/19
6/2
6/11
5/19
5/5
4/28
4/21
6/11
5/28
5/21
5/21
5/21
5/21
4/1
4/1
6/2
6/11
5/19
5/5
4/28
6/11
6/11
4/21
4/1
6/11
5/28
5/28
5/21
6/2
6/11
6/11
3/29
5/18
5/4
4/27
4/16
4/16
4/16
4/15
4/2
4/2
3/29
6/2
6/11
6/11
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
5 days
5 days
5 days
8 days
10 days
10.06 days
7.19 days
10 days
14 days
15 days
Deliver ﬁlm to client
Final approval
Editing
Shooting
Revise script
Script approval
Scheduling completed
Schedule shoots
Schedule shoots
Scriptwriting
Project approval
Task Name
Revised start date: 3/29
Revised ﬁnish date: 6/11
Propose shoots
Begin scheduling
Hire secretary
Start shown
Adjusted for resource availability
Task
Split
Milestone
Slack
Slippage
Summary
Figure 6-8  Gantt chart for film project, adjusted for client availability (MSP).
200

Table 6-3  Resource Loading Chart for Film Production (MSP)
  201

202  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
rarely tell us why in their exit interviews. For most senior executives, the workloads are 
often very heavy—consistently 65–70 or more hours per week. These are the people who 
are overstressed at the very times they must make momentous decisions.
Such resource‐loading documents as Table 6‑3 are among management’s most fre‑
quent requests of the PM, precisely so they can monitor such situations. As we will see in 
the section on resource leveling, managers sometimes make incorrect assumptions about 
the capacity of work groups, and the PM must take on an educational role.
The Charismatic VP
The Vice‐President and Manager of a division of a large chemical company became aware 
that a number of projects he had assigned to his subordinates were not being completed on 
time. Some were finished late, and others were simply unfinished. The VP was tireless, spend‑
ing 60–80 hours per week at work. He was very well liked, and his people tried hard to please 
him. If he asked a subordinate if a task could be handled, invariably the answer was “Yes.”
The VP began to suspect that he was overcommitting his subordinates. He suggested 
this to his people, but most of them insisted that they could handle the work. Not entirely 
convinced, the VP installed a project‐oriented management system and initiated 
resource‐loading reports for all personnel doing project work. The reports showed clearly 
that the division had an urgent need for additional staff engineers.
As is typical of such cases, the individuals most overworked were the most experi‑
enced and most skilled people. Those engineers with spare time were the least skilled 
and, for the most part, recent hires. The untrained remained untrained. The Vice‐
President, however, altered work assignments and ordered that additional engineers be 
hired. Overscheduling was limited to 125 percent (50 hours per week), and at that level 
for a limited time only. A policy of partnering new engineers with experienced cohorts 
was instituted. Within 6 months, division projects were progressing reasonably on time.
	 6.3	
RESOURCE LEVELING
Look once again at Figure 6‑8. Tasks 2, 3.2, and 3.3 are all scheduled to start on March 29. 
The scriptwriter is required for the first two of the three items and the producer for the last 
two. The scriptwriter’s calendar (Table 6‑2) indicates that the scriptwriter can work a 
54‐hour week—6 days per week at 9 hours per day. The producer is available for a standard 
40‐hour week. The resource‐loading table (Table 6‑3) shows the above‐­mentioned tasks 
assigned to the scriptwriter and producer. Apparently both are expected to do two differ‑
ent jobs at the same time.
The scriptwriter’s conflict must be reduced. Figures 6‑9 and 6‑10 illustrate the prob‑
lem clearly. Both illustrations are MSP outputs. Figure 6‑9 lists all tasks for which the 
Resource loading is usually displayed as a list of the amounts of specific resources 
assigned for use on specific project activities at specific times, or as a graph showing 
the level of a resource’s capacity required against the project calendar. To be useful for 
scheduling, the resource must have a calendar showing the resource’s availability. The 
calendar should include hours—and days—worked each week, any holidays on which 
the resource will not be available, and any other information affecting the availability 
of the resource. Resource cost per unit of usage should be included on the calendar, 
plus any additional cost for overtime or overuse. Overscheduling a resource may cause 
serious problems for the PM.

6.3 RESOURCE LEVELING
•  203
scriptwriter is scheduled. Figure 6‑10 indicates that the scriptwriter is overallocated by a 
factor of 2 during the period from March 29 to April 2.*
Task
Prior to resource leveling
Split
Milestone
Slack
Slippage
Summary
WBS
2
3
3.2
5
Duration
Scheduled
Start
Scheduled
Finish
April
May
June
Resource Overallocated: Scriptwriter
39.5 days
2.5 days
6/13
6/6
5/30
5/23
5/16
5/9
5/2
4/25
4/18
4/11
4/4
3/28
3/21
3/29
3/29
3/29
4/27
4/16
4/12
4/2
5/4
5.5 days
6.63 days
14 days
15 days
Revise script
Schedule shoots
Scriptwriting
Task Name
Project start date: 3/29
Project ﬁnish date: 6/11
Propose shoots
Figure 6-9  Resource overallocation report for scriptwriter showing all activities (MSP).
* If MSP’s Gantt chart view is set to show weekly intervals, it indicates resource usage for an entire week even 
if the resource is actually used for only 1 day during that week. To see resource usage with more precision, set the 
MSP calendar to show daily or hourly intervals.
April
200%
180%
160%
140%
120%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
Peak Units:
200%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Allocated:
Overallocated:
Scriptwriter
Project: Producing a Documentary Film
4/4
4/11
4/18
4/25
5/2
5/9
5/16
5/23
5/30
6/6
May
June
Resource Overallocated: Scriptwriter
3/28
Figure 6-10  Graphic resource overallocation report for scriptwriter (MSP).

204  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
Figure 6‑9 also shows considerable slack in WBS 3.2. If we ask MSP to level resources, 
the software will move activities so that resources do not exceed their capacities—and 
will do so by using available slack first, where possible, rather than extending the project 
duration. (Clearly, the PM could do the same thing manually, but the job becomes com‑
plex and time‐consuming on all but small projects.) Figures 6-11 and 6-12 show the 
effect of resource leveling on the scriptwriter’s workload. In this case the project duration 
was not affected because there was sufficient slack in WBS 3.2, and the leveling opera‑
tion used it. (PMBOK covers the topic of resource leveling in Chapter 6 on Time.)
To understand Figure 6‑11 correctly requires an understanding of MSP. The figure 
appears to report that the scriptwriter is still working overtime on Tasks 2 and 3.2. This 
would also mean that there was an error in Figure 6‑12 that shows no such thing. The 
scriptwriter’s efforts are, in fact, solely devoted to scriptwriting (Task 2), but the producer 
and the client are working on Task 3.2, so the task is shown as being underway. MSP has 
split Task 3.2, and the scriptwriter begins work on the task on Monday, April 12 after 
work on Task 2 has been completed. The second part of Task 3.2 does not begin until all 
work on Task 2 is complete. It is easy to verify that this has happened. Table 6‑4 shows 
the resource allocation, after leveling the scriptwriter’s workload, using a daily calendar. 
The scriptwriter is not assigned more than 9 hours per day. On Monday, April 12 work 
transfers from Task 2 to Task 3.2.
The problem of the still overallocated producer is another matter. This is the same 
problem we discussed above concerning the client’s need to attend some meetings. The 
fact that the producer is overscheduled is not really a problem. Neither of the conflicting 
tasks (WBS task 3.2 and 3.3) requires 8 hours per day of work by the producer. The dura‑
tion of 5 days for Task 3.2 (Propose shoots), for example, indicates that the producer will 
be spending some time during a 5‐day period on the job of proposing locations and set‑
tings for filming. Similarly, Task 3.3 (Hire secretary) will require the producer to inter‑
view some candidates for the secretarial position during the same 5‐day period, but this 
will not be a full‐time job either. The 5‐day durations are an indication of when the tasks 
are expected to be complete. Task duration is not necessarily dictated by the amount of labor 
required to complete the task, but by the calendar time required to complete it. Sometimes, of 
course, the amount of labor may be the determinant of calendar time, but often it is not.
At this point a short digression is appropriate. As a student of project management 
reading this book, you probably know little of the reality of the projects used here as 
examples of this or that project management problem. As a PM working on a real‐world 
project, you know a great deal more about the reality of your project than could possibly 
be explained in this book on the subject. The PM of the documentary project knows that 
there will be no problem raised by the apparent conflict in the allocation of the produc‑
er’s time. The PM could have used one of the methods we noted in the discussion of 
resource loading to handle the matter, but elected not to take the time and effort. This, 
then, is another of the trade‐offs the PM must make. Not every facet of a project requires 
equal managerial care. The PM must decide where to expend his or her managerial 
efforts—and then take responsibility for the decision.
A resource allocation decision may be intended to avoid future problems rather than 
to cure a present problem. While the scriptwriter is not overallocated, the PM decided to 
add a second scriptwriter to WBS 2. The PM also leveled the producer’s apparent overal‑
location just to add some slack to the producer’s schedule. Both of these additions were 
made to ensure that the project was not made late by a glitch in the producer’s work or 
in the scriptwriting activity, which is on the project’s critical path. (See Section 6.5 for 
additional information about the advisability of having some excess capacity in pro‑
jects.) The result of all these moves is seen in Figure 6‑13. The project can be finished 
2 weeks or 16 days earlier than indicated in Figure 6‑8.
PMBOK Guide
Trade-Offs

Task
Preleveled Task
Preleveled Split
Split
Milestone
Slack
Slippage
Delay
Summary
After resource leveling
WBS
2
3
3.2
5
Duration
Scheduled
Start
Scheduled
Finish
April
May
June
Resource Leveled: Scriptwriter
Scriptwriter
Scriptwriter, Producer, Client
Scriptwriter, Producer
6/13
6/6
5/30
5/23
5/16
5/9
5/2
4/25
4/18
4/11
4/4
3/28
3/21
3/29
3/29
3/29
4/27
4/30
4/12
4/16
5/4
10 days
6.63 days
14 days
25 days
Revise script
Schedule shoots
Scriptwriting
Task Name
Project start date: 3/29
Project ﬁnish date: 6/11
Propose shoots
Figure 6-11  Resource leveled report for scriptwriter showing all activities (MSP).
  205

206  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
When resources are added to a project, the PM may be asked to explain just how the 
project budget came to be underestimated. To answer such a question, the PM would be 
well advised to contact the administration of any large city that has recently built a 
sports stadium.
A more or less steady state demand for human resources is highly desirable—if it is 
not seriously inconsistent with the technological demands of the project. The cost of 
adding, laying‐off, or permanently releasing human beings is very high for both hourly 
and salaried personnel. If the parent organization is quite large and is operating many 
projects that have reasonably high commonality in their demand for certain skills, it is 
often possible to set up “pools” for such skills as clerical, machine operation, and similar 
types of workers. When pools are used to supply resources for projects, careful records 
must be kept to ensure fast determination of skill availability and that the proper charges 
are made to all projects.
Pools of like resources from which labor can be added temporarily to projects tend to 
cut costs for the firm as a whole. Pools also cut the cost of managing the project. The 
PM’s job is made easier, and the cash flows of the project are less volatile. The PM will 
spend far less time trying to find and recruit personnel. Such pools, however, are useful 
only if the labor is not subdivided into highly specialized subtasks. Secretarial skills 
are less specialized than, say, the skills required to design, generate, or test computer 
Project: Producing a Documentary Film
Peak Units:
20%
100%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Allocated:
Overallocated:
Scriptwriter
40%
60%
80%
100%
April
May
June
Resource Leveled: Scriptwriter
3/28
4/4
4/11
4/18
4/25
5/2
5/9
5/16
5/23
5/30
6/6
Figure 6-12  Graphic resource leveled report for scriptwriter (MSP).

Table 6-4  Daily Resource Loading Chart for Film Project, Scriptwriter Leveled (MSP)
  207

WBS
1
2
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
4
5
6
7
8
9
Deliver DVD to client
Start date: 3/29
Finish date: 5/26
Additional scriptwriter added to activity 2
Task
Milestone
Summary
Split
Final approval
Editing
Shooting
Revise script
Script approval
Scheduling completed
Schedule shoots
Schedule shoots
Scriptwriting
Scriptwriter[200%]
Scriptwriter, Producer, Client
Scriptwriter, Producer
Editor, Production Staff
Editor, Editing staff, Editing room
Producer
Producer, Client
Producer, Client, Editing room, Editor
Secretary
Project approval
Task Name
Duration
Resource Names
Producing a Documentary Film
A. J. Lucas
April
May
June
3/21
3/28
4/4
4/5
4/9
4/23
5/7
5/7
5/2
4/12
4/19
5/3
5/17
5/26
5/26
4/11
4/18
4/25
5/9
5/16
5/23
5/30
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
10 days
5 days
5 days
5.5 days
7.19 days
10 days
10 days
10.06 days
7 days
30 days
Finish
Start
5/3
5/17
5/26
5/26
3/29
4/5
5/7
4/9
4/23
5/7
5/7
4/12
3/29
4/19
3/29
3/29
3/29
3/29
5/26
3/29
5/7
4/5
4/5
4/12
4/19
5/3
5/17
4/26
Propose shoots
Begin scheduling
Hire secretary
3/29
3/29
Figure 6-13  Final film project Gantt chart schedule, with two scriptwriters and producer leveled (MSP).
208

6.3 RESOURCE LEVELING
•  209
software. The conclusion is that secretarial pools are feasible, but that software design, 
generation, and testing should be done by “teams” in which the required specialists are 
available.
Resource Loading/Leveling and Uncertainty
Figure 6‑14 is a resource‐loading chart for a software engineering group in a large firm. 
The chart depicts the total number of hours required of a resource group (all members 
from one department assigned to the firm’s projects) displayed against the group’s capac‑
ity. (MSP resource‐loading information was exported to an Excel® spreadsheet and dis‑
played graphically. The process of producing such displays is not difficult.) There are 
21 members of the group. They are scheduled for 40 hours per 5‐day week by the firm. 
Figure 6‑14 covers a 34‐week period. The graph shows estimated work hours (28,282) 
committed by this team for projects that are currently on the company’s books. The 
delivery‐date commitments are such that group workloads exceed the group’s capacity 
through much of March and April, for a brief period in the middle of May, and again in 
the latter part of June. (The total of these overloads is 1,747 hours, or a bit more than 
83 hours per person.)
A rough estimate of group capacity is
21
40
34
28 560 labor ho
people
hours per week
weeks
,
urs
But a few corrections are in order. There are three national holidays in the period: 
Memorial Day, the Fourth of July, and Labor Day. The time lost for the holidays is
21 3
8
504 labor hours
days
hours
which lowers capacity to 28,056 labor hours. Assume further that 11 people take a 2‐
week vacation during the 34‐week period, a conservative assumption given the fact that 
the period includes May through September. The time for 11 vacations is an additional 
capacity loss of
11 2
40
880 labor hours
weeks
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Weeks
People requested
Total hours over capacity line: 1,747
Total man-hours: 28,282
Engineering group
1/30
2/13
2/27
3/12
3/26
4/9
4/23
5/7
5/21
6/4
6/18
7/2
7/16
7/30
8/13
8/27
9/10
9/24
Figure 6-14  Thirty‐four‐week 
resource loading chart for a 
software engineering group 
(MSP and Excel®).

210  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
There are now 28,056 − 880 = 27,176 labor hours available, and even if the group’s work 
were evenly distributed across the 34‐week period, the team’s capacity is about 1,100 less 
than the scheduled demand for work. The workload is 28,282/27,176 = 1.04 or 104 per‑
cent of capacity.
A 4 percent shortage of capacity does not seem like much. Why not increase the 
hours worked per week for these salaried software engineers to 41.6 hours per week? The 
added capacity will (roughly) equal the estimated workload. While such a move might 
help, it would not begin to solve the problem. For instance, is it likely that no engineers 
in the group will be ill and absent on any of the 170 workdays? Is it likely . . . no; is it 
possible that every task the group is scheduled to perform will be ready for the group’s 
work exactly on schedule? Is it possible that all required facilities and equipment will be 
available when needed? Is it possible that there will be no change orders extending the 
time required for any phase of the work the group is committed to complete? In reality, 
the probability that any of the above conditions will be met is, as mathematicians are 
wont to say, vanishingly small. But even if they were met, what about that large bulge of 
work required in March and April?
For many years, the study of Operations Management has included the subject of 
“line balancing.” (See Meredith and Shafer, 2016, pp 72 ff.) The purpose of line bal‑
ancing is to construct a manufacturing production line such that the individual pro‑
duction units on the line can generate the required amount of product with as little 
excess capacity as possible. Minimizing excess capacity in the elements of a production 
line is one test of production line efficiency. This concept, when applied to the 
resources used by projects—as it often is—is a precursor to disaster. Even in production 
lines, some excess capacity is required to deal with minor problems and variations that 
arise during the production process. In projects, the level of uncertainty surrounding 
the “production process” is so much greater that the amount of excess capacity in the 
work force needs to be much larger. If this flies in the face of managerial instinct, it is 
because that instinct is sometimes in error. We will revisit this problem in the follow‑
ing section.
The result of the situation displayed in Figure 6‑14 is that all the projects to which 
this team of engineers is devoted are going to be late and over budget unless some drastic 
steps are taken to prevent it. The firm in question is known for high‐quality work, and it 
is assumed that the projects will be completed more or less on time with a reasonable 
percent of the promised specifications in place and working. How this comes about is 
quite simple. Engineers in this firm are scheduled to work a 40‐hour week. They do not, 
however, work 40‐hour weeks. They average between 50 and 60 hours per week. At a 
55‐hour week, for example, the capacity of the group is approximately 37,500 labor 
hours. Given the 28,282 labor‐hour workload, the system would operate, on average, at 
about 75 percent of capacity—which explains the engineering group’s ability to meet 
most of its delivery‐date commitments.
Most project management software will, when asked politely, level out the loads 
(usage) for individual resources and warn the PM when a resource is scheduled for 
greater‐than‐capacity workloads. Whenever possible, the leveling will utilize any 
available activity slack rather than extend the duration of the project. When a 
resource is assigned to an activity, it is assigned for 100 percent of its availability 
unless the PM specifies otherwise.
It is often necessary to have significant excess resource capacity on projects 
because of the uncertainty that exists in all projects. Dealing with this issue is a major 
reason for the installation of a competent risk‐management system.
Risk

6.4 ALLOCATING SCARCE RESOURCES TO PROJECTS
•  211
	 6.4	
ALLOCATING SCARCE RESOURCES TO PROJECTS
When we leveled resources in the case of the overworked scriptwriter, MSP simply used 
the available activity slack to reschedule WBS item 3.2 (see Figure 6‑13). The project 
completion date was not altered because the WBS 3.2’s slack was large enough to swal‑
low the added time. Often, that is not possible and the software needs instruction about 
what priority to use when allocating scarce resources to several tasks—which tasks should 
get the resources immediately and go first, and which may be delayed. In order to select 
a suitable method for assigning priorities, we need to understand how the problem 
is solved.
Most solutions start with the PERT/CPM schedule. Given this initial solution, each 
activity is examined period by period and resource by resource. If the demand for a 
resource exceeds its supply, the software considers the tasks one by one and assigns 
resources to the tasks according to some priority rule chosen by the PM. Tasks that 
receive resources under this rule proceed as originally scheduled. Tasks that do not 
get resources are delayed until ongoing tasks are completed and the required resources 
are freed‐up for use. If this increases the project duration, the change will be visible on 
the project’s Gantt chart or network as it was when the videotape project client was not 
available while on vacation. (See Figures 6‑7, 6‑8, and 6‑13.) No matter what priority 
rule is used, the project’s technology always takes precedence.
Some Comments about Constrained Resources
Every time a project falls behind schedule, the PM is apt to plead for more resources. In 
spite of the PM’s complaints about the scarcity of resources, serious cases of resource scar‑
city rarely apply to resources in general, but rather to one or two very specific resources. 
We call such resources “Walts.” The term was derived from the name of an individual, 
Walter A., who is employed by a large insurance company. Walt is a specialist in the rules 
and laws affecting insurance policies for certain types of casualty losses in the firm’s com‑
mercial lines of business. He has an excellent analytical mind and many years of experi‑
ence. His knowledge is required when designing new policies in this area of risk. The firm 
has only one Walt, and while the firm is training others, such training takes years. Walt is 
a true scarce resource. Projects requiring Walt’s input are scheduled around his availability.
There are many other examples. Military combat missions may be scheduled around 
the availability of attack aircraft. Construction projects may be scheduled around the 
availability of a large crane. A Broadway opening may be scheduled around the availabil‑
ity of a star actress. The key problem to be solved is deciding which activities get the 
scarce resource and in what order.
Some Priority Rules
There are many possible rules for assigning preference to some activities over others 
when allocating scarce resources. Most popular project management software packages 
have a limited number of rules that can be automatically applied to level overallocated 
resources so many of the priority rules for assigning scarce resources to activities may 
have to be applied manually. Fortunately, as we will see, this is not as difficult as it might 
seem. Several of the most commonly used rules are as follows:
As soon as possible—This is the standard rule in scheduling. Activities are sched‑
uled to start on their earliest start times (ES), and resources are made available with 
that in mind.

212  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
As late as possible—With this rule, resources are made available so that activities 
start on their latest start times (LS) whenever possible without increasing the project’s 
duration. This may seem irrational, but it preserves the firm’s resources and delays cash 
outflows as long as possible. This rule is also compatible with Eliyahu Goldratt’s conten‑
tion that the “student syndrome” leads workers to delay starting an activity until the last 
possible moment (Goldratt, 1997, Ch. 13).
Shortest task duration first—Always consistent with technological precedences, 
shorter tasks are given priority over longer tasks. This rule maximizes the number of tasks 
that can be completed by a system in a given time period.
Minimum slack first—Tasks are supplied with resources in inverse order of their 
slacks. This rule usually minimizes the number of late activities.
Most critical followers—The number of successors on the critical path(s) for each 
activity is counted. Activities with a higher number of critical successors take prece‑
dence. The rationale here is that such activities would cause the greatest damage to the 
desired project schedule if they are late.
Most successors—The same as the previous rule except that all successors are 
counted. This rule has the same rationale as the preceding rule.
Most resources first—With this rule, the greater the use of a specific resource on a 
task, the higher the task’s priority for the resource. This rule is based on the assumption 
that more important activities have a greater demand for scarce resources.
In addition to these rules, there are many others. For example, it may be company 
policy to put favored customers’ projects at the head of the resource line—or to reserve 
special resources for such clients by withholding them from the available supply. The 
same type of favoritism is sometimes shown to specific projects of high value to the par‑
ent firm. (Some firms show favoritism to specific high‐value activities, but this rule makes 
little sense because all activities of an individual project must be completed to finish the 
project.) Application of a value measure for allocating scarce resources across several 
projects is both rational and common.
There are many other priority rules that might be used, but most project manage‑
ment software packages recognize only a few; however, assigning scarce resources manu‑
ally is not difficult. From our earlier example, recall Figure 6‑9, in which all tasks requiring 
the scriptwriter were listed alone on a Gantt chart showing the task duration, scheduled 
start, scheduled finish, activity slack, and other needed information. The scheduled start 
dates would allow us to apply either the early or late start rules. Information on activity 
slack allows us to use the minimum slack rule. Task duration is the necessary input to 
apply the Shortest Task Duration rule. The project network, Gantt chart, and the task 
list all allow a simple count of followers, critical or not. MSP and most other project 
management software allow verbal or numeric priorities to be assigned easily. This allows 
the use of any priority system required.
Considerable research has been done on these rules* and the minimum slack rule is 
usually best or second best. It rarely performs poorly. If a high‐slack task is not given 
resources in one period, its slack is automatically decreased and in the next period it has 
a better chance of receiving resources. The resource allocation is repeated periodically 
(hourly, daily, weekly, or monthly, etc.), depending on the time frame of the project’s 
activities. If a task becomes critical, that is, all the slack is used up before the activity 
receives resources, the project will be delayed. We will consider borrowing resources 
from ongoing tasks when we discuss the allocation of scarce resources among sev‑
eral projects.
* Kurtulus and Davis (1982) and Kurtulus and Narula (1985) in two excellent research papers extended the 
earlier work of Fendley. They tested many more priority rules than can be covered here.

6.5 ALLOCATING SCARCE RESOURCES TO SEVERAL PROJECTS
•  213
	 6.5	
ALLOCATING SCARCE RESOURCES TO SEVERAL PROJECTS
When the problem of allocating scarce resources is extended to the case when several 
projects are being carried out concurrently, the size and complexity of the problem 
increase but the nature of the underlying problem remains the same. The projects might 
be independent or members of one large superproject. In any case, there is a decided 
advantage if several projects are joined as a set.
Consider a single project for a moment. It is composed of a set of first‐level tasks 
connected in a technological relationship of predecessors and successors. Each first‐level 
task is composed of a set of second‐level tasks, also arranged in technologically deter‑
mined ways. The second‐level tasks are divided into third‐level tasks, and so on, much 
like the fleas in Jonathon Swift’s famous verse:
So, naturalists observe, a flea
Hath smaller fleas that on him prey;
And these have smaller still to bite ’em;
And so proceed ad infinitum.
If we take several projects, we can link them together with pseudoactivities, here 
defined as activities that have duration but do not require any resources. The set of pro‑
jects linked in such a way becomes a sort of superproject and can be “managed” like any 
other. We can use the pseudoactivities to establish precedences between the projects 
they connect, and thus we can separate the projects in time. This is simplest to illustrate 
as an AOA network (see Figure 6‑15), but a Gantt chart could be used by displaying the 
projects with leads and lags. Each node in Figure 6‑15 represents a project, and the arrows 
connecting them are pseudoactivities. The temporal relationships of the projects are 
altered by varying the duration of the pseudoactivities.
When a resource is overallocated, MSP can level resource usage by adopting a variety 
of priority rules, including available activity slack. If there is insufficient slack, other 
priority rules may be used to allocate the scarce resource. Most of the priority rules 
originated as job shop scheduling rules. The minimum slack rule usually works best. 
Only a few critical resources are actually scarce in the sense that project schedules 
must be adjusted to resource availability.
S
t
a
r
t
A
D
E
C
B
Months
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
F
G
Figure 6-15  Multiple 
projects connected with 
pseudoactivities shown on 
a time line.

214  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
The individual projects are interrelated by specifying predecessor/successor relation‑
ships in MSP. Thus they appear (to MSP) to be parts of one project. If the original pro‑
ject calendars are put on the same time base (exactly as we did with individual activities 
when scarce resources were allocated among several activities in a single project), we can 
use the single‐project resource‐allocation methods for several projects at a time. (MSP’s 
ability to handle projects with a very large number of activities on multiple levels is not 
limited by the software but by the size of the computer’s memory.) MSP can also easily 
link many large projects, treated as separate and independent, but they share the same set 
of resources. The pseudoactivities may represent technological relationships among the 
projects—which will often be the case when individual projects are parts of an overall 
program. Pseudoactivities may separate projects according to planned delivery dates, or 
the separations may be completely arbitrary.
Putting a set of projects into a format that deals with them as a single project allows 
us to use MSP’s resource loading and leveling charts and tables. Remembering that the 
calendars of all projects should be adjusted to the same time base, we can examine the 
status of resource allocation—or overallocation—for all activities in all projects over any 
time period. By using the leveling routines, we can also examine the consequences of 
adopting different resource allocation priority rules. Further, we can examine the impli‑
cations of adding more resources by comparing the costs of additional resources with the 
costs that might accrue from late deliveries or delays if the resources are not added. The 
assignment and handling of various priority rules are, of course, the same as in the single 
project case. The number of cases to be investigated will be larger in the multiproject 
case, but few genuine Walts are involved. Extending or contracting the pseudoactivities 
is the mechanism by which we change the start or finish dates of projects in order to 
avoid overallocation of Walts.
Criteria of Priority Rules
Whatever the priority rule, the PM faces the problem of choosing between the alterna‑
tive outcomes that result from different priority rules, as well as different arrangements 
and durations of the pseudoactivities. There are many measurable criteria available to 
help us choose a priority rule. The most useful for projects are schedule slippage, resource 
utilization, and in‐process inventory.
Schedule slippage simply measures the amount by which a project, or a set of pro‑
jects, is delayed by application of a leveling rule (or by extending a pseudoactivity so that 
a project finishes later because it starts later). As we noted above, the PM (and senior 
management) must trade off penalty costs or the possible displeasure of clients against 
the cost of adding resources, if that is possible, or by reducing the overallocation of Walts. 
Just as serious is the ripple effect that often occurs when a delay in one project causes a 
delay in others. Indeed, expediting one project typically causes disturbances in the sched‑
ules of others.
The shortest‐task‐first rule for assigning resources minimizes the level of in‐process 
inventory or how much unfinished work is in the system. Clients have little desire to pay 
for things they have not yet received—though partial prepayment is sometimes arranged 
by contract—and the organization carrying out projects may have large quantities of 
human and material resources invested in projects that have little value until they 
are complete.
The minimum slack rule is probably the best overall priority rule according to 
research on the subject. It gives the best combination of minimum project slippage, mini‑
mum resource idle‐time, and minimum in‐process inventory (Fendley,  1968). While 
first‐come‐first‐served may be the client’s idea of “fair,” it is a poor priority rule when 
Trade-Offs
Best Practice

6.5 ALLOCATING SCARCE RESOURCES TO SEVERAL PROJECTS
•  215
measured against almost any of the others. If the minimum slack rule produces ties among 
two or more projects (or activities), the shortest task rule seems to be the best 
tie‐breaker.
The Basic Approach
It is now appropriate to stop for a moment and consider a matter. The basic approach 
taken here to solve project loading and leveling problems is borrowed from a manufactur‑
ing model that has widespread application and works equally well for projects. Our prob‑
lem is that there exists a set of activities belonging to one or more projects all eager for 
processing by a limited set of facilities or other resources. Not all activities require the 
same subset of facilities or resources, and some activities are more in need of immediate 
attention than others. To make matters worse, some activities need more work than oth‑
ers, and some insist (for technological reasons, of course, rather than natural cussedness) 
on being dealt with before some others.
As if this were not enough, the activities do not have access to the facility or resources 
at precise, predetermined times so the PM or facility manager does not know—with any 
great precision—when to expect specific activities to be ready for processing. Finally, 
even when an activity does arrive, and when the facility is ready to begin, there may still 
be considerable uncertainty about exactly how much time it requires to do the process‑
ing. Remember that we are discussing the unfinished outputs of some projects. They have 
completed a previous activity and are now waiting for resources to engage in the next 
activity for which they are scheduled. All of these activities involve the use of a scarce 
resource (or two) that we must allocate to the waiting activities.
In this setting, a scarce facility (resource) is like a bottleneck. A line or queue of 
activities waiting to be processed forms in front of the processor. Assume that jobs arriv‑
ing to join the queue arrive randomly at an average or expected rate of λ jobs per unit of 
time. Also assume that the time required for the processor to service the activities is 
random and has an average or expected rate of μ jobs per unit of time. The behavior of 
queues has been studied for many years and under our assumptions, not unreasonable for 
the constrained resource, multiproject problem, the average number of jobs in the wait‑
ing line is given by J = (λ/μ)/(1 − λ/μ). Note what happens when the arrival rate of tasks 
approaches the system’s capacity, for example λ approaches. μ. J, the number of jobs in 
the queue, heads toward infinity. This supports our earlier contention that production or 
servicing systems must have excess capacity unless they are tightly controlled assembly‐
line type operations—and even these need a small amount of excess capacity to handle 
the normal, small variations in arrival or service rates.
Resource Allocation and the Project Life Cycle
Whatever the scheduling rule, the scheduling method assigns scarce resources to activi‑
ties on the basis of the degree to which the activity meets some priority conditions. Once 
the most urgent cases (as measured by the priority rule) have been given resources, the 
next most urgent cases receive their resources. The process continues until there are no 
more activities qualified under the rule.
If all critical activities demanding scarce resources are supplied, but the remaining 
stock of scarce resources is depleted before all noncritical activities are resource loaded, 
the less urgent activities go unsupplied. When this happens, the less urgent activities 
become more urgent as period after period passes until they rise far enough up the priority 
rank list and receive their resources. But what happens if the stock of scarce resources is 
depleted before all the critical activities receive resources? For example, when using the 
Best Practice

216  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
minimum slack rule, what happens if we run out of our scarce resource before we run out 
of critical (zero slack) activities?
When this condition occurs, it is often possible to borrow some resources from 
another (ongoing) activity that is lower on the priority list, that is, has some slack in the 
case of the minimum slack rule. Perhaps we could even deschedule such an activity and 
take all the scarce resource being used, restoring the scarce resource later when the 
descheduled activity has risen higher on the priority list. The decision about whether to 
borrow some resources from a high‐slack ongoing task or whether to stop the task and use 
all its resources is made by looking at the implication of either action on the project. 
Borrowing the scarce resource may only slow down progress on an activity or it may stop 
the activity altogether. If borrowing does the latter, it would make sense to borrow all 
other resources at the same time.
We can also use our knowledge of the project’s life cycle to help make the decision. 
Figure  6‑16 shows both types of project life cycle that were discussed in Chapter  1, 
Section 1.4. The Type 1 life cycle shows decreasing returns to additional resources toward 
the end of the project. If we borrow from or deschedule activities late in the life of a Type 
1 project, we lose proportionately little from the project. If we borrow from or deschedule 
activities late in the life of a Type 2 project, we may destroy it completely. On the other 
hand, if the borrowing or descheduling is done near the middle of the life of the project, 
our conclusion might be exactly the opposite. We need to understand the general shape 
of the project’s life cycle curve in order to assess the implications of slowing or stopping it.
	 6.6	
GOLDRATT’S CRITICAL CHAIN
Much research has been done on scheduling with constrained resources, and the findings 
verify what was expected—projects are completed faster when there are fewer of them 
struggling for attention from a limited set of facilities (Adler, Mandelbaum, Nguyen, and 
Schwerer,  1996). More recently, in the book Critical Chain (1997) Eliyahu Goldratt 
Allocating scarce resources among multiple projects is more complicated than 
the ­single project case, but is not different in its basic logic. The several projects are 
linked with pseudoactivities and treated as if they were the individual activities of a 
single project. Schedule slippage, resource utilization, and in‐process inventory are 
measures of the goodness of any priority rule.
Much of the allocation problem results because project facilities/resources have 
insufficient excess capacity to handle the uncertainties associated with projects. The 
shape of the project’s life cycle helps determine whether or not resources can be bor‑
rowed from ongoing activities to supply stalled activities with critical resource needs.
Time/Resource
Type 2
Type 1
100
Percent completion
Figure 6-16  Project 
or task life cycles.

6.6 GOLDRATT’S CRITICAL CHAIN
•  217
applies his Theory of Constraints—so brilliantly developed in his famous book, The Goal 
(Goldratt and Cox, 1992)—to the constrained resource problem. While Goldratt’s focus 
in the Critical Chain is on a single project with multiple demands on a scarce resource, 
the logic extends to the multiproject case without alteration. PMBOK covers the critical 
chain in Chapter 6 on Project Time Management.
In the following few pages you will note that the exposition focuses mainly on sched‑
uling. But isn’t this chapter supposed to be about resource usage? It should be quite clear 
by now that resource usage and project schedules are inextricably bound together. The 
technological necessities that force schedules to be ordered in very specific ways simulta‑
neously force resources to be used in very specific ways. To schedule work is also to sched‑
ule resource usage. If technology is the prime force behind scheduling the activities of a 
project, resource availability constrains all solutions to the scheduling problem.
To begin our discussion of Goldratt’s approach, imagine for the moment that you are 
sitting in a room full of people with extensive experience as both project team members 
and project managers. Now imagine the responses you would hear if the group were asked 
the question: “What things bugged you most about the projects you have been involved 
with?” Typical of the responses that we have gotten to that question are:
• Project due dates are too often unrealistic.
• There are too many changes made in the project’s scope.
• Key resources and data are often unavailable when needed.
• The budget is frequently unrealistic and therefore often exceeded.
• It seems like my project is always in competition for resources with other projects.
One interesting observation is that these same issues are raised regardless of the 
organizational context. Thus we hear strikingly similar complaints regardless of whether 
the group is referring to a construction project, a software development project, a project 
to develop an advertising campaign, or an R&D project. Hussain and Wearne (2005) 
asked more than 1000 project managers to identify the “greatest problem of project man‑
agement,” a subtly different question than we asked, and they found that project “organi‑
zation,” “resource,” and “time” issues were paramount. (“Change in scope was ranked 
11th in their research.) Based on these findings, it is not farfetched to conclude that the 
causes of these problems are generic to all types of projects. As we have discussed through‑
out this book, one of the primary roles of the PM is effectively trading off scope, cost, and 
time. Referring back to the lists of complaints, it can be seen that each issue (excepting 
“organization”) deals with one or more of the three primary project objectives.
Given our conclusion that the problems encountered when managing projects are 
strongly related to the need to trade off one project objective for another, a natural ques‑
tion arises about the extent to which the need to make these trade‐offs are caused by 
human decisions and practices. In other words, can more effective project management 
minimize the occurrence of these problems? To investigate this issue, let’s examine the 
complaint regarding unrealistic due dates in more detail.
One way to investigate this issue is to see if we can identify any generally accepted 
practices that would tend to cause the shared perception of many project workers that 
project due dates are often set too optimistically. To make our discussion more concrete, 
consider the three AOA network diagrams shown in Figure 6‑17. The primary difference 
between the three diagrams is the degree of interdependence across the paths. In sce‑
nario 1, there is only a single path. In scenario 2, the path B‐C‐D‐E is preceded by three 
activities: A1, A2, and A3. Therefore, the completion of path B‐C‐D‐E depends on 
which of its three preceding tasks takes the longest. In scenario 3 there are two com‑
pletely independent paths each consisting of five tasks.
PMBOK Guide
Trade-Offs

218  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
Assume that as project manager you are told that all of the tasks in the three network 
diagrams require 10 days to complete. What completion time would you calculate for 
each project? If you assume that the activity times are known with certainty, then all 
three projects would have the same duration of 50 days. If you find this result somewhat 
unsettling, you are in good company. Thinking about it intuitively, how can a simple 
project like scenario 1 with a single path and only five activities have the same duration 
as scenario 2 with three paths and seven activities, or with scenario 3 with two paths and 
ten activities?
Part of the problem is our assumption that the activity times are known with cer‑
tainty. To investigate this further, let’s assume that all activity times are normally distrib‑
uted with a mean of 10 days and standard deviation of three. The results of simulating 
the completion of the three projects 200 times each are summarized in Table 6‑5.
As you can see from Table 6‑5, removing the assumption that the activity times are 
known with certainty leads to quite different results. Scenario 1’s average duration was 
slightly higher than the 50 we calculated earlier under the assumption of deterministic 
time estimates. To a large extent with this linear structure and with our assumption of 
normally distributed activity times, activities that take less than the expected time tend 
to cancel out the variability of activities that take more than the expected time, resulting 
in an overall average completion time that is close to the expected completion time for 
A
A1
A3
(Scenario 2)
(Scenario 3)
(Scenario 1)
B
C
D
E
A2
B
C
D
E
A1
A2
A3
A4
B1
B2
B3
B4
A5
B5
Figure 6-17  Three project scenarios.
Table 6-5  Project Completion Time Statistics Based 
on Simulating Three Projects 200 Times
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
Average
50.4
51.9
53.4
Std. Dev.
  7.1
  6.3
  5.3
Max.
69.4
72.7
69.3
Min.
30.1
36.1
39.3
Median
50.0
51.8
53.1

the project. (Remember, in Chapter  5 we discovered that this canceling out rarely 
­happens in the real world, because activities may start late or on time, but rarely start 
early because resources are usually not available before the activity’s earliest start time.) 
Also observe that the more interdependent scenarios 2 and 3, on average, take even 
longer than scenario 1 and that their minimum times are significantly longer than sce‑
nario 1’s minimum time.
Most important, note that while the average completion times of the projects 
are still close to 50, this is simply the average project completion time after simulat‑
ing the execution of each project 200 times. That is, approximately 50 percent of 
the time the projects will be completed in less than 50 days and 50 percent of the 
time the projects will be completed in more than 50 days under the reasonable 
assumption that the distribution of project completion times follows a symmetrical 
distribution. (Note that here we are referring to the distribution of project comple‑
tion times as being symmetrical, not the project activity times.) In other words, had 
we determined the project duration based on the assumption that the activity times 
are known with certainty (when they were actually probabilistic), we would incur a 
greater than 50 percent chance that the actual project duration would exceed this 
estimate. How would you like to have responsibility for a project that has less than 
a 50 percent chance of being completed on time? This example clearly demonstrates 
how the commonly made assumption of known activity times in practice can lead to quite 
unrealistic project deadlines.
It is important to point out that the results would have been even more dramatic had 
the activities required some common resources. Similarly, the results would have been 
more dramatic and realistic had a nonsymmetrical distribution been used to model the 
activity times. Why, you might ask, would a nonsymmetrical distribution more realisti‑
cally model the activity times? Suppose you scheduled a status meeting to last 20 min‑
utes. Is there any chance the meeting will last 40 minutes longer than expected, or 60 
minutes? What about 40 minutes less, or −20 minutes?
Estimating Task Times
Based on the discussion to this point and assuming that project workers have a general 
desire to be recognized for good performance, what do you imagine project workers do 
when they are asked to provide time estimates for tasks if they will be held responsible for 
actual task duration? Do you think they give an estimate that they believe provides them 
with only a 50 percent chance of being met? Or, more likely, do you imagine they inflate 
or pad their estimate to increase the likelihood of successfully completing the task on 
time? What would you do?
If you are like most people, you would inflate your time estimate. Unfortunately, 
inflated time estimates tend to create even more problems. First, inflating the time esti‑
mate has no impact on the actual probability distribution of completing the activity. 
Second, what do you imagine happens in cases when a project team member finishes 
early? All too often, the team member believes that it is in his or her best interest to 
remain silent about completing activities in less than the allotted time so that future 
time estimates are not automatically discounted by management based on a track record 
of early task completions. Moreover, there are sometimes penalties or additional costs 
associated with early completion, such as the need to store partially finished materials 
because the resources required for the next activity are not yet available. Third, just as 
things tend to fill available closet and storage space in your home, work tends to fill 
available time. Thus, the work done on the task may be expanded to fill the available 
time, as Parkinson’s Law dictates.
6.6 GOLDRATT’S CRITICAL CHAIN
•  219

220  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
Perhaps even more dangerous than the inflated estimate becoming a self‐fulfilling 
prophecy is that, after receiving approval for a task based on an inflated time estimate, work‑
ers may perceive that they now have plenty of time to complete the task and therefore delay 
starting the task. As we noted in Chapter 5, Goldratt (1997) refers to this as the student syn-
drome, likening it to the way students often delay writing a term paper until the last minute. 
The problem of delaying the start of a task is that obstacles are frequently not discovered 
until the task has been underway for some time. By delaying the start of the task, the oppor‑
tunity to cope with these obstacles and complete the task on time is greatly diminished.
In summary, we observe that the common practice of simply adding up task durations 
often leads to unrealistic project due dates. This is primarily the result of assuming the 
task times are known with certainty, and that we ignore path mergers and assume that 
the paths are independent. A natural consequence of this is that project team members 
will tend to inflate their time estimates. Inflated time estimates further compound the 
problem, particularly in cases where the student syndrome comes into play. In other 
words, this system tends to cause unethical behavior.
In our discussion we used computer simulation to investigate the impact that increasing 
interdependencies in a project network has on the distribution of project completion times. 
Crystal Ball® can also be used to investigate a variety of issues related to resource allocation. 
To illustrate this, let’s investigate the impact of not reporting early completion times.
The Effect of Not Reporting Early Activity Completion
Once again, refer to Table 5‑6 and consider the project described, solved, and then simu‑
lated in Chapter 5. When simulating this problem, we suggested that you should save the 
spreadsheet you created because we intended to use this problem in Chapter 6. We used 
BetaPERT distributions to reflect the uncertainty in activity duration times. The same 
distributions can be used, but in order to reflect Goldratt’s contention (and ours) that 
early completion times go unreported (and even if they were reported, the appropriate 
resources would probably not be available because managers avoid gathering resources 
until the last moment), we can truncate the distributions so that the lower bound is equal 
to the most likely time estimate. In effect, this means that no time below the most likely 
time can be reported. The required changes are easily made.
1.	 Open the spreadsheet for the simulation you performed for the project shown in 
Table 5‑6.
2.	 Click on cell A3. Then click on Define Assumption in the CB ribbon.
3.	 The BetaPERT distribution you used for the prior simulation will appear. In the box 
above the Minimum box, type in the most likely time for the activity—10 days for 
activity a as shown in Figure 6‑18. Then click on OK.
4.	 Proceed to alter each of the activities b‐h (excepting d, which is a constant) similarly.
5.	 Simulate the project 1,000 times.
Figure 6‑19 shows the statistical results of the simulation. A comparison of this figure 
with Table 5‐7 clearly shows the impact of a failure to report early activity finishes. The 
mean completion time is increased by approximately 2.5 percent. The time for comple‑
tion with a 95 percent probability (z = 1.645) increases by 4.6 percent.
The main lesson to be learned is that single point estimates of activity duration are 
not adequate for planning real‐world projects. For a number of reasons discussed above, 
the earlys and lates do not cancel out. The most likely time is, therefore, not a satisfac‑
tory substitute for a three‐time estimate of activity duration.

Multitasking
Up to this point, our perspective has been a single project. We now investigate another 
problem created by conventional practice—the practice of assigning people concur‑
rently to multiple projects.
Figure 6-18  Truncated BetaPERT distribution for activity a reflecting the assumption that early completion 
times are not reported.
Figure 6-19  Summary 
statistics for project 
completion times when 
early activity completion 
times are not reported.
6.6 GOLDRATT’S CRITICAL CHAIN
•  221

222  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
When project team members are assigned to multiple projects, they have to allocate 
their time across these projects or multitask. Multitasking involves switching from a task 
associated with one project to another task associated with a different project. To illus‑
trate this, consider the two small projects shown in Figure 6‑20. The completion of each 
of the projects’ three tasks requires you and one additional resource. Further, the comple‑
tion of each task requires 5 days.
In Figures 6‑21(a) and 6‑21(b), Gantt charts have been developed for two alterna‑
tive ways of completing the tasks. In Gantt chart 6‑21(a), you switch between projects 
after each task is completed, while in Gantt chart 6‑21(b) you complete all of your 
assigned tasks for Project A before beginning any work on Project B. In both of these 
cases the two projects are finished in 25 days; therefore, aren’t both sequences equally 
desirable? The answer is absolutely not. First, while it is true that in both cases Project B 
is finished by time 25, in the first sequence Project A finishes in 20 days, while in the 
second sequence Project A finishes 5 days earlier. Therefore, the sequence shown in the 
second Gantt chart is preferable because it results in Project A finishing 5 days earlier 
with no penalty to Project B.
Even more important, our analysis overlooks another significant factor. Specifically, 
there is typically a penalty or cost associated with switching from working on one project 
to another. In your own experience as a student, is it more efficient to complete the assign‑
ment for one course and then move on to another course or is it more efficient to complete 
one project management homework problem, then move on to an accounting problem, 
then on to a statistics problem, then back to a project management problem, and so on? 
Obviously each time you switch to a different course you have to retrieve the appropriate 
textbook, find the right page, recall where you left off, and (perhaps most significantly) get 
into the proper frame of mind. As this example demonstrates, switching attention from 
project to project is likely to extend activity times. Eliminating such switching costs further 
increases the benefits associated with the Gantt chart shown in Figure 6‑21(b).
Project A
You
Other resources
Project B
A–3
A–1
A–2
B–1
B–2
B–3
Figure 6-20  Two 
small projects.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Days
Project A
Project B
A–1
A–2
A–3
B–1
B–2
B–3
(a)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Days
Project A
Project B
A–1
A–2
A–3
B–1
B–2
B–3
(b)
Figure 6-21  Alternative 
Gantt charts for 
­projects A and B.

Common Chain of Events
According to Goldratt, the activities discussed above lead to the following chain 
of events:
1.	 Assuming that activity times are known and that the paths are independent leads to 
underestimating the actual amount of time needed to complete the project.
2.	 Because the time needed to complete the project is underestimated, project team 
members tend to inflate their time estimates.
3.	 Inflated time estimates lead to work filling available time, workers not reporting that 
a task has been completed early, and the ever‐present student syndrome.
4.	 An important caveat then becomes that safety time is not usually visible to project 
workers and is often misused.
5.	 Misused safety time results in missed deadlines and milestones.
6.	 Hidden safety time further complicates the task of prioritizing project activities.
7.	 The lack of clear priorities likely results in poor multitasking.
8.	 Task durations increase as a result of poor multitasking.
9.	 Uneven demand on resources—some overloaded and others underloaded—may also 
occur as a result of poor multitasking.
10.	 In an effort to utilize all resources fully, more projects will be undertaken to make 
sure that no resources are underutilized. (Recall the impact of this policy from our 
discussion of waiting lines in Section 6.5.)
11.	 Adding more projects further increases poor multitasking.
According to Goldratt, this chain of events leads to a vicious cycle. Specifically, as 
work continues to pile up, team members are pressured to do more poor multitasking. 
Increasing the amount of poor multitasking leads to longer activity times. Longer activity 
times lead to longer project completion times, which ultimately lead to more projects in 
the waiting line.
It might have occurred to you that one way to reverse this cycle would be to add 
more resources. According to Goldratt, however, the appropriate response is to reduce 
the number of projects assigned to each person in an effort to reduce the amount of bad 
multitasking. Incidentally, a simple way to measure the amount of bad multitasking is to 
calculate the difference between the time required to do the work for a task and the 
elapsed time actually required to complete the task.
Determining when to release projects into the system is the primary mechanism for 
ensuring that the right amount of work is assigned to each person. If projects are started 
too early, they simply add to the chaos and contribute to poor multitasking. On the other 
hand, if projects are started too late, key resources may go underutilized and projects will 
be inevitably delayed.
Consistent with his Theory of Constraints, Goldratt suggests that the key to resolv‑
ing this trade‐off is to schedule the start of new projects based on the availability of bot‑
tleneck resources or Walts. Goldratt further suggests that time buffers be created between 
resources that feed bottleneck resources and the bottleneck resources.
While properly scheduling the start of new projects does much to address the prob‑
lems associated with poor multitasking, it does little to address the problem of setting 
unrealistic project deadlines and the accompanying response of inflated time estimates. 
Relying on elementary statistics, it can be easily shown that the amount of safety time 
Trade-Offs
6.6 GOLDRATT’S CRITICAL CHAIN
•  223

224  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
needed to protect a particular path is less than the sum of the safety times required to 
protect the individual activities making up the path. The same approach is commonly 
used in inventory management where it can be shown that less safety stock is needed at 
a central warehouse to provide a certain service level than the amount of safety stock 
that would be required to provide this same service level if carried at multiple distributed 
locations.
Based on this intuition, Goldratt suggests reducing the amount of safety time added 
to individual tasks and then adding some fraction of the safety time reduced back into 
the system as safety buffer for the entire project, called the project buffer. The amount of 
time each task is reduced depends on how much of a reduction is needed to get project 
team members to change their behavior. For example, the allotted time for tasks should 
be reduced to the point that the student syndrome is eliminated. Indeed, Goldratt sug‑
gests using activity durations where in fact there is a high probability that the task will 
not be finished on time.
The Critical Chain
Another limitation associated with traditional approaches to project management is that 
the dependency between resources and tasks is often ignored. To illustrate this, consider 
the network diagram shown in Figure 6-22. According to the figure, the activities ema‑
nating from node 1 require resource A, while the activities emanating from nodes 2 and 
3 require resources C and B, respectively. Using traditional approaches to project man‑
agement, two paths would be identified: A1‐C1 with a duration of 17 days and A2‐B1 
with a duration of 11 days. Taking this approach a step further we would conclude that 
path A1‐C1 is the critical path.
The problem with this logic is that activities A1 and A2 are not truly independent 
as the diagram would seem to indicate since their completion requires the same resource. 
Based on this new insight, we see that if resource A completes activity A1 first, thereby 
delaying the start of A2 for 7 days, then path A1‐C1’s duration remains 17 days while 
path A2‐B1’s duration increases from 11 to 18 days. Likewise, if resource A completes 
activity A2 first, then path A1‐C1’s duration increases from 17 to 22 days while path 
A2‐B1’s duration remains 11 days. (This is precisely what was considered when we 
examined the process of resource leveling.)
To address the need to consider both precedence relationships and resource 
­dependencies, Goldratt proposes thinking in terms of the longest chain of consecutively 
dependent tasks where such dependencies can arise from a variety of sources including 
precedence relationships among the tasks and resource dependencies. Goldratt coined 
the term critical chain to refer to the longest chain of consecutively dependent activities.
Based on this definition of the critical chain, there are two potential sources that can 
delay the completion of a project. One source of delay is in the tasks that make up the 
critical chain. The project buffer discussed earlier is used to protect against these delays 
(see Figure 6‑23). The second source of delay is in the tasks external to the critical chain. 
These tasks can also delay the completion of the project if delays in these “feeder” paths 
end up delaying one or more of the tasks on the critical chain. As shown in Figure 6‑23, 
A1 (7)
A2 (5)
C1 (10)
B1 (6)
3
2
1
4
Figure 6-22  Sample 
network diagram.

safety time can be added to these paths as well to ensure that they do not delay tasks on 
the critical chain. The safety time added to chains other than the critical chain is called 
a feeding buffer since these paths often feed into or merge with the critical chain. Thus, 
the objective of feeding buffers is to ensure that noncritical chains are completed so that 
they do not delay tasks on the critical chain.
Clearly, activities on the critical chain should be given the highest priority. Like 
wise, to ensure that resources are available when needed, they should be contracted at 
the start of the project. It is also wise to keep these resources updated on the status of the 
project and to remind them periodically of when their input will be needed. Goldratt 
suggests reminding these resources 2 weeks before the start of their work, then 3 days 
prior to their start, and finally the day before they start. Since any delay of an activity on 
the critical chain can cause a delay of the entire project, it is important that a resource 
immediately switch to the task on the critical chain when needed.
The last three chapters on budgeting, scheduling, and allocating resources are the 
outcome of the planning process we described in Chapter  3. These subjects, taken 
together, are a description of what to do. Now we turn to two allied subjects: how to 
report what is going on and how to control it.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Given the fact that a project’s resource requirements 
are clearly spelled out in the project plan, why are 
PMs so concerned with resource allocation?
	 2.	 Explain the difference between a project that has a 
fixed delivery day and one that has a fixed limit on 
resource usage. Why might a PM be interested in this 
difference?
	 3.	 What does it mean to “fast‐track” a project?
	 4.	 List as many things as you can think of that should be 
entered into a specific resource’s calendar.
	 5.	 Explain why project‐oriented firms require excess 
resource capacity.
	 6.	 The arrival and departure times of commercial air‑
craft are carefully scheduled. Why, then, is it so 
Critical chain
Project buffer
Feeding buffer
Figure 6-23  Project 
and feeder buffers.
The critical chain concept identifies the facts that activity times are unknown and 
independent, that workers will inflate their time estimates to protect themselves, 
early completion tasks will not be reported, the work will expand to fill the time, tasks 
will not be started until the last minute, multitasking will be misapplied, resource 
demands will be uneven and result in task delays, and more projects and tasks will 
be undertaken to increase resource utilization. All these contribute to project delays 
and inefficiencies. To correct these problems, feeder time buffers are cut severely to 
change behavior, a project buffer is added at the end of a project, the release of pro‑
jects and tasks is based on the availability of bottleneck resources, and time buffers are 
added to resources that feed bottleneck resources.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
•  225

226  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
important to have excess capacity in the airport con‑
trol tower?
	 7.	 Explain the difference in the problems faced by a PM 
who is short of secretarial resources and one who is 
short of a “Walt.”
	 8.	 When allocating scarce resources to several different 
projects at the same time, why is it important to make 
sure that all resource calendars are on the same time 
base (i.e., hourly, daily, weekly, etc.)?
	 9.	 List and describe the three most common criteria by 
which to evaluate different resource allocation pri‑
ority rules.
	10.	 Why is the problem of allocating scarce resources to a 
set of projects similar to the problem of scheduling 
a job shop?
	11.	 What is meant by the term “student syndrome?”
	12.	 Describe in your own words what is meant by 
Goldratt’s critical chain. How does it work?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Describe the fundamental trade‐offs made when decid‑
ing whether or not to crash a project. If the decision is 
made to crash, what additional trade‐offs must be made?
	 2.	 Discuss the advantages of “labor pools” in a project‐
oriented company. Are there any potential disadvan‑
tages with the use of pools?
	 3.	 What purpose(s) might be served by using each of the 
following priority rules for allocating scarce resources?
a.	 As late as possible
b.	 Shortest task duration time first
c.	 Minimum slack first
	 4.	 Linking a group of projects together with pseudoac‑
tivities creates a sort of superproject. What does this 
mean, and why would anyone want to do it?
	 5.	 Projects A and B are both nearing completion. You 
are managing a super important project C that 
requires an immediate input of a resource being used 
by both projects A and B, but is otherwise unavaila‑
ble. Project A has a Type 1 life cycle. Project B’s life 
cycle is Type 2. From which (or both or neither) do 
you borrow the resource? Why?
	 6.	 Goldratt suggested that to avoid the “student syn‑
drome,” it is a good idea to set activity durations so 
short that there is a high probability that the task will 
not be finished on time. On the other hand, it has 
long been known that setting people up for failure is 
strongly demotivating. What should the PM do?
	 7.	 Describe as many types of resource allocation prob‑
lems as you can, based on the situations described in 
the chapter.
EXERCISES
	 1.	 Given the following project to landscape a new 
building site:
Activity
Immediate 
Predecessor
Activity 
Duration 
(days)
Resource 
Used
A
—
2
X, Y
B
A
2
X
C
A
3
X
D
B, C
4
X, Y
E
D
3
W, X
F
D
1
W, X, Y
G
E, F
2
X, Y
a.	 Draw a Gantt chart using MSP.
b.	 Assuming a 5‐day week, find the critical path and 
project duration in days.
c.	 Given that each resource is assigned 100 percent 
to each task, identify the resource constraints.
d.	 Using the MSP default, level the resources and 
determine 
the 
new 
project 
duration 
and 
critical path.
e.	 Identify what alternative solutions can be used to 
shorten the project duration without overallocat‑
ing the resources.
	 2.	 Given the following project (all times are in days):
Acti­
vity
Prede­
cessor
Normal 
Time
Normal 
Cost
Crash 
Time
Crash 
Cost
a
—
5
$50
3
$150
b
—
4
  40
2
  200
c
b
7
  70
6
  160
d
a, c
2
  20
1
    50
e
a, c
3
  30
—
    —
f
b
8
  80
5
  290
g
d
5
  50
4
  100
h
e, f
6
  60
3
  180

a.	 Draw the network (AOA or AON) and find the 
critical path, time, and cost for an all‐normal level 
of project activity.
b.	 Calculate the crash cost‐per‐day (all activities may 
be partially crashed).
c.	 Find the optimal way of getting an 18‐day delivery 
time. What is the project cost?
d.	 Find the optimal way of getting a 16‐day delivery 
time. What is the project cost?
e.	 Calculate the shortest delivery time for the pro‑
ject. What is the cost?
	 3.	 Given the following AOA network, determine the 
first activity to be given extra resources by the follow‑
ing priority rules:
a
b
3
4
5
7
c
d
a.	 Shortest task first
b.	 Minimum slack first
c.	 Most critical followers
d.	 Most successors
	 4.	 Given the project shown in Figure 5‑10 of Chapter 5, 
assume that a facility used by activities c and d is 
scarce. To which activity would you assign the facility 
first, given the following rules:
a.	 Minimum slack rule
b.	 Most followers
c.	 Most critical followers
d.	 Shortest task first
e.	 As late as possible
	 5.	 Consider the following activity information and the 
constraint that the project must be completed 
in 16 weeks.
Activity
Duration 
(weeks)
Preceding 
Activity
A
3
—
B
6
—
C
8
—
D
7
A
E
5
B
F
10
C
G
4
C
H
5
D, E, F
I
6
G
	
	 In addition, activity C may be crashed to 7 weeks at a 
cost of $40, activity F may be crashed to 6 weeks at a 
cost of $20/week, activity H may be crashed to 2 
weeks at a cost of $10/week, and activity I may be 
crashed to 3 weeks at a cost of $30/week. Find the best 
schedule and cost.
	 6.	 Consider the project network below. Suppose the 
duration of both activities A and D can be reduced to 
1 day, at a cost of $15 per day of reduction. Also, activ‑
ities E, G, and H can be reduced in duration by 1 day, 
at a cost of $25 per day of reduction. What is the least‐
cost approach to crash the project by 2 days? What is 
the shortest “crashed” duration, the new critical path, 
and the cost of crashing?
A4
B3
C1
D5
E4
F1
G3
I2
H5
J1
End
Start
	 7.	 The network for shooting a TV commercial as shown 
in the table has a fixed cost of $90 per day, but money 
can be saved by shortening the project duration. Find 
the least‐cost schedule.
Activity
Normal 
Time
Crash 
Time
Cost 
Increase 
(1st, 
2nd, 
3rd day)
1–2: Contract personnel
7
4
$30, 50, 70
2–3: Obtain stage props
9
6
  40, 45, 65
1–3: Rent equipment
12
10
  60, 60
2–4: Contract studio
11
9
  35, 60
3–4: Set time and date
3
3
    —
	8.	 Given a network for an HR training project with nor‑
mal times and crash times (in parentheses), find the 
cost‐duration history. Assume indirect costs for facili‑
ties and equipment are $100 per day. The data are:
Activity
Time Reduction, Direct Cost 
per Day
1–2: Obtain room
$30 first, $50 second
2–3: Select trainer
$80
3–4: Invite personnel
$25 first, $60 second
2–4: Check budget
$30 first, $70 second, $90 third
EXERCISES
•  227

228  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
1
2
8(5)
6(4)
5(4)
6(4)
4
3
	 9.	 Given the following highway rerouting project,
Activity
Immediate 
Predecessor
(months)
A: Schedule crew
—
4
B: Schedule equipment
—
6
C: Plan new route
A
2
D: Costs meet budget?
B
6
E: Inform public
C,B
3
F: Put out signs
C,B
3
G: Begin rerouting
D,E
5
a.	 Draw the network.
b.	 Find the ESs, LSs, and slacks.
c.	 Find the critical path.
d.	 If the project has a 1 1/2‐year deadline for reopen‑
ing, should we consider crashing some activi‑
ties? Explain.
	10.	 *Additional information about the way work will be 
allocated to the Textbook Revision Project described 
in Exercise  10 in Chapter  3 and Exercise  14 in 
Chapter 5 is now available. JR and Mike are preparing 
to revise their project management textbook. The 
­project of revising the book begins with developing a 
revision plan. Developing a revision plan includes 
four activities that each take one week to complete. 
First both JR and Mike go over the reviews provided 
by a sample of current adopters of the book. The sec‑
ond task involves Mike benchmarking other project 
management books. Benchmarking other books can 
either be done in parallel with going over the reviews 
or done after the reviews have been studied. After 
both the reviews have been gone over and the 
benchmarking is completed, JR and Mike decide on 
the changes to make to the book. The final step in 
developing the plan is JR allocating the work 
between himself and Mike. The work can be allo‑
cated once the authors finalize the changes. After 
the plan has been developed, JR and Mike revise the 
book which is expected to take 24 weeks. Once all 
the chapters have been revised, JR and Mike review 
the page proofs which is expected to take 8 weeks. 
After the page proofs have been reviewed, Mike 
works on creating an index for the book which takes 
2 weeks. Finally, after the book has been revised, JR 
updates the supplements that accompany the book 
which takes 8 weeks. Update the information previ‑
ously entered in Microsoft Project with the resource 
information provided here. Assume the project 
begins on March 7, 2016, and the estimated times for 
the tasks are based on the authors working fulltime 
on this project. After entering the resource informa‑
tion, are there any problems with the resources being 
over allocated? If so, level the resource load so that 
the resources are not overloaded. What impact does 
leveling the resources have on the expected project 
completion time?
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
Lab Results, Inc.
Sam G. Farshe runs a medical laboratory in Pittsburgh. He 
has contracts with several doctors’ offices to conduct their 
lab work. He runs the lab tests and reports the results on 
their patients. Lab Results, Inc. has a reputation of always 
delivering quality results within the time specifications of 
each contract. Sam is pleased with his company’s results. 
His crew of technicians works hard. He prides himself on 
the fact that there is no excess capacity in his operation. 
He pays overtime to his technicians weekly, but always 
includes those costs in his contracts.
Sam has been asked to bid on a contract to do the lab 
work for an area hospital whose lab is being renovated. 
The hospital needs to outsource their lab services tempo‑
rarily. They estimate construction will take 2–3 months, 
and they want a free‐standing lab service to cover their 
needs for 4 months; then the hospital will resume the ser‑
vice. Sam is treating this as a project and intends to esti‑
mate the work hours needed based on the number of tests 
the hospital estimates. He will then be able to determine 
his bid price for the job. Sam wants this contract. He has 
heard rumors that some of the other hospitals in the city 
are considering outsourcing their lab work permanently as 
a cost saving measure. Sam thinks that he can submit the 
low bid if he just has his current staff ‘buckle‐down’ for 
the 4‐month time period and pick up this additional 
work. The hospital is estimating a significant amount of 
work, but Sam believes if he just adds additional overtime 
to his bid, he can cover the increase in work load and win 
the contract.
* This problem is included for instructors who supplement their course with additional content on Microsoft Project.

Questions:
	 1.	 Do you think Sam’s plan is going to work? Why or 
why not? How would you handle the bid on the 
new project?
	 2.	 Would Crystal Ball® be useful in assessing Sam’s plan 
and changing it, if necessary?
Southern Kentucky University Bookstore
Southern Kentucky University (SKU) bookstore is begin‑
ning a major project of automating their inventory system. 
The bookstore is organized into four business units: 
Textbooks, General Merchandise—insignia merchandise 
(sweatshirts, coffee mugs, etc.), General Books, and 
Convenience (candy, soft drinks, etc.). Lisa O’Brien, the 
Bookstore Manager, has decided to name each business 
unit supervisor as the PM of his or her area’s automation 
project. Each department has its own information systems 
person assigned, so Lisa feels that each area can work inde‑
pendently and then all meet her deadline of completion. 
The project is scheduled for completion right before 
school starts in the fall, with staggered “Go Live” dates for 
each of the business units. Each unit will do its own data 
entry and then work with the others on testing and 
implementation.
Missy Motz is the supervisor of the Textbook division of 
the bookstore. Missy is concerned that her department 
will not have enough resources to complete the automa‑
tion project. The Textbook department is always swamped 
with book orders from professors right before school starts. 
Missy thinks she has enough staff to handle the data entry, 
but is concerned about supplying personnel at the times 
and quantities required as the implementation is phased in 
over each of the business units.
Missy knows a little bit about resource allocation tech‑
niques. She remembers that one of the most effective allo‑
cation techniques is to work first on the activity with 
minimum slack, so she instructed her staff to approach any 
tasks they are assigned as members of the project team on 
that basis.
Questions:
	 1.	 Is the minimum slack rule a reasonable way to schedule 
resources of the Textbook division? Why or why not?
	 2.	 What complication is added by making this project 
four separate projects?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility 
Resource Usage—6
The team for the Assisted Living Facility (ALF) program 
was working to prepare in‐depth plans, complete with the 
resource requirements for their projects’ tasks.
Marc Alison, MD, the Medical Director of 
Rehabilitation Services for Friendly Medical Center was 
responsible for developing a project plan with the objec‑
tive of identifying the scope and associated costs of health 
services to offer residents. The Medical Director included 
in the plan the development of an assessment tool that 
would be used to determine the required level and cost of 
care for prospective residents. This tool would also be 
used to ensure that the appropriate population was housed 
at the facility. It was important to have a way to distin‑
guish a person who was too sick and needed a more 
intense level of care than that offered by the Assisted 
Living Facility. Once the assessment of a potential resi‑
dent was completed, the facility staff could determine if 
the person assessed was a good candidate for the facility. 
This phase of the project plan was critical to the success 
of the project.
Dr. Alison’s approach was to develop the assessment 
tool and test it on individuals that matched the marketing 
department’s target population of the assisted living facil‑
ity. He felt he had a great opportunity to find his test popu‑
lation by using some of the current Friendly Medical 
Center patients who were almost ready for discharge from 
the hospital. He could also use some of the older volun‑
teers who currently worked at the hospital. Dr. Alison felt 
strongly that a physician should assess potential residents 
but he also knew that it might be cost prohibitive to have 
such an expensive resource conducting pre‐admission 
assessments. He thought that if a physician developed and 
tested the tool first, then additional testing could be con‑
ducted using less costly health care professionals to con‑
duct the evaluations.
Dr. Alison knew he would have to work with Dr. Zen 
Link, Head of Geriatric Medicine, on developing the tool. 
Dr. Link was familiar with the elderly population that the 
marketers were targeting and could offer valuable insights 
on how to assess the health status of potential residents. 
Dr. Link also had an extensive practice at Friendly Medical 
Center and would have some patients who might agree to 
help test the assessment tool. Dr. Alison would also need 
the services of the CFO and his staff to determine the cost 
of the health services the residents would need. Dr. Alison 
prepared and presented the following plan to the project 
steering team:
CASE
•  229

230  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
Resource Names
  1
Medical/Health services determined
48.25 days
  2
Physical health assessment tool for residents developed
25.75 days
Alison, Link
  3
Develop tool
2 wks
Alison, Link
  4
Test of assessment tool conducted by physicians (12 patients)
6 hrs
3
Alison, Link
  5
Revise tool as necessary
1 wk
4
  6
Test of tool conducted by other health professionals (i.e., 
phys. asst., RN, therapist)
2 wks
5
  7
Admission & discharge criteria finalized
1.5 wks
6
Alison, Splient
  8
Investigate copyrighting assessment tool
3 wks
4
Legal
  9
Assessment tool finalized
0 days
7
10
Copyright tool
0 days
8, 9
11
Financial impact of health services determined
15 days
12
Costs determined
1 wk
9
Alison, CFO
13
Scope of health services determined to include in base rate
2 wks
12
Proj. Steering Team
14
Scope of services to provide on a fee for service basis
2 wks
12
Proj. Steering Team
15
Finalize services and programs to be offered
0 days
13, 14
The ALF team was impressed with the thought that 
went into Dr. Alison’s project plan. They were delighted 
with the prospect of copyrighting an admission and dis‑
charge assessment tool, but they raised some questions 
about Dr. Alison’s resource assignments. The COO asked 
how Drs. Alison and Link were going to assess a sufficient 
sample of people in 6 hours’ time given their busy clinical 
schedules. Dr. Alison replied that he and Dr. Link would 
be doing all of the other steps in the plan during their nor‑
mal 8 am to 5 pm workday. The step to test the tool on real 
patients, however, would take some scheduling. Dr. Alison 
added that his colleague intended to conduct evaluations 
of current patients, with their permission, during their 
regular office visits. Dr. Alison admitted he had not figured 
out how he was going to see his share of the test group. He 
knew he could see some inpatients ready for discharge 
from the hospital during the time he did his rounds. He 
also wanted to test the tool on at least a dozen people from 
the volunteer staff who matched the prospective resident 
population. He informed the team that his secretary had 
agreed to phone the volunteers and see if any of them were 
interested. She said she could do this during her normal 
workday, so he had not included her time in the plan.
Dr. Alison sat silently thinking about how long this 
step in his plan would take, given his current workload. He 
knew that he would only be available to do the assess‑
ments during the time that he allocated for administrative 
hospital work, Wednesday from 8:00 am to noon. He did 
not want to give up any of his clinical time, because his 
patients had been scheduled months in advance. 
Dr. Alison wanted to personally test the tool on at least 
12 people. He estimated each assessment would take no 
more than a half hour (that is why he said that step would 
take 6 hours to complete).
Dr. Alison was not sure what to do next. He told the 
project team he would get back to them.
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Prepare a Gantt chart with resources for the project 
plan Dr. Alison submitted. Begin this project on 
January 3. Prepare a resource calendar for Dr. Alison.
	 2.	 How would you handle Dr. Alison’s resource problem?
	 3.	 Given Dr. Alison’s availability, how long will it take 
to complete testing of the assessment tool?
	 4.	 Prepare a Gantt chart for Dr. Alison’s plan incorpo‑
rating any changes you recommend.

C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Charter Financial Bank
Charter Financial Bank operates three branches in a 
southeastern city. Ray Copper, Vice‐President of 
Information Technology at the bank, has recently been 
charged by the bank’s president to develop a mobile app 
that can be used on smartphones and tablet computers to 
promote bank services, to provide access to customer 
account information, and to allow individuals to apply 
online for loans and credit cards.
Ray decided to assign this project to Rachel Smith, 
one of two directors in the information technology group. 
Since this would be Charter Financial’s first mobile app, 
Ray and Rachel agreed that an appropriate starting point 
for the project would be for the project team to bench‑
mark existing apps in order to gain a better understanding 
of the state‐of‐the‐art in this area. At the conclusion of 
their first meeting, Ray asked Rachel to prepare a rough 
estimate of how long this project would take and how 
much it would cost if it were pursued at a normal pace. 
Noting that the president appeared particularly anxious 
to develop the app, Ray also requested that Rachel pre‑
pare a time and budget estimate related to developing the 
app as quickly as possible.
During the first project team meeting, the team identi‑
fied seven major tasks associated with the project. The 
first task was to benchmark existing apps. The team esti‑
mated that completing this task at normal pace would 
likely require 10 days at a cost of $15,000. However, the 
team estimated that this task could be completed in as few 
as 7 days at a cost of $18,750 if the maximum allowable 
amount of overtime was used.
Once the benchmark study was completed, a project 
plan and project definition document would need to be 
prepared for top management approval. The team esti‑
mated that this task could be completed in 5 days at a cost 
of $3,750 working at a normal pace or in 3 days at a cost 
of $4,500.
After the project received the approval of top manage‑
ment, the app design could begin. The team estimated 
that app design would require 15 days at a cost of $45,000 
using no overtime or 10 days at a cost of $58,500 using all 
allowable overtime.
After the app design was complete, three tasks could be 
carried out simultaneously: (1) developing the server code to 
support the app, (2) developing and coding the actual app, 
and (3) developing and coding the app’s user interface. The 
team estimated that developing the server code would 
require 10 days and cost $9,000 using no overtime, but could 
be completed in 7 days at a cost of $11,250 using overtime. 
Likewise, the team estimated that developing and coding 
the app would require 10 days and cost $15,000 using no 
overtime or could be reduced by 2 days at a total cost of 
$19,500. Developing the user interface was to be subcon‑
tracted out and would take 7 days at a cost of $8,400. The 
organization that was to be used to create the user interface 
does not provide an option for paying more for rush jobs.
Finally, once the code for the server, the code for the 
app, and the user interface were completed, the entire app 
would need to be tested and debugged. The team esti‑
mated that this would require 3 days at a cost of $4,500. 
Using overtime, the team estimated that the testing and 
debugging task could be reduced by a day at a total cost 
of $6,750.
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 What is the cost of completing this project if no over‑
time is used? How long will it take to complete 
the project?
	2.	 What is the shortest amount of time in which 
the  project can be completed? What is the cost 
of  completing the project in the shortest 
amount of time?
	 3.	 Suppose that the benchmarking study actually 
required 13 days as opposed to the 10 days originally 
estimated. What actions would you take to keep the 
project on a normal schedule?
	 4.	 Suppose the President wanted the app developed in 
35 days. What actions would you take to meet this 
deadline? How much extra would it cost to complete 
the project in 35 days?
QUESTIONS
•  231

232  •
Chapter 6 / Allocating Resources to the Project
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Rand Contractors
Brothers Anthony and Bruce Rand own and operate a 
house renovation business. Recently they signed a con‑
tract with a homeowner for a fairly extensive addition to 
the house. In particular, the home addition involves 
knocking out the back wall of the kitchen and the corre‑
sponding wall in the basement and expanding the space 
on both levels. Also, the roof of the new addition will 
serve as a terrace for the master bedroom located on the 
second floor, so a door leading to the terrace will also have 
to be installed in the master bedroom. While a cost esti‑
mate for the project has been approved by the homeowner, 
the Rand Brothers need an estimate of how long the pro‑
ject will take so they can provide a start date to the cus‑
tomer of their next project.
The first task in the renovation project is to knock out 
the walls in the basement, kitchen, and master bedroom. 
The brothers work together on this task. Based on their 
experience, their best estimate of the time it will take to 
knock out the walls is 3 days. However, they feel if the task 
goes particularly well, they may be able to knock out all 
the walls in 2.5 days. On the other hand, if they encounter 
unforeseen problems, they estimate that knocking out the 
walls could take as long as 5 days.
Once the walls have been knocked out, the framing for 
the new addition can be started. Only Anthony has the 
skills to do the framing. His best guess is that the framing 
will take 9 days, but he believes there is a chance he might 
be able to complete it in 8 days. By the same token, if he 
encounters some difficulties, he estimates that framing the 
addition could take as long as 12 days.
Once the framing has been complete, either the plumb‑
ing or electrical work can be started which are both done 
by Bruce. Bruce estimates that the plumbing will take 3 
days, but might be done in as few as 2 days or as long as 6 
days. Likewise, he estimates that the electrical work will 
take him 3 days, but that he might be able to finish it in 2 
days or require as many as 5 days.
After both the plumbing and electrical work are com‑
pleted, the drywall and trim work can be started. Anthony 
does the drywall and trim work. He estimates this will take 
6 days, could possibly be done in 5 days, and might take as 
long as 9 days.
Finally, after the drywall is finished, the new addition 
can be painted, which is done by both brothers. Based on 
past projects, the brothers estimate that painting will 
take 3 days. If the job goes well, they could possibly get 
the task done in 2 days, while if it goes slower than 
expected it could take up to 4 days. Also, note that the 
exterior brickwork is being subcontracted out to another 
contractor and can commence as soon as the framing 
is complete.
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Assuming the activity times follow a beta distribu‑
tion, simulate the home renovation project 10,000 
times ignoring for the moment which brother per‑
forms a given task? What is the expected project 
completion time? What are the shortest and longest 
amounts of time you estimate it will take to complete 
the project?
	 2.	 What is the probability the project can be finished in 
25 days or less? What is the probability the project 
will require 27 days or more to complete? What is the 
probability the project can be completed in 24 
to 26 days?
	 3.	 Revise your simulation model so that in addition to 
considering the precedence relationships, it also con‑
siders who will be doing the tasks. Now what is the 
expected project completion time? What is the short‑
est and longest amount of time you estimate it will 
now take to complete the project?
	 4.	 Based on the revised simulation model, what is the 
probability the project can be finished in 25 days or 
less? What is the probability the project will require 
27 days or more to complete? What is the probability 
the project can be completed in 24 to 26 days?
	 5.	 How do the results compare between the two simula‑
tion models? What are the implications of these dif‑
ferences for a project manager?
	 6.	 Based on your simulation results, how would you 
respond to the next customer regarding when their 
remodeling project will start?

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adler, P. S., A. Mandelbaum, V. Nguyen, and 
E.  Schwerer. “Getting the Most Out of Your Product 
Development Process.” Harvard Business Review, March–
April 1996.
Fendley, L. G. “Towards the Development of a Complete 
Multiproject Scheduling System.” Journal of Industrial 
Engineering, October 1968.
Goldratt, Eliyahu M. Project Management the TOC Way 
(uncorrected proofs). The North River Press: Great 
Barrington, MA, 1998.
Goldratt, E. M. Critical Chain. Great Barrington, MA: 
North River, 1997.
Goldratt, E. M., and J. Cox. The Goal. 2nd rev. ed., 
Great Barrington, MA: North River, 1992.
Hussain, R., and S. Wearne, “Problems and Needs of 
Project Management in the Process and Other Industries.” 
Transactions of the Institution of Chemical Engineers, Part A, 
April 2005.
Ibbs, C. W., S. A. Lee, and J. I. Li. “Fast‐Tracking’s Impact 
on Project Change.” Project Management Journal, 
December 1998.
Kurtulus, I., and E. W. Davis. “Multi‐Project Schedul‐
ing Categorization of Heuristic Rules Performance.” 
Management Science, February 1982.
Kurtulus, I., and S. C. Narula. “Multi‐Project 
Scheduling: Analysis of Project Performance.” IEEE 
Transactions on Engineering Management, March 1985.
Meredith, J. R. and S. M. Shafer. Operations and Supply 
Chain Management for MBAs, 6th ed. New York: John 
Wiley, 2016.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
•  233

7
c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
234
7
Monitoring and Controlling the Project
Project monitoring and control are, in some ways, simply the opposite sides of project 
selection and planning. The bases for selection as described in Chapter 1 dictate what to 
monitor and the details of planning identify the elements to be controlled. PMBOK cov‑
ers these topics in Chapter 3 on Processes, but more explicitly covers the topic of con‑
trolling in Chapter 8 on Quality. Monitoring is the collection, recording, and reporting 
of project information that is of importance to the project manager and other relevant 
stakeholders. Control uses the monitored data and information to bring actual perfor‑
mance into agreement with the plan. Clearly, the need to exert proper control mandates 
the need to monitor the proper activities and elements of the project. Frequently, the 
distinction between monitoring and control is blurred, and their interaction often makes 
us think we are working on a single task, but they are quite distinct.
Although the data gathered from monitoring often serve many objectives—auditing, 
keeping management informed, learning from mistakes—these are all secondary compared 
to the purpose of control. The purpose of monitoring is to ensure that all interested parties 
have available, when needed, the information required to exercise control over the pro‑
ject through the use of tools such as the project portfolio process of Section 1.6. Thus, the 
key issue in designing an effective monitoring and control system is to create an informa‑
tion system that gives the project manager and others the information they need to make 
informed, timely decisions that will keep project scope as close as possible to the plan.
	 7.1	
THE PLAN‐MONITOR‐CONTROL CYCLE
Managing a project involves continually planning what to do, checking on progress, 
comparing progress to plan, taking corrective action to bring progress into agreement 
with the plan if it is not, and replanning when needed. As noted previously, the funda‑
mental items to be planned, monitored, and controlled are time, cost, and scope so that 
the project stays on schedule, does not exceed its budget, and meets its specifications.
PMBOK Guide

7.1 THE PLAN‐MONITOR‐CONTROL CYCLE
•  235
This plan‐monitor‐control cycle constitutes a “closed‐loop” process that continues 
until the project is completed. Figure 7‑1,* illustrates the information and authority flows 
for such a cycle in an engineering project. Note that the information flows up the organi‑
zation and the authority flows down.
Unfortunately, it is often the case that when particularly complex, challenging, or 
uncertain projects are initiated, the planning‐monitoring‐controlling effort is minimized 
so that “the real work” can be done. It is a great temptation to focus on doing something, 
anything, rather than to spend time on planning, monitoring, and controlling, especially 
if the stakes are high and the project is a difficult one. It is precisely such projects, how‑
ever, that most desperately need a mature project manager, particularly one who realizes 
the importance of creating an effective planning‐monitoring‐controlling process. Only 
this will ensure that the project and its output are in full compliance with the law, as well 
as with the expectations of both senior management and the client.
We are familiar with many firms that incurred tremendous expense and large losses 
because the planning process was inadequate for the project tasks undertaken. For exam‑
ple, a retailer won a bid to supply a regional office of a national firm with a computer, 
terminals, and software. Due to insufficient planning, the installation was completed far 
beyond the due date with very inadequate performance. The project failure disqualified 
the retailer from bidding on an additional 20 installations planned by the national firm. 
Another firm in the construction industry ran 63 percent over budget and 48 percent 
over schedule on a major project because the PM had managed similar projects several 
Planning and Scheduling
Reporting and Monitoring
Review and
action as
required
Prepare and
forward
management
reports as
required
Distribution
to directors
and managers
Feeder copy
Weekly time
tickets
milestone
report
Copy
Initiate
project
records
Distribute
copies
Project review
and signature
approval
Administration
review, type,
and prepare
ﬁnal copies
Rough draft of
engineering
project authorization
and project
expenditure
and control
schedule chart
Responsible
Engineer
Administration
President and
General Manager
Director of
Engineering
Director of
Research
Director of
Manufacturing
Feeder copy
Distribution
to responsible
engineer
Post to weekly
project status
reports and
project
expenditure
and control
schedule
chart
Figure 7-1  Project authorization and expenditure control system information flow.
Source: Dean, 1968.
*Dean (1968) was a classic work in the infant field of project management that proposed several major innova‑
tions in the field.

236  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
times before and “knew what to do without going into all that detail that no one looks 
at anyway.”
Designing the Monitoring System
The key to setting up a monitoring system is to identify the special characteristics of 
scope, cost, and time that need to be controlled in order to achieve the project goals as 
stated in the project plan. The exact boundaries within which these characteristics 
should be controlled must be determined, as well as the specified performance character‑
istics for each level of detail in the project activities. In order to manage for overall pro‑
ject success, control must be exercised at the detailed work level for each aspect of project 
performance or there is no guarantee that the desired changes will result.
The project plan identifies what is being done, when, and the planned level of resource 
usage for each task and subtask in the project, so real‐time data must be identified to measure 
achievement against the plan. Mechanisms to gather and store such data must be designed. 
In addition to collection systems for hard data, the monitoring system should include tele‑
phone logs, change tracking/control systems, documentation processes for both formal (e.g., 
meetings) and informal communications, and other such softer data collection systems. 
Once again, monitoring is the direct connection between project planning and control.
One way of linking planning and control is to monitor project progress at each mile‑
stone or phase of the project. Alternatively, progress can be monitored continuously 
based on the MSP Gantt chart, as shown in Figure 5‑24 of Chapter 5. The original Gantt 
chart provides the baseline, and every time there is a change the “tracking Gantt” chart 
is updated to reflect the change. The software automatically adjusts all information to 
reflect the change. Another way illustrated later in this chapter is to use an “earned 
value” chart with its preestablished baseline. A fourth method is to monitor the critical 
chain buffers described in Chapter 6. Critical chain software packages such as ProChain® 
include buffer reports in their output which can direct the managers to problem areas 
where attention needs to be focused. The PM should remember to number and save each 
version of all monitoring documents to ensure a timely and accurate record for the pro‑
ject history that is discussed in Chapter 8.
It is temptingly easy to focus monitoring activities on data that are easily gathered rather 
than those that are important for control purposes. For example, too often it is the hard, 
“objective” measures that are monitored when soft, “subjective” data revealed in phone calls 
and water‐cooler or happy‐hour conversations are what are needed for proper control.
Too often, intensity of activity is measured instead of results. Because the measurement 
of project performance may be difficult, there is a strong tendency to let project inputs 
serve as surrogate measures of output, such as assuming that if 50 percent of the budget has 
been spent, and/or 50 percent of the scheduled time has passed, then 50 percent of the tasks 
must be completed. Far, far too often we measure cost (because it is easy to measure and 
both executives and accountants are used to dealing with cost), and completely ignore any 
­consideration of the actual state of the task or project in terms of developing deliverables.
It is essential to spend time up front designing the planning‐monitoring‐controlling 
process, especially for more challenging projects. The project plan is the primary 
document to guide the design of the monitoring system in terms of the detailed tasks 
and resources that need to be controlled in order for the project to achieve its time, 
cost, and output goals. Common errors in setting up monitoring systems are moni‑
toring easy measures instead of relevant measures, monitoring activity in place of 
results, monitoring inputs as surrogates for outputs, and monitoring measures that 
don’t change from one period to the next.

7.2 DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING
•  237
	 7.2	
DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING
Once we have decided on the type of data we want to monitor, the next question is how 
to turn them into information useful for controlling the project. In this section we cover 
the physical collection of data and the analysis of that data, if necessary, to transform 
them into information. Once transformed, however, there are many ways to present the 
information and these are covered under the topic of reporting, including a discussion of 
the three main types of reports. A very special means of both collecting and disseminat‑
ing data, and even sometimes information, is the proverbial “meeting,” and we offer 
some advice for this often painful phenomenon—both in‐person and virtual meetings 
are included. The use of electronic means for distributing information or reports is 
briefly examined.
At some point we have to decide what data we need to collect, when we need to 
collect them, and precisely how we should go about collecting them. A number of ques‑
tions are raised. Should we design and use special forms? Should data be collected just 
before or after an important milestone or phase of the project? Should time and cost data 
always be collected at the same time each month? There are many such issues that arise 
when considering the data collection process and most of them can only be answered in 
the context of a specific project.
Data Analysis
Following the collection of the data through the monitoring system, it is frequently 
­necessary to analyze or process the data in some manner before reporting it for control 
purposes. This may take the form of simple aggregation of the data, such as averaging the 
values, or something as complex as fitting statistical distribution functions to the data to 
ascertain relationships, effects, and trends. Crystal Ball® can do this with ease. Some of 
the quality management techniques for the presentation and analysis of data are often 
useful here (e.g., see Meredith and Shafer, 2016). As an example, a common graph used 
in quality management shows the range of sample values taken on a periodic basis, such 
as daily. If the samples’ range—the largest minus the smallest value—appears to be 
increasing over time, this may indicate that a machine is wearing out or needs 
maintenance.
In general, significant differences from plan should be highlighted or “flagged” in 
some way so the PM or other person exercising control cannot overlook the potential 
problem. The many techniques of statistical quality control (see Meredith and 
Shafer, 2016, Ch.7) are helpful for determining what size variances are “significant,” and 
may even help in determining causes and effects. These formal approaches, however, are 
often “after the fact” techniques for correcting (controlling) problems—variances occur, 
are reported, investigated, and then some action is taken. The astute PM, however, is 
much more interested in preventing fires rather than putting them out, thus the value of 
timely data collection and reporting.
Last, it should be noted that data analysis is sometimes used for the assignment of 
blame. The PM will not find this a helpful endeavor in managing the project. The goal 
is to achieve the project objectives through correcting deviations from plan, not to find 
scapegoats or assign guilt. The PM needs all team members performing at the top of their 
capabilities. Frequent blame placing strongly encourages team members to avoid taking 
the risks necessary to achieve a project’s goals, or from mentioning problems when 
discovered.
Risk

238  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
Reporting and Report Types
After the data have been collected and analyzed, they need to be reported in some form. 
For example, PMBOK suggests in Chapter 10 that routine performance reports include 
status reports, progress reports, and forecasts. There are also many other possible report 
formats, such as time/cost reports, variance reports, update presentations, and similar 
documents. All tables, charts (such as PERT/CPM and Gantt), and especially project 
plans should be updated to reflect current reality. In addition to alerting team members 
to potential problems, such updates help maintain team morale. Where known, some 
form of “comparables” should also be reported such as distributions of previous data, 
perhaps from earlier but similar projects, so that the PM and others can better interpret 
the data. As we have noted before, any time project reports, plans, or other documents 
are updated, great care should be taken to preserve all documents from earlier stages of 
the project’s life. These materials will be invaluable when the project is completed and a 
project final report (project history) is written.
Although everyone concerned with the project should be tied into the reporting 
system in some fashion, not everyone needs to receive the same information. In addition 
to, say, aggregating the data for senior managers with many other such projects under 
their authority, reports may vary in terms of the frequency of distribution and detail as 
well as the particular measures being reported. The client may wish to have reports on 
cost and schedule while functional management may wish to see reports on technical 
accomplishments, for example. Project team members may need information at the task 
or subtask level on a frequent, perhaps daily, basis.
In general, it is a good idea to avoid periodic reports except in those cases in which 
the flow of data is periodic, for example, accounting data. Let the project’s milestones, 
scope changes, problems, and the project team’s needs for information dictate the timing 
of reports. It is our feeling that reports issued routinely every day, week, month, or quarter 
do not get read. An exception to this rule against periodic reporting is made for reports 
mandated by senior management who must examine the status of many projects and may 
need to compare the performance of many projects against the same time frame.
The explosion of electronic media for both collecting and disseminating data and 
information, including project management software such as MSP, makes it possible to 
customize a wide range of information for different audiences. This means that more data 
are available for collection, and more frequent updating is possible. Clearly, this can lead 
to an overload of reporting that is just as dangerous as underreporting. Important events, 
problems, and trends tend to be hidden in a mountain of detail. Thus, it is crucial that 
the reporting system be well designed to make use of such modern technological marvels 
without abusing the recipient of their capabilities. More is said about this later in 
this section.
The reports delivered to those engaged in carrying out or managing the project 
should be timed to allow control to be exercised before completion of the task in ques‑
tion. The project plan, again, identifies the level of tasks and responsibilities according 
to the level of management, and this provides guidance for both the level of detail and 
the timing of reports. For example, drug efficacy tests require a long time to conduct, 
so frequent reports would not be appropriate. In contrast, performance verification tests 
on new silicone chips can result in hundreds of discrepancies within a matter of hours, 
so daily or even more frequent reports are necessary.
In addition to WBS‐determined data and information, individual managers may 
wish to see specific types of information in their reports, and these should be included as 
well. Moreover, they may even have preferences on the timing of reports, which should 
PMBOK Guide

7.2 DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING
•  239
also be followed when they are within reason. The PM, however, must make sure that the 
relevant (for their level) information about project progress is included in their reports, 
and in such a way that it cannot be overlooked. Similarly, it is of no value reporting 
information or data to those who cannot use it for purposes of control, such as reporting 
overhead costs to the project chemist.
For projects, there are primarily three distinct types of reports: routine (which we 
have been describing), exception, and special analysis.
• Exception reports are primarily intended for special decisions or unexpected situ‑
ations in which affected team members and outside managers need to be made 
aware of a change, and the change itself needs to be documented.
• Special analysis reports are prepared to disseminate the results of a special study 
in a project concerning a particular opportunity or problem for the project. They 
may be distributed to top management, other project managers who would 
benefit from the knowledge, functional managers, or anyone who might be 
affected or interested. Typical subjects might include studies of new materials, 
capabilities of new software, and descriptions of the impact of new government 
regulations.
In addition to the benefits of reports for the purposes of control, they offer 
these benefits.
• They provide the mutual understanding between stakeholders in a project regard‑
ing the goals, progress, difficulties, successes, and other ongoing events of impor‑
tance to the project.
• They help communicate the need for coordination among those working on the 
tasks and subtasks of the project.
• They establish and maintain a communication network for global projects.
• There are often changes to the goals and functioning of projects. Reports can 
communicate this information in a timely and appropriate fashion, thus minimiz‑
ing the confusion often encountered during such changes.
• They help maintain the visibility of the project, and the project team, to top 
management, functional managers, colleagues, and clients.
• Finally, unless the project is a disaster, status reports help keep the project team 
motivated.
It is not by chance that the PMI has labeled these collections of project reports, 
plans, charters, change orders, project histories, and other such documents as organiza‑
tional “assets.”
A special problem often encountered in designing project monitoring and reporting 
systems is the relationship between the project’s information system and the overall 
organization’s information system. The PM is, understandably, not free to define costs 
and other measures in ways that differ from the organization’s definition of such measures 
as documented in the overall information system. Thus, the PM is advised to use the 
regular information system as the definitional prototype for project monitoring and 
reporting, making adjustments and additions as necessary for the special circumstances 
and measures needed for the project at hand. The PM should be aware, however, of 
another danger—modules of the parent organization’s information system may not fit the 
needs of project monitoring and reporting. For example, an accounting module to track 
costs for an assembly line will not be adequate for tracking project costs.

240  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
Software packages such as MSP offer extensive and varied reporting mechanisms. 
Gantt charts show the current status of a project, and reports show the availability of 
various resources (see Chapter 6, Table 6‑2) or the demands for work from individuals or 
groups (see Table 6‑3 or Figure 6‑9), just to name a few. MSP not only allows the PM to 
distribute the information anywhere that has electronic communication capability, but 
also allows easy customization of the reports limited only by the PM’s imagination. A PM 
can highlight tasks that are running late (or running early if such exist), and add large red 
Xs to mark cost overages. The level of detail reported on Gantt charts is also completely 
controllable, so the PM can send only first‐level tasks to senior management, and the 
highest level of detail to project team members.
Meetings
For many project workers and managers, meetings are about as welcome as Herpes dis‑
eases or a call from the IRS. So far in our discussion, we have talked about reports as if 
they were going to be delivered by hand, snail mail, or email. Often, however, they (or 
their substance) are delivered through face‐to‐face meetings. These meetings can range 
from regular, highly formalized and structured presentation/question/answer sessions to 
informal, off‐the‐cuff get‐togethers. Project review meetings, regardless of the format, are 
always important.
Although such meetings are usually dreaded because of their length, lack of action‑
able conclusions, and general waste of time, this need not be the case. The following 
guidelines should help avoid the problems with such meetings.
• Some meetings, such as the Weekly Progress Report (also known as “show and 
tell”), should rarely be held at all. Although not always possible, try to hold meet‑
ings only for making group decisions or generating input among meeting mem‑
bers for dealing with important problems or opportunities. That is, hold meetings 
to take advantage of face‐to‐face interaction when no other approach or technol‑
ogy is an adequate substitute.
• Distribute a written agenda in advance of the meetings. The lead time for distrib‑
uting the agenda should be sufficient to allow attendees to prepare to deal with 
agenda items. In addition to a list of the issues that will come before the group, 
the agenda should announce the meeting’s pre‐set starting and stopping times. 
Stick with both. Don’t wander off the agenda, don’t let the meeting run into 
overtime, and especially do not penalize those who show up on time by making 
them wait for those who are late. Obviously, in the case of meetings called to deal 
with emergencies, feel free to disregard the advice in this section.
• If a crisis arises and a meeting is deemed necessary to deal with it, make sure the 
meeting is restricted to that issue. If a stopping time cannot be predetermined, an 
acceptable alternative is “when the crisis is resolved.”
• If homework needs to be done before the meeting by the attendees, check to be 
sure they will be prepared, and above all make sure you are prepared.
• If you chair the meeting, you should take your own minutes. The minutes should 
contain a final set of action items including what is to be done, by whom, and by 
when. The minutes are a critically important piece of documentation for a pro‑
ject, documenting important decisions and responsibilities. Do not delegate this 
responsibility. Microsoft Word® has a template for creating an agenda and for 
taking minutes that focus on action items.

7.2 DATA COLLECTION AND REPORTING
•  241
• Avoid attributing remarks to individuals in the minutes. Remarks are meant to 
foster group process, not to be documented for eternity and for all to see. 
(Obviously this doesn’t apply to designated or volunteered responsibilities.) As 
well, do not record and report votes taken in the meeting. It seems inappropriate 
to report that the motion to send a get‐well card to the boss was passed—four yea 
and three nay. When the group has made a decision, by whatever means, that 
decision becomes the unanimous position of the group. Disagreement and debate 
are appropriate during the meeting, not after the decision is made.
• Although courtesy is always in order, excessive formality at project meetings is 
not. Robert’s Rules of Order can safely be left at the door.
Virtual Meetings, Reports, and Project Management
Virtual meetings are now commonplace. Microsoft Livemeeting® is one of several pack‑
ages that allows any number of people to meet, hear, view, and discuss presentations or 
training sessions on conference call telephone lines and computers. Multiway voice and 
data communication allows questions and answers, either live (interrupting the meeting) 
or submitted via the computer. Multiperson conversations are quite possible.
In this chapter on monitoring, reporting, and control, it is important to note that 
PMs can and do effectively utilize what has come to be called the “information revolu‑
tion.” Using the Internet to communicate and report about the project’s status is now 
easily accomplished whether project team members are in the next cubicle or across the 
world. One large high technology company uses secure Web pages on the Internet to 
collect, store, and disseminate information on various projects. They have several Web 
pages that are specifically designed to communicate project information to and from 
clients. Others are designed for the sole use of members of the project team. Still others 
are created to communicate with the firm’s senior management.
A senior project manager in the software firm mentioned above offered the follow‑
ing comments on project communication:
In today’s entrepreneurial corporate environment, it is necessary to commu‑
nicate project information at varying levels of detail. Users run the gamut 
from software engineers to Business Unit (BU) general managers. Many of 
these users may not know or need to know how to use the project manager’s 
planning tools. In addition, management may not want users from other BUs 
to have the same level of access as users doing and managing most of the 
work. It is important to have tools capable of limiting the detail if the user is 
not interested in it or is not permitted to see it, and providing detail where 
and when the user needs it. There are third‐party software tools that claim to 
do at least some of this.
Web pages can hold any information that the project manager wants to share, such as 
progress‐to‐date on a project, resources assigned to a task, status of a particular task, and 
expenses to date. The amount of information that can be shared is limited only by the plan‑
ning and monitoring processes that are put into place and the project manager’s imagination.
Software programs such as Microsoft Project Server let you utilize the organization’s 
local area network or intranet, as well as the Internet, to help with project communication 
and monitoring. A project manager can electronically check the status of a task or any 
resource used on the project and have updated information automatically entered into a 
project plan. Electronic work groups can be set up to monitor task completion, resource 
usage, and to provide reports to a group of individuals who have an interest in the project’s 

242  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
status. For example, milestone reports can be sent to a senior management work group, 
and up‐to‐date personnel usage reports can be sent to the Human Resources department.
Using Microsoft Project, the converse is also true. With MSP and an appropriate 
computer network, anyone with authorized access can update his or her section of a pro‑
ject plan and submit it back to the PM for inclusion. Project teams and management at 
any site across the world will greatly benefit from these features. Using this network 
capability, users do not need access to a “resident” copy of the software. Valuable real‐
time reports can be prepared without lengthy phone conversations, or costly on‐site 
meetings. The technological progress of the current “turn of the century” only means 
more effective and timely use of project information for planning, monitoring, and com‑
municating. Utilizing video conferencing, virtual presentations, Web posting, email, and 
so on greatly enhance the PM’s ability to manage a project.
Thus virtual project teams are created, perhaps spread across continents, with mem‑
bers contributing their own pieces of the project and being monitored and controlled by 
the PM at another location (Adams and Adams, 1997). In addition to its use for helping 
with the planning, monitoring, and control of projects, the Internet can also be a rich 
source of information. The project team can find building codes, technical aid, data‑
bases, patent information, expert contacts, and almost anything else on the Internet.
	 7.3	
EARNED VALUE
So far, we have discussed monitoring segments of a project—tasks, subtasks, and such. Of 
primary importance, however, is deriving some measure of overall project progress in 
terms of performance, budget, and schedule. Such a measure is “earned value.”
The common problem with comparing actual expenditures against plan (a.k.a. base‑
line or budget) for any given time period is that the comparison fails to consider the 
actual progress made on the project. Thus, if expenditures are lower than expected for a 
given period, it may be either good or bad, depending on whether progress is in line with 
that amount of expenditure. Similarly, if expenditures are higher than expected, this may 
be acceptable if progress is sufficiently greater than planned for that period. The 
performance of a task or project cannot be evaluated by considering cost factors alone.
The earned value (EV) of a task (or a project) is the budgeted cost of the work actu‑
ally performed. It is calculated by multiplying the budgeted cost of the task by 
the percentage of completion of the task and summing over all tasks for the project. 
This process is more difficult than it might sound. The budgeted cost of a task is clear, but 
the percentage of completion is not. In particular, the percent of a task’s budget actually 
spent is not, in general, a particularly good indicator of the percent of that activity’s 
For the monitoring system, data in various forms have to be collected, analyzed, and 
reported. Data also need to be aggregated, manipulated in various ways, and compared 
with planned values in order to allow effective control. The monitoring system helps 
PMs prevent problems instead of having to solve them. Project reports vary in con‑
tent and frequency, depending on who the reports are targeted to and what controls 
they will exert. A special consideration is the relationship between the organization’s 
information system and the project’s system. In addition to printed reports, reports 
may also have to be given orally at meetings, but steps can be taken to maximize the 
effectiveness of such meetings. The Internet and the organization’s local area network 
or intranet have enhanced project communication and meetings as well as facilitated 
the management of geographically dispersed virtual projects.

7.3 EARNED VALUE
•  243
completion. For example, the major cost for a task might be for obtaining the machinery 
to do the task, a cost that will be incurred before any progress is made on that task. Or 
perhaps the major cost will not be charged until completion of the task. To the best of our 
knowledge, there is no satisfactory way to measure accurately the percent of completion of most 
tasks, let alone to measure accurately the percent of completion of an entire project.
As a result, three conventions have been adopted for estimating progress on tasks, but 
they must not be confused with reality. The most popular is 50–50: the task is listed as 50 
percent complete when work on it is initiated, and the other 50 percent is added when 
the task is completed. This approach avoids the difficult problem of trying to estimate 
progress while the task is being executed. Clearly, this overstates the EV of tasks that have 
recently begun, but understates the EV of tasks nearing completion. In a large project, of 
course, with multiple on‐going tasks starting and stopping at different times, the overstat‑
ing and understating may tend to even out resulting in a relatively accurate portrayal of 
project progress. Another convention is 100 percent when the task is complete and zero 
percent before that. This is a very conservative approach that will only show project pro‑
gress that is definitely achieved. Projects, however, will always appear to be “behind 
schedule,” and upper management will be in a constant state of worry about the project’s 
progress (not to mention the project manager’s competence). The last approach is the 
common, intuitive one of trying to estimate percentage completion by using the ratio of 
cost expended to the total cost budgeted for a task, the ratio of the actual time elapsed 
relative to the total scheduled task time, or some combination of both. There is no strong 
evidence that either the time or cost ratio is an accurate estimator of percent completion.
These conventions are meant for application only to individual tasks on a project, 
not to the project as a whole. (At the end of this section, we show how aggregating the 
task EVs can be used to estimate the progress of the project as a whole.) In fact, applying 
these conventions to the project as a whole may result in a seriously misleading number 
because none of the conventions noted has much semblance of reality. If one must esti‑
mate the percent complete for an activity—and as we shall see, one must—the best guess 
of a knowledgeable person is probably the most that can be expected for most tasks.
As the earned value of a project is calculated, a graph such as that shown in Figure 7‑2 
can be constructed. Given the limitations of the input data, such a figure provides a basis 
for evaluating cost, schedule, and performance to date. The earned value completed to 
date tells the manager whether progress is up to expectation, the “baseline” planned for 
this point in time. Any difference is called the “schedule variance,” which shows how 
much the project is ahead of or behind schedule. As seen in the figure, the value com‑
pleted to date is less than the baseline estimate for this point in the project’s life and 
represents about a 10‐day delay, resulting in a negative schedule variance (delay is nega‑
tive). The actual cost, however, is considerably above the amount of value completed, 
resulting again in a negative (bad) “spending variance,” and even exceeds the baseline 
cost for this point. Thus, this figure represents a difficult ­situation—a project signifi‑
cantly behind schedule and considerably over budget at this time in the project’s life.
The variances on the earned value chart are calculated based on two simple rules:* 
(1) A negative variance is “bad,” and a positive variance is “good”; and (2) the spending 
and schedule variances are calculated as the earned value minus some other measure. 
Specifically, the cost or spending variance is the earned value (EV) less the actual cost 
(AC) of the work performed. The schedule variance is the EV less the planned cost (PV) 
of the work budgeted and scheduled to have been performed to date as determined from 
the baseline plan. All measures are made as of the same date. For a variety of examples of 
different possible scenarios, see Figures 7‑3(a), (b), and (c).
Although the above method of calculating variances is relatively standard, another 
way of handling the data is more useful for making comparisons at different points in time, 
or across different projects, or among different project managers. This procedure is simply 
Best Practice
Best Practice

244  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
to take the ratios of the measures rather than their differences. Thus, the spending or cost 
variance becomes the Cost Performance Index (CPI)  EV/AC, and the schedule variance 
becomes the Schedule Performance Index (SPI)  EV/PV. Values less than 1.0 are undesirable.
We illustrate the above with a simple example. Suppose that work on a project task 
was expected to cost $1,500 to complete the task and the workers were originally sched‑
uled to have finished today. As of today, however, the workers have actually expended 
$1,350, and our best estimate is that they are about 2/3 finished. Our calculations follow:
Cost spending variance
Schedule
/
,
/
,
EV
AC
1 500 2 3
1 350
350
 variance          
       
EV
PV
CPI
1 500 2 3
1 500
500
,
/
,
                         
EV AC
/
,
/
/ ,
.
1 500 2 3
1 350
74
SPI                                  
EV PV
/
,
/
/ ,
.
1 500 2 3
1 500
67
Thus, we are spending more than the baseline plan indicates and, given what we have 
spent, we have not made as much progress as we should have.
We can use these calculations to determine some additional items of interest as well, 
such as the estimated (remaining cost) to completion (ETC) and the projected (total cost) 
estimated at completion (EAC) if nothing is done to correct the problem. Given that the 
budget at completion (BAC) is 1,500 and the EV is 1,500(2/3)  1,000,
ETC
EV CPI
BAC
/
,
,
/.
1 500
1 000
74
676
Note that this assumes that the work will be completed at the same level of efficiency or 
inefficiency as conducted thus far. The total cost to complete the task is
EAC
ETC
AC
676
1350
2 026
,
Month
Dollars
1
2
Value completed
PV
EV
AC
Actual cost
3
Cost schedule plan
(baseline)
Schedule
variance
Spending variance or
cost overrun (quantity
and price)
Figure 7-2  Earned 
value chart.
*Here we adopt the standard PMBOK convention that a negative variance is undesirable. While this conven‑
tion is most common, it is not universal either in the literature or in practice.
PMBOK Guide

7.3 EARNED VALUE
•  245
Figure 7-3(b)   
Negative schedule 
variance, negative 
spending variance.
AC
EV
PV
$
Time
(b)
Figure 7-3(c)   
Negative schedule 
variance, positive 
spending variance.
EV
AC
PV
$
Time
(c)
Figure 7-3(a)   
Positive schedule 
variance, negative 
spending variance.
AC
EC
PV
$
Time
(a)
That is, the projected additional cost to complete this task is $676 which, when added to 
the cost accrued to date of $1,350 gives a total task cost to completion of $2,026 rather 
than the original estimate of $1,500. (See Barr, 1996, and Flemming and Koppleman, 1996.)
Tables 7‑1 and 7‑2 illustrate the application of some of these variance calculations 
for a project to produce a documentary film. Tables 7‑1 and 7‑2 were generated by MSP. 
Table 7‑1 depicts a status report for the documentary film project outlined in Chapter 6.
Table 7‑1 is an overview of the actual information on the project steps compared to 
the baselines for duration, start dates, finish dates, cost, and hours worked. The project 
began 3/29 and is scheduled to be completed by 5/26. The project baseline or budgeted 
task and cost information is compared to what actually happened.

TABLE 7-1  MSP Project Status Report for Documentary Film Project, 5/2
Project Status as of: 5/2
Producing a Documentary Film
WBS
Task Name
Act. Start
Baseline 
Start
Act. 
Finish
Baseline 
Finish
Actual 
Duration
Baseline 
Duration
Act. Cost
Baseline  
Cost
Act. Work
Baseline 
Work
1
Project approval
3/29
3/29
3/29
3/29
0 days
0 days
$0.00
$0.00
0 hrs
0 hrs
2
Scriptwriting
3/29
3/29
4/9
4/5
12 days
7 days
$14,400.00
$8,400.00
192 hrs
112 hrs
3
Schedule shoots
3/29
3/29
4/21
5/7
18 days
30 days
$11,400.00
$13,000.00
224 hrs
240 hrs
3.1
Begin scheduling
3/29
3/29
3/29
3/29
0 days
0 days
$0.00
$0.00
0 hrs
0 hrs
3.2
Propose shoots
3/29
3/29
4/9
4/9
10 days
10 days
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
120 hrs
120 hrs
3.3
Hire secretary
4/5
4/5
4/7
4/23
3 days
5 days
$2,400.00
$4,000.00
24 hrs
40 hrs
3.4
Schedule shoots
4/8
4/26
4/21
5/7
10 days
10 days
$2,000.00
$2,000.00
80 hrs
80 hrs
3.5
Scheduling completed
4/21
5/7
4/21
5/7
0 days
0 days
$0.00
$0.00
0 hrs
0 hrs
4
Script approval
4/9
4/5
4/16
4/12
5 days
5 days
$4,000.00
$4,000.00
50 hrs
80 hrs
5
Revise script
4/19
4/12
4/23
4/19
5.5 days
5.5 days
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
80 hrs
80 hrs
6
Shooting
4/26
4/19
NA
5/3
5 days
10 days
$3,600.00
$7,200.00
80 hrs
160 hrs
7
Editing
NA
5/3
NA
5/17
0 days
10.06 days
$0.00
$5,290.00
0 hrs
168 hrs
8
Final approval
NA
5/17
NA
5/26
0 days
7.19 days
$0.00
$6,250.00
0 hrs
160 hrs
9
Deliver DVD to client
NA
5/26
NA
5/26
0 days
0 days
$0.00
$0.00
0 hrs
0 hrs
246

TABLE 7-2  MSP Earned Value Report for Documentary Film Project, 5/2
Project Status as of: 5/2
Producing a Documentary Film
Earned Value Chart
WBS
Task Name
PV
EV
AC
SV
CV
EAC
BAC
VAC
1
Project approval
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
2
Scriptwriting
$8,400.00
$8,400.00
$14,400.00
$0.00
($6,000.00)
$14,400.00
$8,400.00
($6,000.00)
3
Schedule shoots
$12,000.00
$13,000.00
$11,400.00
$1,000.00
$1,600.00
$11,400.00
$13,000.00
$1,600.00
3.1
Begin scheduling
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
3.2
Propose shoots
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
$0.00
$0.00
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
$0.00
3.3
Hire secretary
$4,000.00
$4,000.00
$2,400.00
$0.00
$1,600.00
$2,400.00
$4,000.00
$1,600 00
3.4
Schedule shoots
$1,000.00
$2,000.00
$2,000.00
$1,000.00
$0.00
$2,000.00
$2,000.00
$0.00
3.5
Scheduling completed
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
4
Script approval
$4,000.00
$4,000.00
$4,000.00
$0.00
$0.00
$4,000.00
$4,000.00
$0.00
5
Revise script
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
$0.00
$0.00
$7,000.00
$7,000.00
$0.00
6
Shooting
$7,020.00
$3,600.00
$3,600.00
($3,420.00)
$0.00
$7,200.00
$7,200.00
$0.00
7
Editing
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$5,290.00
$5,290.00
$0.00
8
Final approval
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$6,250.00
$6,250.00
$0.00
9
Deliver DVD to client
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
$0.00
Totals
$38,420.00
$36,000.00
$40,400.00
($2,420.00)
($4,400.00)
$55,540.00
$51,140.00
($4,400.00)
  247

248  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
At any point during the project the project plan can easily be updated. MSP uses 
earned value analysis as a tool to compare the actual to the baseline plan. Table 7‑1 
shows the project updated as of 5/2. Task 2.0 has a baseline (budgeted) duration of 7 days. 
It actually took 12 days to complete. Task 3.3 took only 3 days instead of the baseline of 
5 days. Since we hired the secretary earlier, we could start task 3.4 for scheduling the 
shoots earlier than expected. Because task 2.0 took longer, however, task 4.0 was delayed 
in starting. (MSP makes these adjustments automatically once actual information is 
entered.) All other tasks were on schedule. Step 6 is underway and not yet completed. 
Steps 7 to 9 have not yet begun.
Table 7‑2 is the earned value table prepared by MSP once the project information is 
updated. Note that only completed stand‐alone tasks or subtasks have final cost variances 
calculated for them. Summary tasks show the roll‐up variances for their subtasks. The col‑
umns titled EAC, BAC, and VAC show “estimate at completion,” “budget at completion,” 
and “variance at completion (VAC  BAC  EAC),” respectively. MSP does not automati‑
cally adjust the estimate to complete by the CPI of the project to date as we did above.
As noted above, some older versions of MSP do not calculate earned value variances 
recommended by the PMI. The MSP earned value numbers in Table 7‑2 have been cor‑
rected to reflect the PMI Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK, Chapter 11) 
definitions. (In some older versions, MSP calculation methods even differ from the MSP 
“help” file definitions.) The calculations used in this book are those recommended by the 
PMI. Our detailed calculations above were for a particular project task, but the approach 
can sensibly be extended to an entire project to give a reasonable estimate of the percent 
completion of the project. The conventional 0/100, 50/50, or percent of budget (time) 
expended are too ham‐handed to apply to the project as a whole. An alternative is to 
aggregate the calculations made for individual tasks, as shown in Table 7‑2. Using the 
overall task data for the project to date, one can estimate the project CPI and SPI, and 
thus the cost and schedule at completion for the project.
If the earned value calculations indicate a cost or schedule deficiency, the PM must 
still figure out what to do (control) to get the project back on budget or schedule. Options 
include borrowing resources from other tasks, holding a brainstorming meeting with the 
project team, requesting extra resources from senior management, or informing the cli‑
ent and/or senior management of the projected deficiency. Unfortunately, research on 
700 military projects indicated that the chances of correcting a poorly performing project 
more than 15–20 percent complete were effectively nil (Christensen, 1994).
An interesting exception to this situation is that of ViewStar Corporation, under 
contract to design an Accounts Receivable imaging system for Texas Instruments. As the 
project progressed, although costs were under control, earned value progress fell behind. 
To catch up, ViewStar directed the project team to meet only key project requirements 
at the least cost and time (Ingram, 1995). Earned value thereafter rapidly increased back 
to the planned schedule.
PMBOK Guide
Earned value represents a way to capture both in‐process performance and cost on a 
certain date as measured against budget or schedule. Including the planned costs and 
actual costs allows the calculation of spending and schedule variances, where nega‑
tive values are undesirable. Using these figures, a projection can be made of costs 
to completion and total cost for the task or project under consideration. Although 
percentage completion makes limited sense for individual tasks and work elements, 
it has little meaning for the project as a whole. Nonetheless, one can aggregate the 
individual task earned values and variances to make reasonable estimates of project 
completion costs.

7.4 PROJECT CONTROL
•  249
	 7.4	
PROJECT CONTROL
Control, the act of reducing differences between plan and actuality, is the final element 
in the planning‐monitoring‐controlling cycle. Monitoring and comparing activities with 
plan, and reporting these findings is to no avail if actions are not taken when reality devi‑
ates significantly from what was planned. In fact, the simple act of noting and reporting 
discrepancies may motivate the actions required to correct the deviations. When it does 
not, however, active control is needed to bring performance, schedule, cost, or perhaps 
all three, back in line with plan. Control has the primary purpose of ensuring that the 
project is in compliance with its objectives. Particularly in large projects with a wealth of 
detail and constant hubbub, it is all too easy to lose sight of these three fundamental 
targets. Large projects develop their own momentum and tend slowly to move out of 
hand, going their own way regardless of the wishes of the PM, top management, and even 
the client. In large projects early control is crucial!
Control is one of the PM’s most difficult tasks, invariably involving both mechanis‑
tic and human elements. Sometimes humans, through action or inaction, set in motion 
a chain of events that eventually results in a discrepancy between actuality and plan. 
Sometimes events occur that affect people in a negative way, leading to undesirable dis‑
crepancies. Anger, frustration, irritation, helplessness, apathy, despair, and many other 
emotions arise during the course of a normal project and affect the activities of the pro‑
ject team members who experience them. It is over this welter of confusion, emotion, 
inertia, fallibility, and general cussedness that the PM tries to intervene and exert control.
Control is difficult for a number of reasons, perhaps the most important of which is 
that it involves human behavior. The problem that the human element poses for control 
by the PM is that it invariably involves the project team—a “we” group rather than a 
“they” group—a group we perceive as our friends. Yet it is difficult to criticize friends, 
which is exactly what control does. Control means interceding in an activity that some‑
one has been doing and “correcting” it, thereby implying that someone was at fault and 
doing something wrong.
Another reason that control is difficult is that problems are rarely clear cut, so the 
need for change and redirection is also fuzzy. In fact, most discrepancies uncovered by a 
monitoring system turn out to be “messes,” in the terminology of Russell Ackoff*. 
A “mess” is a general condition of a system that, when viewed by a manager, leads to a 
statement that begins “%#@*&+#!!!” and goes downhill from there. The discovery of a 
mess leads the PM to suspect that there is a problem(s) affecting the project; and in situ‑
ations as complex as a project, identification of the real problems is difficult. Determining 
what to control raises further difficulties. Indeed, it is rarely clear if someone took an 
incorrect action, and thus needs to be corrected, or if the discrepancy (mess) was simply 
the work of an unkind Mother Nature.
Purposes of Control
There are two primary purposes of control: the stewardship of organizational assets and 
the regulation of results through the alteration of activities. So far in this chapter we 
have primarily discussed the latter in terms of the plan‐monitor‐control cycle, and we 
*The term “mess” originated in a provoking but delightful after‐lunch speech to a large, mixed business/academic 
audience at a meeting of the American Institute of Decision Sciences (renamed the D.S.I. following the AIDS epi‑
demic in Africa) in Boston, MA on November 16, 1973. In his speech Ackoff draws a useful distinction between 
detecting and describing a “mess” (the task of managers), and translating the mess into a set of “structured problems” 
(the task of the analyst/academic).

250  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
will spend the majority of the rest of the chapter on this purpose also. Thus, we take a 
moment to discuss the first purpose, conserving the organization’s three primary assets: 
physical, human, and financial.
Physical asset control is concerned with the maintenance and use of the project’s 
physical assets. This includes the timing as well as quality of maintenance being con‑
ducted on the assets. For example, it is important to conduct preventive maintenance 
prior to that last stage of the project life cycle known as the Last Minute Panic (LMP), 
even though the precise timing of the LMP is usually unknown. And, of course, physical 
inventory must be received, inspected, certified for payment to suppliers, and perhaps 
stored prior to use. All project assets, even the project coffeepot, project team’s couch, 
and project library, must be controlled. Most important, however, is the set of physical 
equipment that was charged to the client that must be delivered to the client at the end 
of the project.
The stewardship of human resources primarily involves controlling and maintain‑
ing the growth and development of the project team. Fortunately, projects provide a 
particularly fertile environment for cultivating humans, given that each project typi‑
cally offers a unique professional experience over a short duration. These experiences, 
more than performance appraisals and reports, foster growth and development of project 
team members.
Last, financial control involves stewardship of the organization’s expenditures on the 
project, including both conservation of financial resources and regulation of resource 
use. Most accounting tools used for projects are excellent in this area of control: current 
asset controls, project budgets, capital investment controls, audits, and even representa‑
tion on the project team through the project accountant. We cannot overemphasize the 
importance of proper conformance to both the organization’s and the client’s financial 
control and record‐keeping standards. Recall that all project records, plans, budgets, 
evaluations, and so on are an organization’s “assets” and are subject to the most rigorous 
control and preservation.
Nevertheless, the PM is invariably more inclined toward the use of project assets 
than to their conservation. Although most PMs view the conservationist mindset as that 
of the fabled librarian who is happiest when all the library’s books have been collected 
from readers and are neatly sorted in their proper places on the bookshelves, PMs must 
realize the dual, albeit conflicting, roles they have assumed. These antithetical attitudes 
must, however, be merged and compromised in the PM as best they can.
An example of the use of extensive controls to help produce a successful project was 
the Metro Turnback project for San Francisco (Wu and Harwell, 1998). This massive, 
high‐risk, 11‐year underground construction project was conducted in the high‐traffic, 
downtown region of the city. To keep the project on schedule and within budget, an 
extensive and complex Management Plan and Control System was devised. To illustrate 
the depth of this monitoring and control system, its subsystems are listed here: Project 
Code of Accounts, Cost Code of Accounts, Control Budget, Trend Program, Scope 
Change Log, Monthly Contract Cash Flow Schedule, Contractual Milestone Summary 
Schedule, Construction Schedule, 3‐Week Rolling Construction Schedule, Quality 
Control and Quality Assurance Program, Contractor’s Nonconformance Report, and 
Corrective Action Report.
For an example of what happens when control is inadequate, we turn to Cincinnati, 
Ohio, to quote from The Cincinnati Enquirer of January 21, 2000:
Guesswork, management neglect and possible criminal conduct allowed city 
engineers to report as completed $15 million in street repairs that were never 
done, a city audit says.

7.5 DESIGNING THE CONTROL SYSTEM
•  251
. . .  In annual reports between 1991 and 1997, the city’s Engineering Division 
reported that a total of 818 lane miles [of street repairs] has been completed 
at a cost of about $65 million.
The internal audit found that only 460 lane miles have been completed, 
costing $50.5 million. (Cincinnati Enquirer, January 21, 2000, p. 1)
The issue has been assigned to limbo, still in a “blame someone else” state. It dis‑
played certain aspects of low comedy with the city’s Engineering Division, City Council, 
and City Manager all involved in the matter. There is little doubt that inadequate and 
unaudited reporting coupled with incompetent control by managers on several levels 
over 7 years all contributed to the fiasco.
	 7.5	
DESIGNING THE CONTROL SYSTEM
When designing the control system, there are certain helpful guidelines to keep in mind. 
For instance, the primary purpose of the control system is to correct error, not to identify 
and punish the guilty. Managers must realize that the past cannot be changed, no matter 
how loudly they yell. Moreover, investment in the control system is subject to sharply 
diminishing returns. The cost of control increases faster and faster while the degree of 
control—and its value—increases more and more slowly.
We could, if we wished, control the quality of “hardware store” type wooden yard‑
sticks, so that they were accurate to 1/10,000th of an inch. But who cares? Moreover, 
who would be willing to invest the increased cost in a product that is usually given away 
as a gift? Thus, there is some optimum amount of resources worth investing in the control 
process. The control system should exert control only to the degree required to achieve 
its objectives; additional control will not help and may be cost‐inefficient.
In the same vein, as the degree of control increases beyond some difficult‐to‐define 
point, innovation and creativity are discouraged until they are finally shut off completely. 
In general, the control system should employ the lowest degree of hassle consistent with 
accomplishing its goals. It is best to avoid annoying those people whose cooperation is 
needed to reach project goals. To summarize, the control system should be cost‐effective 
and should operate with the minimum force required to achieve the desired end results.
There are three primary mechanisms by which the PM exerts control: process reviews, 
personnel assignment, and resource allocation. The process review is directed to an analysis 
of the process of reaching the project objectives rather than on the results, per se. Because 
results are largely dependent on the process used to achieve them, the process can be 
subjected to control even if the results cannot. On R&D projects, for example, project 
team members usually cannot be held responsible for research or technological outcomes, 
but they can certainly be held responsible for adherence to the proposal, the budget, and 
the schedule. Care must be taken, however, not to overstress methods as opposed to 
results; although methods are controllable, it is still the results that count.
Best Practice
Project control, the final activity in the planning‐monitoring‐control cycle, involves 
taking action when reality deviates from plan. It includes both mechanistic and human 
elements, and because it is closely concerned with human behavior, is one of the most 
difficult tasks of the PM. It includes two seemingly antithetical purposes: (1) ­stewardship 
of the organization’s and the client’s physical, human, and financial assets; and (2) the 
use of these assets to bring project actuality into conformance with the plan. Somehow, 
the PM must meld these two purposes into a uniform focus of activity.

252  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
As an example of the effective use of process controls, Australia’s 7‐year Parliament 
House construction project matched the inherent construction complexity with an 
equally sophisticated set of schedule, cost, and time controls. The time controls, for 
instance, included four levels of increasing detail that could be accessed during progress 
review and coordination meetings (Nixon, 1987).
Control can also be exercised through personnel assignments based on past project 
productivity. Although it is relatively easy to separate workers in the top and bottom 
quartiles by measuring performance or productivity, separating the middle two quartiles 
is much more difficult, so this approach should be used carefully. Moreover, reassignment 
can have drawbacks in terms of creating elite groups of top producers but demotivating 
everyone else in the system.
Controlling resource allocation can be a powerful motivator—and demotivator. 
Resources are usually allocated to the more productive or important tasks and this can 
significantly influence the attainment of project results. (Remember that all tasks in a 
project must be completed to complete the project.) As in the use of other control tech‑
niques, the PM needs to exercise care when making decisions about which tasks need the 
resources in the future, regardless of past efficiencies.
There are some common mistakes PMs and other organizational managers make 
when trying to control projects. For example, when controlling processes, there is the 
danger of emphasizing short‐run results at the expense of long‐run objectives. Excessive 
control directed to specific objectives can result in sacrificing other project objectives. 
Across‐the‐board cuts in resource allocations tend to reward those who have already 
overspent or overhired while penalizing the frugal and efficient. Finally, focusing on 
certain items for control can distract the attention of team members from other, equally 
important items: “What isn’t counted, doesn’t count.” There is hardly a community in 
the United States that has not adopted a set of standardized tests to measure the learning 
of school children. The salaries of teachers are affected by these test results. It should, 
therefore, hardly come as a shock to the public that teachers spend considerable time and 
effort “teaching to the test.”
Types of Control Systems
The process of controlling a project, or any other system, is more complex than might be 
expected. Decisions must be made concerning where in the project we will try to exert 
control, what is to be controlled, how it will be measured, and how much deviation from 
plan will be tolerated before we intercede. It is helpful in making these decisions first to 
understand thoroughly the primary types of control systems used by project managers: go/
no‐go controls and post‐control.
The go/no‐go control takes the form of tests (sensors) to determine if some specific 
precondition (standard and comparator) has been met before permission is granted to 
continue (decision maker and effector). This type of control can be used on almost 
every aspect of a project. The project plan, budget, schedule, earned value charts, and 
other such information can all operate as control documents. In addition, the PM has 
prespecified project milestones as control checkpoints. The PM can intercede at any 
level of the project tasks and subtasks for which detail is available in these control 
documents.
The “phase‐gate” method of monitoring and control (also known as “quality gate,” 
“toll gate,” and other names) often makes use of the natural milestones in a project as 
phase gates, though some may be ignored or other phases added. The preconditions to 
pass each gate are specified beforehand so upper management will not be tempted to let 
a project slip by without a thorough evaluation, the result of which could be approval to 

7.5 DESIGNING THE CONTROL SYSTEM
•  253
proceed, an order for additional resources, a change in direction, or the termination of 
the project.
It is worth repeating that a primary aim of the PM is to intercept problems before 
they arise—at least before they get serious—so it is worthwhile for the PM to include an 
early warning system with the control system. In this way, potential problems can be 
exposed and dealt with before they turn into full‐blown disasters. Because any project 
early warning system will include people, it is important for the PM to make it known 
that the messenger who brings bad news will not be shot, but anyone who sweeps bad 
news or problems under the rug will be!
An example of a status report used by the agricultural products division of a large 
chemical company for go/no‐go control is illustrated in Figure 7‑4. As can be seen, some 
of the tasks are completed, some are in progress, and some have not yet started. Details 
from the PM or additional reports about those tasks completed and in progress are used 
to make the go/no‐go decisions.
Post‐controls, also known as postperformance reviews, are applied after the project 
has been completed. Although it might appear that this is the legendary situation of 
locking the barn door after the horse has been stolen, it is not. The purpose here is not 
to control the already completed project, but to allow future projects to learn and profit 
from past project experience. Such lessons might include information about certain sup‑
pliers, cost‐estimating procedures, or even ways of improving the process of managing 
projects. Certain managerial methods, organizational procedures, or processes might be 
altered for future projects, resulting in greater predictability and control and, one hopes, 
better performance, cost, or schedule results.
The earlier the PM can intercede in a problem, the more likely the project team will 
be able to correct its activities, but humans respond to these controls in different ways. 
Response to go/no‐go controls tends to be neutral. Because there is no gradation between 
excellent and barely acceptable, or between terrible and just unacceptable, the fine line 
of acceptability thus becomes a very sharp knife, subject to complaint and irritation. In a 
project, however, criticism tends to be leveled toward the team instead of the individual 
so the response is often less severe than it might have been otherwise.
Task
Project
Notes:
N/A—Not
       applicable
C—Completed
W—Work in progress
      (number refers to
      months required)
NS—Not started
NR—Need resources
HR—Have resources
#3
#1
#2
Priorities set
PM selected
Key members briefed on RFP
Proposal sent
Proposal accepted as negotiated
Preliminary design developed
Design accepted
Software developed
Product test design
Manufacturing scheduled
Tools, jigs, ﬁxtures designed
Tools, jigs, ﬁxtures designed
Production complete
Product test complete
Marketing sign-off on product
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
W/1
W/2
NS/HR
NS/HR
NS/HR
C
C
C
C
C
W/10
W/12
NS/NR
W/30
NS/NR
NS/NR
NS/NR
NS/HR
NS/HR
NS/HR
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N/A
W/15
W/8
W/2
W/8
NS/HR
NS/HR
NS/HR
Figure 7-4  Sample 
project milestone 
status report.

254  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
Tools for Control
We have already described some of the tools that can help the PM in designing and 
applying the control system: variance analysis, trend projections, and earned value anal‑
ysis. With trend projection, for instance, the PM can plot a budget, plan, or growth curve 
as shown in Figure 7‑5 and then, as actual values come in with project progress, plot 
these as a dashed line on the same chart. Using the dashed line, the PM can forecast on 
a continuing basis what the projected completion will be. Based on the projection, the 
PM can decide if there is a problem, what alternatives exist for control, what they will 
cost and require, and what they will achieve.
Another useful tool for a PM is the critical ratio. A critical ratio indicates to a man‑
ager when a task or process is becoming unacceptable, typically when the ratio drops 
below 1. By tracking the ratio, the manager can anticipate when a problem may be brew‑
ing. The calculation of the critical ratio for project tasks is the product of a schedule ratio 
and a cost ratio. The schedule ratio is actual progress divided by scheduled progress, as 
measured by some common standard such as earned value: EV/PV. Clearly, ratios greater 
than one are desirable. The cost ratio is budgeted cost divided by actual cost, or if earned 
value data are available, EV/AC. Again, values greater than one are most desirable. 
Taking the product of these two ratios thus gives us an overall measure that includes 
performance, cost, and schedule.
CR
actual progress scheduled progress
budgeted cost actu
/
/
al cost
Note that the two ratios are equally important in the calculation of the critical ratio. If 
one ratio is bad, it can be offset by the other ratio if it is equally good. For example, if 
the actual progress is 2 and the scheduled progress is 3, resulting in a schedule ratio of 
2/3, and the budgeted cost is 6 and the actual cost is 4, resulting in a cost ratio of 3/2, 
their product, 2/3  3/2  1. Thus, although the project is behind schedule, the cost is 
correspondingly below budget so everything is fine if lateness is no problem for this 
activity. This may not really be acceptable to the PM, so a wise PM will evaluate the 
components of a critical ratio as well as the overall value. Remember that the measure‑
ment of progress is subject to the same warnings we noted in the discussion of 
earned value.
Similar calculations are given in Table 7‑3 where the above example is an illustra‑
tion of Task Number 1. Task 2 is on budget but progress is lacking, so too much money 
was spent than should have been spent; when the project is completed, it will probably 
go over budget. Similarly, Task 3 is on schedule but is over budget, creating another 
Projected
Budget, plan
Now
Actual
Cumulative cost, value, progress
Date
Figure 7-5  Trend 
projection.

7.5 DESIGNING THE CONTROL SYSTEM
•  255
TABLE 7-3  Critical Ratio (CR)  (actual progress/scheduled progress)  (budgeted cost/actual cost)
Task 
Number
Actual 
Progress
Scheduled 
Progress
Budgeted 
Cost
Actual 
Cost
Critical 
Ratio
1
(2
/
3)
(6
/
4)
1.0
2
(2
/
3)
(6
/
6)
  .67
3
(3
/
3)
(4
/
6)
  .67
4
(3
/
2)
(6
/
6)
1.5
5
(3
/
3)
(6
/
4)
1.5
TABLE 7-4  Monitoring the Critical Ratio
Day
Actual 
Project 
Progress
Scheduled 
Project 
Progress
Budgeted 
Project 
Cost
Actual 
Project 
Cost
Critical 
Ratio
July 17
(13
/
14)
(28
/
26)
1.00
18
(18
/
17)
(34
/
26)
1.15
:
:
:
:
­probable cost overrun. The critical ratios for Tasks 4 and 5 both exceed 1.0, and none of 
the subratios is a problem. Task 4 is ahead of schedule and on budget, and Task 5 is on 
­schedule and below budget. The PM may want to look further into these happy events to 
see what is going on, or if the monitoring system is reporting accurately.
Beyond evaluating each of the activities of a project, a critical ratio for the project as 
a whole can be calculated as well, as illustrated in Table 7‑4. Here, the project is assumed 
to consist of the five tasks in Table 7‑3 and the values of each element of the critical ratio 
are summed on a daily basis with the critical ratio calculated for each day. This ratio can 
then be itself tracked in a table (see Table 7‑4 where the first day is from Table 7‑3) and 
plotted on a control chart. The PM can also set some “control limits” for the critical ratio 
so that if they are exceeded on the upside or downside, an investigation is in order, as 
shown in Figure 7‑6. Different tasks, of course, may warrant different control limits. 
Further, the upside limits may be different, probably larger, than the downside (prob‑
lem) limits.
Dealing with such differences is the purpose of another tool, the control chart. Any 
measure—the volume of raw material being used, the cost of contract labor in the pro‑
ject, the hours of computer time—can be plotted and tracked on a control chart such as 
that shown in Figure 7‑7. As illustrated, control limits for intervention can be set by the 
PM and shown on the chart, so that when a measure exceeds one of these limits, action 
is instigated.
Another recent development, benchmarking, can be a useful tool for a PM when 
designing a monitoring and control system (Christensen, 1994; Gupta and Graham, 1997; 
Ibbs and Kwak, 1998; Thamhain, 1996; Toney, 1997). The process here is to make com‑
parisons to “best in class” practices across organizations, or divisions, or even depart‑
ments within an organization. An example is a benchmarking study (Ibbs and Kwak, 1998) 
to generate data for a Project Management Maturity Model. The model measures project 
processes, tools, techniques, and practices across a range of industries, the various life‐
cycle phases, and the ten knowledge areas of PMBOK.
PMBOK Guide

256  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16 Week
Investigate immediately
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
1.0
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
Critical ratio (for factor X)
Investigate immediately
Inform company management
Investigate at leisure
Ignore
Ignore
Watch carefully; have project engineer investigate
Figure 7-6  Critical ratios with control limits.
Cost Prediction Report
Date
Projected
overrun
Projected
underrun
Limit lines for
management action
Time
50
40
30
20
10
0
10
Dollars (000)
20
30
50
40
Contact
ʺAʺ
+
Program—Rader LMS
Project—Shadow Computer
Figure 7-7  Cost control chart.

7.6 SCOPE CREEP AND CHANGE CONTROL
•  257
An example of an internal benchmarking study was Johnson Control’s benchmark‑
ing of the project management procedures of their own highly successful product 
­development project managers, to be used by less‐successful project managers. They 
identified four common sets of procedures these successful PMs all used. These proce‑
dures are now used to train new employees, standardize practices, create a common lan‑
guage, tie together company functions, and create a positive project management culture 
(Reith and Kandt, 1991). Benchmarking and the control chart are tools commonly used 
in quality management, a subject discussed in more detail in Chapter 8 of PMBOK. (See 
also Meredith and Shafer, 2016.)
Burnup and Burndown Charts
Burnup and burndown charts are relatively new additions to the PM’s arsenal of tools to 
help monitor and control overall project progress. Their popularity stems from increased 
interest in Agile project management approaches as well their intuitive nature. A burn‑
down chart is created with scope on the vertical axis and time on the horizontal axis. 
The remaining work that needs to be completed to finish the project at various points in 
time is plotted on the chart which creates a downward sloping line. The slope of the 
plotted line corresponds to the rate of progress with a steeper line being associated with 
a greater rate of progress. Based on an estimate of the future slope of the line, the time of 
project completion can be estimated.
While a burnup chart contains the same axes as the burndown chart, two different 
lines are plotted on it. The first set of data plotted is the amount of work completed to 
date, and the second set of data is the total amount of work, including scope changes, yet 
to now be completed. Both burnup and burndown charts provide the PM with a straight‑
forward approach for monitoring and communicating overall project progress. The 
choice of one chart versus the other is a matter of personal preference.
	 7.6	
SCOPE CREEP AND CHANGE CONTROL
If midcourse changes in the project specifications are not controlled, the following are 
typical results: a newspaper front‐page headline reading “Stadium costs soaring;” an 
article on an inner page stating that “Change orders . . . are one of the most common 
sources of waste and fraud during projects, experts say;” and a quote from a County 
Commissioner, “The project is in trouble, but it’s absolutely recoverable. . . . We can 
work out responsibility for those payments at a later time. Now is not the time to start 
pointing fingers.” An auditor appointed to look into the matter “found that there 
is not sufficient oversight to properly monitor the change orders, check if they were 
PMBOK Guide
Designing the project control system entails many issues, but the major guiding 
objective should be to create a balanced system where the benefits obtained exceed 
the cost of control. The primary means to active control by the PM are process 
reviews, personnel reassignment, and resource allocation. Two types of control sys‑
tems are useful for projects: go/no‐go controls and post‐controls. Tools to aid the 
PM in control are variance analysis, trend projections, earned value analysis, critical 
ratios, control charts, and benchmarking. Burnup and burndown charts are relatively 
new additions to the PM’s arsenal of tools to help monitor and control overall pro‑
ject progress.

258  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
­necessary and determine who is responsible” (see Cincinnati Enquirer, February 15, 
2000, pp. A‐1 and A‐4).
As we noted in Chapter 6, input from over 500 project managers regarding things 
that “bugged” PMs the most indicated that coping with changes is at the top of their list. 
The most common source of changes is the natural tendency of the client, as well as the 
project team members, to try to improve the project’s output as the project progresses—a 
phenomenon so frequently encountered, a name for it has been coined: “scope creep.” 
The most common result of scope creep is an upset client who was not (or claims not to 
have been) told how long the change would delay the project and how much it would 
raise the project’s cost. The general subject of scope management is described in more 
detail in Chapter 5 of PMBOK.
New technologies and materials become available, new requirements and needs 
become apparent, and these lead to changed projects. The later these changes are made 
in the project, the more difficult and costly they become. The one absolutely certain 
thing about a project—even though virtually nothing in a project is ever certain—is that 
there will be concerted attempts to change it. PMs must expect these attempts and be 
prepared to deal with them. Fighting change is not appropriate. The best approach is for 
the PM to set up a well‐controlled, formal process whereby such changes can be intro‑
duced and accomplished with as little distress as possible.
This process is known as the change control system. The purpose of this system is to:
• review all requested changes (either content or procedural changes)
• identify all impacts the change may have on other project tasks
• translate these impacts into alterations of project scope, schedule, and cost
• evaluate the benefits and disadvantages of the requested changes
• identify and evaluate alternative changes that might accomplish the same ends 
with greater benefits and/or fewer disadvantages
• install a process so that individuals with appropriate authority may accept or 
reject the proposed changes
• communicate accepted changes to all concerned parties
• ensure that the changes are implemented properly
• prepare reports that summarize all changes to date and their impacts
Avoiding scope creep is not possible. Controlling it, and thereby reducing some of 
the pain, is possible—if the PM follows a few rules.
1.	 Every project plan must include a change control system by which requests for changes 
in the project’s plan, processes, budget, schedule, or deliverables are evaluated.
2.	 Every project change must be introduced by a change order that includes a description 
of the agreed‐upon change together with any resulting changes in the plan, processes, 
budget, schedule, or deliverables.
3.	 Changes must be approved in writing by the client’s agent as well as by a representa‑
tive of senior management of the firm conducting the project.
4.	 The project manager must be consulted on all proposed changes prior to the prepara‑
tion and approval of the change order. (The PM’s approval is not required.)
5.	 Once the change order has been approved, the project plan be amended to reflect the 
change and the change order becomes a part of that plan.
PMBOK Guide
Best Practice

The process of controlling change is not complicated. For large projects, a change 
control board consisting of all interested parties is recommended for handling change 
requests. For smaller projects, a smaller group may be designated. The main source of 
trouble with requested changes is typically that the PM, in an attempt to avoid bureau‑
cracy, adopts an informal process of handling requests for change. Such a process leads to 
misunderstanding on the part of the party requesting the change, and before the PM can 
undo the damage, the organization is committed to extending the scope of the project 
but without the additional resources and time to do it.
In March 2003, the United Kingdom’s Child Support Agency (CSA) started 
using their new $860 million software system for receiving and disbursing child sup‑
port payments (PMI, January  2005). By the end of 2004, however, only about 
12 ­percent of all applications had received payments, and even those took about three 
times longer to process than expected. CSA is now threatening to scrap the entire 
system and is withholding $2 million/month in service payments to the software 
­vendor. The problem seems to be due to control both scope management problems 
and the lack of a risk management strategy. The vendor claims that the project was 
disrupted constantly by CSA’s 2,500 change requests, while CSA maintains that there 
were only 50 requests, but the contract did not include a scope management plan 
to help define what constituted a scope change request. The lack of a risk manage‑
ment strategy resulted in no contingency or fallback plan in case of trouble, so when 
project delays surfaced and inadequate training became apparent, there was no way 
to recover.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Why can’t the PM use the organization’s current 
information system for project monitoring and 
reporting?
	 2.	 What does it mean to say that project monitoring and 
control are on the opposite sides of project selection 
and planning?
	 3.	 The monitoring system is the direct connection 
between project planning and control. Why is 
this true?
	 4.	 Why is it probably a good idea to avoid periodic 
reports, except in specific cases such as reports tied to 
the organization’s accounting system?
	 5.	 Aside from the obvious benefits for project control, 
what other benefits might result from a good project 
reporting system?
	 6.	 If the calendar should not dictate reporting frequency, 
what should?
	 7.	 Using earned value analysis, explain how the total 
cost of a partially completed project can be estimated.
Risk
Scope creep arises quite naturally from both the client as well as the project team as 
new capabilities and needs surface during the course of the project. Rather than try‑
ing to ignore or handle change requests on an informal basis, the PM must anticipate 
that they will inevitably arise and institute a formal change control system to handle 
them. The purpose of the system is to evaluate each change formally to determine its 
benefits as well as its costs and other impacts on the project, and to make arrange‑
ments for obtaining the resources and altering the project specifications as needed to 
implement the change, if it is eventually approved.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
•  259

260  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
	 1.	 When making an estimate for the time and cost to 
execute a project, should the time and cost required 
to develop the planning, monitoring, and controlling 
systems be included as well? Should the actions 
required to monitor and control a project be included 
in the project’s action plan or WBS?
	 2.	 The chapter included an example of a firm where the 
PM dispensed with all the planning formality because 
no one ever looked at it anyway. What did the PM think 
the purpose of such planning was in this firm? What 
should the firm do in the future to correct this problem?
	 3.	 In fields such as psychology and sociology, verbal 
characterizations are frequently used to show the 
amount of some factor. How might one set up such a 
measure for a project management characteristic such 
as the “energy” of the project team?
	 4.	 How can the PM circumvent the problem that the 
monitoring system can only report on activities that 
have passed, thus telling the PM what has already 
gone wrong but not what will go wrong in the future?
	 5.	 How might using electronic media to report project 
information lead to problems with control?
	 6.	 Explain how the earned value chart captures all three 
objectives of a project: scope, cost, and schedule.
	 7.	 Why isn’t there an earned value reporting conven‑
tion that allows progress on a task to be credited 
when the task is half completed? Wouldn’t this be 
more accurate than giving credit only when the task 
is finally completed?
	 8.	 When would spending and schedule variances be more 
informative than ratios? When would ratios be better?
	 9.	 How should a PM reconcile the dual purposes of con‑
trol: conserving resources and regulating results 
through the use of resources?
	10.	 Identify situations where each of the following con‑
trol tools might be useful: earned value charts, bench‑
marking, critical ratios, control charts, variance 
analysis, trend projections.
	11.	 How might the existence of a change control system 
affect the behavior of a client, or a project team mem‑
ber, who desires to make a change in the project?
	12.	 “In order to manage for overall project success, con‑
trol must be exercised at the detailed work level for 
each aspect of project performance or no significant 
change will occur.” Does this mean that the PM 
should micromanage the project? If not, what 
does it mean?
	13.	 Of all the rules for conducting meetings, the most dif‑
ficult to enforce is the injunction against the weekly 
(or daily) standard project progress report (the “show 
and tell” meeting). Why is this, and under what cir‑
cumstances do you think that such meetings are 
justified?
	14.	 If your project management software calculates 
earned value, or any other standard item to be 
reported differently than the Project Management 
Institute suggests, should you deal with this matter in 
management reports? If so, how?
	15.	 Logically, when using earned value data in the criti‑
cal ratio formula, should the “budgeted cost” be the 
planned value or the earned value? What problems 
occur with each choice?
EXERCISES
	 1.	 A project in its 26th week has an actual cost of 
$270,000. It was scheduled to have spent $261,000. 
For the work performed to date, the budgeted value is 
$272,000. What are the cost and schedule variances 
for the project? What are the SPI and CPI?
	 2.	 A project has just completed the 87th item in its 
plan. It was scheduled to have spent $168,000 at this 
point in the plan, but has actually spent only 
$156,000. The foreman estimates that the value of 
the work actually finished is about $162,000. What 
are the spending and schedule variances for the 
­project? What are the SPI and CPI?
	 3.	 The following project is at the end of its sixth week. 
Find the cost and schedule variances. Also find the 
CPI and SPI. Then find the critical ratio of the pro‑
ject using earned value calculations. Finally, calculate 
the ETC and EAC for the project.
Activity
Prede­
cessors
Duration 
(wks)
Budget  
($)
Actual 
Cost ($)
% Com­
plete
a
—
2
300
400
100
b
—
3
200
180
100
c
a
2
250
300
100
d
a
5
600
400
  20
e
b, c
4
400
200
  20

	 4.	 Repeat Exercise  3 using MSP (omit calculation of 
CPI and SPI).
	 5.	 Given an activity in a smartphone design project 
whose planned cost was $13,000 but actual cost to 
date is $12,000 so far, and whose value completed is 
only 80%, calculate the cost and schedule variances. 
Will the client be pleased or angry?
	 6.	 Resolve Exercise 3 using the 50‐50 rule for planned 
value and earned value.
	 7.	 Given the following information about a website 
design, which activities are on time, which are early, 
and which are behind schedule?
Activity
Budgeted 
Cost
Actual 
Cost
Critical 
Ratio
A
$300
$200
1.0
B
125
250
0.5
C
225
150
1.5
D
100
100
1.5
E
250
250
0.67
	 8.	 Design and plot a critical ratio chart for an advertis‑
ing project that had planned constant, linear progress 
from 0 to an earned value of 400 over a 100‐day dura‑
tion. In fact, progress for the first 20 days has actually 
been: 4,6,8,12,14,18,24,28,30,34,40,42,42,44,48,52,5
4,58,62,66. What can you conclude about this project?
	 9.	 Given the following information, calculate the criti‑
cal ratios and indicate which activities are on target 
and which need to be investigated. Comment on the 
situation for each of the activities.
Activity
Actual 
Progress
Scheduled 
Progress
Budgeted 
Cost
Actual 
Cost
A
2 days
2 days
$40
$35
B
4 days
6 days
$30
$40
C
1 day
3 days
$50
$70
D
3 days
2 days
$25
$25
	10.	 Industrial Building, Inc., has two project teams 
installing virtually identical, 4‐story commercial 
buildings for a customer in two separate cities. Both 
projects have a planned daily cost of 100 and a 
planned daily earned value of 100. The first six days 
for each team have progressed as follows:
Day
Team A: 
Earned  
Value
Team B: 
Earned  
Value
A: Cost
B: Cost
1
90
90
95
95
2
92
88
98
94
3
94
95
101
102
4
98
101
106
109
5
104
89
116
99
6
112
105
126
118
Compare the two projects in terms of general progress 
and according to critical ratios.
	11.	 At week 24 of a project to shoot a television com‑
mercial, the project manager is worried about her 
budget since costs have risen to $7,500. Find if there 
is a cost overage, and if so, how much it is. Is the 
schedule ahead or behind? Overall, does the project 
appear to be in control?
Activity
Prede­
cessors
Duration 
(wks) 
Budget 
($)
% 
Com­
plete
a: Write script
—
6
900
100
b: Screen actors
—
6
1200
100
c: Select actors
a
6
1200
100
d: Contract  
studio
a
12
1800
100
e: Obtain props
b,c
14
1400
100
 f: Schedule  
date
b,c,d
10
1500
40
g: Shoot 
commercial
d,e
16
800
0
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
St. Margaret’s Hospital
Mary Lynn DeCold is the Quality Improvement Director 
at St. Margaret’s Hospital, a large acute care facility. She is 
responsible for monitoring all of the performance improve‑
ment projects that take place in the hospital. At any given 
time numerous projects can be underway, some depart‑
mental and some enterprise‐wide efforts.
The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations is scheduled to conduct a survey of 
St. Margaret’s in 9 months. It is a requirement of the accred‑
iting agency that three performance improvement projects 
be spotlighted during the survey. Mary Lynn wants to be sure 
that she picks three projects that will be finished within the 
next month or 2 so that they have at least 6 months’ worth 
of data to show that the project improved performance.
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
•  261

262  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
Mary Lynn is having trouble getting information on the 
status of the three projects she chose. Communication 
between the project managers and the Quality 
Improvement Department is not always timely. She wants 
to be sure that all three are completed in plenty of time 
before the survey is scheduled. Mary Lynn also wants to be 
able to tell where the projects are in relation to each other, 
as they all need to be completed by a certain date. She 
wonders how she can tell if they are behind or ahead 
of schedule.
Question: What would you recommend Mary Lynn do?
Stoneworth Paving Company
Stoneworth Paving Company specializes in highway paving 
jobs for the State of Virginia. When the state first awarded 
Stoneworth the contract, they stipulated a 1 percent pen‑
alty for each week Stoneworth was late on a completion 
date. Preston Flintrock, the project coordinator for 
Stoneworth, began to notice that the last two jobs were 3 
weeks late, and the paving job that was due to be completed 
in the next 2 weeks was behind schedule. When Preston 
went in the field to investigate, he found the job to be 
understaffed, supplier delays, and a high work rejection rate/
repaving needed. As a result, Preston decided to establish a 
better system of project control and present it to his boss.
Question: If you were Preston, what characteristics 
would you be looking for in a new control system? Will a new 
control system be adequate for the problem? Explain.
Happy Customers
J. Z. Smith is a small consulting firm specializing in 
implementing new information systems installation 
­projects for service agencies. J. Z. Smith has a standard 
project action plan for the implementation projects 
they  work on. They feel very confident in the project 
plan they use; all steps are included and the costs are 
­estimated well.
The project teams are very entrepreneurial and have 
great relationships with their small client base. The com‑
pany works with their clients informally following the 
standard action plan. They provide weekly progress reports 
for the client and for Jeremy Smith, the president of 
J. Z. Smith. Jeremy has noticed that they have problems 
with meeting budgets and due dates. He thinks his teams 
allow their clients to add steps to the projects. A current 
client, the local welfare department, has asked J. Z. Smith 
to help them implement a newly purchased Dead‐Beat‐
Parent tracking system. Jeremy is nervous and wants to be 
sure that they meet the specifications of this new project. 
He is not sure if the standard action plan needs changing 
or if there is something else he should do.
Question: What should Jeremy Smith do?
Cable Tech, Inc.
Cable Tech is a contract cable wiring company. It pro‑
vides support to local cable companies in seven states in 
the midwest. Cable Tech has one operation in each state, 
and they vary in size from 60 to 250 employees. A dis‑
turbing trend has been developing for the last couple of 
years that Cable Tech management wishes to stop. 
Incidences of tardiness and absenteeism are on the 
increase. Both are extremely disruptive in a contract wir‑
ing operation. Cable Tech is nonunion in all seven loca‑
tions, and since management wants to keep this situation, 
it wants a careful, low‐key approach to the problem. 
Assistant Personnel Manager Jean Alister has been 
appointed project manager to recommend a solution. All 
seven operations managers have been assigned to work 
with her on this problem.
Jean has had no problem interfacing with the opera‑
tions managers. They quickly agreed that three steps must 
be taken to solve the problem:
1.	Institute a uniform daily attendance report that is sum‑
marized weekly and forwarded to the main office. 
(Current practice varies from location to location, but 
comments on attendance are normally included in 
monthly operations reports.)
2.	Institute a uniform disciplinary policy, enforced in a 
uniform manner.
3.	Initiate an intensive employee education program to 
emphasize the importance of good attendance.
In addition, the team decided that the three‐point pro‑
gram should be tested before a final recommendation is 
presented. They thought it would be best to test the pro‑
gram at one location for 2 months. Jean wants to control 
and evaluate the test by having a daily attendance report 
transmitted to her directly at headquarters, from which 
she will make the final decision on whether or not to pre‑
sent the program in its current format.
Question: Does this monitoring and control method 
seem adequate? What are the potential problems?

C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility Case—7
It is now just 4 months until the Assisted Living Facility 
program is scheduled to be completed. The team is excited 
because they can watch the construction of the facility 
and feel they are moving toward the end of this program.
Every week since construction began, the construction 
project manager, Kyle Nanno, has been holding a meeting 
of his project team. At the meetings he invites representa‑
tives of the construction company, the facilities manager 
from Friendly Medical Center, the Director of Security, 
and other key people as he deems necessary. The meetings 
are scheduled every Friday at 1:00 pm and last not more 
than 1 hour. No matter who is or is not there, Kyle starts 
the meetings exactly at 1:00 pm. Kyle developed the fol‑
lowing standing agenda:
1.	Review schedule and budget as of today’s date
2.	Review schedule and budget for next 2 weeks
3.	Issues impacting schedule or budget
4.	Next steps and action items to be completed
The construction project update presented at the 
April 11, 20X1 meeting is shown on the next page.
After each meeting the construction project manager 
emails the minutes of the meeting and the action item list 
generated to each member of the Construction Project 
team. He also sends the information to Fred Splient, the 
president of Friendly Medical Center, as well as to each 
member of the ALF Project Steering Team.
Following the update is the most recent copy of the 
action items generated at the 4/11/X8 construction pro‑
ject meeting.
Upon reading the minutes and action items from the 
week’s meeting, Fred got quite angry. Fred read the min‑
utes every week and would immediately phone Kyle to ask 
why certain decisions still had not been made. This week 
he wanted to know why the location of the security panel 
had not been picked out yet, and what the hair salon issue 
was about. Kyle decided that these matters would be better 
discussed face to face. He went to Fred’s office.
Kyle proceeded to explain to Fred that the Director of 
Security, Frank Geagy, had not attended the construction 
project update meeting in weeks. Kyle said that Frank 
informed him that in light of the cost cutting going on in 
the hospital, he is short staffed and cannot hire a new 
security guard. Frank states that he personally has to cover 
shifts during the time when the update meetings take 
place. Kyle told Fred that he was not comfortable making 
the security panel decision without the head of security’s 
input, and that Frank has not returned his phone calls or 
answered his emails. Fred Splient proceeded to tell Kyle in 
a very loud and angry voice, “That guy is not short staffed 
and is not busy covering anyone’s shift. Who does he think 
he is?” Fred instructed Kyle to tell Frank to answer the 
contractor’s questions immediately or the decisions would 
be made for him.
Kyle said he would do so and then changed the subject. 
He told Fred that they were still waiting for the city offi‑
cials to approve the parking lot construction permit. 
Friendly Medical Center’s legal officer estimated that it 
would take 8–10 weeks to hear back on approval. Kyle 
allocated that amount of time in the schedule.
Kyle received notice from Fred to proceed with the 
parking lot construction on January 11, 20X8. On 
February 9, he submitted the application for a permit, com‑
plete with appropriate plans and descriptions of the pro‑
posed lot, and allocated 10 weeks to wait for the county to 
notify him. He expected approval on or before April 19 
and scheduled construction to begin April 20. Privately, he 
doubted he would hear from the county by his target date.
The lot would take 3 weeks to build, 2 weeks to install 
the lighting and add landscaping, and 1 week to pave and 
stripe. The plot had to be completed by the end of June so 
that parking spaces would be available when Marketing 
wanted to begin showing the facility to potential residents. 
This was a tight schedule, but the marketing people 
insisted that residents had to begin preparing for this kind 
of move at least a month before they took residence. 
Potential residents needed to see the facility, get familiar 
with apartment layouts, and they needed a place to park. 
Also, Marketing insisted on having some occupancy by 
the opening date.
Kyle told Fred that Legal was calling the county weekly 
to follow up. Fred wanted to know why the parking lot 
construction was not outlined on the project plan for facil‑
ity construction. Fred asked Kyle to add it to the Gantt 
chart and to do a what‐if analysis on the assumption that 
the county did not respond until May 1. Fred also wanted 
to know the latest date that they could be notified and still 
meet a June 15 deadline for completion of the lot.
As Kyle was leaving Fred’s office, Fred asked him about 
the hair salon. Kyle explained that the COO and VP of 
Marketing had come up with an idea to build and operate 
a hair salon in the facility for the residents. They thought 
this might be a great selling point that could generate rev‑
enue. They came to Kyle just 2 months ago and asked him 
to include a hair salon on the first floor of the facility. Kyle 
explained that he did not have enough information to be 
able to determine the impact this would have on the con‑
struction schedule or the cost of this addition. Fred lis‑
tened and then wondered if the members of his team had 
done any analysis to determine if this was a good idea or 
not. Fred told Kyle he would get back to him on that one. 
He then made a phone call to the COO and VP of 
Marketing.
CASE
•  263

Assisted Living Facility  
Construction Project Update  
as of 4/11/X8
ID
Task Name
Baseline 
Start
Actual 
Start
Baseline 
Finish
Actual 
Finish
Baseline 
Duration
Actual 
Duration
Remaining 
Variance
Dur. 
Variance
Finish 
Variance
1
Construction & furnishings
03/01/X7
03/01/X7
07/30/X8
NA
369 days
278.76 days
104.24 days
14 days
14 days
2
Facility construction
03/01/X7
03/01/X7
06/04/X8
NA
329 days
285.12 days
57.88 days
14 days
14 days
3
Phase 1 ‐ Foundation &  
Excavation
03/01/X7
03/01/X7
07/11/X7
08/01/X7
95 days
110 days
0 days
15 days
15 days
4
Phase 2 ‐ Structure
04/19/X7
05/24/X7
09/22/X7
10/09/X7
113 days
99 days
0 days
‐14 days
11 days
5
Phase 3 ‐ Enclosure
07/12/X7
08/01/X7
01/15/X8
01/15/X8
134 days
120 days
0 days
‐14 days
0 days
6
Phase 4 ‐ Interiors
07/12/X7
08/01/X7
06/04/X8
NA
234 days
139 days
95 days
0 days
14 days
7
First 45 (light‐assisted) units  
ready to prepare for occupancy
05/01/X8
NA
05/01/X8
NA
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
14 days
8
First 45 units ready for residents 05/01/X8
NA
06/25/X8
NA
8 wks
0 wks
8 wks
0 wks
14 days
9
Remaining 57 units (light &  
heavy) ready to prepare for  
occupancy
06/04/X8
NA
06/04/X8
NA
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
14 days
10
Construction complete
06/04/X8
NA
06/04/X8
NA
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
14 days
11
Building ready for residents
06/05/X8
NA
07/30/X8
NA
8 wks
0 wks
8 wks
0 wks
14 days
Project Manager: K. Nanno.
264

Friendly Assisted Living Facility Construction 
coordination meeting 4/11/X8 
ACTION ITEM LIST
Item
Date 
Initiated
Date 
Required
Date 
Resolved
Required 
From
Comments
Provide notice to proceed on 
parking lots
01/10/20X8
ASAP
02/11/20X8
St. Dismas
Proposal to St. 
Dismas 1/18/X7
Provide PS. # for designer to 
purchase accessories
11/9/20X7
12/1/20X7
02/8/20X8
St. Dismas
What are the security 
requirements? There are fire 
doors, and they do not have 
locks. We have rough‐in for 
card readers, but no electric 
hardware.
11/9/20X7
12/1/20X7
St. Dismas 
Security
Cost proposal to  
St. Dismas 1/13/X7
Lighting review—will exterior 
lighting in addition to the 
building mounted lights be 
required?
12/14/20X7
03/15/20X8
03/15/20X8
St. Dismas 
lighting 
consultant & 
electrician
Location of security panel
09/28/20X7
ASAP
St. Dismas 
security
Room number style and 
placement
01/18/20X7
01/27/20X8
02/11/20X8
St. Dismas 
designer
Part of signage 
discussion
Parking lot permit
02/9/20X8
ASAP
Contractor
Permit application 
2/9/20X8, waiting 
for City to approve
Fire alarm connection to 
hospital panel
02/11/20X8
ASAP
St. Dismas 
electrician
Conduit required
Hair salon decision
02/11/20X8
ASAP
St. Dismas
Updated fire alarm drawings
02/7/20X8
07/1/X8
Contractor & 
electrician
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 What do you think the construction project manager 
should have done when the Director of Security 
stopped attending the project meetings?
	 2.	 Do you think it is an effective communications tool 
to send the construction project meeting minutes to 
the ALF steering team and the President? Support 
your answer.
	 3.	 How much time has to be made up for the original, 
baseline schedule to be met?
	 4.	 Develop a plan and draw a Gantt chart for the 
Parking Lot phase of the project as originally planned 
by Kyle. Answer Fred’s questions.
	 5.	 What information does Fred need to make a decision 
about building a hair salon?
QUESTIONS
•  265

266  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Palmstar Enterprises, Inc.
Palmstar Enterprises, a leading manufacturer of tablet 
computers, is currently in the process of developing its 
next generation device, the model 2000HD. A key feature 
of the 2000HD is its high definition display. According to 
the original project schedule, the 2000HD is to be released 
1 month from now.
Because the amount of time required to convert the 
existing software to capitalize on the high definition 
­display was significantly underestimated, the project has 
fallen behind schedule. The project manager estimates 
that without additional resources, the development project 
will be 3 months late. He has also estimated that increasing 
the project’s budget of $3 million by 30 percent would per‑
mit the project to be completed on schedule. The added 
budget would be used primarily to staff the project with 
additional software engineers.
If released on schedule, first quarter demand for the 
2000HD is forecast to be 200,000 units at an initial price 
of $450. Demand data for similar products suggest that 
unit sales will increase 5 percent per quarter over the prod‑
uct’s 3‐year life. Despite pricing pressures in the market, 
accounting data indicate that Palmstar is able to maintain 
a 20 percent contribution margin to profit and overhead 
through continuous process improvements and efficien‑
cies accruing from producing in larger volumes.
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 What has a larger impact on Palmstar’s profits: delay‑
ing the 2000HD’s introduction by 3 months or 
increasing the project’s budget by 30 percent?
	 2.	 Are there other factors you would consider in addi‑
tion to profit?
	 3.	 What should Palmstar do? Why?
	 4.	 How generalizable do you think the results of your 
analysis in this particular case are to other situations?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Peak Lighting, Inc.
Peak Lighting, Inc. develops stages, lighting systems, and 
special effects for the concert tours of major musical acts. 
Recently, they were approached by Bullwhip, a popular 
band, to develop the stage, lighting, and special effects for 
its upcoming tour.
The project to develop the stage, lighting, and special 
effects for a concert tour progresses through four major 
phases. In the first phase, which lasts about a week, Peak 
develops a sound track for the concert based on the song 
list the band provides it for the tour. Using the sound 
track, Peak employees develop a synchronized lighting and 
special effects show on a computer that allows them to 
view an animated stage with the lighting and special 
effects as the sound track is being played.
In the second phase, the materials needed for the stage, 
lighting, and special effects are ordered from outside sup‑
pliers. The lead time for receiving these materials is 
4 weeks, and during this period the project team members 
are assigned to other projects.
Once all the materials arrive, the third phase involves 
constructing the stage with the lighting and special effects. 
Also, writing the computer code to control the lighting 
and special effects is done in the third phase. This phase 
takes 3 weeks.
In the final phase, which takes a week, the lighting and 
special effects are tested and enhanced. The total cost of 
the Bullwhip project is estimated to be $600,000 of which 
$400,000 is for the stage, lighting equipment, and special 
effects, and $200,000 is for labor costs.
Eric Page was recently hired as Peak’s VP of Operations. 
All the project managers that oversee the stage and light‑
ing projects report to Eric. Prior to joining Peak Lighting, 
Eric served as a project manager for a leading management 
consulting firm for 10 years. Based on his extensive project 
management experience, one of the first things Eric did in 
his new role as VP was implement a formal project ­reporting 
system that would help him monitor the progress of the 
projects under way.
The Bullwhip project had been underway for 5 weeks, 
and all the materials had arrived. The project team was now 

ready to start the third phase of the project and construct 
the stage with the designed lighting and special effects.
In reviewing the most recent progress report for the 
Bullwhip project and based on his project management 
experience, Eric became gravely concerned. According to 
the report, the project had an earned value of $120,000 
based on the project manager Jimmy Rush’s estimate that 
20 percent of the project had been completed. In further 
studying the report, Eric observed that the planned value 
and actual costs incurred were both $440,000.
Based on his concern, Eric decided to walk down the 
hall to Jimmy’s cubicle and discuss his concerns related to 
the progress on the project.
Eric began:
I just reviewed the progress report for the Bullwhip ­project, 
and I am very concerned that the project is falling way 
behind schedule. Based on my review, it appears there are 
very significant cost and schedule variances. As you know, 
we have a hard deadline for completing the project as the 
Bullwhip needs everything fully operational 2 weeks prior 
to the start of their tour so they can rehearse with it.
Jimmy responded:
To be perfectly honest, I don’t know much about schedule 
and cost variances but I do have a great deal of experience 
managing these projects. Again, I don’t know how you cal‑
culated the variances you mentioned, but in my view we 
are exactly where we should be.
To this Eric replied:
I don’t see how you can possibly think the project is on 
track when it has an earned value of only $120,000 and 
the planned value by this point in the project is $440,000? 
And I am equally disturbed you don’t understand basic 
project management concepts such as earned value.
Later that day, Jimmy shared his frustration about his 
new boss with one of the project team members.
“Eric really chewed me out today. He questioned my 
ability to manage a project. I wonder if he even under‑
stands the nature of these projects. Does he even get 
it  that two thirds of the project costs are for materials 
and  that these costs are incurred in the early part of 
the project?”
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Calculate the schedule variance and cost variance for 
the Bullwhip project.
	 2.	 Does Jimmy’s point about the material costs have 
merit? If so, does this have any implications for the 
way the earned valued is calculated at Peak?
	 3.	 Who is right about the status of the project? 
Eric or Jimmy?
	 4.	 What advice, if any, would you offer Eric related to 
his new role of VP of Operations?
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ackoff, R. L. “Beyond Problem Solving.” Decision 
Sciences, April 1974.
Adams, J. R., and L. L. Adams. “The Virtual Project: 
Managing Tomorrow’s Team Today.” PM Network, January 
1997. (An excellent brief discussion that covers the nature 
of virtual projects and some of the communication meth‑
ods allowing their proliferation.)
Barr, Z. “Earned Value Analysis: A Case Study.” PM 
Network, December 1996.
Byrne, J. “Project Management: How Much Is Enough?” 
PM Network, February 1999.
Christensen, D. S. “A Review of Cost/Schedule Control 
Systems Criterion Literature.” Project Management Journal, 
September 1994. (This study of military projects notes 
that after a project is 15–20 percent complete, its total CPI 
changes by less than 10 percent and overruns worsen. This 
article is briefly noted in Flemming and Koppleman, 1996.)
Dean, B. V. Evaluating, Selecting, and Controlling R&D 
Projects. New York: American Management Association 
Research Study 89, 1968.
Flemming, Q. W., and J. M. Koppleman. “Forecasting the 
Final Cost and Schedule Results.” PM Network, January 
1996. (This is one of five excellent, instructional articles 
on earned value by these authors. They appeared in PM 
Network between January 1994 and May 1996.)
Gupta, V. K., and D. J. Graham. “A Customer Driven 
Quality Improvement and Management Project at 
Diamond Offshore Drilling.” Project Management Journal, 
September 1997.
Ibbs, C. W., and Y.‐H. Kwak. “Benchmarking Project 
Management Organizations.” PM Network, February 1998. 
(This article discusses the development of a tool for find‑
ing and assessing the “best” managerial tools for project 
management.)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
•  267

268  •
Chapter 7 / Monitoring and Controlling the Project
Ingram, T. “Client/Server, Imaging and Earned Value: A 
Success Story.” PM Network, December 1995.
Meredith, J. R., and S. M. Shafer. Operations and Supply 
Chain Management for MBAs, 6th ed. New York: John 
Wiley, 2016.
Nixon, T. R. “Project Management at the New Parliament 
House, 
Canberra.” 
Project 
Management 
Journal, 
September 1987.
PMI, “Lack of Support,” PM Network, January 2005.
PMI Standards Committee. A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge, 5th ed. Newton Square, 
PA: Project Management Institute, 2013.
Reith, W. D., and D. B. Kandt. “Project Management at 
a Major Automotive Seating Supplier.” Project Management 
Journal, September 1991.
Thamhain, H. J. “Best Practices for Controlling 
Technology‐Based Projects.” Project Management Journal, 
December 1996. (A fine analytical study of finding and 
assessing the “best practices” for controlling high‐­
technology projects. It not only finds the “best” control 
practices, but also generates a “benchmark” to which any 
firm can compare its practices.)
Toney, F. “What the Fortune 500 Know about PM Best 
Practices.” PM Network, February 1997.
Wu, C., and G. Harwell. “The MUNI Metro Turnback 
Project.” PM Network, May 1998.

c
 
•
 
h
 
•
 
a
 
•
 
p
 
•
 
t
 
•
 
e
 
•
 
r
  269
8
Evaluating and Closing the Project
We now come to the exciting final stage in any project—witnessing the result of all our 
project efforts! This usually consists of two sets of activities: evaluating the result of our 
efforts and then closing down the project. As we will see, there are many ways to do both, 
some relatively formal, some quick and dirty, and some rather casual. We discuss evalu-
ation first, in the generic sense, and then discuss a very specific and often formal type of 
evaluation known as the “project audit.” We contrast the project audit with the more 
commonly recognized “financial audit.” We then describe the audit process, the audit 
report, and give some advice for conduction such an audit.
Following this, we discuss various ways of closing out the project, including the pos-
sibility of early closure which can occur for a variety of reasons such as a reduced market 
need for the output or a low expected return on the investment. Four major types of 
closure are “by extinction,” where the project was either successfully completed or failed 
(or expected to be a failure); “by addition,” where the project output is added to the 
organization in whole, as with a new plant; “by integration,” where the project output 
is distributed throughout the organization, as with a software upgrade. However, there 
are some interesting variants of some of these involving starvation and (gasp!) murder! 
Project management can be an exciting field!
	 8.1	
EVALUATION
The term “evaluate” means to set the value of or appraise. A project evaluation appraises 
the progress and performance relative to the project’s initial or revised plan. The evalu-
ation also appraises the project against the goals and objectives set for it during the selec-
tion process—amended, of course, by any changes in the goals and objectives made 
during the project’s life. In addition, evaluations are sometimes made relative to other 
similar projects.

270  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
The project evaluation, however, should not be limited simply to an after‐the‐fact 
analysis. Rather, it is useful to conduct an evaluation at a number of crucial points during 
the project life cycle. Because the primary purpose of a project evaluation is to give feed-
back to senior management for decision and control purposes, it is important for the 
evaluation to have credibility in the eyes of both senior management and the project 
team. The control purpose of evaluation is meant to improve the process of carrying out 
projects. The decision purpose is intended to improve the selection process. Thus an 
evaluation should be as carefully planned and executed as the project itself.
The use of postproject evaluation is to help the organization improve its project‐
management skills on future projects. PMBOK refers to this as “lessons learned,” a topic 
PMBOK covers in Chapter 8 on Quality. This means that considerable attention must 
be given to managing the process of project management. This is best accomplished and 
most effective if there is already a project‐management guide or manual detailing stand-
ardized project‐management practices for the organization. Such manuals commonly 
cover best practices for planning, monitoring, and controlling projects and may include 
advice on both selecting and closing projects. An example of such a manual was that 
developed by Johnson Controls, described in Chapter 7, where internal benchmarking of 
their most successful project managers identified four sets of detailed project manage-
ment procedures. These procedures are updated with each new project experience so that 
the learning that has occurred is captured and made available for future projects.
Evaluation Criteria
There are many different measures that may be applied in a project evaluation. As 
indicated, senior management may have particular areas they want evaluated for future 
planning and decisions, called “ancillary goals,” and these should be indicated in the 
charge to the evaluation committee. Beyond that, the original criteria for selecting 
and funding the project should be considered—for example, profitability, acquiring 
new competencies for the organization, or getting a foothold in a new market segment. 
Any special reasons for selection should also play a role. Was this project someone’s 
sacred cow? Did a scoring model identify particularly important quantitative or 
­qualitative reasons to select this project? Was the project a competitive necessity? 
How the project is progressing on such criteria should be an important part of the 
evaluation as well.
Certainly, one of the major evaluation criteria would be the project’s apparent 
“­success” to date. One study (Shenhar, Levy, and Dvir, 1997) identified four important 
dimensions of project success. The first dimension is simply the project’s efficiency in 
meeting the budget and schedule. Of course, efficiency does not necessarily translate into 
performance, or effectiveness, so the second (and most complex) dimension is customer 
impact/satisfaction. This dimension includes not only meeting the formal technical and 
operational specifications of the project but also the less tangible aspects of fulfilling the 
customer’s needs, whether the customer actually uses the project results—that perennial 
challenge of customer “satisfaction.”
The third dimension is business/direct success meaning, for external projects, factors 
such as the level of commercial success and market share and for internal projects, the 
achievement of the project’s goals such as improved yields or reduced throughput time. 
The final dimension, more difficult to assess, is future potential which includes establish-
ing a presence in a new market, developing a new technology, and such.
To this list we would add two other criteria: the project’s contribution to the organi-
zation’s ancillary goals and objectives, and the project’s contributions to the objectives of 
PMBOK Guide

8.1 EVALUATION
•  271
project team members. To recognize the project’s contributions, all facets of the project 
must be considered in order to identify and understand the project’s strengths and 
­weaknesses. The evaluation report should include the findings regarding these two 
­criteria, as well as some recommendations concerning the items in Table 8.1.
Measurement
Measuring the project’s performance against a planned budget and schedule is relatively 
straightforward, and it is not too difficult to determine if individual milestones have been 
reached. As we have noted several times, there are complications regarding measure-
ment of actual expenditures and earned values, as well as with reporting on difficult 
technical issues that may have been deferred while progress was being made along 
other fronts.
If the project selection process focuses on profits, the evaluation usually includes 
determination of profits and costs and often assigns these among the several groups work-
ing on the project. Conflict typically results. Each group wants credit for revenues. Each 
group wants costs assigned elsewhere. Although there are no “theoretically correct” 
­solutions to this problem, there are politically acceptable solutions. As with budget and 
schedule, these are most easily addressed if they have been anticipated and decided when 
the project was initiated rather than at the end. If allocations are made by a predeter-
mined formula, major conflicts tend to be avoided—or at least lessened.
When a multivariate model (e.g., a scoring model, such as Table D in the scoring 
model example in Chapter 1) has been used for project selection, measurements may 
raise more difficult problems. Some measures may be objective and easily measured. 
Others, however, are typically subjective and may require careful, standardized measure-
ment techniques to attain reliable and valid evaluation results. Interview and question-
naire methods for gathering data must be carefully constructed and executed if their 
results are to be taken seriously.
Table 8.1  Items to Consider for Project Evaluation Report Recommendations
• Communication with the client and senior management.
• Locating opportunities for technological advances.
• Reduction of indirect costs and direct costs.
• Improving the project‐management process.
• Identification of risks in the organization’s use of projects.
• Utilization of the skills resulting from project members’ work on projects.
• Employment of general management experience gained by project managers.
• Improving the organization’s use of projects.
• Increasing the speed of obtaining results in projects.
Risk
A project evaluation is an appraisal for use by top management. Its criteria should 
include the needs of management; the organization’s stated and unstated goals; the 
original selection basis for the project; its efficiency, customer impact/satisfaction, 
business success, and future potential. Measuring the project’s success on budget, 
schedule, and scope is easier than measuring revenues or qualitative, subjective 
­factors. Establishing the measures at project formation is helpful, as well as using 
carefully standardized measurement techniques for the subjective factors.

272  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
	 8.2	
PROJECT AUDITING
A very special type of evaluation is the formal audit. The project audit is a thorough exami-
nation of the management of a project, its methodology and procedures, its records, proper-
ties, inventories, budgets, expenditures, progress, and so on. The project audit is not a financial 
audit, but is far broader in scope and may deal with the whole or any part of the project. For 
a comparison of the two, refer to Table 8.2. It can also be very flexible, and can focus on any 
issues of interest to senior management. The project audit is also broader than the tradi-
tional management audit that focuses its attention on the organization’s management sys-
tems and operation. Next we discuss the audit process itself and its result, the audit report.
The Audit Process
The timing of the audit depends on the purpose of the audit, as shown in Table 8.3. 
Because early problem identification leads to easier solutions, it is often helpful to have 
an audit early in the project’s life. Such audits are usually focused on technical issues. 
Later audits tend to focus more on budget and schedule because most of the technical 
issues are resolved by this time. Thus, these later audits are typically of less value to the 
project team and of more interest to general management. An obvious case here is the 
postproject audit, often contractually required by the customer as well as a common ingre-
dient in the Final Project Report.
While audits can be performed at any level of depth, three levels are common. The 
first is the general audit, usually constrained by time and cost and limited to a brief inves-
tigation of project essentials. The second is the detailed audit, often initiated if the general 
audit finds something that needs further investigation. The third is the technical audit, 
usually performed by a person or team with special technical skills.
Best Practice
Table 8.2  Comparison of Financial Audits with Project Audits
Financial Audits
Project Audits
Status
Confirms status of business in 
relation to accepted standard
Must create basis for, and confirm, 
status on each project
Predictions
Company’s state of economic  
well‐being
Future status of project
Measurement
Mostly in financial terms
Financial terms plus schedule, 
progress, resource usage, status of 
ancillary goals
Record‐keeping 
system
Format dictated by legal 
regulations and professional 
standards
No standard system, uses any system 
desired by individual organization 
or dictated by contract
Existence of 
information  
system
Minimal records needed to 
start audit
No records exist, data bank must be 
designed and used to start audit
Recommendations Usually few or none, often 
restricted to management of 
accounting system
Often required, and may cover 
any aspect of the project or its 
management
Qualifications
Customary to qualify statements if 
conditions dictate, but strong 
managerial pressure not to do so
Qualifications focus on shortcomings of 
audit process (e.g., lack of technical 
expertise, lack of funds or time)

8.2 PROJECT AUDITING
•  273
Typical steps in a project audit are:
1.	 Familiarize the audit team with the requirements of the project, including its basis for 
selection and any special charges by upper management.
2.	 Audit the project on‐site.
3.	 Write up the audit report in the required format (discussed in the next subsection).
4.	 Distribute the report.
Collection of the necessary data can be expedited by developing forms and proce-
dures ahead of time to gather the required data, such as that inducted by Figure 8.1. To 
be effective, the audit team must have free access to all information relevant to the 
­project. Most of the information will come from the project team’s records or from vari-
ous departments such as accounting, human resources, and purchasing. Other valuable 
information will come from documents that predate the project such as the Request for 
Proposal (RFP), minutes of the project selection committee, and minutes of senior 
­management committees that initiated the project.
Special attention needs to be given to the behavioral aspects of the audit. While 
the audit team must have free access to anyone with knowledge of the project, except the 
customer, the audit team’s primary source of information should be the project team—
but project team members rarely trust auditors. Even if the auditor is a member of the 
project team, his or her motives will be distrusted and thus the information the auditor 
requires will be difficult to obtain. Worry about the outcome of the audit ­produces self‐
protective activity, which also distracts the project team from activity devoted to the 
project. Audits are always distracting and uncomfortable to those being audited, much 
like having a police car in one’s rear view mirror while trying to drive.
Trust‐building is a slow and delicate process that can be easily stymied. The audit team 
needs to understand the politics of the project team, the interpersonal relationships of the 
team members, and must deal with this confidential knowledge respectfully. Regardless, 
the audit team will undoubtedly encounter political opposition during its work, either to 
rebuff the team’s investigation or to co‐opt them. As much as possible, the audit team 
should attempt to remain neutral and not become involved. If information is given to the 
audit team in confidence, discreet attempts should be made to confirm such information 
through nonconfidential sources. If it cannot be so confirmed, it should not be used. The audit 
team must beware of becoming a conduit for unverifiable sources of criticism of the project. 
As in all matters pertaining to projects, the project team and audit team must be honest.
Table 8.3  Timing and Value of Project Audits
Project State
Value
Initiation
Very useful, significant value of audit takes place early—prior to 25 percent 
completion of initial planning stage
Feasibility study
Very useful, particularly the technical audit
Preliminary plan/
schedule budget
Very useful, particularly for setting measurement standards to ensure 
conformance with standards
Master schedule
Less useful, plan frozen, flexibility of team limited
Evaluation of data 
by project team
Marginally useful, team defensive about findings
Implementation
More or less useful depending on importance of project methodology to 
successful implementation
Post‐project
More or less useful depending on applicability of findings to future projects

274  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
DATA COLLECTION FORM
Date: _____________
Auditor: __________________________
MANAGERIAL DATA:
Project: __________________________________________________________________
Project manager: ______________________________________________
Start date: ____________________________
Due date: ____________________________
•
•
•
FINANCIAL DATA:
Allocated budget, $: ________________________
Spent to date, $: _________________________
•
•
•
SCHEDULE DATA:
Scheduled time for work performed: ____________________________
Actual time for the work performed: _____________________________
•
•
•
TECHNICAL DATA:
% User involvement in design: _________________________
User training, hours:
‐Planned: ________________
‐Completed to date: ___________________
Software complexity
‐Lines of code: _________________
‐# Modules: _________________
Organizational complexity
‐# Department involved: ____________________
•
•
•
Figure 8.1  Form 
to audit a software 
installation project.
There are other rules the audit team should follow as well. First, project personnel 
should always be made aware of the in‐progress audit. Care must be taken to avoid mis-
understandings between the audit team members and project personnel. Critical com-
ments should always be avoided. This is especially true of on‐the‐spot, offhand opinions 
and remarks. No judgmental comment should be made in any circumstance that does not 
represent the consensus opinion of the audit team, and even consensus judgments should 
be avoided except in official hearings or reports.
The Audit Report
If the audit is to be taken seriously, all the information must be credibly presented. The 
data should be carefully checked, and all calculations verified. Deciding what to include 
and what to exclude is also important. The audit report should be written with a 
“­constructive” tone or project morale may suffer to the point of endangering the project. 
Bear in mind, however, that constructive criticism never feels that constructive to the 
criticizee. An example audit report is shown in Figure 8.2.

8.2 PROJECT AUDITING
•  275
AUDIT REPORT
Auditor: Fred Williams
Audit Team: Sarah Smith, Mustafa Tudesco
Date of Audit: March 5‐12, 2001
Project Manager: Craig Stoutheart
•
•
•
INTRODUCTION
The aim of this project was to install a limited‐version ERP system in our corporate office, Greenville 
production plant, and our southeastern field offices. This included testing of functionality, training of user 
personnel, and hand‐off to the users.
CURRENT STATUS
Direct charges on the project are slightly in excess of the planned budget, as shown in the attached Gantt 
charts (not included here). The planned milestones have been achieved to date but task 451, Interface to 
Warehouse Inventory System, is experiencing difficulty and is both behind schedule and over budget, as seen 
in the earned value charts (not included). . . .
FUTURE PROJECT STATUS
At this time, it would appear that the project is progressing satisfactorily. Attention is currently being 
given to task 451 but it appears that a new approach is needed for interfacing the vendor’s system with our 
current system. However, this appears to be a normal and temporary dilemma; progress is expected to catch 
up to plan within 6‐7 weeks, and the budget may also. At this time, no recommendations for changes in 
schedule, scope, or budget appear to be necessary. . . .
CRITICAL MANAGEMENT ISSUES
Interfacing with our existing systems seems to be more difficult than we anticipated. Although the 
vendor’s software is reputed to be one of the easiest to tie in with a firm’s existing systems, the difficulties 
were greater than expected. It is recommended that all upcoming interfacing tasks be examined in greater 
detail in advance so that these kinds of difficulties do not take us by surprise again. . . .
RISK ANALYSIS AND RISK MANAGEMENT
There does not seem to be any reason at this point to expect either project failure at this stage of the 
program or serious monetary loss. (The next stage, Implementation, is a separate and higher risk project, 
however.) As noted above, the major risks in the project do not seem to be equipment compatibility, as we 
had assumed, but rather software interfacing. If more serious interface issues arise, this could delay the project 
and/or substantially increase the cost of the project. As noted, it is recommended that future projects with 
significant software interfaces be examined much more carefully before decisions are made. . . .
FINAL COMMENTS
This report has assumed that the software interface issue will in fact be resolved without significant 
further delay or cost. If this assumption proves to be incorrect, it could have a major effect on the success of 
the project, and future projects, not only with this software system but other systems as well. . . .
Figure 8.2  Software installation audit report.

276  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
The report information should be arranged so as to facilitate the comparison between 
planned and actual results. Significant deviations should be highlighted and explained in 
a set of footnotes or comments. This eases the reader’s work and tends to keep questions 
focused on important issues rather than trivia. Negative comments about individuals or 
groups associated with the project should be avoided. The report should be written in a 
clear, professional, unemotional style and its content restricted to information and issues 
relevant to the project.
At a minimum, the following information should be contained in the report.
1.	 Introduction: A brief description of the project that includes the project’s direct goals 
and objectives.
2.	 Current status: This compares the work actually completed to the project plan 
along several measures of performance. The actual direct charges made to the pro-
ject should be compared to the planned budget. If total costs must be reported, 
including allocated overhead charges, total costs should be presented in addition to 
the direct charges, not in place of them. The completed portions of the project, 
especially planned events and milestones, should be clearly noted. The percent 
completion of unfinished tasks should also be noted if estimates are available. 
A comparison of work completed with resources expended should be offered—for 
example, using MSP earned value reports. The need here is for information that 
can help pinpoint specific problems. Based on this information, projections can be 
made concerning the timing and amounts of remaining expenditures required for 
success. Finally, if there are detailed quality specifications for the project, a full 
review of quality control procedures and the results of quality tests conducted to 
date must be reported.
3.	 Future project status: The auditor’s conclusions regarding project progress and recom-
mendations for changes in technical approach, schedule, or budget should be made in 
this section. It is not appropriate, however, to try to rewrite the project proposal. The 
audit report should consider only work that has already been completed or is well 
under way; no assumptions should be made about technical problems under investiga-
tion at the time of the audit.
4.	 Critical management issues: Any issues that the auditor feels senior management should 
monitor should be identified here. The relationship between these issues and the 
project objectives should be briefly described.
5.	 Risk analysis and risk management: This section addresses the potential for project fail-
ure or monetary loss. The major risks associated with the project and their projected 
impact on project schedule/cost/performance should be identified. If alternative 
courses of action exist that may significantly change future risks, they should be noted 
at this point.
6.	 Final comments: This section contains caveats, assumptions, limitations, and 
­information applicable to other projects. Any assumptions or limitations that affect 
the data, accuracy, or validity of the audit report should be noted here. In addition, 
­lessons learned from this audit that may apply to other projects in the organization 
should also be reported.
Risk

8.3 PROJECT CLOSURE
•  277
	 8.3	
PROJECT CLOSURE
Eventually the project is closed, either quickly or slowly, but the manner in which it is 
closed out will have a major impact on the quality of life in the organization. PMBOK 
refers to this as “project closure” which is covered in PMBOK’s Chapter 4 on Integration. 
Occasionally, the way project closure is managed can have an impact on the success of 
the project. Invariably, however, it has a major effect on the residual attitudes toward the 
project held by senior management, the client, the project team, and even others in the 
organization. It also has a major effect on the organization’s successful use of projects in 
the future.
In some project‐organized industries (e.g., construction, consulting, or software 
development), project closure is a less serious problem because the teams often remain 
relatively intact, moving on to the next project. In other industries, however, the termi-
nation of a project, particularly a long and difficult one, is akin to the breakup of a family 
and may well be stressful, even to the point of grieving. Therefore, the skill and manage-
ment of the closure process—a project in itself—can have a major impact on the working 
environment of the larger organization.
When to Close a Project
If one adopts the position that sunk costs are irrelevant to current investment decisions, 
a primary criterion for project continuance or closure should be whether or not the 
organization is willing to invest the time and cost required to complete the project, given 
its current status and expected outcome. Although this criterion can be applied to any 
project, not everyone agrees that sunk costs are irrelevant, nor does everyone agree that 
this is a primary criterion. The criteria commonly applied for deciding whether to close 
a project fall into two general categories: (1) the degree to which the project has met its 
goals and objectives, and (2) the degree to which the project qualifies against a set of 
factors generally associated with success or failure. Table 8.4 identifies the most impor-
tant factors in closing R&D projects at 36 different companies.
In terms of the first category, if a project has met its goals, the time has come to shut 
it down. The most important reason for the early closure of a project is the likelihood it 
will be a technical or commercial failure (Baker et al., 1983). The factors associated with 
project failure, however, vary for different industries, different project types (e.g., R&D 
versus construction), and different definitions of failure (Pinto and Mantel, 1990).
PMBOK Guide
The project audit is a thorough examination of the entire project at any level of 
depth. Early audits tend to focus on more technical aspects of the project while later 
audits focus on schedule and cost. The audit team must have full access to project 
data and staff familiar with the project, including the project team. Working with the 
project team is a delicate behavioral process. The final audit report should be written 
with a professional and constructive tone and should include the following sections: 
introduction, current status, future status, critical management issues, risk analysis 
and risk management, plus final comments.
Risk

278  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
As we have already noted, there appear to be four generic factors associated with 
project success (Shenhar, Levy, and Dvir, 1997): efficiency of project execution, cus-
tomer satisfaction and use, impact on the firm conducting the project, and contribu-
tion to the project firm’s future. Success on these dimensions appears to be directly 
related to the effectiveness of the project’s management (Ingram, 1994). There also 
appear to be four fundamental reasons for project failure: (1) a project was not required 
for this task in the first place; (2) insufficient support from senior management (espe-
cially for unanticipated resources); (3) naming the wrong project manager (often a 
person with excellent technical skills but weak managerial skills); and (4) poor up‐
front planning.
Wheatley (2009) takes a broader view of the closure problem. To decide which 
projects should be continued and which should be dropped, he suggests that the deci-
sion makers answer five questions: (1) Which projects have a legal or strategic impera-
tive? (2) Which projects are luxuries? (3) Which projects are likely to drive future 
revenues and growth? (4) Which projects best match our skill sets and strengths, 
allowing us to deliver successfully? and, (5) What are the potential risks to the busi-
ness if we do not service the demands for the project’s deliverables? He also suggests 
taking any pressing current requirements into consideration. For example, if lowering 
costs to reduce cash flows has suddenly become more important than some longer‐ 
run strategic goals, other projects may now take priority over more strategically 
focused projects.
Types of Project Closure
There are three fundamentally different ways to close out a project: extinction, addition, 
and integration. Project extinction occurs when the project activity suddenly stops, although 
there is still property, equipment, materials, and personnel to disburse or ­reassign. The ­project  
was closed either because it was successfully completed, failed, or because the ­expectation 
Risk
Table 8.4  Rank‐Ordered Factors Considered in Closing R&D Projects
Factors
No. of Companies 
Reporting the Factor as 
Being Important
Technical
Low probability of achieving technical objectives or 
commercializing results
34
Technical or manufacturing problems cannot be solved with 
available R&D skills
11
Higher priority of other projects requiring R&D labor or funds
10
Economic
Low profitability or return on investment
23
Too costly to develop as individual product
18
Market
Low market potential
16
Change in competitive factors or market needs
10
Others
Too long a time required to achieve commercial results
  6
Negative effects on other projects or products
  3
Patent problems
  1
Source: Dean, 1968.

8.3 PROJECT CLOSURE
•  279
of failure was high. Successful projects are completed and ­delivered to the client. Expected 
failures occur when the project no longer meets cost/benefit criteria, or when its goals have 
been achieved by another project, often in another firm. An example of the former cause of 
failure is the cancellation of the superconducting super collider (SSC). The SSC project’s 
tremendous costs relative to the lack of clear benefits doomed the project, and it was can-
celled during President Clinton’s term in office. Other examples of projects facing extinc-
tion are when a project’s process yield may have been too low, or a drug failed its efficacy 
tests, or other firms have discovered better alternatives.
One special type of closure that should be noted is closure by “murder,” characterized 
by its unexpected suddenness, and initiated by events such as the forced retirement of the 
project’s champion or the merger of the firm conducting the project with another firm.
Closure‐by‐starvation often occurs when it is impolitic to terminate a project but 
its budget can be squeezed, as budgets always are, until it is a project in name only. The 
project may have been suggested by a special client, or a senior executive (e.g., a sacred 
cow), or perhaps closing the project would be an embarrassing acknowledgment of 
managerial failure. Occasionally a few project personnel members remain assigned to 
such a project along with a clerk whose duty it is to issue a “no‐progress” report once 
each ­quarter. It is considered bad manners for anyone to inquire about such projects.
Closure‐by‐addition occurs when an “in‐house” project is successfully completed, and 
institutionalized as a new, formal part of the organization. This may take the form of an 
added department, division, subsidiary, or other such organizational entity, depending on 
the magnitude and importance of the project. 3M Corporation often uses this technique 
to reward successful innovation projects, such as the invention of Post‐It Notes®, and 
Nucor uses its own construction management teams to staff new steel minimills.
Sometimes, project team members become the managers of the new entity, though 
some team members may request a transfer to new projects within the organization—
project life is exciting. Although the new entity will often have a “protected species” 
status for the first year or so of its life, it eventually has to learn to live with the same 
burden of overhead charges, policies, procedures, and bureaucracy that the rest of the 
organization enjoys. Exceptional project status does not carry over to permanent entities. 
This shift may be a difficult one for the project team to make.
Closure‐by‐integration With closure‐by‐addition, the project property often is simply 
transferred to an existing or newly created organizational entity. With closure‐by‐­
integration, the output of the project becomes a standard part of the operating systems of 
the sponsoring firm, or the client. The new software becomes the standard, and the new 
machine becomes a normal part of the production line. Project property, equipment, 
material, personnel, and even functions are distributed among the existing elements of 
the parent or client organization. Whether the personnel return to their functional 
homes in the organization or become a part of the integrated system, all the following 
functions of the project need consideration in the transition from project to integrated 
operations: human resources, manufacturing, accounting/finance, engineering, informa-
tion systems/software, marketing, purchasing, distribution, legal, and so on.
The Closure Process
As usual, the following process and advice may be ignored in the case of small, routine 
projects. For all major and nonroutine projects, however, it is best for a broadly based 
committee of reasonably senior executives to make the closure decision in order to dif-
fuse and withstand the political pressures that often accompany such decisions. In 
­general, projects do not take kindly to being shut down. To the extent possible, it is best 

280  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
to detail the criteria used and explain the rationale for the committee’s decision, but do 
not expect sweet reason to quell opposition or to stifle the cries of pain. Again, the PM 
will need the power of persuasion. In any case, shutting down an ongoing project is not 
a mechanistic process and should not be treated as such. There are times when hunches 
and beliefs about the project’s ultimate outcomes should be followed. The closure 
­committee that treats the decision as mechanistic is sure to make some costly errors.
The activities required to ensure a smooth and successful project closure will have, 
we hope, been included in the initial project plan. The closure process will have much 
better results for all concerned if it is planned and managed with care—even treating it 
as a project in itself, as illustrated in Figure 8.3. Usually, the project manager is asked to 
close out the project but this can raise a variety of problems because the PM is not a 
disinterested bystander in the project. We believe it is better to appoint a specialist in the 
process, a closure manager (project undertaker), to complete the long and involved pro-
cess of shutting down (interring) a project, preferably someone with some experience in 
closing projects. The primary duties of the closure manager are given in Table 8.5.
Many of these tasks will be handled, or at least initiated, by the project manager. 
Some will have been provided for in the project proposal or contract. One of the more 
difficult jobs is the reassignment of project personnel. In a functional organization, it 
usually entails a simple transfer back to duty in the individual’s parent department; but 
at those times when a large project is shut down, many team members may be laid off. In 
a pure project organization there may be more projects to which project personnel can be 
Project
close-out
Site
Purchasing
Financial
Collect
receivables
Final
report
Final
payments
Supplier
notiﬁcations
Compliance
documents
Close down
facilities
Equipment material
disposal
Charge
audits
Organization
Close out
meeting
Reassignment
plan
Personal
reports
Figure 8.3   
A closure project.
Table 8.5  Main Duties of the Closure Manager
• Ensure completion of the work, including that of subcontractors.
• Notify the client of project completion and ensure that delivery and installation are 
accomplished. Acceptance of the project must be acknowledged by the client.
• Ensure that documentation is complete, including the project final report.
• Clear all accounts and documentation for final billings and client invoicing.
• Redistribute personnel, materials, equipment, and other project resources to appropriate 
places, including the return of client‐provided resources.
• Clear the project with legal counsel, including filings for patents and recording and archiving 
all nondisclosure documents.
• Determine what records to keep and deliver them to safe and responsible people, such as the 
organization’s archivist, or store them in the organization’s archives.
• Ascertain any product support requirements (e.g., spares, service manuals) and ensure that 
such support will be delivered.
• Oversee the closing of the project’s books.

8.3 PROJECT CLOSURE
•  281
transferred but no “holding area” such as a home functional department. The matrix 
organization, having both aspects, may be the least problematic in terms of personnel 
reassignments.
The prevalence of corporate mergers in recent years has exacerbated personnel dis-
placement problems. It is expected that the closure manager and the organization’s Human 
Resources department will aid loyal project workers in finding new employment. This is 
not merely an act of charity. It may prevent the tendency of some team members to seek 
employment on their own and leave a project early, which can compromise the successful 
completion of the project. If such people are unsuccessful in finding new jobs, they may 
drag out the final tasks to give themselves more time—also detrimental to the project. 
The PM needs to make it clear that midproject resignations as well as tenure‐for‐life are 
both unacceptable. Facing the closure decision in a timely and straightforward manner 
will pay dividends to the PM, as well as the closure manager, in a smooth project transition.
Clearly, the closure process can be handled well or poorly. An example of the former 
is Nucor’s closure‐by‐addition strategy where the closure of its Crawfordsville, Indiana, 
steel plant construction project was planned in detail months ahead of time 
(Kimball, 1988). An example of poor closure is that which resulted when Atlantic States 
Chemical Laboratories suddenly saw its contract with Ortec canceled, throwing the pro-
ject, and its close‐out, into disarray (Mantel, undated).
The Project Final Report
As the Beagle 2 Mars probe designed jointly by the European Space Agency and British 
National Space Center headed to the surface of Mars in December 2003, contact was lost 
and the probe never heard from again (PMI, October 2004). In retrospect, it appears that 
excessive pressure on time, cost, and weight compromised the mission right from the 
start. With insufficient public funding, the design team had to spend much of their time 
raising private funds instead of addressing difficult technical issues. Further, late changes 
forced the team to reduce the Beagle’s weight from 238 pounds to 132 pounds. The three 
airbags developed to soften the probe’s landing impact failed during tests, and a para-
chute design was installed, but lack of time prevented sufficient testing of it. A review 
commission’s Final Report recommended that in the future:
• Requisite financing be available at the outset of a project.
• Formal project reviews be conducted on a regular basis.
• Milestones be established where all stakeholders reconsider the project.
• Expectations of potential failure be included in the funding consideration.
• Robust safety margins be included and funded for uncertainties.
The project final report is not another evaluation, though the audits and evaluations 
have a role in it. With the exception of routine projects where a simple “We did it. No 
problems” is sufficient, the project final report is a history of the project. It is a chronicle, 
typically written by the PM, of what went right and what went wrong, who served the 
project in what capacity, what was done, how it was managed, and the lessons learned. 
The report should also indicate where the source materials can be found—the project 
plan and all of its many parts; charter, budget, schedule, earned value charts, audit 
reports, scope‐change documents, resource allocations, all updates of any of the above 
documents, and so on. It is all too easy to ignore these left‐overs from yesterday’s project, 
but it is most important not to do so. The PMI refers to these as the organization’s assets, 
and the Project Report is a critical part of them. We think of them as the experiences all 
managers should learn by—but so often do not.
Risk
Best Practice

282  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
How the report is written, and in what style, is a matter of taste and preference. In 
any case, the following items should be addressed.
• Project performance— perhaps the most important information is what the project 
attempted to achieve, what it did achieve, and the reasons for the resulting per-
formance. Since this is not a formal evaluation of the project, these items can be 
the PM’s personal opinion on the matter. The lessons learned in the project 
should also be included here.
• Administrative performance— administrative practices that worked particularly 
well, or poorly, should be identified and the reasons given. If some modification 
to administrative practices would help future projects, this should be noted and 
explained.
• Organizational structure— projects may have different structures, and the way the 
project is organized may either aid or hinder the project. Modifications that 
would help future projects should be identified.
• Project teamwork— a confidential section of the final report should identify team 
members who worked particularly well, and possibly those who worked poorly 
with others. The PM may also recommend that individuals or groups who were 
particularly effective when operating as a team be kept together on future 
assignments.
• Project management techniques— project success is so dependent on the skill and 
techniques for forecasting, planning, budgeting, scheduling, resource allocation, 
control, risk management, and so on that procedures that worked well or badly 
should be noted and commented upon. Recommendations for improvements in 
future projects should be made and explained.
The fundamental purpose of the final report is to improve future projects. Thus, rec-
ommendations for improvements are especially appropriate and valued by the organization. 
Of course, none of the recommendations for improvement of future projects will be of any 
help whatsoever if the recommendations are not circulated among other project managers 
as well as the appropriate senior managers. The PM should follow up on any recommenda-
tions made to make sure that they are accepted and installed, or rejected for cause.
Since most of the information and recollections come from the PM, it is suggested 
that the PM keep a project “diary.” This is not an official project document but an infor-
mal collection of thoughts, reflections, and commentaries on project happenings. Not 
only will the diary help the PM construct the final report, but also it can be a superior 
source of wisdom for new, aspiring project managers. Above all, it keeps good ideas from 
getting lost amid the welter of project activities and crises.
Risk
Projects are usually closed out either based on (1) the degree to which they are ­meeting 
their goals or (2) the degree to which they qualify on factors shown to be linked to 
success or failure in other projects. The most common reason for early ­closure is the 
probability of a technical or commercial failure. The three types of ­project closure are 
extinction, addition, and integration. The closure decision should be decided by a 
management committee, run by a closure manager, and executed as a project in itself. 
Placing the project team members in new assignments is a particularly important 
aspect of closure. The PM should prepare a project final report that makes recom-
mendations for improving the organization’s future project‐management practices.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
•  283
REVIEW QUESTIONS
	 1.	 What are some of the commonly used project evalua-
tion criteria?
	 2.	 What are the measurement challenges associated with 
using a multivariate model such as a scoring model?
	 3.	 Contrast project audits with financial audits.
	 4.	 What are the typical steps in a project audit?
	 5.	 What information should be included in a project  
audit?
	 6.	 What are the types of project closure?
	 7.	 What are the main duties of the closure manager?
	 8.	 What issues should be addressed in the project 
final report?
	 9.	 What are the major purposes served by an after‐the‐ 
fact project evaluation?
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
	 1.	 How should an audit team handle an audit where it is 
explicitly restricted from accessing certain materials 
and/or personnel?
	 2.	 What might be some characteristics of a good clo-
sure manager?
	 3.	 How should a committee decide which closure 
method to use?
	 4.	 What steps might be taken to reduce the anxiety of 
project team members facing an audit?
	 5.	 What are the dangers in evaluating a project based on 
the reason(s) it was selected (such as its being a com-
petitive necessity), rather than the goals and objec-
tives in the project proposal or contract?
	 6.	 It is frequently suggested that items that will become 
potential problems later in the project life be decided 
up front, such as how to allocate revenues or dispose 
of project assets. How can this wisdom be used for 
project problems that cannot be foreseen?
	 7.	 Can you think of any acceptable ways of assigning 
credit for profits (or responsibility for costs) resulting 
from a project on which several departments worked?
	 8.	 How might an audit team deal with an attempt to 
co‐opt the team?
	 9.	 In Section  8.2, subsection The Audit Report, six 
­elements are listed that should be included in every 
audit report. For each element, explain why its inclu-
sion is important.
	10.	 Referring to the “Evaluation Criteria” subsection of 
Section  8.1, how do you reconcile the difference 
between the goals and objectives of the project as 
given to the project manager in Chapter 1 and these 
criteria by which she or he is now judged?
	11.	 If the actual closure of a project is a project in itself, 
how is it different from other projects?
	12.	 What are some reasons that a failing project might 
still not be closed?
	13.	 What might make a project unsuccessful during the 
closure process?
	14.	 Who would make the best auditors: outside unbiased 
auditors or inside auditors who are more familiar with 
the organization, its procedures, and the project? Why?
	15.	 Under what circumstances would you change your 
answer to the previous question?
	16.	 Would frequent brief evaluations be best, or would 
less frequent major evaluations be preferred?
	17.	 Should the results of an evaluation or audit be shared 
with the project team?
	18.	 Under what circumstances is a detailed audit apt to 
be useful?

284  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
INCIDENTS FOR DISCUSSION
General Construction Company
General Construction Company has a contract to build 
three lower‐income apartment buildings for the city of 
Santa Fe, New Mexico. During construction of the first 
building, the Project Manager formed an auditing team to 
audit the construction process for each building. He asked 
the team to develop a list of minimum requirements for 
the projects and use this as a baseline in the audit. While 
reviewing the contract documents, one of the audit team 
members found a discrepancy between the contract mini-
mum requirements and the City’s minimum requirements. 
Based on his findings, he has told the project manager that 
he has decided to contact the city administrator and dis-
cuss the problem.
Question: If you were the project manager, how would 
you handle this situation? How can a customer be assured of 
satisfactory project completion?
Lexi Electronics
Lexi Electronics is nearing completion of a 2‐year project 
to develop and produce a new digital phone. The phone is 
no bigger than a Popsicle stick but has all the features of a 
standard digital cellular phone. The assembly line and all 
the production facilities will be completed in 5 months. 
The first units will be produced in 8 months. The plant 
manager believes it is time to begin winding down the pro-
ject. He has three methods in mind for closing the project: 
extinction, addition, and integration. He is not sure which 
method is best.
Question: Which of the three methods would you rec-
ommend, and why?
The Shocking Machine
Lithotropic Corporation is the manufacturer of machinery 
for pulverizing kidney stones with shock waves. They have 
just completed a new machine. The new machine performs 
at a medically acceptable level, but it does not precisely 
meet the specific performance standards that were set for 
the project. The hospital that contracted for the purchase 
of the machinery is threatening to sue for failure to deliver 
to the project specifications. The hospital has contacted 
Tom Lament, the corporate attorney for Lithotropic.
Question: What do you suggest Mr. Lament do, if any-
thing, to begin his preparation for defending or settling this 
potential lawsuit?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Friendly Assisted Living Facility Case—8
It was a beautiful day in mid‐May 20 8. The Friendly 
Medical Center Assisted Living Facility project was near-
ing completion. As usual, the construction project man-
ager, Kyle Nanno, was thinking about the construction 
project’s schedule. It seemed to him that work on finishing 
the interior of the building was slowing down a bit. He 
knew that the final weeks of a project always seemed to 
take forever, but he also knew that the project was running 
almost 2 weeks late as a result of a problem encountered 
during the excavation phase of the construction project.
During March and April, it appeared that they were 
catching up. Kyle had discussed with the construction 
contractor that Friendly Medical Center would pay over-
time to catch up, but the speed‐up was temporary, and the 
job continued to be late. Kyle was not quite sure why. 
Progress just seemed to be in slow motion. He decided to 
meet with Fred Splient, the President and CEO of Friendly 
Medical Center, to discuss the problems.
Fred suggested that Kyle call in someone to audit the 
project, in particular to examine the project schedule care-
fully. Fred also wanted the auditor to look at the project 
expenses to date. Fred had just received a crude spread-
sheet from the CFO, and it did not reflect the progress he 
thought should have been made as this project was coming 
to an end.

ALF Program Expenses as of 5/24X8
Budgeted
Actual as of  
5/24/X8
Remaining $
Construction Costs:
Building
$6,743,000.00
$6,743,000.00
$0.00
Contingency
674,300.00
453,277.00
221,023.00
Land
600,000.00
600,000.00
0.00
Program development &  
equipment costs
405,000.00
354,332.00
50,668.00
Furniture
400,000.00
249,679.00
150,321.00
A&E fees
 
 
 
Financing costs
202,000.00
202,000.00
0.00
Capitalized interest
135,000.00
135,000.00
0.00
Site improvements
125,000.00
147,655.00
−22,655.00
Phone & IS system
30,000.00
22,438.00
7,562.00
Kitchen equipment
30,000.00
23,776.00
6,224.00
Subtotal
$9,691,300.00
$9,278,157.00
$413,143.00
Organizational Costs:
Legal and accounting
$25,000.00
$0.00
$25,000.00
Initial marketing
250,000.00
0.00
250,000.00
Project consultant
80,000.00
0.00
80,000.00
Follow‐up market survey
20,000.00
0.00
20,000.00
Subtotal
$375,000.0
$0.00
$375,000.00
Total
$10,066,300.00
$9,278,157.00
$788,143.00
Fred asked Kyle to find out if anyone in the hospital’s 
accounting department had experience with projects and 
project‐management software. Kyle knew instantly who to 
call. Caroline Stevens had once helped him on other hos-
pital projects. Kyle trusted her to act impartially and to be 
able to figure out what was happening.
Caroline agreed to function as the Project Auditor. She 
began by examining the most recent project schedule from 
the construction company. She then created a progress‐to‐
date report with MSP. She also did a complete analysis of 
the CFO’s report. The expense report she reviewed and 
updated is found below.
Using MSP, Caroline created a graphical progress 
report on the project as of May 24. She marked the actual 
progress of each unfinished activity by placing a diamond 
embedded in a circle on the project’s Gantt chart. If the 
symbol was to the left of the May 24 line, that activity was 
late; the amount of lateness was indicated by the distance 
of the symbol to the May 24 line. The symbol for on‐time 
activities rested on the May 24 line. If there had been early 
activities, their symbols would have been to the right of 
the May 24 line. Caroline’s chart is shown above.
Caroline then scheduled a meeting with Kyle and Fred 
Splient. She reported that she did see a work slowdown. 
She conducted interviews with the construction team, 
and it appeared that they were concerned about their next 
work assignment. They told her that in the past as projects 
were coming to a close they were told of their next 
­scheduled job. They had not heard anything yet, and they 
were worried. She also reported that the interior designer 
had added seven extra days to complete the interiors (Task 
#6 of the project) because the carpet and wall coverings 
might arrive a week late from the manufacturer. They 
actually arrived on schedule. The estimated remaining 
duration for the interiors to be completed was 34.6 days. 
The designer did tell her that the furniture had not all 
arrived, so they were withholding about 30 percent of the 
payment until it all arrived.
Caroline also reported to Fred that it appeared that the 
expenses that were allocated to pay back Friendly Medical 
Center for such things as preliminary marketing efforts, 
legal support, and so on had not yet been expensed to the 
project budget. The only thing that was expensed was the 
original project construction budget. That budget seemed 
to be right on track. Kyle reported that he intended to 
spend the rest of the contingency budget for overtime 
work by the construction crews. He also intended to use 
the rest of the IS budget to purchase computers for the 
common areas of the facility and to wire those areas for 
access to the Internet. In addition, he was waiting for bills 
case
•  285

Assisted Living Facility
Construction Project Update
as of 5/24/X8
ID
Task Name
Baseline Duration
Remaining Duration Duration Variance
Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug
Mar Apr May Jun
5/24
Jul Aug
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan
20X8
100%
100%
100%
80%
0%
0%
0%
0%
Feb
Construction & furnishing
369 days
329 days
95 days
113 days
134 days
234 days
0 days
8 days
0 days
0 days
8 days
307.47 days
314.49 days
110 days
99 days
120 days
187.2 days
0 days
0 wks
0 days
0 days
0 wks
14 days
14 days
15 days
–14 days
–14 days
0 days
0 days
0 wks
0 days
0 days
0 wks
76.63 days
28.61 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
46.8 days
0 days
8 wks
0 days
0 days
8 wks
Facility construction
First 45 (light assisted) units turned over
Remaining 57 units (light & heavy) turned over
Construction complete
Building ready for residents
Current date shown as:
% Complete is % of baseline time
divided by time used to date
Project Manager: K. Nanno
First 45 units ready for residents
Phase 1 – Foundation & excavation
Phase 2 – Structure
Phase 3 – Enclosure
Phase 4 – Interiors
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Task
Progress
Baseline
Milestone
Baseline summary
Baseline milestone
Summary
*Please note MSP calculates the duration variance for each step of the action plan by subtracting the actual from the baseline. The summary task baseline and actual duration 
are then rolled up to the summary tasks’ baseline and actual duration figures. The summary tasks’ duration variance is then calculated by adding the summary task actual 
duration plus the remaining duration and then subtracting that sum from the baseline duration.
286

from some of the companies that supplied the required 
medical equipment. He was planning to spend all that was 
allocated for that budgeted item. He was over budget on 
the site improvements and under budget for the kitchen 
equipment.
Caroline and Fred praised Kyle for his management of 
the Construction budget.
As soon as Caroline and Kyle left Fred’s office, Fred 
called his CFO to find out why the other items were still 
not reflected in the project budget.
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Estimate the final construction budget.
	 2.	 What should they do about the work slowdown?
	 3.	 Create a Gantt chart with the revisions to the dura-
tion of the interiors step. When will the project be 
completed?
	 4.	 What is the importance of the fact that the Hospital 
staff expenses were not reported under the project  
budget?
	 5.	 Write a one‐page audit report of this project.
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Datatech
Steve Bawnson joined Datatech’s engineering department 
upon obtaining his B.S. in Electrical Engineering almost 6 
years ago. He soon established himself as an expert in 
analog signal processing and was promoted to Senior 
Design Engineer just 2 years after joining the firm. After 
serving as a Senior Design Engineer for 2 years, he was 
promoted to Project Manager and asked to oversee a prod-
uct development project involving a relatively minor 
product line extension.
As Steve was clearing his desk to make room for a cup 
of coffee, his computer dinged indicating the arrival of yet 
another email message. Steve usually paid little attention 
to the arrival of new email messages, but for some reason 
this message caught his attention. Swiveling in his chair to 
face the computer on the credenza behind his desk, he 
read the subject line of the message: Notebook Computer 
Development Project Audit Report. Steve then noticed 
that the message was addressed to the Vice‐President of 
Product Development and was cc: to him. He immediately 
opened and read the message.
Datatech had recently adopted a policy requiring that 
all ongoing projects be periodically audited. Last week this 
policy was implemented and Steve was informed that his 
project would be the first one audited by a team consisting 
of internal and external experts.
Datatech Inc. is a full‐line producer of desktop and 
notebook computers that are distributed through a ­network 
of value‐added resellers. After completing the desktop 
product line extension project about 9 months ago, Steve 
was asked to serve as the project manager for a project to 
develop a new line of ultrathin notebook computers.
In asking Steve to serve as the project manager for the 
notebook computer development project, the Vice‐
President of Product Development conveyed to Steve the 
importance of completing the project within a year. To 
emphasize this point, the Vice‐President noted that  
he personally made the decision to go forward with this 
project and had not taken the project through the normal 
project selection and approval process in order to save 
time. Steve had successfully completed the desktop project 
in a similar timeframe, and told the Vice‐President that 
this target was quite reasonable. Steve added that he was 
confident that the project would be completed on time 
and on budget.
Steve wasted no time in planning the project. Based on 
the success of the desktop project, he decided to modify 
the work breakdown structure he had developed for the 
desktop project and apply it to this new project. He 
recalled the weeks of planning that went into developing 
the work breakdown structure for the desktop project. The 
entire project team had been involved, and that was a rela-
tively straightforward product line extension. The current 
project was more complicated, and there simply was not 
sufficient time to involve all team members. What was the 
point of wasting valuable time and resources to re‐invent 
the wheel?
After modifying the work breakdown structure, Steve 
scheduled a meeting with the Vice‐President of Product 
Development to discuss staffing the project. As was typical 
of other product development projects at Datatech.
case
•  287

288  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
Steve and the Vice‐President agreed that the project 
should be housed within the engineering division. In his 
capacity as project manager, Steve would serve as liaison 
to other functional areas such as marketing, purchasing, 
finance, and production.
As the project progressed, it continued to slip behind 
schedule. Steve found it necessary to schedule a meeting 
each week to address how unanticipated activities would 
be completed. For example, last week the team realized 
that no one had been assigned to design the hinge system 
for attaching the screen to the base.
Indeed, Steve found himself increasingly in crisis mode. 
For example, this morning the manufacturing group sent a 
heated email to Steve. The manufacturing group noted 
that they just learned of the notebook computer project 
and based on the design presented to them, they would not 
be able to manufacture the printed circuit boards because 
of the extensive amount of surface mount components 
required. Steve responded to this message by noting that 
the engineering group was doing its job and had designed 
a state‐of‐the‐art notebook computer. He added that it was 
the manufacturing group’s problem to decide how to 
produce it.
Just as troubling was the crisis that had occurred earlier 
in the week. The Vice‐President of Product Development 
had requested that the notebook computer incorporate a 
new type of interface that would allow the notebook com-
puter to synchronize information with a tablet computer 
Datatech was about to introduce. Steve explained that 
incorporating the interface into the notebook computer 
would require changes to about 40 percent of the com-
puter and would delay the introduction by a minimum of 
several months. Nevertheless, the Vice‐President was 
­adamant that the changes be made.
As Steve laid down the audit report, he reflected on its 
conclusion that the project be closed immediately. In the 
judgment of the auditing team, the project had slipped so 
far behind schedule that the costs to complete it were not 
justified.
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 To what extent were the problems facing the note-
book computer development project avoidable? 
What could have been done to avoid these problems?
	 2.	 Would it make sense to apply a project selection 
model such as the weighted scoring model to this pro-
ject to determine if it should be terminated?
	 3.	 In your opinion, are the types of problems that arose 
in this situation typical of other organizations? If so, 
what can organizations in general do to avoid these 
types of problems?
C
 
A
 
S
 
E
Ivory Tower Systems
Ivory Tower Systems (ITS) was founded by two former 
computer science professors to develop mobile apps for the 
consumer market that leverage state‐of‐the‐art research in 
the computer science field. Typically, the company looks 
for opportunities to apply sophisticated algorithms to prac-
tical problems with mass appeal. Its first app used a sophis-
ticated optimization algorithm to create weekly meal plans 
based on data the users supplied about their food likes and 
dislikes, and their weekly food budget.
Currently an app is under development code named 
Tour Guide. While there are many mapping apps currently 
available that provide directions from one location to 
another, Tour Guide allows the users to enter their starting 
location and multiple destinations. Then, based on a pro-
prietary heuristic algorithm, the app would provide the 
optimal sequence to travel to all destinations and ulti-
mately end at the starting location. It was envisioned that 
the app would be used by people to plan weekend errands 
as well as people on vacation to plan sight‐seeing days.
The project was originally planned to take 18 months. 
The project is now in its 16th month, and technical chal-
lenges that should have been resolved months ago remain. 
As a result, the ITS founders decided to hire an external 
expert in software development projects to audit the 
­project. The audit report is provided in Figure A.

AUDIT REPORT
Auditor: George Johnson
Date of Audit: January 11
Project Audited: Tour Guide App Development
Project Manager: Roger Gilbert
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of this project is to develop a proprietary heuristic algorithm and then embed the algorithm 
in a mobile app that people can use to plan trips involving multiple destinations. The app would provide 
directions to each destination and would end at the starting location.
CURRENT STATUS
The project is significantly behind schedule. The deadline for the project is 2 months from the date of 
this audit, and several significant technical challenges related to developing the algorithm remain to be 
resolved. Furthermore, it is likely that numerous other significant challenges will arise as the project team 
attempts to integrate the algorithm with the mapping database.
FUTURE PROJECT STATUS
Given the known technical challenges and likely challenges to arise, there is virtually no chance the 
project will meet its original due date. Furthermore, the longer the project is delayed, the more it will go over 
budget. Given the nature of the current and likely future technical challenges, it is not possible to estimate 
what changes should be made to the project’s schedule or budget.
CRITICAL MANAGEMENT ISSUES
The project has been mismanaged from the start. While Mr. Gilbert has a solid technical background in 
computer science, he has no prior background or experience in leading a project. One team member confi-
dentially communicated to me that because of his background, Mr. Gilbert spends almost all of his time 
trying to solve the technical problems related to developing the algorithm and spends little time actually 
managing the project. I personally found Mr. Gilbert to be very abrasive and unwilling to share key project 
documents. After meeting with Mr. Gilbert, I believe there is a good chance that his reluctance to share 
project‐related documents stems from the fact that they simply do not exist.
FINAL COMMENTS
There is virtually no chance that the project will finish on schedule and on budget. I recommend that a 
new project manager be immediately appointed and Mr. Gilbert reassigned as a project team member. 
Alternatively, senior management may decide to terminate the project.
Figure A
QUESTIONS
	 1.	 Do you have any concerns about the audit process at 
ITS? If so, what are they and what changes to their 
auditing process would you recommend for the future?
	 2.	 Critique the audit report. What are its strengths and 
weaknesses?
	 3.	 What are the pros and cons of using an external audi-
tor in this situation? Which type of auditor would you 
recommend for this project?
QUESTIONS
•  289

290  •
Chapter 8 / Evaluating and Closing the Project
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baker, N. R., S. G. Green, A. S. Bean, W. Blank, and 
S. K. Tadisina. “Sources of First Suggestion and Project 
Success/Failure in Industrial Research.” Proceedings: 
Conference on the Management of Technological Innovation. 
Washington, D.C., 1983. (A groundbreaking, early empir-
ical paper on predictions of project success and failure.)
Dean, B. V. Evaluating, Selecting, and Controlling 
R&D  Projects. New York: American Management 
Association, 1968.
Ingram, T. “Managing Client/Server and Open Systems 
Projects: A 10‐Year Study of 62 Mission‐Critical Projects.” 
Project Management Journal, June 1994.
Kimball, 
R. 
“Nucor’s 
Strategic 
Project.” 
Project 
Management Journal, September 1988.
Mantel, J. R. Private consulting project.
Pinto, J. K., and S. J. Mantel, Jr. “The Causes of Project 
Failure.” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 
November 1990.
PMI, “Mars or Bust,” PM Network, October 2004.
Shenhar, A. J., O. Levy, and D. Dvir. “Mapping the 
Dimensions of Project Success.” Project Management 
Journal, June 1997.
Wheatley, M. “Making the Cut.” PM Network, June 2009.

  291
A
p
p
e
n
d
i
x
This appendix is intended to serve as a brief review of the probability and statistics con-
cepts used in this text. Students who require more review than is available in this appen-
dix should consult one of the texts listed in the bibliography.
	A.1	
PROBABILITY
Uncertainty in project management is a fact of life. The duration of project activities, 
the costs of various resources, and the timing of a technological change all exemplify the 
types of uncertainties encountered when managing projects. Each of these random 
­variables is more or less uncertain. Further, we do not know when or if a given activity 
will be successfully completed, a senior official will approve a project, or a piece of soft-
ware will run without problems. Each event is more or less uncertain. We do not know the 
values that each variable and event will assume.
In common terminology we reflect our uncertainty with such phrases as “not very 
likely,” “not a chance,” “for sure.” While these descriptive terms communicate one’s feel-
ing regarding the chances of a particular event’s occurrence, they simply are not precise 
enough to allow analysis of chances and odds.
Simply put, probability is a number on a scale used to measure uncertainty. The range 
of the probability scale is from 0 to 1, with a 0 probability indicating that an event has 
no chance of occurring and a probability of 1 indicating that an event is absolutely cer-
tain to occur. The more likely an event is to occur, the closer its probability is to 1. This 
probability definition, which is general, needs to be further augmented to illustrate the 
various types of probability that decision makers can assess. There are three types of prob-
ability that the project manager should be aware of.
• Subjective probability
• Logical probability
• Experimental probability
Probability and Statistics

292  •
Appendix a/ Probability and Statistics
Subjective Probability
Subjective probability is based on individual information and belief. Different ­ 
individuals will assess the chances of a particular event in different ways, and the same 
individual may assess different probabilities for the same event at different points in time. 
For example, one need only watch the blackjack players in Las Vegas to see that different 
people assess probabilities in different ways. Also, daily trading in the stock market is the 
result of different probability assessments by those trading. The sellers sell because it is 
their belief that the probability of appreciation is low, and the buyers buy because they 
believe that the probability of appreciation is high. Clearly, these different probability 
assessments are about the same events.
Logical Probability
Logical probability is based on physical phenomena and on symmetry of events. For 
example, the probability of drawing a three of hearts from a standard 52‐card playing 
deck is 1/52. Each card has an equal likelihood of being drawn. In flipping a coin, the 
chance of “heads” is 0.50. That is, since there are only two possible outcomes from one 
flip of a coin, each event has one‐half the total probability, or 0.50. A final example is 
the roll of a single die. Since all six sides are identical, the chance of any one event occur-
ring (i.e., a 6, a 3) is 1/6.
Experimental Probability
Experimental probability is based on frequency of occurrence of events in trial situations. 
For example, in estimating the duration for a particular activity, we might record the 
time required to complete the activity on similar projects. If we collect data on 10 pro-
jects and the duration was 20 days on 3 of the 10, the probability of the duration equaling 
20 days is said to be 0.30 (i.e., 3/10).
probability of event
number of times event occurred
total number of trials
Both logical and experimental probability are referred to as objective probability in 
contrast to the individually assessed subjective probability. Each of these is based on, and 
directly computed from, facts.
	A.2	
EVENT RELATIONSHIPS AND PROBABILITY LAWS
Events are classified in a number of ways that allow us to state rules for probability com-
putations. Some of these classifications and definitions follow.
1.	 Independent events: events are independent if the occurrence of one does not affect the 
probability of occurrence of the others.
2.	 Dependent events: events are termed dependent if the occurrence of one does affect the 
probability of occurrence of others.
3.	 Mutually exclusive events: Two events are termed mutually exclusive if the occurrence 
of one precludes the occurrence of the other. For example, in the birth of a child, the 
events “It’s a boy!” and “It’s a girl!” are mutually exclusive.

A.2 EVENT RELATIONSHIPS AND PROBABILITY LAWS
•  293
4.	 Collectively exhaustive events: A set of events is termed collectively exhaustive if on 
any one trial at least one of them must occur. For example, in rolling a die, one of the 
events 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 must occur; therefore, these six events are collectively 
exhaustive.
We can also define the union and intersection of two events. Consider two events 
A and B. The union of A and B includes all outcomes in A or B or in both A and B. For 
example, in a card game you will win if you draw a diamond or a jack. The union of these 
two events includes all diamonds (including the jack of diamonds) and the remaining 
three jacks (hearts, clubs, spades). The or in the union is the inclusive or. That is, in our 
example you will win with a jack or a diamond or a jack of diamonds (i.e., both events).
The intersection of two events includes all outcomes that are members of both events. 
Thus, in our previous example of jacks and diamonds, the jack of diamonds is the only 
outcome contained in both events and is therefore the only member of the intersection 
of the two events.
Let us now consider the relevant probability laws based on our understanding of the 
above definitions and concepts. For ease of exposition let us define the following notation.
P A
A
P B
( )
( )
probability that event
will occur
probability thatt event
will occur
B
If two events are mutually exclusive, then their joint occurrence is impossible. 
Hence, P A
B
(
)
and
0 for mutually exclusive events. If the events are not mutually 
exclusive, P A
B
(
)
and
 can be computed (as we will see in the next section); this probabil-
ity is termed the joint probability of A and B. Also, if A and B are not mutually exclusive, 
then we can also define the conditional probability of A given that B has already occurred 
or the conditional probability of B given that A has already occurred. These probabilities 
are written as P A B
( | ) and P B A
( | ), respectively.
The Multiplication Rule
The joint probability of two events that are not mutually exclusive is found by using the 
multiplication rule. If the events are not mutually exclusive, the joint probability 
is given by
P A
B
P A
P B A
P B
P A B
(
)
( )
(
)
( )
(
)
and
or
If the events are independent, then P B A
( | ) and P A B
( | ) are equal to P B
( ) and P A
( ), 
respectively, and therefore the joint probability is given by
P A
B
P A
P B
(
)
( )
( )
and
From these two relationships, we can find the conditional probability for two dependent 
events from
P A B
P A
B
P B
( | )
(
)
( )
and
and
P B A
P A
B
P A
( | )
(
)
( )
and

294  •
Appendix a/ Probability and Statistics
Also, the P A
( ) and P B
( ) can be computed if the events are independent, as
P A
P A
B
P B
( )
(
)
( )
and
and
P B
P A
B
P A
( )
(
)
( )
and
The Addition Rule
The addition rule is used to compute the probability of the union of two events. If two 
events are mutually exclusive, then P A
B
(
)
and
0, as we indicated previously. Therefore, 
the probability of either A or B or both is simply the probability of A or B. This is given by
P A
B
P A
P B
(
)
( )
( )
or
But, if the events are not mutually exclusive, then the probability of A or B is given by
P A
B
P A
P B
P A
B
(
)
( )
( )
(
)
or
and
We can denote the reasonableness of this expression by looking at the following 
Venn diagram.
B
A
The two circles represent the probabilities of the events A and B, respectively. The 
shaded area represents the overlap in the events; that is, the intersection of A and B. If 
we add the area of A and the area of B, we have included the shaded area twice. Therefore, 
to get the total area of A or B, we must subtract one of the areas of the intersection that 
we have added.
If the two circles in the Venn diagram do not overlap, A and B are said to be mutually 
exclusive and P A
B
(
)
and
0. In this case
P A
B
P A
P B
(
)
( )
( )
or
If two events are collectively exhaustive, then the probability of (
)
A
B
or
 is equal to 1. 
That is, for two collectively exhaustive events, one or the other or both must occur, and 
therefore, P A
B
(
)
or
 must be 1.
	A.3	
STATISTICS
Because events are uncertain, we must employ special analyses in organizations to ensure 
that our decisions recognize the chance nature of outcomes. We employ statistics and 
statistical analysis to
1.	 Concisely express the tendency and the relative uncertainty of a particular situation.
2.	 Develop inferences or an understanding about a situation.

A.3 STATISTICS
•  295
“Statistics” is an elusive and often misused term. Batting averages, birth weights, 
student grade points are all statistics. They are descriptive statistics. That is, they are 
quantitative measures of some entity and, for our purposes, can be considered as data 
about the entity. The second use of the term “statistics” is in relation to the body of 
theory and methodology used to analyze available evidence (typically quantitative) and 
to develop inferences from the evidence.
Two descriptive statistics that are often used in presenting information about a popu-
lation of items (and consequently in inferring some conclusions about the population) 
are the mean and the variance. The mean in a population (denoted as µ and pronounced 
“mu”) can be computed in two ways, each of which gives identical results.
j
k
j
j
P
1
(
)
where
k
j
the number of discrete values that the random variable
may assume
a value of the random variable
the prob
j
j
P(
)
ability (or relative frequency) of 
 in the population
j
Also, the mean can be computed as
i
k
i N
1
/
where
N
the size of the population the number of different items
(
 in the population
the value of the ith item in the po
)
j
pulation
The mean is also termed the expected value of the population and is written as E( ).
The variance of the items in the population measures the dispersion of the items about 
their mean (denoted 
2 and pronounced “sigma squared”). It is computed in one of the 
following two ways:
2
1
2
j
k
j
j
P
(
)
(
)
or
2
1
2
j
N
j
N
(
)
The standard deviation, another measure of dispersion, is simply the square root of 
the variance (denoted )
2
Descriptive versus Inferential Statistics
Organizations are typically faced with decisions for which a large portion of the relevant 
information is uncertain. In hiring graduates of your university, the “best” prospective 
employee is unknown to the organization. Also, in introducing a new product, proposing 
a tax law change to boost employment, drilling an oil well, and so on, the outcomes are 
always uncertain.

296  •
Appendix a/ Probability and Statistics
Statistics can often aid management in helping to understand this uncertainty. This 
is accomplished through the use of one or the other, or both, of the purposes of statistics. 
That is, statistics is divided according to its two major purposes: describing the major 
characteristics of a large mass of data and inferring something about a large mass of data 
from a smaller sample drawn from the mass. One methodology summarizes all the data; 
the other reasons from a small set of the data to the larger total.
Descriptive statistics uses such measures as the mean, median, mode, range, variance, 
standard deviation, and such graphical devices as the bar chart and the histogram. When 
an entire population (a complete set of objects or entities with a common characteristic 
of interest) of data is summarized by computing such measures as the mean and the vari-
ance of a single characteristic, the measure is referred to as a parameter of that population. 
For example, if the population of interest is all female freshmen at a university and all 
their ages were used to compute an arithmetic average of 19.2 years, this measure is 
called a parameter of that population.
Inferential statistics also uses means and variance, but in a different manner. The 
objective of inferential statistics is to infer the value of a population parameter through 
the study of a small sample (a portion of a population) from that population. For exam-
ple, a random sample of 30 freshmen females could produce the information that there is 
90 percent certainty that the average age of all freshmen women is between 18.9 and 
19.3 years. We do not have as much information as if we had used the entire population, 
but then we did not have to spend the time to find and determine the age of each mem-
ber of the population either.
Before considering the logic behind inferential statistics, let us define the primary 
measures of central tendency and dispersion used in both descriptive and inferential 
statistics.
Measures of Central Tendency
The central tendency of a group of data represents the average, middle, or “normal” value 
of the data. The most frequently used measures of central tendency are the mean, the 
median, and the mode.
The mean of a population of values was given earlier as
i
N
i
N
1
where
the mean
the value of the th data item in the populati
i
i
oon
the number of data items in the population
N
	
The mean of a sample of items from a population is given by
i
N
i
N
1
where
the sample mean pronounced
bar
the value of the ith
(
)
“
”
i
 data item in the sample
the number of data items select
N
ed in the sample	

A.3 STATISTICS
•  297
The median is the middle value of a population of data (or sample) where the data 
are ordered by value. That is, in the following data set
3 2 9 6 1 5 7 3 4
, , , , , , , ,
4 is the median since (as you can see when we order the data)
1 2 3 3 4 5 6 7 9
, , , , , , , ,
50 percent of the data values are above 4 and 50 percent below 4. If there are an even 
number of data items, then the mean of the middle two is the median. For example, if 
there had also been an 8 in the above data set, the median would be 4 5
4
5
2
.
(
) / .
The mode of a population (or sample) of data items is the value that most fre-
quently occurs. In the above data set, 3 is the mode of the set. A distribution can  
have more than one mode if there are two or more values that appear with equal 
frequency.
Measures of Dispersion
Dispersion refers to the scatter around the mean of a distribution of values. Three meas-
ures of dispersion are the range, the variance, and the standard deviation.
The range is the difference between the highest and the lowest value of the data 
set, that is,
high
low
The variance of a population of items is given by
2
1
2
i
N
i
N
(
)
where
2
the population variance	
The variance of a sample of items is given by
S
n
i
n
i
2
1
2
1
(
)
where
S2
the sample variance	
The standard deviation is simply the square root of the variance. That is,
i
n
i
N
1
2
(
)
and
S
n
i
n
i
1
2
1
(
)
 and S are the population and sample standard deviations, respectively.

298  •
Appendix a/ Probability and Statistics
Inferential Statistics
A basis of inferential statistics is the interval estimate. Whenever we infer from partial 
data to an entire population, we are doing so with some uncertainty in our inference. 
Specifying an interval estimate (e.g., average weight is between 10 and 12 pounds) rather 
than a point estimate (e.g., the average weight is 11.3 pounds) simply helps to relate that 
uncertainty. The interval estimate is not as precise as the point estimate.
Inferential statistics uses probability samples where the chance of selection of each 
item is known. A random sample is one in which each item in the population has an 
equal chance of selection.
The procedure used to estimate a population mean from a sample is to
1.	 Select a sample of size n from the population.
2.	 Compute  the mean and S the standard deviation.
3.	 Compute the precision of the estimate (i.e., the limits around  within which the 
mean  is believed to exist).
Steps 1 and 2 are straightforward, relying on the equations we have presented in 
earlier sections. Step 3 deserves elaboration.
The precision of an estimate for a population parameter depends on two things: the 
standard deviation of the sampling distribution, and the confidence you desire to have in 
the final estimate. Two statistical laws provide the logic behind Step 3.
First, the law of large numbers states that as the size of a sample increases toward 
infinity, the difference between the estimate of the mean and the true population mean 
tends toward zero. For practical purposes, a sample of size 30 is assumed to be “large 
enough” for the sample estimate to be a good estimate of the population mean.
Second, the Central Limit theorem states that if all possible samples of size n were 
taken from a population with any distribution, the distribution of the means of those 
samples would be normally distributed with a mean equal to the population mean and a 
standard deviation equal to the standard deviation of the population divided by the 
square root of the sample size. That is, if we took all of the samples of size 100 from the 
population shown in Figure  A.1, the sampling distribution would be as shown in 
Figure A.2. The logic behind Step 3 is that
1.	 Any sample of size n from the population can be considered one observation from the 
sampling distribution with the mean 
x
 and the standard deviation.
x
n
2.	 From our knowledge of the normal distribution, we know that there is a number (see 
normal probability table directly following the index) associated with each probabil-
ity value of a normal distribution (e.g., the probability that an item will be within 2 
standard deviations of the mean of a normal distribution is 94.45 percent, Z
2 in 
this case).
3.	 The value of the number Z is simply the number of standard deviations away from the 
mean where a given point lies. That is,
Z
(
)

A.3 STATISTICS
•  299
or in the case of Step 3
Z
x
x
(
)
4.	 The precision of a sample estimate is given by Z
x.
5.	 The interval estimate is given by the point estimate  plus or minus the precision, or
Z
x
In the previous example shown in Figures A.1 and A.2, suppose that a sample estimate  
based on a sample size of 100 was 56 and the population standard deviation  was 20. 
Also, suppose that the desired confidence was 90 percent. Since the associated Z value 
for 90 percent is 1.645, the interval estimate for  is
56
1 645
20
100
.
or
56
3 29
52 71
59 29
.
.
.
or
or
This interval estimate of the population mean states that the estimator is 90 percent 
confident that the true mean is between 52.71 and 59.29. There are numerous other 
sampling methods and other parameters that can be estimated; the student is referred to 
one of the references in the bibliography for further discussion.
σ = 20
µx = 50
X
Figure A.1  Population distribution
µx = 50
X
20
100
σx = n
σ =
= 2
Figure A.2  Sampling distribution of 
Standard Probability Distributions
The normal distribution, discussed and shown in Figure A.2, is probably the most com-
mon probability distribution in statistics. Some other common distributions are the 
Poisson, a discrete distribution, and the negative exponential, a continuous distribution. 
In project management, the beta distribution plays an important role; a continuous dis-
tribution, it is generally skewed, as in Figure A.1. Two positive parameters, alpha and 
beta, determine the distribution’s shape. Its mean, µ, and variance, 
2, are given by
2
2
2
(
) (
)

300  •
Appendix a/ Probability and Statistics
These are often approximated by
(
) /
a
m
b
4
6
and the standard deviation approximated by
(
) /
b
a
6
where
a is the optimistic value that might occur once in a hundred times,
m is the most likely (modal) value, and
b is the pessimistic value that might occur once in a hundred times.
Recent research (Keefer and Verdini,  1993) has indicated that a much better 
­approximation is given by
0 630
0 185
0 630
0 185
2
2
2
2
.
.
(
)
.
(
)
.
[(
)
(
) ]
d
c
e
d
c
e
where
c is an optimistic value at 1 in 20 times,
d is the median, and
e is a pessimistic value at 1 in 20 times.
See Chapter 5 for another method for approximating µ and 
2.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anderson, D., D. Sweeney, T. Williams, J. Camm, and 
J. Cochran. Statistics for Business and Economics. 12th ed. 
Mason, OH: South‐Western, 2014.
Bhattacharyya, G., and R. A. Johnson. Mathematical 
Statistics. Paramus, NJ: Prentice‐Hall, 1999.
Keefer, D. L., and W. A. Verdini. “Better Estimation of 
PERT Activity Time Parameters.” Management Science, 
September 1993.
Neter, J., W. Wasserman, and G. A. Whitmore. Applied 
Statistics, 4th ed. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1992.
Wackerly, D., W. Mendenhall, and R. L. Schaeffer. 
Mathematical Statistics with Applications, 7th ed. Belmont, 
CA: Thompson, 2008.

  301
I
n
d
e
x
Aaron, 77
Abernathy, 16
Abram, 125
Ackoff, 249
Across-the-board cuts, 252
Action plan. See Planning
Activity. See also Scheduling
budgeting, 118
definition, 146
dummy, 148
pseudoactivity, 213–214
slack, 146, 151–152
time estimation. See also Time estimation
at the 90% and 95% levels, 156
deterministic, 146
expected time, 155
probabilistic (stochastic), 146, 155–158
standard deviation of, 155
variance of, 156
Activity-based costing, 114, 118
Activity-on-arrow (AOA), activity-on-node 
(AON). See Scheduling
Adams, 242
Adler, 216
Afzalur, 64
Agile management, 3
Agile Manifesto, 92
Agile project management, 92—94, 257
comparison to waterfall approach, 93
Aggregate project plan, 22–23. See also 
Project Portfolio Process
breakthrough projects, 23
derivative projects, 23
platform projects, 23
R&D projects, 23
Uses, 23
Amor, 121
Analytical approach, 35
Atlantic States Chemical Laboratories, 281
Auditing, 272–277
behavioral aspects, 273
financial vs. project audits, 272
process of, 272–274
reports, 274–276
types of, 272
Australia’s M5 East Tunnel, 96
Australian Parliament House project, 252
Badiru, 121
Baker, 277
Barr, 245
Baseline plan. See Planning
Benchmarking, 255, 270
Benefit realization management, 11
Beta distribution, 131, 155–156, 164
BetaPERT distribution, 133
Block, 57
Boeing, 39
Bolles, 57
Booz-Allen Hamilton, 146
Boston’s Big Dig, 125
Bracker, 76
Brainstorming, 78, 88
Bratta, 77
Brown, 88, 91
Budget. See also Cost
activity budgeting, 118
bottom-up, 113
budgeting in practice, 128–129
changes,
causes, 126
handling changes, 126
cuts, impact of, 114–116
defined, 109
life cycle, impact of, 114–116
methods of, 110–113
monitoring, 109
multiproject, 118
negotiation process, 114–116
program budgeting, 118
revision, 125–128
risk management, 27, 94–101
sub processes, 94–101
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis 
(FMEA), 95–96
Risk Priority Number (RPN), 96
top-down, 112, 116
uncertainty, 125–128
Burnup and burndown charts, 257
Business case, 74, 75

302  •
Index
Buffers. See Critical chain
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 123, 128
Camm, 121
Central Arizona Project (CAP), 36
Central Limit Theorem. See Statistics
Change control board, 259
Change management, 11, 126
Change order, 79, 93, 126, 258
Charter. See Project charter
Christensen, 248, 255
Cincinnati Enquirer, 250, 251, 258
Cisco Systems, 25
Clark, 22
Commitment Assessment Matrix, 38–39
Comparative benefit selection method, 13
Communication plan, 39
Communications, 36–39
on virtual projects, 39–40
Conflict and conflict resolution, 2, 4, 34, 36, 
37, 44, 47, 48, 57, 62–64, 64–65
and the life cycle, 62
dealing with, 45–46
intrateam, 62–64
matrix team, 61
project evaluation, 271
Conger, 45
Contingency plan, 42, 100
Control
benchmarking, 255
common mistakes, 252
definition, 234, 249
mechanisms of, 251
milestone status reports, 252
plan-monitor-control cycle, 234–236
project baseline, 80, 236, 242, 248
project management maturity model, 
57–59, 255
purposes of, 251
system design, 251–257
tools for control, 254–257
control charts, 255, 256
critical ratio, 254–255
types of control systems, 252–253
go/no-go controls, 252
phase-gate controls, 252
post-project controls, 253
Cost. See also Budget
account numbers, 112
direct, 114
GS&A, 114
overhead, 114
perspectives on, 112
Cost estimation, 113–118, 118–125
direct cost (work element costing), 113
improving, 118–125
forms, 118–119
learning curve, 119–123
price information, 123
influence of organizational climate, 124
overhead costs, 112, 113
padding cost estimates, 219
Cost variance. See Earned value
Cox, 35, 217
CPM. See Scheduling
Crash duration, 187
Crashing a project. See Resource allocation
Critical chain, 216–225
definition, 224
early completion time
“not reporting” simulation, 220–221
example, 220–221
feeding buffer, 224–225
multitasking, 49, 221, 223
ProChain®, 236
project buffers, 224
student syndrome, 175, 212, 220, 223
Theory of Constraints, 217, 223
Critical path. See Scheduling
Critical Path Method (CPM). 
See Scheduling
Critical time. See Scheduling
Crystal Ball®,* 129–137, See also, Simulation
Assumption cell, 131
CB User’s Group, 131
Distribution Gallery, 131, 132
fitting statistical distribution to data, 237
Forecast cell, 131
simulation,
project selection, 129–137
networks, 164–166, 218–221
not reporting early task completion,  
220–221
Decision Science Institute, (aka: American 
Institute of Decision Science), 249
Decision table (payoff matrix). See Risk 
management
Delphi Method, 24
Design Structure Matrix (DSM), 91–92
*Oracle's Crystal Ball® is referenced frequently throughout the book, and page entries will not be cited except 
for discussions of the use of the software.

Index
•  303
Ditch Witch, 187
Discounted cash flows, 14–16
Dupont de Nemours, 146
Dvir, 270, 278
Earned value, 242–248
actual cost of work performed (AC), 243
baseline plan. See Planning
budget at completion (BAC), 244
conventions for calculations, 243
cost performance index (CPI), 244
cost (spending) variance, 244–245
definition, 242
estimated (cost) at completion (EAC),  
244
estimated (cost) to complete (ETC), 244
MSP calculations, 245–248
differences from PMI standards, 248
MSP estimate at completion (EAC), 248
MSP variance at completion (VAC), 248
planned (budgeted) cost of the work 
performed (EV), 242
planned (budgeted) cost of the work 
scheduled (PV), 243
schedule performance index (SPI), 244
schedule variance, 243
Emotional intelligence (EQ), 43–44
Enterprise project management. See Project-
oriented organization
Eppinger, 66
Ethics, 18, 48, 56, 124
Evaluation, 269–271
conflict, 271
criteria for success, 270–271
measurement, 271
definition, 269
post-project evaluation, 270
Evans, 121
Event (node)
definition, 146
Excel®,
calculating probabilities, 161–162
crashing a project with, 191–194
resource loading display, 209
Solver, use of, 154
Expected value. See Risk management
Fast tracking, 65, 195, 196
Fendley, 214
Flemming, 245
Flexibility, 9, 48, 56
Float, See Slack
Flynn, 39
Ford, 79
Free slack, 154
Functional project organization. 
See Organization
Gagnon, 41, 115
Gale, 25, 51
Gantt chart. See Scheduling
General Electric Co., 13
Global competition, 3
Goldratt, 35, 173, 212, 216, 220
Gozinto chart, 81
Graham, 255
Grumman Aircraft. See Northrup- 
Grumman
Gupta, 255
Hamburger, 112
Harwell, 250
Hayes, 16
Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 112
Hertz, 96
Hertzberg, 60
Hierarchical planning process. See Planning
Hurdle rate of return, 14, 15, 129
Hurricane Katrina, 136
Hussain, 217
Hyer, 88, 91
Ibbs, 57, 255
Ingram, 248, 278
Integration management, 64–65
Iron triangle, 7
ISO 9001, 59
Iterations, See Sprints
Johnson Controls, 257, 270
Jones, 48
Kamburowksi, 155
Kandt, 257
Keefer, 155
Kilmann, 45
Kimball, 281
Koppleman, 245
Knutson, 77
Kurstedt, 100
Kurtulus, 195
Kwak, 59, 255
Labor pools, 206
Langley, 74

304  •
Index
Last Minute Panic (LMP), 250
Launch meeting. See Project launch meeting
Lawrence, 123, 154
Leads and lags, 174, 213
Lean management, 92
Learning curve, 119–123
Learning rate, 121
Lencioni, 60, 64, 65
Levy, 270, 278
Life cycle, 10–11, 21, 43
budget, impact on, 114–116
managerial focus, 10–11
resource allocation, impact on,  
215–216
S-shaped, 10
J-shaped, 11
Limerick nuclear power generator, 114
Line balancing, 210
Lockheed Martin Corp., 146
Logic chart, 100
Lubianiker, 59
Mallak, 100
Manage by exception, 4
Management by projects. See Project 
oriented management
Mandelbaum, 216
Mantel, 41, 115, 277, 281
Martin, 77, 123
Matrix management. See Organization
McCarthy, 116–117, 118, 124
McLaughlin, 79
McMahon, 172
Meetings, 40–41, 77–80, 240–242
guidelines, 240–241
launch. See Project launch meeting
Meredith, 210, 237
Micromanagement, 36, 83, 187
Microsoft Excel®*. See Excel®
Microsoft Livemeeting®, 241
Microsoft Project® (MSP),
earned value. See also Earned value 
calculations, 248
Gantt charts, 170–172, 197, 200, 213
strengths and weaknesses, 172
multiple project scheduling, 213–216
project calendar, 159, 196
reports, 240, 241
resource leveling, 202–210
resource loading, 196–202
loading display, 201
resource loading, leveling reports,  
202–210
tracking a project, 236
use to build networks, 152–154
use to plan, 84–86
Microsoft Word®, 240
Milestone, 146, 152, 172, 236, 252
definition, 146
Mind mapping.  See Planning
Mission, 3
Mixed form. See Organization
Monitoring
baseline, 236, 242, 243, 248
benefits of, 239
definition, 234
earned value. See Earned value
meetings, 240–242
objectives of, 234
plan-monitor-control cycle, 234–236
system design, 236
reports, 238–240
report timing, 238
types of, 239
tracking a project, 236
Monte Carlo simulation. See Crystal Ball® 
and Simulation
Multidisciplinary, 2, 5, 34
Multiple projects, 118
budgeting, 118
resource allocation and scheduling, 
213–216. See also Resource 
allocation
Multitasking. See Critical chain
Mythical man month, 124
Name-only team, 64
Narula, 195
NASA, 116
National Association of Industrial and Office 
Properties, 58
Negotiation, 5–6, 44–46, 61, 64, 86
budget, 114–116
life cycle, impact of, 115–116
lose-lose, 5—6, 46
plan, 86
win-lose, 5–6, 45, 64
win-win, 5–6, 44–45, 46, 64, 115
Net present value. See Discounted cash  
flows
*Microsoft Excel® is referenced so frequently throughout the book, that page entries will not be cited except 
for discussions on the use of the software.

Index
•  305
Network. See Scheduling
Nguyen, 216
Nippon Sanso, Inc., 65
Nixon, 252
Node. See Event
Northrop-Grumman Corp., 43
Nucor Corp., 279, 281
Operating/Competitive Necessity selection 
method, 13
Opportunity cost of capital, 16–18
Organization (of projects)
functional, 53–54, 55, 56
matrix, 54–57
advantages, 55–56
balanced, 55
disadvantages, 56–57
strong, 55
weak, 55
mixed form, 57
pure project, 52–53, 54, 55, 56
Ortec International, 281
Participatory decision making/ management, 
35, 79, 86, 113, 114–116
Paralysis by analysis, 74
Pasternak, 154
Path. See Scheduling
Pennypacker, 59
Patzak, 100
Pells, 76
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals 
(PETA), 76
Persuasion, 45
PERT. See Scheduling
Peters, 74
Pinto, 60, 277
Plan-monitor-control cycle, 234–236
Planning
project plan, 4, 5, 10, 75–76, 145
baseline plan, 80, 236, 242, 243
contents of plan, 75–76
hierarchical planning process,  
80–83
process, 76–86
rolling wave planning, 76
sequence (steps to plan), 76–77
templates, 76–77, 83, 85
whole-brain approach, 88–91
mind mapping, 88–91
work breakdown structure (WBS), 75, 
80–83, 109, 113
process of constructing, 80–83
extensions of WBS, 83–86
forms, 83, 85
PM Network, 51
PM3, 59
Portfolio management. See Aggregate 
project plan
Post-project evaluation. See Evaluation
Power-Interest Grid, 38
Precedence diagramming. See Scheduling
Precedence of tasks, 84
Prentis, 76
Probability, 291–292
definition, 291
event relationships, 292–293
addition rule, 294
multiplication rule, 293–294
laws, 292–294
standard distributions, 299–300
types of, 291–292
Procter & Gamble, 2
Product scope, 4
Program, 2, 35
budgeting, 118
Program evaluation and review technique 
(PERT). See Scheduling
Project
as a system, 35
breakthrough, 23
budgeting compared to standard 
budgeting, 5
calendar, 159
characteristics, 2
Charter, 74–76
definition, 2
derivative, 23
goals (scope), 7–9
time, cost scope, 7–9
quality, 7
milestones, 146, 152, 236, 252
owner, 3, 11
platform, 23
portfolio, 21–25
purpose of, 2
quality, See Project, goals
R&D, 23
resource constrained, 187
reports. See Monitoring
slack, 151–152
time constrained, 187
vs. nonprojects, 4–5
Project audit. See Auditing
Project champion, 11, 78
Project charter, 74–75

306  •
Index
Project closure, 277–282
criteria for, 277–278
project failure, 278
project success, 270, 278
project final report (history), 
238, 281–282
contents of, 282
manager, 280, 222
process, 279–281
timing of, 277–278
types of, 278–279
Project control. See Control
Project evaluation. See Evaluation
Project final report. See Project closure
Project history (project final report), 
238, 281–282
Projectitis, 53, 54, 56
Project launch meeting, 33, 77–79
outcomes of, 79
Project management maturity, 3, 59
Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK), 2, 4, 8, 10, 18, 21, 34, 
39, 50, 51, 59, 75, 80, 86, 94, 112, 
125, 129, 238, 244, 248, 255, 258
Project Management Institute (PMI), 2, 18, 
48, 50, 94, 125, 248
PMI Certification, 51, 94
PMI Code of Ethics, 18, 48, 99, 124
Project Management Journal, 50
Project management maturity model, 59, 255
Project management office (PMO), 3, 8, 22,  
57, 80
Enterprise project management office 
(EPMO) (aka: Corporate proj. mgt. 
office, CPMO), 58, 80
Project management v. general management,  
4–6
Project manager
authority, 4–6
career, 34, 50–51
responsibilities, 4–6, 36, 41–46
acquiring resources, 41–42
firefighting, 42
leadership, 42–44
making trade-offs, 42–43
negotiation, conflict resolution, 
persuasion, 44–46
roles, 34–41
communicator, 36–39
facilitator, 34–36
primary role, 8, 9
v. supervisor 34–35
selection of, 11–21, 46–50
required characteristics, 46–50
credibility, 47
sensitivity, interpersonal and 
political, 47, 60
Project monitoring. See Monitoring
Project office. See Project management office
Project oriented organization, 2, 50
Project Portfolio Process, 21–25. See also 
Aggregate project planning
Project Council, 22, 25
Project scope, 4, 7, 75, 77, 79, 126, 129, 
234, 257–259
Project selection, 11–21, 234
non-numeric methods, 12–13
comparative benefits, 13
operating/competitive necessity, 13
sacred cow, 12–13
numeric methods, 13–21
financial assessment, 13–18
payback period, 14
discounted cash flow, 14–18
financial options and opportunity 
costs, 16–18
scoring methods, 19–21
unweighted 0–1 method, 18
weighted factor method, 19–21, 22
risk management, 129–137
simulation, 129–137
Project sponsor, 11, 40, 58, 60
Project success, 270, 278. See also Evaluation 
Project team, 59–66. See also 
Multidisciplinary teams
characteristics of effective team, 59–60
matrix team problems, 61
Project termination. See Project closure
Project uncertainty. See Risk management
Pseudoactivities, 213–214
Pure project. See Organization
Q-sort, 13
Quasi-projects, 3
Queues (waiting lines), 215
length of queue, formula, 215
Q-sort, 13
RACI Matrix, 86–87
Random number generation. See Excel® 
and Crystal Ball®
Reif, 76
Reith, 257
Remy, 59

Index
•  307
Required rate of return.  See Hurdle 
rate of return
Resource allocation. See also Scheduling
borrowing resources, 216
constrained resources, 211
priority rules, 211–212
criteria for choice, 214–215
Walts, 211, 214, 223
Critical Path Method (CPM), 187–196
crashing a project, 187–196
descheduling, 216
expediting in practice, 195–196
life cycle, impact of, 216
multiple projects, 213–216
multiple project scheduling, 213–216
using Microsoft Project®, 214
priority rules, 211–212, 214–215, 216
resource availability calendar, 
196, 198, 202
resource leveling, 202–210
using Microsoft Project®, 202–209
under uncertainty, 209–210
resource loading, 196–202
Microsoft Project® display, 201
monitoring, 202
under uncertainty, 209–210
resource loading, leveling reports, 202–209
resource pools, 206
resource usage
standard practice, 187–188
Resource calendar. See Resource allocation
Resource constraints. See Resource allocation
Resource leveling. See Resource allocation
Resource loading. See Resource allocation
Responsible, Accountable, Consult, 
Informed matrix. See RACI matrix
Return on investment, 14
Risk analysis, 8, 94, 129
Risk management, 94–101, 129–137
contingency planning, 100
decision table (payoff matrix), 97–99
disaster, 136
expected value, 97–99, 136
Failure Mode and Effect Analysis 
(FMEA), 95–96
Risk Priority Number (RPN), 96
outcome estimates, 97
path merge calculation problem, 163
probability of path (project) 
completion, 159–161
probabilistic activity times, 156–158
qualitative risk analysis, 94, 95 
quantitative risk analysis, 94, 96–99
risk identification, 94, 95
scenario analysis, 95
risk management planning, 94
risk monitoring and control, 100–101
risk profile, 9, 96, 129
risk register, 8
risk response, 100
scheduling, 155–163
simulation. See Simulation
uncertain activity times. See Activity
uncertainty of critical path and time, 157
San Francisco Metro Turnback project, 250
Sacred cow selection method, 12–13
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX), 112
Schedule variance. See Earned value
Scheduling. See also Activity
computer, use of, 152–154, 158–159
crashing a project. See Resource 
Allocation
critical path, 146, 149–151, 174, 188
definition, 146
critical path method (CPM), 146–151, 
187–194. See also Resource 
Allocation
critical time, 146, 149–151, 188
definition, 146
definition of terms, 145–146
earliest start (finish) time (ES, EF),  
149–151
Gantt chart, 170–172, 197, 200, 222
construction of, 170
strengths and weaknesses, 172
using MSP, 171–172
latest start (finish) time (LS, LF), 149–151
Microsoft Project
constructing network, 152–154,  
158–159
constructing Gantt chart, 171–172
precedence diagramming, 173–174
multiple projects. See Resource allocation
network (AOA and AON), 147
construction, 147–148
definition, 146
slack, 151–152
path merge problem, 163
precedence diagramming, 173–174
linkages defined, 173–174
probability of project or path completion,  
159–161
project (network) slack, 152

308  •
Index
program evaluation and review  technique 
(PERT), 98, 146–152
simulating a schedule. See Simulation
slack calculation, 151–152
free slack, 154
total slack, 154
sources of problems for schedules, 223–224
Schwerer, 216
Scope creep (change), 37, 42, 61, 76, 116
change control system, 257–259
control of change, 257–259
reasons for, 126, See also Project selection
Selection. See Project selection
Shafer, 210, 237
Sheffi, 136
Shenhar, 47–48, 270, 278
Simulation. See also Crystal Ball®
Monte Carlo simulation, 8, 99, 129–137, 
164–170, 218–221
Incorporating costs, 166–167
project network simulation Crystal 
Ball®, 164–170
vs. statistical analysis, 167–170
Simon, 96
Slack (aka: float). See Scheduling and  
Activity
Slevin, 60
Smith, 77
Sprints, 92, 93
Stakeholder, 37, 75, 76, 93
identifying and analyzing needs, 37—39
issue log, 38
register, 38
Statistical Quality Control, 237
Statistics, 294–300
Central Limit Theorem, 160, 308
descriptive statistics, 295–296
inferential statistics, 295–296
measures of central tendency: mean, 
median, mode, 296–297
measures of dispersion
range, 297
sample mean, 296
sample standard deviation, 297
sample variance, 297
path merge probability calculation, 163
population mean (μ), 296
population standard deviation (σ), 297
population variance (σ2), 297
statistical independence, 169
Strategy, 1, 3, 8
Stress, 48–49
Student syndrome, 175, 212, 220, 223
Suboptimization, 35, 47, 54, 56, 65
Subtask, 2
Superconducting supercollider (SSC), 279
Systems approach, 35–36
Systems engineering. See Concurrent 
engineering
Task, 2
predecessors, successors, 83–86
Tate, 77
Teplitz, 121
Texas Instruments Inc., 248
Thamhain, 62, 63
Theory of Constraints, 217, 223
Thermos Co., 65
Thomas, 45, 96
Time estimation
at the 90% and 95% levels, 156
deterministic, 146
expected time, 155
improving, 118–125
learning curve, 119–123
probabilistic (stochastic), 155–158
standard deviation of, 155
variance of, 156
3M Corp., 279
Toney, 255
Trade-offs, 7–9, 37, 42–43, 94
influence of organizational climate on,  
42–43
project vs. project, 213–216
resources vs. time, 187–196
Transdisciplinary teams. See 
Multidisciplinary teams
Trends in Project Management, 3
Triangular distribution, 131
Triple constraints, 7
Trust, 40
Tuckman, 60
Uncertainty, 7–9, 129–137, 125–128. See also 
Risk management
United Kingdom Child Support Agency, 259
United States Department of Commerce, 123
United States Federal Transportation 
Security Administration, 58
United States Navy, 146
Unity of Command, 56
Verdini, 155
ViewStar Corporation, 248
Virtual projects, 3, 39
Scheduling (cont.)

Index
•  309
Virtual projects manager, 39–40
communications, 39–40
meetings. See Monitoring
reports. See Monitoring
Walt Disney Co., 61
Walts, 211, 214, 223
War room, 61. See also Project management  
office
Waterfall method, 65, 93
comparison to Agile Project 
Management, 93
Wearne, 217
Webster, 76
Wheatly, 24, 116, 278
Wheelwright, 22
Whole-brain planning, See Planning
Wilemon, 63
Win-win, 5–6, 44–45, 46, 64, 115
Womer, 121
Work breakdown structure (WBS). 
See Planning
World Trade Center, 136
Wu, 250

The Cumulative (Single Tail) Probabilities of the Normal Probability Distribution (Areas under the Normal 
Curve from 
 to Z)
Example: the area to the left of Z
1 34
.
 is found by following the left Z column down 
to 1.3 and moving right to the .04 column. At the intersection read .9099. The area 
to the right of Z
1 34
.
 is 1
9099
0901
.
.
. The area between the mean (dashed line) 
and Z
1 34
.
 is .
.
.
9099
5
4099.
µ
Z
‒∞
X
  z
00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
   0
  5000
.5040
.5080
.5120
.5160
.5199
.5239
.5279
.5319
.5359
  .1
.5398
.5438
.5478
.5517
.5557
.5596
.5636
.5675
.5714
.5753
  .2
.5793
.5832
.5871
.5910
.5948
.5987
.6026
.6064
.6103
.6141
  .3
.6179
.6217
.6255
.6293
.6331
.6368
.6406
.6443
.6480
.6517
  .4
.6554
.6591
.6628
.6664
.6700
.6736
.6772
.6808
.6844
.6879
  .5
.6915
.6950
.6985
.7019
.7054
.7088
.7123
.7157
.7190
.7224
  .6
.7257
.7291
.7324
.7357
.7389
.7422
.7454
.7486
.7517
.7549
  .7
.7580
.7611
.7642
.7673
.7704
.7734
.7764
.7794
.7823
.7852
  .8
.7881
.7910
.7939
.7967
.7995
.8023
.8051
.8078
.8106
.8133
  .9
.8159
.8186
.8212
.8238
.8264
.8289
.8315
.8340
.8365
.8389
1.0
.8413
.8438
.8461
.8485
.8508
.8531
.8554
.8577
.8599
.8621
1.1
.8643
.8665
.8686
.8708
.8729
.8749
.8770
.8790
.8810
.8880
1.2
.8849
.8869
.8888
.8907
.8925
.8944
.8962
.8980
.8997
.9015
1.3
.9032
.9049
.9066
.9082
.9099
.9115
.9131
.9147
.9162
.9177
1.4
.9192
.9207
.9222
.9236
.9251
.9265
.9276
.9292
.9306
.9319
1.5
.9332
.9345
.9357
.9370
.9382
.9394
.9406
.9418
.9429
.9441
1.6
.9452
.9463
.9474
.9484
.9495
.9505
.9515
.9525
.9535
.9545
1.7
.9554
.9564
.9573
.9582
.9591
.9599
.9608
.9616
.9625
.9633
1.8
.9641
.9649
.9656
.9664
.9671
.9678
.9686
.9693
.9699
.9706
1.9
.9713
.9719
.9726
.9732
.9738
.9744
.9750
.9756
.9761
.9767
2.0
.9772
.9778
.9783
.9788
.9793
.9798
.9803
.9808
.9812
.9817
2.1
.9821
.9826
.9830
.9834
.9838
.9842
.9846
.9850
.9854
.9857
2.2
.9861
.9864
.9868
.9871
.9875
.9878
.9881
.9884
.9887
.9890
2.3
.9893
.9896
.9898
.9901
.9904
.9906
.9909
.9911
.9913
.9916
2.4
.9918
.9920
.9932
.9925
.9927
.9929
.9931
.9932
.9934
.9936
2.5
.9938
.9940
.9941
.9943
.9945
.9946
.9948
.9949
.9951
.9952
2.6
.9953
.9955
.9956
.9957
.9959
.9960
.9961
.9962
.9963
.9964
2.7
.9965
.9966
.9967
.9968
.9969
.9970
.9971
.9972
.9973
.9974
2.8
.9974
.9975
.9976
.9977
.9977
.9978
.9979
.9979
.9980
.9981
2.9
.9981
.9982
.9982
.9983
.9984
.9984
.9985
.9985
.9986
.9986
3.0
.9987
.9987
.9987
.9988
.9988
.9989
.9989
.9989
.9990
.9990
3.1
.9990
.9991
.9991
.9991
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9992
.9993
.9993
3.2
.9993
.9993
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9994
.9995
.9995
.9995
3.3
.9995
.9995
.9995
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9996
.9997
3.4
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9997
.9998

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

