How to Manage Your Project 
with Checklists
 ―
Melanie McBride
Project
Management
Basics

 PROJECT MANAGEMENT 
BASICS 
 HOW TO MANAGE YOUR PROJECT WITH 
CHECKLISTS  
 
 
 
 
Melanie McBride 

Project Management Basics: How to Manage Your Project with Checklists
Melanie McBride 
 
 
Chandler, Arizona, USA 
 
 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4842-2085-6 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4842-2086-3
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016949470
Copyright © 2016 by Melanie McBride
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or 
part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustra-
tions, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or 
by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a trademark 
symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we use the names, logos, 
and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no 
intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even 
if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or 
not they are subject to proprietary rights.
While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the 
date of publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal 
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, 
express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein.
Managing Director: Welmoed Spahr
Acquisitions Editor: Robert Hutchinson
Development Editor: Matthew Moodie
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Pramila Balen, Laura Berendson, Aaron Black, 
Louise Corrigan, Jonathan Gennick, Robert Hutchinson, Celestin Suresh John, 
Nikhil Karkal, James Markham, Susan McDermott, Matthew Moodie, Natalie Pao, 
Gwenan Spearing
Coordinating Editor: Rita Fernando
Copy Editor: Brendan Frost 
Compositor: SPi Global
Indexer: SPi Global 
Cover Designer: Isaac Ruiz Soler
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media New York, 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 348-
4505, e-mail   orders-ny@springer-sbm.com , or visit   www.springeronline.com . Apress Media, 
LLC is a California LLC and the sole member (owner) is Springer Science + Business Media 
Finance Inc (SSBM Finance Inc). SSBM Finance Inc is a Delaware corporation.
For information on translations, please e-mail   rights@apress.com , or visit   www.apress.com . 
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, or promo-
tional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. For more information, 
reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page at   www.apress.com/bulk-sales .
Any source code or other supplementary materials referenced by the author in this text is 
available to readers at   www.apress.com  . For detailed information about how to locate your 
book’s source code, go to   www.apress.com/source-code/ .
Printed on acid-free paper

 Apress Business: The Unbiased Source of Business 
Information 
 Apress business books provide essential information and practical advice, 
each written for practitioners by recognized experts. Busy managers and pro-
fessionals in all areas of the business world—and at all levels of technical 
sophistication—look to our books for the actionable ideas and tools they 
need to solve problems, update and enhance their professional skills, make 
their work lives easier, and capitalize on opportunity. 
 Whatever the topic on the business spectrum—entrepreneurship, finance, sales, 
marketing, management, regulation, information technology, among others—
Apress has been praised for providing the objective information and unbiased 
advice you need to excel in your daily work life. Our authors have no axes to 
grind; they understand they have one job only—to deliver up-to-date, accu-
rate information simply, concisely, and with deep insight that addresses the 
real needs of our readers. 
 It is increasingly hard to find information—whether in the news media, on the 
Internet, and now all too often in books—that is even-handed and has your 
best interests at heart. We therefore hope that you enjoy this book, which has 
been carefully crafted to meet our standards of quality and unbiased coverage. 
 We are always interested in your feedback or ideas for new titles. Perhaps 
you’d even like to write a book yourself. Whatever the case, reach out to us 
at   editorial@apress.com and an editor will respond swiftly. Incidentally, at 
the back of this book, you will find a list of useful related titles. Please visit 
us at    www.apress.com  to sign up for newsletters and discounts on future 
purchases.
 The Apress Business Team 

   

 For Paulette: “Plan the work; work the plan.”  

   

Contents
About the Author. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii
Chapter 1: 
Stripping Down Project Management to the Chassis  . . . . . 1
Part I:      The Mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Chapter 2: 
Getting Started on Your First Project  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Chapter 3: 
Doin’ Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Chapter 4: 
Executing Your First Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Chapter 5: 
Releasing Your First Project  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Chapter 6: 
Closing Your First Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Part II:      Reality Check   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89
Chapter 7: 
Chopping Down Your Project Mechanics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Chapter 8: 
PMP-ing Your Project with Flashy Methodologies  . . . . . . . 99
Chapter 9: 
Steering Your Project with Flexible Checklists . . . . . . . . . 109
Chapter 10: Hitting the Open Road  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Chapter 11: The End of the Road  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Chapter 12: Appendix A: Project Management Checklists . . . . . . . . . . 133
Chapter 13: Appendix B: Estimation Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 139
Chapter 14: Appendix C: Decision-Making Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Chapter 15: Appendix D: Additional Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
Index  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151

   

  About the Author 
 Melanie   McBride,  PMP ,   is a Technical Project 
Manager at Intel Corporation. With 20 years’ 
experience managing projects in the semicon-
ductor industry, she has worked variously as 
product development project manager, opera-
tions project manager, and vendor development 
manager. McBride is a recognized subject mat-
ter expert at Intel, where she writes a weekly 
blog on project management best practices. She 
speaks regularly at such professional conferences 
as PMI’s Global Congress. She holds an MS in physics from Texas Tech University. 
McBride is the author of  Managing Projects in the Real World (Apress, 2013). 
 
 

   

 Acknowledgments 
 If you’re going to presume to write a “how-to” book about the basics of 
project management, then you must acknowledge the deep debt owed to the 
Project Management Institute for defining what those basics are in the first 
place. I’d especially like to thank the Phoenix, AZ chapter for the endless sup-
port from a community of like-minded people, especially Tom Stokes and the 
entire Chandler Breakfast Professional Development Meetings crew. 
 In large part, the idea for this book came to me through the mentoring I do, 
where I’m frequently asked for advice on how to get started in project man-
agement. These people are often intimidated by the magnitude of a project 
they need to manage, and I’ve found myself breaking down the basics for them 
over and over again. I’d like to extend a great big “thank you” to each of you 
who’ve approached me over the years. I hope that I helped you out! 
 For their longstanding support, I’d like to thank a few of the senior project 
managers I have the honor to know and work with. First, a big shout-out to 
Paulette Moore, who is never too busy to listen while I work out the right 
wording or strategy to tackle a difficult challenge. When Marc Conkle told 
me that he’d reluctantly loaned out his highlighted and dog-eared copy of my 
first book, I couldn’t have been more flattered. Here’s another one for you to 
scribble in and dog-ear, Marc! I’d also like to thank the team at Intel’s Decision 
Quality office for teaching me something new and for the great discussions. 
For opening new doors and dragging me through them, I’d like to thank Linda 
Guariglio and Phillip Smesrud. 
 I’d like to thank Robert Hutchinson from Apress for believing I had another 
book cooking in my brain somewhere. He graciously helped me connect a few 
disjointed ideas into a coherent concept and ultimately into a practical discus-
sion of just how you actually do get started managing a project. 
 Writing a book is nice challenge, and it really helps when you get to work with 
rock stars like the folks at Apress. For superbly managing this project, I’d like 
to thank Rita Fernando. When she started doing “bottoms-up” estimation, 
I knew right then that she was my kinda PM! I’d also like to thank Matt Moodie 
for his awesome help cleaning up and sharpening my writing. Of course there 
are plenty of other hardworking people behind the scenes making this book 
shine, and I’d like to just say “thanks for making me look good!” 

Acknowledgments
xii
 I’d like to thank my family for their continued support and for never once 
telling me that I was crazy for getting up so early to write. Thanks to Christy 
Odom and Stormy McBride for providing inspiration for this book; I wrote it 
for folks like you trying to figure out how to get started on a big project. 
 Last, my most sincere “thank yous” to all the project teams I’ve led over the 
years. Thank you for working so hard and following where I led. I’ve learned 
something from each of you and it’s truly made me a better project manager.  

  Introduction 
 I came to project management as an experienced engineer; I knew how to do 
my highly technical job and how to get work done within a highly matrixed, 
international company. What I didn’t know was how to perform the basic 
processes required to manage a project. You see, they seemed so simple as to 
be completely ignorable, and let’s be honest, with a graduate degree in physics, 
I was arrogant and dismissive. What could be so hard about laying out work 
on a timeline and calling it the project schedule? I’d like to say that I wised up 
quickly and realized what I didn’t know, but that’s not what happened. What 
happened was about four years of “learning by doing,” which really meant 
“learning while screwing things up.” Ironically, it was studying for the Project 
Management Professional (PMP) certification that woke me up to the best 
practices for executing some of the processes needed to effectively manage 
a project. For instance, it turned out that the real reason I had to engage in 
those epic battles with that popular scheduling software was because I didn’t 
know how to develop a comprehensive schedule in the first place. My frustra-
tion wasn’t caused by some evil software package; it was caused by my own 
ignorance. It turns out that there’s a very simple, systematic way to collect the 
information needed to build a good project schedule, and guess what? Once 
I mastered that method, those epic battles dwindled to the occasional hiccup. 
 What I learned and, yes, I admit that I learned it the hard way, is that conquer-
ing these fundamental processes was a game-changer. Your effectiveness as 
a PM consists of two equal parts: mastery of these fundamental processes 
and your agility with interpersonal communication. Trust me, it’s significantly 
harder to improve your soft skills than it is to improve your capability to 
execute the fundamental processes of project management. These processes 
are straightforward and easy to grasp, requiring no advanced math and only 
slightly frightening software applications. The absolute easiest and fastest way 
to improve as a project manager is to focus on improving your grasp of the 
mechanics of project management. 
 This idea that you can dramatically improve your effectiveness by following 
these best practices is why I wrote this book. These processes are also sur-
prisingly simple to understand. You won’t need a semester-long course on 
scheduling to get started or even to dramatically improve the next schedule 
you develop. Take the practice of managing project risks. Once you under-
stand that there are really only five options for managing any risk, the hoopla 

Introduction
xiv
and drama that surround risk management in many organizations boil down 
to a multiple-choice question. 
 In all honesty, this should have been my first book. You see, my first book 
 Managing Projects in the Real World was all about navigating the people chal-
lenges of managing projects. Those are tough challenges, to be sure, but 
frankly you need to know what the heck you’re doing before you can make 
much headway dealing with a difficult stakeholder or crazy coworker. You 
really can’t respond to that insane request to pull in the schedule by 8 weeks 
if you don’t have a realistic execution plan to start with. In fact, there’s a pretty 
strong case to be made that you should focus on improving your project man-
agement mechanics before you deep dive into growing your soft skills. 
 This book sets up the beginning project manager to do just that with a concise 
set of instructions and actionable advice on what to do and how to do it. It 
contains checklists for each phase of the project lifecycle which keep you on 
track and help you stay organized. The second half of the book is dedicated to 
how you do this stuff in the Real World, offering advice on how to navigate low 
and high PM maturity organizations. There are also some actionable ideas for 
where to go next once you’re comfortable with the mechanics of the job. In 
short, this is the book I wish I’d had when I first started out as a project man-
ager, and I hope it helps those of you out there struggling to master your craft.    

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_1
 C H A P T E R 
 Stripping 
Down Project 
Management to 
the Chassis 
 Congratulations, you’re a project manager! 
 Now what do you do?  
 Project management  is a vastly complex and complicated endeavor, and like any 
other complex and complicated effort it’s often hard to know just where to start. 
In this case it’s not that you can’t find training material or mentors to help you 
along your journey, it’s that you’re completely overwhelmed by all of the informa-
tion out there and by the consequences of screwing it all up. You feel like you’re 
1
Electronic supplementary material The online version of this chapter 
(doi:  10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_1  ) contains supplementary material, which is available to 
authorized users.

Chapter 1 | Stripping Down Project Management to the Chassis
2
destined to be the featured entrée at a management luau sometime in the distant 
future if you can’t lead this project team. You’re completely bewildered by all 
of the processes you must follow and the documentation you must produce. 
Never fear! There is a light at the end of this tunnel and this book will help you 
find it. Now take a deep breath and let’s dive right in by stripping down this thing 
we call project management to the bare bones, the fundamentals, the chassis if 
you will. 
 The first thing you need to realize is that the  underpinning  of all projects is 
a framework of specific processes that produce the artifacts of project man-
agement. Okay, let’s stop here for a minute to explain what I mean by the 
“artifacts of project management.” These are the output of those foundational 
processes and are things like the project schedule, the risk register, the Change 
Control Board, and the communications plan, to name a few. If you’ve already 
acquired your  Project Management Professional (PMP) certification  , then you 
already know that there’s a whole slew of plans you need to consider as well. 
The key thing to understand here is that once you master these foundational 
processes, then your life as a project manager gets a whole lot easier. 
 Think of this like driving an unfamiliar car. A few years ago, I vacationed in 
Scotland and I rented a car for transportation. I was able to drive that car 
because I already knew the  sequences and processes  for driving an automobile. 
Get in, put your seatbelt on, get out and switch sides so that you can reach the 
pedals and steering wheel, seatbelt again, adjust the mirrors, foot on the break, 
crank the key, engage the clutch, shift into first gear, ease foot onto the gas, and 
watch out for crazy Yank drivers. You see from this example that I had already 
mastered the foundational skills for driving, so all I had to concentrate on were 
the nuances of driving an unfamiliar car in Scotland. Sure, things like driving on 
the other side of the road gave me a bit of trouble, but I was still able to motor 
around the Highlands and see that beautiful country. Mastering project man-
agement is just like that. Master the fundamentals and you can drive a project 
anywhere, on either side of the road. 
 Executing  these processes and producing the associated artifacts are what I call 
the mechanics of project management, and trust me, they aren’t that hard to 
master. Here’s the thing: it’s not the mechanics that make project management 
so hard, it’s dealing with difficult people that makes it hard. In this book, I’m 
going to walk you through the mechanics of project management so that when 
you tackle that next project you can spend more of your time and energy deal-
ing with the people, the really challenging part of project management, instead 
of struggling through generating the Network Diagram. Oh, and when you’re 
ready to pick up your ball and go to another playground, a.k.a. find another 
project management job, these foundational skills will enable you to spend 
more time learning that new organization’s politics and nuances because you’ve 
got mad skills when it comes to the mechanics of managing a project. 

Project Management Basics
3
 Understanding the Workflow of Any Project 
 All projects follow the same basic  workflow  , so you really need to engrain this in 
your brain. (Figure  1-1 ) It starts with the Initiating Phase, which we’ll discuss in 
detail in Chapter   2  . Essentially, this is where the project objective is determined 
and the high-level constraints are identified through a process called scoping. 
It’s not uncommon for organizations to have a dedicated team to perform the 
scoping analysis and provide that to the project manager as a starting place for 
their work. Next comes the Planning Phase, which we will cover in Chapter   3 ; 
this is where the project team develops their overall plan; how they will exe-
cute the project, what resources are needed, what the specific deliverables will 
be, a detailed schedule, etc. Most of the project management processes fall into 
this phase, and it’s where most of the artifacts are developed. In short, Planning 
is where most of the mechanics of project management occur. It’s often con-
sidered the most challenging phase of a project to manage, but again, it’s not 
the mechanics of the work that are hard, it’s the negotiation and stakeholder 
management that are hard. Upon exiting the Planning Phase, we will move 
into the Execution Phase in Chapter   4 . This is where the team executes the 
plan they developed earlier. It goes without saying that the more thorough the 
planning the smoother the execution. Now, the Project Management Institute 
(PMI) considers Monitoring and Control to be separate phases but I do not. 
By the way, PMI is the governing body for the project management profession 
and they administer a variety of project management certifications including 
the PMP. The work of Monitoring and Control is basically what you think it is. 
You monitor the indicators and the project schedule to identify any deviations 
from the plan. You take steps to control the workflow and progress to continu-
ally optimize both. In my opinion, the work of Monitoring and Control happens 
within the Execution Phase, so it doesn’t really warrant its own box in the flow 
chart, if you know what I mean.   
 Now, there’s a special set of work that is unique to the Executing Phase, and 
that’s the work you need to do for releasing your project: we’ll cover this 
in Chapter   5 . Interestingly, I’ve found that a lot of great project management 
training material tends to gloss over the work that needs to happen to launch 
your project’s output, so here I talk about those tricky things like figuring out 
if you’re really ready to release and how to facilitate the final approval meeting. 
 Figure 1-1.  Basic project workflow  
 

Chapter 1 | Stripping Down Project Management to the Chassis
4
 The last phase is the Closing Phase, which we will cover in Chapter   6 ; this 
is where the project team wraps up the work by archiving collateral, dispo-
sitioning excess material, performing a retrospective analysis of the project, 
ensuring long-term support for the project deliverables, reporting out a sum-
mary of the project, celebrating their achievements, etc. Closing as you would 
expect is the end of the road. 
 As I mentioned, all projects follow the same workflow (Figure  1-2 ), but how 
this flow is described or documented varies. This is where the project lifecycle 
comes in, and there are quite a few of them out there. Your organization will 
probably expect you to use a specific, well-documented lifecycle, so you don’t 
need to figure out which one to use by yourself. While not exactly the same, 
all the lifecycles that I’ve run across have the basic flow I mentioned and many 
have formal reviews of the deliverables produced during each phase. These 
reviews are referred to as gate reviews and are often tied to funding and approval 
for the project team to proceed. You will also run across lifecycles that iterate 
the basic workflow, such as those following an Agile methodology, where the 
project team performs smaller, more frequent iterations of the basic flow, com-
bining many iterations to produce the project deliverables one bite at a time.   

Project Management Basics
5
• Capture Project Objective
• High level schedule, scope, and resources
• Start managing stakeholder expectations
• Kick off the Project
Initiating
• Complete Communication Plan
• ID Project Lifecycle
• Gather Requirements
• Establish CCB
• Release Readiness Checklist
• Risk Management Plan 
• Manage Stakeholder Expectations
• WBS, Network Diagram, Schedule
• Optimize and Baseline Schedule
• Commit the Project
Planning
• Standing Team Meetings
• Manage Changes via the CCB
• Update the Schedule
• Monitor and Control Execution Progress
• Review Risks Regularly
• Regular Project Status Updates
Execution
• Complete the Release Readiness Checklist
• Plan the Release Activities
• Release "Go /No Go" Decision
• Complete the Release Activity
• Formal Release Approval
Release
• Conduct a Project Retrospective
• Disposition Leftover HW
• Archive SW and Documentation
• Publish Project Summary
• Obtain agreement that the project work 
is complete
• Celebrate the project completion
• Recognize the team
• Release resources from the project 
Closing
 Figure 1-2.  The Project Workflow  
 

Chapter 1 | Stripping Down Project Management to the Chassis
6
 After we cover Closing in Chapter   6 , we will move into some special topics in 
Part II. In Chapter   7 , I’ll help you understand how to cherry-pick just the right 
processes you need when you’re working in a low project management matu-
rity organization. For Chapter   8  , we’ll flip the coin and talk about how to set 
yourself apart in a high-maturity PM house. Chapter   9 expounds on the sheer 
brilliance of using checklists to make your life easier. Finally, in Chapter   10   , 
I’ll circle back to your original question of where to start by giving you some 
realistic strategies for improving your project management mechanics and 
where to go next in your quest to continually improve.  
 How to Use This Book 
 The key to mastering the mechanics of project management is to immerse 
yourself in this workflow and intimately understand the work that happens in 
each phase and how to do it. To help you keep track of which lifecycle phase 
you’re in and what work remains to be done in that phase, Part I of this book is 
organized by project phases, and each chapter contains a helpful checklist. These 
checklists contain the bare minimum work that you should complete for each 
phase. If you’re just getting started with project management, these checklists 
are a great tool for planning the work you need to do in each phase and to help 
make sure that you don’t forget an important step.   
 For the more experienced project managers out there, these checklists are 
your big takeaway from this book. You can reuse the checklists for any project 
to ensure that all of the critical project management tasks get done at the 
right point in the project lifecycle. Additionally, you can use them as a spring-
board to create your own custom checklists that best suit your particular 
projects and organizations. In fact, these checklists are why I wrote this book. 
You see, I firmly believe that anyone can master the mechanics of project 
management, and if you have a handy-dandy checklist to keep you on track 
you’re good to go.  
 The Project Manager  Value-Add  
 Before we move on to the specifics of the Initiating Phase, I want to spend a 
few pixels talking about one of the core values a project manager brings to the 
project team. Yes, as a project manager you’re the leader and you bring all of 
the goodness and responsibility that entails to the team. But really, when you 
get right down to it, the work a project manager does, the true value-add, is 
rooted in the mechanics of the job. When you become a project manager, your 
job is no longer to design the power array or create killer marketing collateral; 
instead, your job is to develop a realistic execution strategy and plan. It’s things 
like ensuring that real and meaningful risk management plans are developed. 

Project Management Basics
7
 As the project manager, I own the communication to our customers and key stake-
holders, not the electrical engineer or the planner, but me, the project manager. 
Many inexperienced project managers fail to develop their skills in the mechanics 
of the job because they get consumed by the people challenges. When this hap-
pens, things like schedules and strategic communications get de-prioritized and 
the results are often a project out of control or sinking fast. Project managers 
must treat these artifacts as key deliverables and hold themselves accountable 
for developing them on time and with excellent quality. It’s quite hypocritical of 
the project manager to berate a software engineer for a late code drop when 
they themselves haven’t developed a realistic risk management plan. So don’t be 
that PM; instead, spend time with this book and master the mechanics of the job. 
 Your time will be well spent as your future projects will have more realistic 
schedules, real risk management plans, solid communication with stakeholders, 
etc., and all of that leaves you with more time to focus on those stakeholder 
expectations, strategic partnerships, and, yeah, dealing with those difficult or 
underperforming team members. One more time with feeling: it’s not the 
mechanics of the job that are hard, it’s dealing with demanding people that 
makes it hard, so master the mechanics and live a happier PM life!   

 The Mechanics 
 What to Do and How to Do It 
 The underpinning of all projects is a framework of specific processes that 
produce the artifacts of project management. Executing these  processes  and 
producing the associated artifacts are what I call the mechanics of project 
management. Part I takes you through the stripped-down, nuts-and-bolts 
work you need to do to manage any project. It also contains helpful checklists 
for each project phase to help you stay on track and keep you from forgetting 
any of the important bits. Ready to manage a project? Let’s get started!  
P A R T
I

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_2
 C H A P T E R 
 Getting Started 
on Your First 
Project 
 a.k.a. The  Initiating Phase  
 Starting projects can be  overwhelming  . Where do you start, what exactly do 
you do first, and who the heck do you need to talk to now versus later? 
These are just a few of the questions racing through your mind when you 
get assigned your first project, and it can be pretty overwhelming. You’re in 
the storm path and those swirling, gale-force winds are tugging at your hair 
but you know that you’re just at the edge and that it’s gonna get a lot worse 
before you figure out what the heck you’re doing. Welcome to the Initiating 
Phase of project management! This is real life, where starting a new and com-
plicated endeavor can psych you out. The good news is that most of the time 
all you’ve got to do is take that first step and get started. That’s what this 
chapter is all about; getting started.  
2

Chapter 2 | Getting Started on Your First Project
12
 A Few Words About Scoping 
 The scoping  activity  is precursor to planning, and it’s where all of the planning 
inputs come from; it’s also the main work of the Initiating Phase. Here’s where 
the high-level schedule, budget, deliverables, and resources to execute the 
project are identified. 
 For the scoping activity, you gather a group of subject matter experts to evalu-
ate the opportunity that is your project and come up with high-level estimates 
for what’s needed to execute the project and a timeline. Often this work is 
done by a separate team and the project team is provided the output of the 
scoping analysis to kick off their planning efforts.   
 Before you get into scoping your new project, you need to understand one 
thing: scoping is not the same thing as planning, and it requires a completely 
different mindset. When scoping a project, you need to up-level your thinking. 
Instead of trying to nail down the specific project requirements, focus your 
thinking on the big chunks of work. For instance, instead of getting mired in the 
specifics of the terms and conditions that need to be included in the joint devel-
opment agreement, simply capture the fact that you need that contract. You and 
your team will hash out the details of that contract later; the important thing in 
•Capture Project Objective
•High level schedule, scope, and resources
•Start managing stakeholder expectations
•Kick off the Project
Initiating
Planning
Execution
Release
Closing

Project Management Basics
13
scoping is to understand the larger deliverables and work packages so that you 
can come up with a realistic work estimate. Make sense? 
 As you would expect, some organizations follow a formal scoping process 
and others wing it. Structured scoping analysis is good; informal scoping is 
bad. Organizations utilizing a structured scoping process are generally more 
mature in their overall project management practices and culture. Good scop-
ing involves a systematic examination of the project environment, the market 
drivers, and the technical feasibility where decisions and project constraints 
are developed with actual data. If you work in such an organization, then this 
step of the process is a cakewalk and you take what the scoping team pro-
duces and jump right into planning. However, not all of us are so fortunate, so 
let’s talk a bit about how to navigate a less mature organization. 
 If your organization falls into the informal scoping camp, there are a few things 
to be aware of. First, it’s likely that some aspects of the project environment 
will be overlooked, as there’s no systematic review during the quasi-scoping 
activity. Project managers should be sure to utilize schedule buffer to deal 
with factors missed during scoping that can come up during execution. For 
instance, in some regions extreme weather drives work stoppages, and if this 
is not accounted for during scoping, there’s a good chance that the expected 
completion date is too aggressive for the project team to hit. A junior project 
manager might not be aware of the potential work delays due to extreme 
weather, so if this is missed in scoping, it’s likely to be missed during planning 
as well. A smart PM throws in some schedule buffer to cover these unknown 
unknowns that come out of half-baked scoping  activities  . 
 Another pitfall of informal scoping is the tendency to set project targets based 
on “gut” feel versus real data. Here’s how this goes: the engineering manager 
asserts that it will only take 3 months to design the controller, so that’s the esti-
mate used to determine the expected project completion date. The problem 
here is that that manager hasn’t designed anything in the last 10 years, and the 
entire design environment is completely different from what he was used to 
“back in the day.” Further, if the project is a high priority for the organization, it’s 
common to see the expected project date set to what the major stakeholders 
need it to be. This is the target; it’s not an actual estimate of the work needed 
to deliver, and that’s a crucial difference. Project managers often feel like this 
kind of date is “dictated” to them and that the project team must “do whatever 
it takes” to hit that date. The problem with both of these scenarios is of course 
that the actual work content is completely ignored in the quasi-analysis. This 
is actually pretty common in some fields, and project managers need to be on 
the lookout for this type of informal scoping. During the Planning Phase, the 
project team will work out what it takes to actually execute the project, and 
in situations where the scoping was done informally, the project manager will 
need to educate the stakeholders on this work content as they negotiate the 
project completion date. Note that if the scoping was done informally, then you 
should expect to negotiate the project timeline during the planning. 

Chapter 2 | Getting Started on Your First Project
14
 One last pitfall of informal scoping is that you often see internal political moti-
vations driving the scoping analysis. When the project objective is defined, care 
should be taken that all of the stakeholders agree on what the project should 
achieve. Often, the project manager will need to bring all parties together and 
broker a common understanding of the objective and, at a high level, how that 
objective will be achieved. It’s critical to the project’s success that this com-
mon understanding be developed at this early stage of the project. Yes, you 
may need to perform this level setting multiple times throughout the project 
if your organization is particularly unaligned, but at a minimum you should not 
go into planning with major disconnects among your major stakeholders with 
respect to what the project should achieve. 
 Now that you have a good understanding of the scoping activity, let’s talk 
about the specifics of determining the high-level schedule, budget, deliverables, 
and resources to execute the project; a.k.a. let’s scope that project!   
 Figuring Out the Project Objective 
 So what’s the first step for any project and any project manager, experienced or 
newbie? It’s to figure out what the  objective  of the project is. Simple, right? Uh 
huh . . . Yep, I’ve been there and this is definitely not simple, so here’s what you 
do. You start asking people, the important people who should know this infor-
mation. Those “important” people are your stakeholders, and we’ll make some 
sense of them in a bit, so for now just figure out what they think the purpose of 
the project is. Ask questions like: “ So, Melanie, what do you need this project team 
to deliver? ” and “ What do you see as the output of this project? ” You know what 
to do next: ask some confirming questions like “ Okay, so you need us to deliver a 
new web portal for the POS solution by the end of Q3, correct? ” The objective here 
is to understand what these VIPs think the project should produce or achieve. 
At this point in time, you only need that objective, so stay focused and don’t get 
distracted when your stakeholders start moving into solution space or deep-
diving into execution strategies. Ignore that noise for now. 
 Once you’ve talked to several people and you feel like you have a handle 
on what they want you to do, write it down. Yes, really, write or type that 
objective out. There’s a really good reason for taking this step and it’s to test 
your understanding of the goal of the project. You should be able to state the 
objective in one succinct sentence. If you can’t clearly articulate this, then you 
don’t know enough about the project yet; go talk to more “important” people. 
Notice the confirming question above; in that example the project objective 
is to deliver a web portal to support the Point Of Sale solution by the end of 
the 3rd fiscal quarter. This concise statement is your starting point and touch-
stone for the rest of the project, so it makes sense to start here, doesn’t it?  

Project Management Basics
15
 Figure Out Who the Major Stakeholders 
Are . . . and Go Talk to Them 
 Now that you’ve got a project objective, you’re ready to start identifying those 
 stakeholders  . For now, you’re only going to focus on the major ones, and 
we’ll come back to building out a complete stakeholder list later. This will be 
the start of your stakeholder management plan, so it’s time to capture some 
data; for this, I generally use Excel, but you can use whatever application floats 
your boat. Start by making a list of the people within your organization that 
care about this project. For now, just focus on the most influential and the 
decision-makers. Capture each person’s role and what they care about with 
respect to the project. Now go talk to each one and discuss what they see 
as the project objective and what the project success criteria are. You want 
to confirm your understanding of the project objectives and what constitutes 
success, and start building collaborative relationships with these stakeholders. 
Yes, this is going to take some time, and yes, you really have to talk to these 
people. A big part of project management, you will find, is relationship building, 
so even if you think you know what the objective is, make that appointment 
and start building relationships with those key stakeholders, ’cause trust me, 
you’re gonna need them later!  
 Figure Out the High-Level Project Constraints: 
The Triple Constraint 
 At this point, you should have a solid project objective and a pretty good idea 
of who the major stakeholders are, so it’s time to figure out the high-level 
project  constraints  . Once upon a time in a land far, far away, project managers 
worshiped at the altar of the venerable Triple Constraint. Time passed, and the 
empire that is PMI moved away from this construct in favor of other ideas; 
however, those of us who were chiseling out project schedules with rocks still 
recall and use the Triple Constraint. 
 The  Triple Constraint  is  a   construct that defines the relationship of the sched-
ule, scope, and resources of a project. Think of it as a triangle, one where the 
legs represent the available resources, the expected completion date or sched-
ule, and the scope of work. (Figure  2-1 ) The idea here is that the integrity of the 
triangle must be maintained, so if the schedule is pulled in, that is, if the schedule 
leg of the triangle is shortened, then to maintain the integrity of the triangle 
the resources leg, the scope leg, or both must change as a result of shortening 
the schedule leg. It works like this: if you want to pull in the schedule then you 
need to either add more people to do the work (elongate the resources leg) 
or reduce the scope of work (shorten the scope leg). To maintain the triangle 
you must change one of the other two legs if you want to shorten the schedule 

Chapter 2 | Getting Started on Your First Project
16
leg. That’s it; there’s no free lunch here, folks. This construct still informs my 
thinking when I’m looking at changes to the project environment, and I use it 
regularly to help illustrate just why it is that my project team can’t pull in the 
schedule without affecting anything else. Okay, enough of the  history   lesson; 
let’s get on to figuring out the high-level project constraints!  
 The High-Level  Schedule  
 Generally, there are only two things you need to figure out with respect to the 
project schedule at this point in the project: the expected end date and any 
interim deliverables the team must meet. This part is actually pretty easy if you 
keep in mind that you’re doing this analysis from a bigger-picture view of the 
project. The goal here is to figure out when those major stakeholders expect 
your team to wrap up the project, and trust me, they all have a clear idea of 
what that date should be. Whether or not the date is realistic is another issue, 
and you’ll tackle it during planning. Think of this date as a target, NOT a com-
mitment; though it may be presented as a dictate, it’s always negotiable later 
during the Planning Phase. One pitfall junior project managers fall into here is 
 Figure 2-1.  Triple Constraint  
 

Project Management Basics
17
the expectation that this date is set in stone and there’s no wiggle room for 
reality. In fact, that date is often fixed for very good business reasons, and okay, 
for some not-so-good wishful-thinking reasons. However, that doesn’t mean 
that other things like the scope of work, the budget, and the resources are not 
negotiable. So for now, don’t get too wrapped around the axle on this date: it’s 
a target only. Don’t let your team lose focus or get distracted by a blatantly 
unrealistic date; instead, keep them focused on gathering data to understand 
the problem that they need to solve with this project. 
 Now don’t forget to discuss those interim deliverables with your major stake-
holders as well. Often there are commitments made, or expectations set, 
for test material, mock-ups, sample output, test results, etc., to other parties. 
These committed dates need to feed into the team’s planning process, so you 
need to uncover them early. Just like that “target” completion date, consider 
these dates to be targets where your team will assess their ability to hit those 
targets during planning. Yes, folks, at this stage of a project all deliverables and 
their associated dates are negotiable; the trick though is to wait until you’ve 
done some planning before renegotiating them. At this stage of the game, all 
you’ve got are those hysterical voices in your head telling you that there’s 
no way the team can hit that deliverable on time. This isn’t a strong negotia-
tion position for you. However, if you wait a bit until some of the planning is 
done, then you can offer up alternatives with business impacts based on data. 
Once you’ve got options and the cost of those options in your back pocket, 
you can renegotiate the schedule, scope, and resources required to execute 
the project from a position of strength. Therefore, don’t burn your political 
capital trying to weasel out of an unrealistic date at this stage. Sure, it’s okay 
to express doubt about the team’s ability to perform such a miracle, but be 
sure to emphasize that your team will “crunch the numbers” and come back 
with some viable options for those major stakeholders to consider. Those 
stakeholders purely love to “consider options” and make prioritization calls, 
and you’re going to provide the data for them to do just that during planning, 
so don’t spend your energy fighting with these folks now: you’ve got better 
things to do, like finishing the scoping work.   
 The High-Level  Scope of Work  
 You’ve probably caught on by now to the fact that when you are meeting with 
these major stakeholders, you’re going to talk about more than just the objec-
tive of the project. In fact, you’ll cover the objective plus the Triple Constraint 
components, schedule, scope, and resources, so now let’s break down what 
you need to figure out with respect to the high-level scope of work for the 
project. You need to determine the big pieces of functionality that the project 
needs to deliver. These items will turn out to be the most important deliver-
ables from your stakeholder’s perspective, so you need to spend some time 
talking about how each stakeholder views the project deliverables and what 

Chapter 2 | Getting Started on Your First Project
18
aspects of the project are important to each stakeholder. This is only the 
beginning of requirements gathering, and it’s likely that these major stakehold-
ers don’t know or particularly care about the specific details. Instead, they 
tell you that they want your team to develop that web portal. The specifics 
of that portal’s design will be developed during requirements gathering in the 
Planning Phase. Basically you want to answer the “is it bigger than a breadbox 
or smaller than a matchbook” question with respect to the scope of work. 
Be careful to separate the deliverable from the solution or how stakeholders 
expect the team to execute the project. Often, these major stakeholders have 
strong opinions in this space, but keep in mind that things like the use of spe-
cific software applications, project methodologies, and/or design practices are 
not scope. Smile and nod when these things come up and commit the team to 
evaluating these ideas during planning.  
 The High-Level  Resources  
 Now we come to the tricky topic of resources for your new project. Here 
you need to understand which of your major stakeholders are funding the 
project and what aspects of the project each stakeholder is funding. The basic 
question is: what is this project expected to cost? Trust me when I say that 
each of these stakeholders has a dollar amount in mind and it may or may not 
be grounded in the reality of previous project budgets. Just like discussing the 
delivery date and the scope of work, keep in mind that you’re simply collect-
ing data at this point, so gather those stakeholder expectations and know that 
you will probably need to renegotiate budget once the team has figured out 
the requirements and execution strategy. You also need to be aware of the fact 
that not all costs fall into the same financial buckets. This is specific to each 
company and organization, so spend some time reviewing the budget for a 
previous project with an experienced colleague so that you get a feel for what 
those buckets are and any accounting nuances you need to be aware of. For 
instance, travel costs are a big “gotcha” for a lot of project teams. The travel 
budget may come from the program or project bucket or it can come from 
the reporting structure for each team member. If your project will require 
team members to travel, especially internationally, then you need to under-
stand where the money to pay for that travel will come from and what the 
expected cost of that travel is. The last thing you want to hear midway through 
the Execution Phase is that a critical engineer can’t travel to an important cus-
tomer site for a demo because her department doesn’t have the travel budget 
to cover the cost. Don’t forget to consider the team size and location, since 
these factors also affect projected travel costs. 
 Speaking of team size and location, be sure to discuss these two factors with 
your major stakeholders too. Has it been decided already that the Poland 
team will develop the cloud infrastructure while the India team develops the 
software? What about the facilities your team will need? Will the team be 

Project Management Basics
19
working with the previous ad agency in San Francisco? If so, do they need 
some office space there? Often, junior project managers find that these kinds 
of decisions are already made prior to kicking off the project, so you need to 
understand them before moving into the Planning Phase. Let me give you an 
example of what I’m talking about here. Once I had a project where it was 
decided that the team would do the power-on testing of the new design in 
one of the company’s facilities in California. That decision was made without 
me in the loop. Unfortunately, this CA lab consisted of one borrowed work 
bench in some other organization’s lab. Therefore, our project plan had to 
include the work to build up the lab infrastructure to support the testing 
we needed to do. If I’d asked my major stakeholders about resources and 
team locations during the Initiating Phase of the project, I probably could 
have changed that decision to use a nonexistent lab. Instead, my team and I 
had to do extra work to accommodate this little surprise later in the project. 
So learn from my mistake and be sure to discuss how many team members 
your stakeholders expect you to need and where the work will be done now 
rather than waiting for an unpleasant surprise later. 
 Another key question you need to ask is this: has the project team already 
been identified? In organizations with mature project management practices, 
the answer is usually “no,” but in reality, this assignment of resources often 
happens much sooner, so it’s a good idea to understand who’s already tagged 
to work on the project at this stage of the game. If the project team has not 
been assigned yet, then you have an opportunity to influence who will be 
selected. Ask yourself who you’d like to be on the team based on the skills 
you think you’ll need, technical expertise, ability to work well with a team, etc. 
Also consider potential team members you do not want added to the team. 
It doesn’t hurt to lobby for those key team members early, so don’t miss the 
opportunity to do so before resources are assigned. The best practice is to 
wait until the Planning Phase to pull the team together after you’ve identified 
the skill sets needed to execute the project, but in reality much of the team is 
already assigned to the project before the Planning Phase starts.   
 Figure Out the  Players  
 By this point in your work, you’ve probably made several additions to your 
list of major stakeholders, so it’s time to build out a stakeholder management 
tool. The idea here is to build a list of people who have an interest in your 
project. You will use this list later in planning, and it will be one of the most 
useful tools you develop to manage your project, so invest the time now to 
build out a list of players. You can use any software application you like, and I 
tend to toggle between a spreadsheet and a mind map depending on which 
tools I’m using to manage the project. 

Chapter 2 | Getting Started on Your First Project
20
 To start, make a  list   of all of the people involved in, influenced by, or affected 
by your project. Who’s got “some skin in the game”? Who are your customers 
and partners? Who are the likely project saboteurs? This should be a long list, 
and it will grow as the project evolves. For each person, capture their organi-
zation, their role with respect to the project, their location and time zone, and 
their contact information. All of these people are your stakeholders, since at 
some level they can influence the project direction. During the Planning Phase, 
you will use this list to develop your project communication plan, so yes, be 
sure to capture that location and time zone info while you’re already looking 
up reporting structures and job roles. 
 Now that you’ve got a solid list of stakeholders, it’s time to refine it and iden-
tify the key project stakeholders. Here you want to identify those people who 
are decision-makers, budget owners, highly influential players, project approv-
ers, etc.: basically those people who can shut down or completely derail the 
project. These are your key stakeholders, and during planning you will also 
develop a stakeholder management plan.  
 Building the Project Charter 
 Now that you’ve met with the major stakeholders and have a pretty good idea 
of the project objective and the high-level project constraints, it’s time to build 
a project charter. The charter is a document that basically captures the infor-
mation you’ve been gathering informally. There are two camps when it comes 
to the importance and ownership of a project charter, so let me  explain . 
 The first camp is the Project Management Institute (PMI), the organization 
that governs the project management profession. PMI maintains a documented 
set of best practices for managing projects and programs called the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) which is available for purchase 
(nonmembers) or download (members) from their website,    www.pmi.org  . 
The PMBOK is considered the definitive word on the work of project man-
agement. According to the PMBOK, the project charter is solely owned by the 
project sponsor, and it specifically authorizes the project manager to utilize 
resources to execute the project. Further, the charter outlines such things as 
the business need the project is expected to fulfill, the high-level requirements, 
assumptions, and constraints, the schedule milestones, the budget, the stake-
holders, etc. As you would expect, such a document is held in high regard and 
considered very important by PMI. In short, it’s everything a project manager 
needs to know to get started all delivered with a big glittery bow. 
 That’s what PMI thinks; now let me explain the other camp when it comes 
to project charters. For many of us, myself included, the project charter is 
like that mythical unicorn; everyone knows what it looks like, yet no one has 
actually seen one! I’ve never found a project charter to be all that helpful, 
mostly because I’ve never been given one at the beginning of a project. I have 

Project Management Basics
21
completed a charter template and posted it to a project repository then promptly 
forgot about it for the rest of the project, so you could say that I’ve used them 
but that’s a pretty liberal interpretation of what I actually did. Often, your organi-
zation’s Project Management Office (PMO) will require a project charter, and you 
will be expected to comply with their expectation that a charter exists. However, 
the PMO mandates do not mean that there are formal project sponsors assigned 
or that these sponsors will actually do the work to develop a fully documented 
charter. In my opinion, the charter is pretty useless to a project manager. First, if I 
happen to get lucky and am handed a charter that a project sponsor or scoping 
team developed, I’m still going to validate the information with each of the major 
stakeholders. This information is too important to the Planning Phase to get 
wrong and I sure don’t want to find out that there’s a disconnect between major 
stakeholders about a key deliverable once the team has started the Execution 
Phase. Second, if I’m not lucky and I have to create the charter myself, then it’s 
duplicate work for me, as all of that information is contained in my project plan. 
So I’m going to do the informational interviews with the major stakeholders any-
way, and I’m going to document the critical information in my project plan, which 
is then reviewed by said stakeholders at the end of the Planning Phase, so I really 
don’t see any value in a  project charter.   
 As has been mentioned, the charter  should be provided to the project manager at 
the initiation of the project. The project sponsor  should own this document and 
it  should reflect the output of a scoping analysis. The reality is that there are an 
awful lot of  shoulds that never actually happen in the real world, so if your orga-
nization requires a project charter, then this is the point in the project timeline 
where it makes its appearance and either you or the project sponsor  should put 
it together. I’ve shared my experience with you but your organization may handle 
project charters in a different manner, so do what you need to in order to stay on 
the right side of the PMO and continue to make progress on defining the project.  
 Holding the Project Kick-Off Meeting 
 Okay,  you are now ready to hold the project kick-off meeting! This is for many 
of your team members and stakeholders the official start of the project. Before 
you schedule this important meeting, there are a few key considerations to 
think about. What kind of team dynamic do you need for this project? Is this 
going to be a “pedal to the metal,” “no holds barred” screamer of a proj-
ect where speed of execution trumps everything? Or is this a lower-priority 
project with a limited budget, where ingenuity and innovation will determine 
whether or not the team is successful? Each team needs a different dynamic, 
and setting the stage for a team that has a refined sense of urgency or an open 
collaborative approach starts with the kick-off meeting. Think about what traits 
you need to incentivize and foster when setting up this first team meeting. If 
you want to set the stage for a high-performing team, then now’s the time to 
do it. Consider how you will communicate the project objectives and high-level 

Chapter 2 | Getting Started on Your First Project
22
constraints to your teammates. Is this information something you need to send 
out ahead of the meeting so that the team members can review it and come 
with any questions? What about your expectations of the team and the “rules 
of the road” you will all live by for the duration of the project? If you expect 
team members to let you know if they can’t make a meeting ahead of time, 
then you need to explicitly state that during the kick-off meeting. Be sure to 
consider and include how the team will be governed. Which decision-making 
method will you use, and how will meeting agendas be set? The kick-off meet-
ing needs to go well, and everyone needs to feel included right out of the gate, 
so take the time to properly prepare for this important meeting. 
 
■ Note  It’s extremely important to specifically state any team governance items during the project 
kick-off meeting. As I mentioned, you can’t hold your teammates accountable if you haven’t broken 
down the rules of the road to them. To get you started, consider including these items in your kick-off 
material: expectations for attending meetings and notification practices if a team member can’t attend; 
expectations of mutual trust and respect; that everyone is expected to speak up and participate in 
the meeting; that team members will share potential roadblocks and showstoppers early to avoid 
surprises; that everyone on the team succeeds or fails together, etc. 
 Checklist #1—Initiating Phase 
 The Initiating Phase of the project is where it all starts. Key information is 
gathered, scoping is performed, and the project kick-off meeting is conducted. 
Complete these major tasks and  you   are ready to enter the project’s Planning 
Phase. These items are arranged in chronological order, but note that you may 
end up completing them in any order; the important thing is to do them all 
before proceeding to the next phase of the project. 
 Checklist #1—The Initiating Phase 
 □  Capture the objective of the project in 1 complete, succinct sentence 
 □  High-level project schedule milestones identified 
 □  High-level scope of work identified 
 □  High-level project resources (budget and people) identified 
 □  1st draft of the stakeholder management tool developed 
 □  Complete the project charter (if needed) 
 □  Hold the project kick-off meeting 
 Congratulations! You’ve just exited the Initiating Phase of your project! See, that 
wasn’t so hard, was it? Now let’s move on to Planning and have some real fun!  

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_3
 C H A P T E R 
 Doin’ Work 
 a.k.a. The  Planning Phase  
 If you’ve completed Checklist #1, and the kick-off meeting happened last 
week, it’s time to start doin’ the hard work of planning the project. For many 
project managers, the Planning Phase is the most difficult. This is where the 
bulk of the mechanics will be done and it’s also where you encounter your 
first, and most serious, soft skill challenges. The good news, as I mentioned in 
Chapter   1 , is that once you master the mechanics you’ll have more energy and 
time to focus on those more difficult challenges, so let’s get started, shall we?  
3

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
24
 Determining the Project Lifecycle 
 The first thing you’ve got to decide is which project lifecycle or  methodology  
best suits your project. This is no more than a framework that defines the 
specific stages of the project work. It is well understood by the organization 
and the various team members. The most common project lifecycle models 
are Waterfall, Agile, and  Theory of Constraints (TOC)  , and each has particular 
strengths. It’s quite common for an organization to have resources set up in 
support of, and a cultural bias toward, a particular lifecycle. If that’s your world, 
then you really don’t have anything to decide; just go with what’s already 
established. Whew, one less decision to make! However, if your organization 
doesn’t have expectations, then you can certainly choose the lifecycle model 
that best fits your project, so let’s break down the top three. 
Initiating
•Complete Communication Plan
•ID Project Lifecycle
•Gather Requirements
•Establish CCB
•Release Readiness Checklist
•Risk Management Plan 
•Manage Stakeholder Expectations
•WBS, Network Diagram, Schedule
•Optimize and Baseline Schedule
•Commit the Project
Planning
Execution
Release
Closing

Project Management Basics
25
 
WHAT’S ALL THE DRAMA ABOUT ANYWAY?
 Interestingly, this is one of those areas of project management where there’s a lot of 
intellectual drama around which lifecycle is the best. Note that this assumes that there 
really is one “best” model that will work for all projects, which even a novice project 
manager can tell you is unrealistic. The top three all have their proponents, and these 
folks are quite passionate about their favorites. Personally, I don’t get it; it’s a tool, not a 
cure-all. You see, many people associate organizational and cultural deficiencies with 
the project execution methodology. The thinking goes something like this:  We can’t fully 
define the requirements during planning so that’s why Waterfall fails and it’s also why 
Agile is the best way to go . This argument fails to hold water, in my opinion, because in 
most instances the project team could have defined the requirements if they had gone 
about collecting them in a systematic manner. 
 Think of it this way. These project lifecycles are simply tools the project team uses to 
guide their work. If you need to remove a dead tree from your front yard, you have a 
number of tools to choose from. You could nibble away at that monster live oak with a 
limb saw but it would take you a really long time. You could also fire up that chainsaw 
collecting dust in your garage and go at it like a wild man. But let’s say you’ve still got 
some common sense and that’s a really big tree, so you whip out your wallet and pay a 
professional to remove the tree. Note that the objective here is to remove the tree, not 
to use the chainsaw: all too often, we dictate a project methodology thinking that it will 
improve project execution when it’s simply the wrong tool for the job. In fact, I think that 
the real problems are cultural. Remember, tool selection doesn’t fix a broken culture and 
you can’t blame a framework for crappy execution. 
 Waterfall Project Lifecycle 
 The  Waterfall lifecycle  is probably the most common and widely used project 
lifecycle model. The Project Management Institute (PMI) has a rich history 
with this framework, and their PM Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) is primarily 
based on it. If you’ve attained your Project Management Professional (PMP) 
certification, then you’re already well aware of the ins and outs of Waterfall. 
It’s a phased approach to project execution with gate reviews at the end of 
each phase. The most commonly used project scheduling software, Microsoft 
Project, is optimized first and foremost for the Waterfall lifecycle. It should be 
noted that the thoroughness of planning is a critical success factor for proj-
ects following this lifecycle. With this one, failing to plan is truly planning to fail, 
and that’s what makes this lifecycle so challenging for junior project managers 
who may not yet have a feel for what it takes to adequately plan a project.   

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
26
 The Waterfall methodology works well when the requirements can be ade-
quately defined. Note that this requires a systematic approach to requirements 
gathering that many project teams skim over. This methodology also works well 
when the team has to incorporate many interdependent deliverables into the 
project. Scheduling software packages that support Waterfall are often exqui-
sitely optimized to handle these interdependent work packages, but they do 
require a skilled user to construct this type of schedule. Waterfall works best 
for midsized projects lasting several quarters to a year with less than twenty 
discrete resources to track. Finally, the most important reason to utilize the 
Waterfall lifecycle is its superior ability to predict the project milestones and 
ultimately the completion date. 
 Waterfall doesn’t work well when the requirements are ambiguous or changing 
frequently, since the all of the planning work is done up front. This model also 
flounders when the customer doesn’t know what they want and project success 
depends on innovative customer experiences, since there’s not a customer feed-
back loop built into the lifecycle. Trying to plan a long-term project with many 
resources and complicated interdependencies, using Waterfall, becomes a frus-
trating exercise in complexity. The biggest problem with Waterfall is that when the 
lifecycle fails, it tends to fail epically. When things go south, it’s often noticed late 
in the project execution and there’s a substantial amount of sunk cost incurred. 
Worse, it’s entirely possible to execute flawlessly and still deliver something the 
customer doesn’t like or won’t use with this methodology. In short, the Waterfall 
methodology has little tolerance for inadequate project planning.  
 Agile Methodology 
 The  Agile methodology  is something entirely different from Waterfall. It’s a 
framework of iterative execution; each iteration consists of planning, execu-
tion, and release. Think of this one as the “lather-rinse-repeat” mode of proj-
ect execution. While there are many different software packages to choose 
from, two of the most popular are JIRA and Rally. Here team members self-
organize to meet specific project needs and deadlines. Primarily used for 
software development, this methodology is particularly useful when the user 
experience is paramount to the project’s success. Unlike Waterfall where all 
of the requirements must be documented up front and with good detail, the 
Agile method focuses on sufficient documentation at each iteration, thereby 
giving the team the ability of take advantage of, and react to, changing require-
ments. It should be noted that it’s very challenging to get this one right unless 
the organization already knows and loves Agile.   
 Agile is often the best tool for software development and in instances where 
the customer doesn’t know what they want or can’t articulate the specifics of 
the final deliverable. Teams find Agile useful in rapid prototyping scenarios or 
for projects involving iterative design strategies. It excels at delivering on-target 
user experiences. Agile also works well with truly multidisciplinary teams where 

Project Management Basics
27
each team member can fill many of the roles needed to execute the project. 
Because this methodology is so different from the more traditional Waterfall 
lifecycle, it most successful when the organization understands and embraces 
the Agile mindset. 
 The Agile methodology doesn’t fare well in a predominantly Waterfall culture, 
where the management mindset is focused on specific milestones and deliver-
ables. Due to the iterative nature of this framework, the project team cannot 
commit to deliver the full set of features required by a specific date. They can, 
and do, commit to deliver the most important features on that specific date, 
but again, due to the cyclical nature of Agile planning, a high-confidence com-
mitment is not possible during the early stages of the project. Whether or not 
that is acceptable to the management chain is the Achilles heel of this method-
ology. This methodology also breaks down for teams where each member can 
only fill one specialized role, such as that of a database analyst or web designer. 
The flexibility of the project team to react to the changing development envi-
ronment is a true advantage of the Agile lifecycle; however, if the team itself 
doesn’t have the necessary technical flexibility to react quickly, this advantage 
is lost. Finally, if there is no Agile infrastructure present, I strongly suggest you 
leave this one alone. It’s too big of a hurdle for a junior project manager to 
implement a radically different lifecycle framework for your first project. You 
need to pick your battles, and cultural issues shouldn’t be your focus for your 
first few projects.  
 TOC Lifecycle Model 
 The  TOC   methodology  is similar to Waterfall but with the use of systematic/
strategic buffering. Each major milestone, or work package, has a carefully cal-
culated schedule buffer associated with it. Tasks are planned at 60–80% confi-
dence durations; then, a buffer is added to the endpoint milestone. The project 
manager manages the buffer consumption, not the specific work packages, and 
commits are communicated as a confidence range (low, medium, high). The 
idea is to optimize the workflow through the critical chain, and whether or 
not specific work packages are completed on time is not so important. This 
methodology is better than Waterfall at dealing with complicated interde-
pendent work packages/deliverables. ProChain is a commonly used software 
package associated with TOC, and with the exception of how the buffers are 
managed, it looks and feels very much like Microsoft Project. 
 TOC works well when the project environment is particularly ambiguous and 
the predictability of the completion date is important. Because it is a tweak of the 
Waterfall methodology, it works well in environments where Waterfall flourishes, 
such as those in which requirements can be adequately defined and in which 
there are a lot of complicated interdependencies. TOC does well in organizations 
with mature project management practices. Further, unlike Agile, it’s much easier 
to switch to TOC if you are already working in a Waterfall-oriented culture. 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
28
 TOC struggles in organizations where schedule buffers are considered “pad-
ding” and the management tolerance for commit windows is low. It also suf-
fers the same weaknesses discussed above for the Waterfall lifecycle. Last, 
TOC is difficult to practice in organizations where the management focus on 
specific deliverables trumps achieving the project milestones. This is a sub-
tle but important point. Recall that with a TOC schedule, each deliverable is 
scheduled with a 60–80% confidence duration, making it highly unlikely that all 
deliverables will be completed on time. In organizations where team members 
are rigidly held to hit deliverable due dates, this creates a no-win situation for 
the project team and leads to inflated work estimates, with baked-in buffers. 
The end result is a team that is viewed as underperforming with a project 
schedule containing an overly large amount of buffer. 
 There you go: the pros and cons of the top three project lifecycles. As I men-
tioned, if this is one of your first projects, then pick the lifecycle that your 
team and management chain already understand. It’s too big of a hurdle to try 
to change an organization’s culture while figuring out the nuances of how to 
lead a project team. Save that dogfight for another time once you’ve mastered 
the mechanics of project management. Still not sure which one to go with? 
Pick the Waterfall methodology simply because this book follows it and I’ll 
virtually hold your hand while you grind through the mechanics.   
 Setting Up Your Team 
 Okay, it’s now time to start revving up your  project team  , so let’s get started. 
You’ve already held the kick-off meeting, so there are a few things you need 
to do right away. The first thing you need to do is schedule regular, recurring 
team meetings. Now at first blush, you’d think that would be easy, wouldn’t you? 
Not so, my friend, not so. You need to do some planning before hitting send on 
that calendar invite. First, consider who’s on the team and where in the world 
they are located. Pick a time that best suits all of your team members, a time 
that falls into normal working hours for each person. Project managers leading 
geo-dispersed teams already know that this can be challenging. If you can’t find 
a time that is reasonable for everyone, then set up a rotating meeting schedule 
so that no one geography gets slighted. Yes, this is more work for you, and yes, 
you’ll need to put a bit more effort into “reminding” team members when the 
next meeting will be held, but this one consideration goes a long, long way to 
building a high-performing team. After you figure out a good timeslot it’s time 
to turn your attention to the standing meeting agenda. I find that an agenda that 
includes time to review change requests (more on this later), individual team 
member updates, opens, and action items works well for most project teams. 
Obviously, you also need to book a conference room if your team will be meet-
ing face to face or set up a teleconference if your team is spread around the 
world. It’s a good practice to book these meetings out for a few weeks past 
the expected project completion date, because the team will need to wrap up 
loose ends and do the work of closing the project after the release date. 

Project Management Basics
29
 Now that you’ve got all those meetings organized, there are a few more house-
keeping tasks to take care of. Often, you will need to set up new accounts and 
update your organization’s tool(s) of record for tracking your project work, 
including financial, project metric, and resource-tracking systems. Since these 
tools are specific to your organization, I can’t help you here, but I suspect 
you’ve got more help in this space than you need from your colleagues in 
charge of those systems. If you haven’t already done so, then you also need 
to set up a project repository. This is a specific place where all of the project 
documents will reside while they are being developed. Many organizations 
use Microsoft SharePoint or some other document repository for this pur-
pose. Okay, one last housekeeping task to take care of: collect your team-
mate’s vacation and training plans for the expected duration of the project. 
Put another way, send your team an e-mail asking them to provide any dates 
they will not be available to work on the project for the specific time period 
you expect the project to run. You will need this information when you build 
the project schedule later.   
 Develop a Communication Plan 
 The next step in our planning process is to develop a  communication plan  ; it’s 
quick to do and will prove extremely useful throughout the life of the project. 
A communication plan outlines how you will communicate important project 
information to your team and your stakeholders. It’s often just a simple one-
page document that outlines how project status, major decisions, upcoming 
changes, and escalations will be communicated and who these things will be 
communicated to. To build this plan, first start with the stakeholder manage-
ment plan you built in Chapter   2 . Remember that Excel spreadsheet that 
listed each stakeholder and what they cared about? If you were paying atten-
tion, then you also thought to capture where these folks work, and if you were 
really on your A game, then you thought to ask the key stakeholders how they 
preferred to get updates. If you didn’t catch their preferred communication 
method, then go find that out now so that you can figure out the best way 
to communicate your project status updates. To create the communication 
plan, I will often use a second worksheet in my stakeholder management plan 
to capture this information. First, list all of the major project communication 
opportunities such as project status updates, reporting out test results, com-
municating changes to the scope of work, etc. Then, identify who needs this 
information. Next, determine how frequently this information needs to be 
sent out. For instance, there should be a line item for project status informa-
tion, it should go to all stakeholders, and it should go out on a regular basis. If 
there’s a required format for this information, note that as well and perhaps 
include a hyperlink to a required web tool so that all of your communications 
information is located in one spreadsheet. Once you’ve completed the plan for 
all important project information, take the opportunity to sit down with each 
of your major stakeholders and review your plan to make sure that it meets 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
30
their expectations and needs. In a perfect world, you would only need to send 
out one project status update in a format that is easiest for you to update. In 
the real world, it’s often prudent to send out an up-leveled update to your key 
stakeholders to ensure that they are getting the information they need and to 
actively manage their expectations with respect to the team’s progress. That’s 
all there is to a communication plan: see, I told you it was quick!   
 Facilitate the Collection of Requirements 
 Now we’re moving into the belly of the beast and starting to get some serious 
PM work going; the next step is to facilitate the collection of requirements. If 
you’re feeling a tad overwhelmed at this point, don’t worry: that’s completely 
normal. Requirements  gathering  is second only to the angst of dealing with the 
stakeholders’ expected completion date for generating drama and PM stress. 
Hang in there and I’ll walk you through this snake pit. 
 The process of gathering requirements is actually pretty simple. Here’s a per-
fect example of the mechanics being simple while the people aspects are hard. 
This is how it works in a nutshell. The technical lead, the business analyst, or 
whoever is leading the requirements gathering process meets with the appro-
priate stakeholders and collects their wants and desires with respect to the 
project output. Please note that it is not the project manager who generally 
leads the requirements gathering. These requirements are then documented in 
some form or fashion depending on the organization, usually in a specification 
or product requirements document. After the technical lead is satisfied with 
the completeness of the set of requirements, the team does a detailed review 
of the requirements, making adjustments as needed along the way. After the 
requirements have been updated with the review feedback, they are considered 
“frozen” and any further changes require a formal change request. Simple, right? 
Well, I did say that it was the people that make this part so challenging, didn’t I? 
 The first thing you need to understand about requirements gathering is the 
role of the project manager in this process. It’s not what you think it is and 
it’s not what you’ve done in the past as a team member. The job of the proj-
ect manager is to ensure that due diligence was done in the requirements 
gathering and that all affected functional areas are represented in the process. 
In general, the technical lead for your project will conduct the requirements 
gathering; you as the PM need to orchestrate the process of collecting and 
reviewing them. Further, during the requirements review process you need 
to keep your PM hat firmly on. You are no longer a part of the team for your 
technical prowess; instead, you’re there to provide leadership and organiza-
tion. This is a big distinction, and many new PMs struggle to separate these two 
very different perspectives when leading their first few projects.   
 Okay, so what should a project manager be doing during requirements gath-
ering? First off, you need to ensure that this work is completed in a timely 

Project Management Basics
31
manner, so set an expected completion date and make it a tad aggressive. The 
goal here is to drive a sense of urgency but not contribute to the already 
amped-up atmosphere that is common during requirements collection. It’s 
important that the PM hold the entire team to completing the requirements 
collection by a specific date because, if left to their own devices, your team-
mates will stall out here, overcome with analysis paralysis. During this work, 
you should expect to step in and facilitate discussions about specific require-
ments, negotiating with key stakeholders as necessary to assist the technical 
lead. After the requirements are gathered, the team will then move into a peer 
review process. While reviewing the requirements, keep in mind that you’re 
not a technical reviewer; instead, you need to consider things like complete-
ness, testability, and whether or not the needs of each affected functional 
area are captured. Whenever I need to review requirements from both the 
technical and the project management perspectives, I find it easier to do two 
separate reviews so that I look at the requirements from the appropriate 
mindset each time. After the review is completed, the PM needs to ensure that 
all parties agree that the requirements are accurate and in sufficient detail to 
inform the project work. This agreement needs to be formally documented 
and stored as part of the project documentation archive. Once that agree-
ment has been reached, communicate that the requirements are frozen and 
any changes must be approved by the project Change Control Board. 
 Obviously, I’m skimming the highpoints of requirements collection here. The 
important thing to keep in mind is the role of the project manager. Your job is 
to make sure that this process happens in a timely and comprehensive man-
ner and that all affected parties are in agreement about the requirements. 
I mentioned that you want to drive a sense of urgency but in reality, your 
team needs to take as much time as is needed to get the requirements right. 
The requirements are the core of the project work and the time you save 
by accepting half-baked requirements is dwarfed by the amount of time you 
will spend rehashing the definition and implementation of those requirements 
later. The time a team takes in requirements gathering is a bit of a balancing 
act, and while it may seem murky to you now, as you gain experience as a proj-
ect manager you will develop a sense for how long this process should take. 
For now, set a reasonable target date for completing the process, then push it 
out if the team truly needs more time to get it right. You can always make up 
schedule with solid requirements, but you will likely go slower if the require-
ments are vague, missing, or in contention. Think of this as a “pay me now, or 
pay me later” scenario and take enough time to develop solid requirements. 
Last, if you get tagged to also lead the requirements collection efforts, then I 
highly encourage you to do some research into this process. There’s a lot of 
great training material out there on how to plan for, write, and collect good 
requirements. I personally find it distracting and difficult to do both require-
ments collection and manage the overall project, so if you find yourself in that 
predicament, I strongly encourage you to find a mentor and a colleague who 
can help you out here.   

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
32
 Establish the Project Change Control Board 
 If you recall, we said that once everyone buys off on the requirements all 
changes need to be approved by the project  Change Control Board  . Now’s 
the time to set that up! The first thing you need to do is to determine how 
changes will be tracked, reviewed, and approved: what process will you use? 
Remember that here you’re only concerned about changes that are internal 
to your project team, so you don’t need a wildly complicated process or mas-
sive approval board. Here’s my recommendation: dedicate 10–15 minutes at 
the start of each team meeting to the project CCB. During that time, review 
any new changes and discuss them as a team, then document the outcome 
of that discussion in the meeting minutes. During that discussion, your team 
will determine what you’re going to do about that request, so you need to 
determine who will be a voting member of the CCB, that is, who can approve 
or deny the request. For my project teams, the voting members—in fact, all of 
the members of the CCB—are the project team, and we follow the decision-
making process we all agreed to in the kick-off meeting. Independent of the 
meeting minutes, you need to record change requests into a Change Control 
Log so that you have a history of changes and why those changes were made. 
This log is extremely useful when closing the project to summarize everything 
that went on, so it pays to take the time to set up that log now. 
 That’s the overall process for tracking changes internally, but there are a few 
details you need to take care of as the PM. First, you need to determine which 
types of changes must be reviewed by the CCB. A good rule of thumb is that 
a change request must be submitted for any change that modifies the form, 
fit, or function of the project deliverable. You also need to create a change 
request form and distribute it to the team for use. This form should collect 
all of the information the team needs to evaluate a potential change, including 
what is changing, why the change is needed, what’s affected by the change, and 
how long this change will take to implement by functional area. Along with the 
specifics of the change, your form should also include space to document the 
change submitter, how the request is dispositioned (approved, conditionally 
approved, denied, etc.), the date the change is dispositioned, the total schedule 
impact of the change, and any relevant details to the implementation of the 
change (revision changes, implementation date, etc.). This can be a simple form 
that you create in whatever software application you like. Finally, you need to 
determine who needs to be advised of any project CCB decisions and how you 
will communicate those changes to them. This can be as simple as information 
captured in meeting minutes or it may require a separate communication to 
key stakeholders. The whole point here is that the project team CCB should 
be as simple and painless as possible so that your teammates will actually use it.  
 Ah, I know what you’re thinking now: Change Control Boards are scary and 
the whole process is Byzantine, right? Well they can be at the organization 
level, but at the project level they can and should be simple, short, and sweet. 

Project Management Basics
33
For the project team CCB, I view this process more as a communication tool 
rather than a gauntlet to run. The goal here is to make it as easy as possible 
for your team to talk about changes in a way that includes everyone affected. 
This is a critical process, so you really need to set it up in such a way that it 
works for your team. Those organizational CCBs are another matter entirely, 
and we will talk more about them in Chapter   4 during the Execution Phase.  
 Identifying Organizational Project Management 
Requirements 
 Now that you’ve got the framework of your project execution process 
defined, it’s time to start bolting on some parts. In this case I’m talking about 
any specific  organizational requirements  for your project artifacts. Just like in 
scoping, some organizations are more mature in their project management 
practices than others. If you work in an organization that can’t spell “project 
management” without a dictionary, then chances are the expectations about 
what project management artifacts you produce are pretty low. This actually 
makes the job of a junior project manager harder, because it can be confus-
ing determining what you really need. If that’s where you’re at, then just fol-
low this book and produce the artifacts we walk through. You don’t need 
to do anything else. If however, you work in an organization with a Project 
Management Office (PMO), then the chances are good that you are expected 
to produce specific documents in specific formats. My rule of thumb is that no 
matter what format I am required to use, I focus primarily on those that help 
me actually manage the project. All of the other bureaucratic detritus I put as 
little effort into as I can get away with. Let me give you an example of what 
I’m talking about here. I once worked in an organization where I was required 
to use a specific change request form. The problem, as you can probably guess, 
was that the form had a ton of fields for the change request submitter to fill 
out that were not relevant to evaluating the impact of a proposed change. 
What happens when you try to get your teammates to use a confusing, overly 
complicated form? No one uses it, that’s what! My teammates were simply 
implementing the changes and announcing it after the fact. That’s not change 
control, that’s a free-for-all. Once I made only the most useful fields “required,” 
the team started using the form and I was able to rein in the execution. The 
funny part about that whole story is that I never got dinged in a compliance 
audit for “improperly” filled out change request forms. So while you may be 
required to use a specific form or tool, make sure that it serves your needs 
before you put too much energy into using it. 
 Now let’s talk about where you go to find out about any specific forms or 
tools you’re expected to use. Your first stop should be your organization’s 
PMO. These folks are generally happy to help you get started and can pro-
vide the templates and work instructions you need. They will also set you up 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
34
with any tools of record you need to use. Wait! What do I mean by “tools 
of record”? Let me explain: here I’m talking about the web tools you will be 
required to enter your project data into. These tools are frequently used to 
make project execution progress visible to the organization’s management 
chain and to provide a mechanism to track compliance to project manage-
ment processes you are required to follow. You may be asked to upload/track 
data like resource spending (hours billed, for instance), project specific metrics 
such as Earned Value Metrics (EVM), and schedule performance to plan data, 
budget consumption, etc. Since your PMO really cares about these systems 
and this data, they take pains to document this stuff, so you probably only need 
to tap into the right person to get started. If your organization does not have 
a PMO, then you will probably need to ping a more experienced PM in the 
group to see what they consider to be required processes or forms. Chances 
are in that scenario there are very few “required” items you need to incor-
porate, since there’s no PMO to enforce compliance, but there may be some 
tools you need to use for budgeting and resource-tracking purposes, so do a 
little digging and set those things up now.   
 Finally, there are a few more things you need to search out while you’re 
looking for any other project management requirements your team needs to 
fulfill, and these are the compliance deliverables: things like regulatory, safety, 
and legal reviews and approvals. Sadly, it’s not uncommon for some of these 
items to get lost in the shuffling requirements, as if a magician pocketed a 
marked card from the deck. As the PM you need to be on the lookout for 
things like safety reviews that require approval from a designated review 
board. These boards often have specific checklists or requirements that your 
project output will have to satisfy, so you need to make sure that this sort of 
compliance work is comprehended in the project requirements and in your 
project schedule. Let me tell you that it’s mighty unpleasant to do a last-min-
ute scramble to get Legal to sign off on some marketing collateral because 
no one remembered that you can’t publish it until Legal has approved it. One 
note of caution here: you need to be cognizant of what types of compliance 
requirements are common for your particular industry. Don’t rely on your 
subject matter experts and project team to know this stuff, because they 
may simply be working from the “ this is how we’ve always done it” mindset. Yes, 
I’ve had senior technical people tell me that a safety review wasn’t needed 
despite the fact that we were shipping a physical product to an external 
customer, and I’ve had managers tell me that we didn’t need Marketing to 
approve the branding we were designing into a silkscreen for a control box. 
This is definitely one area where it pays to do your homework and make sure 
that your project plan comprehends any compliance requirements up front. 
Finally, another good resource for identifying these kinds of requirements are 
the experienced PMs in your organization, so go talk to them to make sure 
that your team isn’t missing any major requirements that might be on the 
periphery of your project deliverables.   

Project Management Basics
35
 Develop the Schedule—The First Draft 
 Once you have the requirements identified, then you’re ready to start building 
the project  schedule  . We are actually going to tackle the project schedule in 
two steps; we will make a first pass now, and then we will optimize it at the 
end of this chapter. Therefore, it’s not necessary to have 100% of your require-
ments defined at this point in time, but you do need a solid 80% to proceed. 
Many junior project managers find this to be the hardest project artifact to 
create, but if you follow the systematic process I’ll outline here, then you’ll 
see that what appears at first glance to be a monster task is really a set of 
completely doable subtasks. Here we will build the draft of the schedule using 
a three-step process. The good news is that each of these steps is simple to 
master and once strung together produce a pretty decent schedule, even 
before we optimize it. The first step is to build what we PM practitioners call 
a Work Breakdown Structure, a.k.a. the WBS. The second step is to string 
the tasks identified in the WBS into a logical flow which we call the Network 
Diagram, and after that we transfer the flow of tasks into whichever schedul-
ing software application we like to generate our project schedule. (Figure  3-1 ) 
 Figure 3-1.  Draft  schedule development flow  
 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
36
 Develop the WBS 
 The good news is that the  WBS is the easiest project artifact you and your 
team will produce, and you can usually knock it out in a couple of hours. 
Here’s the deal; you and your team will start with the identified project deliv-
erables and devolve them into actual work tasks, building a  WBS in the pro-
cess. To build the WBS, you start with the primary deliverables of your project. 
Then, for each of these primary deliverables you identify the sub-deliverables. 
For each sub-deliverable, you break them down further until you get to tasks. 
(Figure  3-2 ) Let me give you an example of what I’m talking about here. 
You start with a major project deliverable: something like, say, the Product 
Documentation. That documentation has sub-deliverables, one of which is 
going to be the User’s Manual as an example. You can break the User’s Manual 
into subparts such as the Wiring Diagram and the Assembly Instructions. At 
some point, your sub-deliverables become tasks such “Create the Wiring 
Diagram” and “Verify the Wiring Diagram.” You and your team break down 
each primary deliverable until you get down to the task level you want to 
track in the schedule. For each task, capture who will perform the task and 
how long they think it will take to complete. You may need to break some 
tasks down to a more manageable size depending on the work. For instance, 
if the task is something like “Build the control box,” you might need to break 
that down further if it’s an especially long or complicated piece of work. Large 
chunks of work like this are called work packages in PM-speak and are usually 
associated with a schedule milestone, but more on that later. Once you’ve 
broken down a major deliverable into its specific work tasks, you move to the 
next one and lather, rinse, repeat until you and your team have broken down 
all of the work to execute the project. When you think you’re done, do a gut 
check and ask the team this: “ Okay, folks, does it look like we’ve captured all of 
the work we need to do to execute this project? ” The point here is twofold; one, 
you want to leverage the collective experience of the team to verify that the 
breakdown is comprehensive, and two, you want to build buy-in with your 
teammates for the final schedule.  

Project Management Basics
37
 This process appears to be pretty simple and straightforward to execute, 
doesn’t it? Well, that’s because it is! Yes, this is a perfect example of what I’ve 
been talking about. The hardest part about creating a WBS is first convinc-
ing the team that they need to do it and second refereeing the inevitable 
discussion of who owns each task. Over the years, I’ve found that it’s a pretty 
easy sell to convince the team to do this exercise, and the refereeing is usu-
ally limited to a handful of tasks. If I’m working with a co-located team or a 
team that’s able to gather physically to do the project planning, then I go old 
school and do this exercise on a big blank wall with a pile of sticky notes and 
markers. The team lays out the WBS similar to the way you would lay out an 
organizational chart, in a hierarchical manner. You could also just clump the 
tasks together by deliverable at this stage because it doesn’t really matter. The 
important thing is to systematically break down the work to ensure that the 
team captures all of the work packages and tasks. If I’m working with a virtual 
team, then we will use mind-mapping software, a spreadsheet, or a collabora-
tion tool that allows us to capture the breakdown. At this point you’re not 
worried about the order in which the tasks will be performed; that comes 
next when you build the Network Diagram.  
 Figure 3-2.  WBS example  
 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
38
 Develop the  Network Diagram  
 Now that you’ve got all of the work you need to do to execute the project 
identified, it’s time to start laying it out in a logical manner on a timeline. To 
create the Network Diagram, you basically line up the tasks and work pack-
ages in the order in which they will be performed, that is, the workflow. Start 
by drawing a timeline, starting with the milestone “Project Start” and ending 
with “Project Complete.” Add in any major dates or milestones the team will 
need to anchor the workflow to, such as customer commitments, interim 
deliverables, key project milestones such as gate reviews, etc. If you don’t 
have an exact date for these milestones, that’s okay, just put them where you 
think they make the most sense for now. These are just stakes in the ground 
to anchor the diagram, and the actual dates for them will be adjusted later. 
You only need two, Start and Complete, to get started, but it’s often helpful 
to add a few intermediate stakes into your timeline to help the team lay out 
the workflow. Next, move the tasks and work packages from the WBS to the 
timeline where they make the most sense. The goal here is to nail down the 
best workflow for the project, so expect to move the tasks around until you 
get a flow that makes the most sense. Step back from the diagram and see if 
there are places where more work can be done in parallel and be sure that 
each task has whatever deliverable it needs to start work lined up appropri-
ately. Next, optimize the flow. As a team, walk through the flow, adjusting and 
tweaking it as needed until everyone is in agreement. Now draw connecting 
lines between the tasks to illustrate the workflow, carefully connecting all of 
the tasks to each other. Last, number each task sequentially along the work-
flow. Boom! That’s your Network Diagram completed! 
 For teams that are physically able to do this planning work together, you 
have each team member move the sticky notes they own to the appropriate 
place on the timeline. The “timeline” consists of a long strip of paper, such as 
butcher paper, taped to the wall. After all of the sticky notes are transferred to 
the timeline, the team walks through the flow, moving the sticky notes around 
until the flow is optimized. Linkages are drawn and each note gets an index 
number. For teams that are doing this work virtually, it’s especially helpful 
to use a software application that allows the team to drag and drop objects 
representing the tasks around to build a virtual project timeline “wall.” Mind-
mapping software is particularly good for this type of work. It should be noted 
that this type of planning is especially hard to do virtually, so if you’ve got a 
virtual team, then you really need to think hard about the best way to execute 
the WBS and the Network Diagram. Often, virtual teams do a lot of pre-work 
independently, coming together only at the end to walk the workflow and 
finalize the  Network Diagram.   

Project Management Basics
39
 Building the  Draft Schedule  
 Let’s recap, shall we? At this point in the schedule development process, you 
should know:
 1.   All of the deliverables for the project  
 2.  All of the work packages and tasks needed to produce 
the deliverables and execute the project  
 3.  The owner for each task  
 4.   How long each task is estimated to take  
 5.  The predecessors and successors for each task, that is, 
the workflow  
 6.  The Task ID number  
 If you are missing any one of these pieces of data, then stop right here and go 
find it. Do not proceed to building a schedule without this core knowledge 
base. The next step in the schedule development process is to use this core 
data set to build a project schedule using some type of scheduling application. 
Every cryin’, cussin’, spittin’ fit I’ve ever had over a scheduling application was 
due to the fact that I didn’t start with this core set of data. This is definitely a 
case of “garbage in, garbage out,” so take my advice and don’t start until you 
have the full data set. 
 The choice of scheduling application is up to you and is dependent on the 
project methodology you are using. These applications vary quite a bit, so I’m 
not going into the specifics for any particular one; instead, I’m going to walk 
you through a high-level process. If you a new user of this type of software, 
then do yourself a favor and take some basic user training before you start. 
Your first step is to set up the project parameters such as the type of calendar 
to use, the start date, how frequently file saves happen, units of measure for 
time (e.g., weeks, hours, minutes): basically, the typical configuration settings 
you tweak for other applications. Next, load in any non-working days such 
as company holidays for the expected duration of your project; extend your 
schedule end date a few weeks in case the project runs  long  . 
 Now you’re ready to start entering specific tasks and milestones. You’re going 
to use “milestones” to differentiate work packages, to mark significant dates, to 
structure your status reports around, and to measure progress against. For the 
most part you enter these babies into your scheduling software just like you 
would a task, and there’s usually a field you toggle to assign these items a zero 
duration. So always start with your “Project Start” milestone as your first line 
item entered into the schedule. At this point you have a choice to make: do 
you want to enter each project task sequentially from the Network Diagram 
using the Task ID or do you want to group tasks by ownership, and by that I 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
40
mean group all of the tasks for each functional area together? There’s no right 
or wrong answer here; it’s purely a matter of personal preference. It’s easier 
to enter the tasks sequentially, because you can just leverage your Network 
Diagram Task ID numbers and enter each task in order of appearance in the 
flow. However, this does make it harder to view all of the tasks for a specific 
functional area. I prefer to lay out tasks sequentially by functional area so that I 
can “see” all of the work for each sub-team at one time; this, however, makes the 
data entry harder. Most types of scheduling software allow you to set up flags 
and filters to handle however you’d like to see the data so again, there’s really 
no wrong way to go here. If you’re a first-timer, then do yourself a favor and just 
lay out the tasks in the order they appear on the Network Diagram. Why bor-
row trouble, right? As you proceed through the Execution Phase, the tasks will 
be ordered in your schedule to align with the workflow and it’s much easier to 
follow along. As you enter tasks, be sure that you’re entering in the owner, work 
estimate, predecessors, and successors for each task as you go.  Do not enter 
specific start and finish dates. The goal here is to make the software do the work 
of figuring out those dates so only enter start/finish dates for milestones repre-
senting incoming deliverables. The best practice is to manually enter start/finish 
dates for as few tasks or milestones as possible because these dates artificially 
constrain the scheduling software and that’s not really what you want to happen. 
Insert milestones as needed to help you keep track of the execution progress. I 
separate major work packages with start/end milestones; for example, I’ll use a 
“Development Start” milestone and a “Development Complete” milestone so 
that I can report out on the status of that “Development Complete” milestone 
throughout the life of the project. Use milestones liberally to help group the 
work packages; just be sure that each milestone is set to zero duration and that 
it has at least one predecessor and one successor.   
 Once you’ve entered all of your tasks and finished typing the “Project 
Complete” milestone, jump up and do a quick happy dance! You’ve just com-
pleted 75% of the work to create your project schedule! Notice that the 
hardest part of this whole process so far has been wrestling with the schedul-
ing software? If you took my advice and made sure that you had a complete 
core set of data to start with, then I bet that you were surprised at how pain-
less using that scheduling software was as well. Obviously, just how “easy” that 
process was is dependent on how much effort you put into learning how to 
use the scheduling software, so make the time to do that training. 
 Okay, sit back down and let’s do a little housekeeping before we call that draft 
schedule done. First, double-check that each task is linked into a continuous 
chain or flow. In a perfect schedule, the only two line items that won’t have a 
predecessor and a successor are the “Project Start” and “Project Complete” 
milestones. Do your best to achieve perfection. Next, look for any tasks with 
dates you’ve manually entered: there should only be a few of them, and they all 
should be milestones representing external deliverables into the project work-
flow. Look at the critical path or chain depending on the software you are using. 

Project Management Basics
41
Does it make sense? Are the tasks you were expecting to be there on it? If not, 
figure out where the logic is breaking down and fix it. Now verify that each 
task has a resource assigned to it. I assign myself, as the PM, ownership of all of 
the milestones on the schedule. Finally get with your subject matter experts 
and do a sanity check. Ask things like  “does it make sense that the code develop-
ment will take 4 months?” and  “is it reasonable that the marketing collateral will take 
2 weeks to complete?” Once you’re satisfied that all of these troubleshooting 
areas have been resolved, then it’s time to call this  draft schedule done!   
 
A WORD ABOUT DATES AND WHY THEY DON’T 
MATTER AT THIS STAGE OF THE GAME
 Okay, right about now you’re probably freaking out because the Project Complete date 
is not the date you were told to hit, is it? Relax, this is exactly what should be happening 
at this stage of the planning. In fact, it’s very rare for the schedule to line up exactly with 
the target date the team was given during scoping. So what’s going on and why do I think 
these dates don’t matter that much at this stage of the game? Until you’ve optimized the 
project schedule, any dates that are generated so far are speculative at best. There are 
too many factors in play right now to lock in on a specific date and believe that it’s set in 
stone. For instance, while the team is building the Network Diagram, they may come to 
the realization that they can’t hit the desired project delivery date. However, this layout 
doesn’t take into account holidays, individual vacations, the intricacies of coordinating 
highly interdependent work packages, the parallel nature of some of the work, etc., so it’s 
not really surprising that those dates are not accurate. Your draft schedule is just that, a 
draft that we will optimize after we’ve done some more planning. So relax, you’re doing it 
right! Care should be taken to manage your teammates’ and stakeholders’ expectations 
at this point in time. Remind them that these dates are early indicators and that all of the 
factors that contribute to the finished schedule aren’t baked in yet. In fact, I usually take 
precautions to hide the dates as they appear in the scheduling software while the team 
is validating the schedule logic to avoid mass paranoia and “sky is falling” soliloquies.    
 Build the Release Readiness Checklist 
 Once the deliverables are solid, you need to think a bit about the release pro-
cess and build a  Release Readiness Checklist  . This step must be done before 
you optimize your schedule, but it can be done at any point in the planning 
workflow. I most frequently find myself doing it after I’ve completed the draft 
schedule. The Release Readiness Checklist is pretty much what it sounds like: 
a checklist of items that must be completed before the project deliverable can 
be released. The items on this checklist are what I consider “due diligence” 
items, that is, items that must be done to ensure that the end product is 
safe and secure, meets all necessary compliance requirements, and has been 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
42
created using industry best practices. You need to find, or create, this checklist 
now because part of the schedule optimization we will discuss later includes 
making sure that the items on this checklist have corresponding work pack-
ages in the project schedule. In more mature project management organi-
zations, these checklists already exist and all you need to do is use them. 
However, if there’s no such creature in your world, then you will need to 
create it, so let’s talk about how you go about constructing one. 
 Creating the Release Readiness Checklist is another one of those straightfor-
ward PM tasks that if taken on independently is easy to knock out. I prefer 
to use a spreadsheet, but really you can use whatever software you like for 
this task. Structurally, you want to have a list of items, a spot (a.k.a. a check-
box) to indicate whether or not the task was completed, a place for notes 
for each item, and some contextual notes on the project such as the project 
name, revisions, scope of work considered, etc. Write each item as a ques-
tion, something like this:  “Are all personally identifiable data encrypted in storage 
and in transit?” As to what exactly needs to be on the checklist, start with 
best practices, which are things like design reviews, validation of the design, 
defect closure and management, compliance to corporate standards such as 
branding or privacy, etc. Next, consider safety and what needs to be done to 
attain compliance approval for the project deliverables. Consider items such 
as customer acceptance criteria and other quantifiable metrics the project 
objective may call out. Finally, consider the release process itself: Are there any 
formal approvals that need to be obtained? Change requests that need to be 
submitted? If so, then there needs to be a corresponding item on the checklist. 
Don’t forget to include logistical items for the release planning such as sched-
uling and availability of resources. The final checklist for your specific project 
probably won’t be longer than 20–30 items depending on the scope of your 
project. Remember these are the absolute “must-do” items that the team 
needs to accomplish, and anything that garners a “No” on the checklist is a 
showstopper and should get serious scrutiny before deciding whether or not 
to release the project. After you have your checklist complete, shop it around 
to your teammates and key stakeholders to make sure that you haven’t missed 
anything. Once you’ve secured agreement on the checklist items, you can put 
it away for now. We’ll refer to it when we optimize the schedule, but we will 
actually use it later for the release planning in Chapter   4 .  
 Develop the Risk Management Plan 
 We come now to the most frequently skipped project management process 
out there, developing the  risk management plan  . Da-duh . . . Da-duh . . . Da-duh 
. . . can you hear the  Jaws music yet? Okay, it’s actually not that bad, and I think 
most PMs, senior ones included, struggle with developing the risk management 
plan because while the actual mechanics of risk management are simple to 
learn, it requires the PM to motivate, negotiate, referee, and lead their team to 

Project Management Basics
43
complete the risk planning, and that’s a whole other kettle of fish. Once again, 
we see that the mechanics are simple, but the soft skills needed to be successful 
make this work harder than it has to be. So, like the broken record I’ve become, 
let me say it again: master the mechanics so that you will have more time and 
energy to deal with the interpersonal challenges of project management. 
 The biggest hurdle to implementing risk management is the  perception  that the 
whole thing is a complicated, bureaucratic hot mess that mostly wastes the team’s 
time. To overcome this perception, I’m going to help you streamline the process 
and craft it into something you and your project team can actually use. In case 
you’re tempted to skip this process, let me just say that I believe the risk man-
agement process alone is the single best tool a PM has for reducing the need 
for frantic firefighting during the Execution Phase. You see we are going to 
plan for those potential fires and tee up responses so that when the embers 
of a potential forest fire spark up, the team is ready with a plan that effectively 
douses that spark with good solid execution. 
 Risk planning is, like so much of  project planning  , a three-step process: first we 
collect the risks, then we rank ’em, and finally we develop plans to deal with 
the top risks. To collect potential project risks, facilitate a brainstorming ses-
sion with your project team. The idea here is to identify as many risks as pos-
sible, so don’t get hung up on how reasonable each suggestion is. To get a rich 
set of risks, pose future-thinking questions like  “We just released this project 
deliverable and no one is buying it. What happened?” and  “The product is wildly suc-
cessful so now manufacturing can’t keep up with the demand. What did we miss?” 
Like all brainstorming sessions, the team eventually winds down, so move to 
the next step, which is ranking the identified risks. To rank the risks you need 
two scales: one for the impact of the risk if it were to occur and one for the 
probability that the risk will occur. These scales are completely arbitrary, so 
just make a balanced one up; be sure to use an even number of scaling options, 
such as a scale of 1–4. If you were to choose a scale of 1–9, for instance, what 
you will find is that some of your team won’t want to choose sides and will 
take the middle ground of a 5. If enough people choose a 5, then you end up 
with every risk being rated as equally likely/impactful, which doesn’t help, so 
construct your scale with an even number of options. It’s quite common for 
some of your teammates to offer up wildly improbable risks and advocate for 
them passionately. This is not a big deal and you can defuse a potentially rat-
holed discussion by simply agreeing to add their pet risk to the list. During 
the rating process, many of these risks will drop out due to the fact that the 
likelihood of occurrence is so low. Therefore, save yourself the headache and 
don’t make an issue of their crazy talk. For most small to midsized projects, 
a team can identify and rate potential risks in an hour or two. In the case of 
large projects, it’s likely that there already exists a required tool of record for 
recording and tracking project risks. In these cases risk identification and rat-
ing can take a while to complete. (Figure  3-3 )   

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
44
 Once all of the identified risks have been rated for probability of occurrence 
and impact, it’s time to rank them. The risk ranking is a simple formula; the rank 
is equal to the occurrence rating multiplied by the  impact rating  . If you order 
your risks by ranking, then you should see the most urgent risks to address at 
the top of the list. By the way, this list with each risk listed including the ratings 
and rankings is referred to as the risk register. Cool, huh? You’re now throw-
ing down PMI-blessed terminology! The next step is to apply a little common 
sense. As a team, review the list of ranked risks and determine which of the top 
contenders the team can actually affect. It’s pointless and frustrating to argue 
around a risk the team cannot address. For example, I commonly hear the risk 
 “resources may be pulled off the project” ; well, sure, that can happen, but at the 
risk-planning point in the project, there are no plans to do that, so why waste 
time arguing about it? If there’s a likelihood that a specific resource will be pulled 
away, then that’s something we can plan around, but a nebulous risk that cannot 
be predicted or affected is not something the team can plan for. We call that an 
 unknown unknown in PM-speak. As a team, identify the top three to five risks you 
want to address. Why only three to five risks? Well, in my experience, that’s the 
most reasonable number of risks a team can tackle at one time without suffer-
ing a hit on their productivity. If your team has the bandwidth and you’ve already 
addressed the top risks, you can always add more into the risk management plan 
as time allows, but for now just focus on those top three to five risks. 
 So far, so good right? You’ve now got a list of three to five risks you need to 
develop plans around, so let’s talk about risk planning now. The trick to risk 
management planning is realizing that there are only five ways to deal with a 
 potential risk  , and they are as follows:   
• 
 Mitigation—take specific actions to prevent or 
lessen the impact of the risk occurring 
• 
 Contingency—take specific actions to reduce the 
impact of the risk once it has occurred 
• 
 Transference—take specific actions to transfer 
the risk to another entity 
• 
 Acceptance—do nothing and accept the impact if 
the risk occurs 
• 
 Avoidance—take specific actions to avoid the like-
lihood and impact of the risk occurring 
 Figure 3-3.  Risk planning  flow diagram  
 

Project Management Basics
45
 That’s it! Once you can wrap your head around the fact that you only have 
these five options, risk management plans get a whole lot easier to develop. 
Walk through these five options for each risk and determine which actions 
the team will take (or not take) in anticipation of the risk occurring and once 
it does in fact occur. The  actions  the team decides to take here need to be 
incorporated back into your schedule as specific tasks. By doing this, you take 
away much of the bureaucracy commonly associated with the risk manage-
ment process. These tasks are now tracked as part of the regular project 
work and are monitored and controlled as such. We’ll talk more about this 
later, but for now, just understand that it’s important that you translate your 
risk management plans into specific tasks embedded into the project sched-
ule. You will probably select more than one option for the really important 
risks to address and you will be choosing to accept all of the risks you do 
not address. This is okay, and it’s perfectly legitimate to state that acceptance 
up front. One final note here on how to record your risk management plans. 
Since I integrate the tasks associated with managing each risk the team takes 
on into the project schedule, the weekly team meeting minutes are where 
any updates to the risk plans are documented. However, many organizations 
require the PM to log risks and track risks into a formal risk register. These 
are frequently separate web tools or documents that the PM is expected to 
maintain. Maintaining a separate risk register is a duplication of effort if you’ve 
incorporated your risk plans into your schedule, so this is one area where I 
put as little effort as possible into compliance.   
 Optimize the Schedule 
 Okay,  we’re  almost done with planning your first project; in fact, we’re so close 
you can practically smell the baseline! The only thing left to do is optimize the 
schedule, so let’s get to it. The first thing you need to do is verify that all project 
work is represented in the schedule. If you will recall, you might have built the 
WBS with only 80% of the project requirements documented, so it’s time to 
double back and make sure that all of the documented requirements have associ-
ated tasks in the schedule. Ensure that all of the items on the Release Readiness 
Checklist have representative tasks in the schedule. Do the same thing for your 
risk management plans. It’s not uncommon for some of the work packages or 
risk plans to have some ambiguity about them. For instance, the technical lead is 
waiting for final feedback from the security architect, which may result in a new 
requirement. For these ambiguous tasks, you need to enter a placeholder task 
into the schedule and give it a conservative work estimate. These placeholder 
tasks are really schedule buffers, and we’ll talk more about them later. The key 
thing here is to mitigate the ambiguity by adding these buffers. In the case of 
risk management, you may not know if the risk has occurred, so you need to 
add tasks to test whether or not the risk is active. These are simple tasks such 
as  “Check the weather forecast before committing to the foundation pour.” In that 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
46
example, if bad weather is expected and pouring the foundation will be delayed, 
the next task in the workflow is a weather buffer task which is activated. If there’s 
no expected delay, that task can be inactivated or marked as completed with 
zero duration. Once you’re sure that you’ve captured all of the known work, it’s 
time to  move to the next step. 
 After verifying that all of the work is represented, you need to make sure that 
all holidays and any non-working days are captured in the scheduling tool. Be 
sure to include team members’ planned vacations, training, etc. It can be a has-
sle to get your teammates to provide their vacation plans, especially if you’re 
asking in February and they haven’t even started thinking about their summer 
vacation. In those cases, put in a placeholder for any vacation or training time 
they might have that will last longer than a few days. (FYI, these non-working 
days are tracked in the calendar function of your scheduling application and 
are not specific tasks in the schedule.) It’s prudent to plan for those times 
when your team members will not be working on your project up front to 
avoid having those same folks working overtime to catch up on the project 
work once they return. If the project will span the end-of-year holidays such 
as Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s, I block the full week for each holi-
day as non-working days. I do the same thing for Chinese New Year as needed. 
This provides a little extra buffer for the schedule and accounts for the fact 
that much of the team will be taking time off. 
 Speaking of buffers, it’s now time to add some more. For each of the major 
work packages, add a buffer task to the schedule in anticipation of those 
unknown unknowns we talked about earlier. Place these buffer tasks right 
before the completion milestone and make it a predecessor for the next 
task in the workflow. Don’t worry about how much work to assign to each 
buffer yet; simply add them into the schedule between major work packages 
or milestones. I typically buffer the development work, the validation work, 
and a catchall buffer right before the project release milestone. To figure out 
how much buffer you need, look at the total estimated work and calculate a 
percentage of the total to distribute across the project timeline. For projects 
where I feel we have high confidence in the requirements and low to moder-
ate risk, I will typically use a buffer of 15%; for projects where there are still 
a lot of unknowns and the risk is higher I will use 25%. Obviously, how much 
buffer you use is a matter of experience so if you’re not sure just start with 
20%. This buffered schedule is your “worst-case” scenario, which means that 
even if things go slightly sideways and the team encounters some obstacles 
you didn’t plan for, you can still hit the buffered release commitment. As long 
as nothing unexpected and grossly impactful happens, your team can deliver 
to this schedule; it’s your “high-confidence” commit. The flip side is also true; 
even if things go swimmingly, the likelihood of the team delivering the project 
much earlier than this buffered date is low. You and your management chain 
may not like this date, but it is the most likely date the team can deliver to 
unless specific actions are taken to pull in the schedule.   

Project Management Basics
47
 
MORE ON BUFFERING A SCHEDULE
 Yes, a  buffered schedule yields a high-confidence commitment to deliver, but is that 
realistic? Many organizations view schedule buffers as evil padding and heavily 
scrutinize any project schedule in an attempt to stomp out buffers. This is extremely 
short-sighted in my opinion, because you are then planning for nothing to go wrong, 
for the sun to always shine, and the design to always work. That’s just not realistic, 
is it? Instead, I look at buffers as part of responsible project planning. A well-buffered 
schedule dramatically increases the predictability of delivering the project on time, and 
isn’t that the point of planning in the first place? High predictability of project execution 
allows an organization to better utilize resources and coordinate work across programs. 
Further, a buffered schedule ensures that the team isn’t burnt out at the end because 
delays and unexpected risks were planned for. 
 Pull In the Release Date (if Needed) 
 At this point, you’re probably  caught   between a rock (the stakeholder’s expec-
tations) and a hard place (the high-confidence schedule), and you need to 
figure out what to do next. It’s important to realize a key point here. The 
stakeholder expectations are primarily based on business needs and possibly 
a commitment to a customer. They are not based on the actual work needed 
to produce the project deliverables. The high-confidence schedule is solidly 
grounded in the actual work content and may not meet that business need. 
It’s now time to optimize the schedule to see if it’s possible to bridge the gap 
between the stakeholders’ expectations and reality. 
 Your first step when pulling in a schedule is to look for ways to optimize the 
workflow. This is the low-hanging fruit. Identify work that can be done in par-
allel and reorder the workflow to shorten the overall project duration. Look 
for specific tasks that can start earlier with a partial predecessor deliverable. 
Any work you can move off of the critical path will shorten the overall project 
duration, so carefully scrutinize those tasks and see if there are opportuni-
ties to reorder the work. Once you’ve done all of the workflow optimization 
you can, baseline your schedule and make a copy. You will use this copy to do 
“what-if” scenario modeling next. 
 In Chapter   2 we discussed the Triple Constraint and the fact that you must bal-
ance the project’s schedule, scope, and resources. If you recall, there really are 
only two ways to pull in your project schedule—either reduce the scope of work 
or add more resources—so let’s dig a little deeper into what that looks like.   
 Reducing the scope of work is often the most realistic way to pull in a sched-
ule since resources don’t grow on trees. As a team, carefully scrutinize the 
requirements and identify any that are considered “nice to haves” or that can 

Chapter 3 | Doin’ Work
48
be delayed. Consider using a phased approach to implementing requirements 
that will allow the team to deliver the most important functionality on time. 
Another completely viable, though unpopular, strategy is to reduce the qual-
ity of the project deliverable through reducing the amount of validation to be 
performed, so that again, the most important functionality can be delivered 
on time. Use that copy of the schedule you made to do “what-if” scenario 
modeling by cutting tasks from the schedule to understand the impact to the 
overall timeline. Be sure to keep track of the schedule impact each of these 
reduced-scope options generates. 
 Adding resources to the schedule is called  “crashing the schedule.” Cute 
name, huh? Who says project managers don’t have a sense of humor? Often 
junior project managers go to their stakeholders with a generic ask for more 
resources:  “We need five more resources to be able to release this product by the 
end of October.” The problem here is that this ask is too vague and not action-
able by the stakeholders. The trick to getting more resources is to identify 
specific work packages to apply them to, in order to accelerate the sched-
ule. To do this, you take your “what-if” scenario modeling schedule and add 
resources to tasks on the critical path to see what the impact to the final date 
will be. By doing this modeling, you and your team can identify some strategic 
work packages where additional resources can have a meaningful impact. Now 
the ask looks something like this:  “If we can get an additional database analyst for 
the first two weeks of June, then we can pull the schedule in by three weeks.” Now, 
the stakeholder who can provide that resource knows exactly what you need 
and when you need it, and your stakeholder is more likely to act. 
 At this point, you should have your high-confidence schedule and several 
options for pulling it in, so now it’s time to negotiate with your stakehold-
ers. This negotiation is often contentious and difficult because the project 
manager hasn’t done their homework. The job of the project manager here 
is to provide viable options to the decision-makers. We get paid whether we 
execute Plan A or Plan B, but it’s our responsibility to provide the data to the 
decision-makers so that they can make informed decisions about additional 
resources or reduced scope. The careful planning you and your team have 
done so far has generated that data through the “what-if” scenario model-
ing, and while your stakeholders may huff and puff a bit, eventually they will 
face reality and make some decisions that allow you to lock in the plan and 
schedule. At this point, you can obtain stakeholder buy-off on the major proj-
ect milestones, so update your baseline schedule with any changes based on 
these negotiations. Re-baseline the schedule and use these dates as your com-
mitment to deliver. Last, send out a formal communication committing the 
project to these new dates. 
 That’s it! You are finished planning your project! The Planning Phase is where 
most of the mechanics of project management happen, and it’s all downhill 
from here with respect to artifacts you need to generate or specific PM pro-
cesses you need to follow.   

Project Management Basics
49
 Checklist #2—The Planning Phase 
 The Planning Phase of the project is where the work really happens when it 
comes to project mechanics. We’ve covered a lot of ground here, so be sure 
to use this checklist to keep yourself on track. Just like  Checklist  #1, these 
items are arranged in chronological order but you may end up completing 
them in any order; the important thing is to do them all before proceeding to 
the next phase of the project. 
 Checklist #2—The Planning Phase 
 □  Regular team meetings have been scheduled for the expected duration of the project 
 □  The communication plan has been completed 
 □  Project lifecycle model has been identified 
 □  Project requirements are frozen and formal change control is now in effect 
 □  Change Control Board has been established 
 □  The Release Readiness Checklist has been developed 
 □  The risk register has been developed and the top risks have active risk management 
plans identified 
 □  All stakeholders agree to the project timeline milestones 
 □  Schedule has been baselined 
 □  The committed project schedule has been communicated to the organization 
 Congratulations! You’ve just exited the Planning Phase of your project! You’ve 
now completed the majority of the project management processes and pro-
duced the bulk of the artifacts you will need to manage the project. All that’s 
left now is to put your planning into action in the Execution Phase, which 
comes next.   

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_4
 C H A P T E R 
  Executing Your 
First Project 
 a.k.a. The  Execution Phase  
 By this point in time, you should have completed all of the items on Checklist 
#2; that is, you should have a solid project plan. In the Execution Phase of the 
project you will move from creating project management artifacts into using 
them. Here you will leverage the work you did to kick off the project and the 
stakeholder management plan to facilitate regular team meetings. You will use 
your project Change Control  Board  to participate in the program- or organi-
zation-level Change Control Board(s). You will utilize the project schedule to 
track work and gauge progress. Risks will be triggered, and those action plans 
you and your team developed to deal with potential risks will be activated. 
Finally, you will use all of the artifacts you’ve created to generate regular status 
updates and manage escalations. The bulk of the project work does happen in 
this phase; however, since you’ve taken care of business in the Planning Phase, 
Execution for the project manager is about using the tools you developed 
previously. At this point in time, you are probably feeling a little shell-shocked 
since the Planning Phase involved a lot of work. Don’t worry; the mechanics of 
the job will be significantly easier going forward.   
4

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
52
 Holding Regular Team Meetings 
 By the time you’ve exited the Planning Phase, you’ve already got a  standing 
team meeting  set up, however this is a great time to fine-tune your meeting 
dynamic. First, think about the content of this meeting, a.k.a. the agenda. It 
needs to be a balance of au courant topics and team updates. I suggest break-
ing your agenda up like this: 10% of the time for your project CCB, 60% for 
team updates, 20% to discuss the schedule, and the remaining 10% of the 
meeting to reviewing action items, next steps, help needed, and any open 
questions the team might have. The trick here is to devote enough time to the 
team updates but still address the business of managing the project, so let me 
break this down a bit further for you. That 10% devoted to the  CCB  is not 
always needed, so here’s where you can fit in meatier topics the team needs to 
discuss on a periodic basis. Note that if the special topic is especially contro-
versial or involved, you may need to adjust the meeting time to go longer. The 
individual team updates should constitute the bulk of the meeting time and 
discussion. It’s a good idea to set expectations that each team member come 
prepared to discuss what they’ve accomplished, any help they need, what they 
Initiating
Planning
•Standing Team Meetings
•Manage Changes via the CCB
•Update the Schedule
•Monitor and Control Execution Progress
•Review Risks Regularly
•Regular Project Status Updates
Execution
Release
Closing

Project Management Basics
53
plan to work on next, and any new developments in their domain. The goal is 
to get succinct updates from each team member and it may take some coach-
ing and a bit of time for the team to get into this groove. I prefer to cover the 
schedule updates after the individual team updates because this serves as a 
recap of the update portion of the meeting. There are two goals here: one is 
to ensure that each team member understands what work they are account-
able for and when it’s due, and the second goal is to validate the schedule 
logic and ensure that it matches reality. The last bit of the agenda is dedicated 
to housekeeping, that is, updates on open action items that the team hasn’t 
already discussed, reviewing any next steps the team has decided to take, and 
time for any questions the team may have that were not previously covered. 
I prefer to discuss these items at the end of the meeting because I’ve found 
that for the most part these open action items organically come up during 
the team updates and accompanying discussion. The time at the end of the 
agenda is mostly used to capture anything we missed talking about earlier and 
individual team members’ out-of-office plans.   
 Now that you know what content the meeting will address, it’s time to tweak 
the logistics. First, consider when your team meeting is happening. Do you have 
any team members who are always late or who regularly miss the team meet-
ing? If so, then it’s probably time to adjust the meeting timing. It should be during 
accepted working hours for each team member. But what exactly are “accepted 
working hours,” anyway? We’re talking 8 a.m. to 5 p.m., generally speaking. 
Sounds logical, right? Not so fast! There’s more to this that first meets the eye. 
Many people have personal commitments or ugly commutes, so you should 
avoid the 8–9 a.m. window and the 4–5 p.m. window. Lunchtime meetings, or 
meetings that run over and extend into the lunch hour, are really bad ideas. Yes 
you can compel your team members to attend a meeting over their lunch hour, 
but they won’t be happy about it and their level of engagement and willingness to 
take on more work will reflect their opinion of you co-opting their lunch hour. 
So this leaves us with these optimum meeting times: 9 a.m.–noon and 1 p.m.–4 
p.m. It gets further complicated if your team resides in different time zones. See, 
I told you there was more to this than you thought. The best course of action 
is to find a time that works for everyone on the team in those optimum meet-
ing timeframes. The second best option is to rotate the meeting times so that 
everyone shares the pain . . . this month we meet at my 6 p.m. and next month 
we meet at your 7 a.m. This is a significant challenge for geo-dispersed teams, 
and it’s one with no perfect solution in many cases. In fact, many teams prefer to 
pick one not-so-wonderful time and stick to it for the duration of the project 
rather than deal with rotating meetings. The best you can do is to check in with 
team members regularly and make adjustments as necessary. 
 Where you meet is as important as the agenda and when the meeting takes 
place. The first choice should always be to meet in person. Ironically, in our 
world of virtual meetings you may have to influence your team members to 
leave their desks and actually walk down to a conference room. It might have 

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
54
been a long time since they had regular, standing, in-person meetings! If you 
can’t manage to meet in person, then use videoconferencing to improve com-
munication. If you can’t do in person or videoconferencing, then you’re left 
with teleconferencing. Here it’s important to have some way to “share your 
screen” so that everyone can see the same thing as the meeting progresses. 
This is where you want to take meeting minutes in real time while sharing that 
screen. Finally if all else fails, go old school and do the meeting with audio only. 
Remember, we all used to execute perfectly complex and complicated work 
with only telephones and e-mail; it can be done. If you’re going the “audio-only” 
route, be sure to tell your teammates up front and let them know that they 
will need to follow along with collateral provided earlier and take their own 
notes. An “audio-only” meeting is not one they can effectively participate in 
from their car or in any venue without the ability to boot up their laptop and 
review the collateral. I always ask my teammates to take their own notes during 
audio-only meetings so that they stay engaged in the discussion. I still capture 
and distribute meeting minutes as part of my normal meeting facilitation duties. 
 Finally a word about  meeting facilitation:   do it! A poorly facilitated meeting is 
a waste of everyone’s time and it degrades your ability to make progress as a 
team. Actively control the discussion and direct it to the agenda unless there’s 
a very good reason to diverge. Ensure that an actual decision is made rather 
than the team just talking around an issue. This often requires the project 
manager to drive the discussion with statements like  “Okay, so what exactly 
are we going to do here?” Be sure to pull in opinions and ideas from the entire 
team, especially those who appear to be on the fringes of the discussion. It’s 
perfectly fine to sideline a topic for another discussion  or   forum if it’s not 
central to the stated meeting agenda, and it’s perfectly fine to add an adjacent 
topic into the agenda if it’s germane to what the team is trying to achieve. 
Actively manage those meeting participants who tend to monopolize the dis-
cussion, and again, ensure that everyone gets to participate. At the end of the 
meeting, restate any decisions that the team has made and quickly review the 
action items to ensure that owners understand what they need to go do. Most 
importantly, end the meeting on time. If the discussion isn’t finished, schedule a 
follow-up meeting. Meeting facilitation is a core project manager competency, 
and if you’re not quite there yet, then you need to focus on building this skill 
quickly. A well-run meeting is like duct tape; it can fix darn near anything, so get 
comfortable facilitating meetings to improve your PM effectiveness.   
 Playing at the Program-Level CCB 
 In Chapter   3 , we talked about streamlining your project change control pro-
cess to remove bureaucracy and improve the team’s ability to comprehend 
changes efficiently. Now it’s time to consider how to manage changes within 
the realm of an overarching program or organization. Here you will leverage 
the project CCB infrastructure you’ve already built to feed into the  higher-level 

Project Management Basics
55
CCB  . The first thing you need to do is figure out the change control process 
the program uses. There will likely be a specific change request form and an 
approval body, a.k.a. the Program CCB. Previously, I helped you sidestep the 
bureaucracy that often accompanies change control, but at some point your 
team will either need to implement a change that affects entities outside of 
the specific project’s sphere of control or be asked to implement a change 
from those external entities. Now you’re moving up from the farm team to 
the minor league of change control, so how do you do that? 
 If your project team is proposing the change, then you fill out the form and 
submit it for review. There are two keys to getting these proposed changes 
approved: supporting data and stakeholder management. Before even propos-
ing the change, get that data. Your goal here is  to   quantify the change impact, so 
figure out how much it will cost or how long it will take and include that infor-
mation within your change request. While you are pulling this data together, 
and before submitting the request, discuss this possible change with affected 
stakeholders. Remember those folks you identified in Planning? Those folks! 
Your goal is to get buy-in for the change before it’s presented to the program 
CCB. Yes, this takes some time, and you could be doing something else, but 
here’s the catch: if you submit a half-baked change request, then chances are 
you will be rejected and you’ll need to revamp the request to try again. It 
takes longer to go through the “lather-rinse-repeat” cycle than it does to talk 
to the stakeholders before the CCB meeting. Plus, these change requests are 
great excuses to have a synch-up session with your major stakeholders; that 
is, they can be the stated purpose of a one-on-one meeting that you can then 
leverage to check in with those stakeholders to gauge how satisfied they are 
with your team’s performance to date. In short, you kill two birds with one 
change request stone; you expedite the approval of your change request and 
you improve your relationship with key stakeholders. If you do your home-
work and grease the skids with your stakeholders, then the actual review of 
the request in the approval body is merely a rubber stamp and your change 
request is quickly approved. If you fail to address these two key success fac-
tors, then the approval body review of your change request will be frustrating 
and drawn-out, so just be prepared and avoid the headache.   
 You need a different strategy for those times when another group brings a 
change request to the program CCB. In a perfect world, the change submit-
ter would have talked to you before submitting the request to understand 
the impact on your project team and your specific concerns. You don’t work 
in a perfect world and you probably weren’t consulted ahead of time. It’s not 
uncommon for a proposed changed to be presented as a “must-do” change, 
and you may get some significant pressure to agree to execute it. Resist the 
temptation to give in without doing due diligence. Here’s where you offer to 
 “take this back to my team and understand the impact.” Your objective is to agree 
to assess the proposed change and bring back impact and options. You should 
never agree to a change, especially a major change, without understanding 

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
56
the potential impact. At this point, the change request will either be on hold 
or conditionally approved pending your impact analysis. Your next step is to 
meet with your team to discuss what it will take to implement this proposed 
change. Leverage your project schedule to do some “what-if” modeling just 
like you did when you optimized the schedule at the end of Planning. But don’t 
stop there! Now see if you and your team can come up with some alterna-
tive options and model those as well. Once you’ve done this analysis, you’re 
ready to go back to the program CCB with an impact and some options. In my 
experience, having solid supporting data blunts the peer pressure to simply 
approve the change request and figure out how to execute it later. By provid-
ing this supporting data, you enable the decision-maker(s) to make a data-
based decision about how they want to proceed. Sure, you still may need to 
execute the change request, but by doing that analysis, your team has already 
figured out what work they need to do, and it’s fairly easy to integrate the 
change into the project schedule.   
 
A COMMON CHANGE CONTROL DILEMMA
 While this book is not focused on the soft skills needed to lead projects, there’s one “soft 
skills” challenge that seems to crop up all the time, and it’s directly related to controlling 
changes. You see, it’s quite likely that after you and your team have met to hash out 
that impact to the project for a proposed change, your teammates will go off and start 
executing the change before it’s officially approved. You also see this at the project 
level, where a teammate is sure that the change must be implemented, so they just 
do it and submit the change request after the fact. In fact, it’s very common, especially 
in high-performing teams, for the team to begin work on the change request before it’s 
officially approved. Is that a bad thing? Possibly, since there’s some chance that the 
change request will get denied. If that happens, then all of the work done to implement 
the change pre-CCB approval will need to be backed out. The flip side is also true, in 
that the change request could be approved and now your team is ahead of schedule for 
executing that change pre-approval. So what’s a PM to do? Do you browbeat your team 
into stopping work on the change request before it’s approved? To be honest, there’s 
no “right” answer here and you have to go with your instincts and decide how likely the 
CCB is to approve the change. In general, I let my teams run with the implementation 
of the change while making it clear that there’s still a possibility that the change will be 
denied and we will have to back out the change. If I’ve got a pretty strong feeling that 
the change will not be approved or will be approved with significant changes to the 
implementation, then I share that knowledge with the team to influence them to hold 
off on further changes. In either scenario, I make it clear that if we have to back out of 
the changes due to a denied change request, then we must do that without impacting 
the schedule. For the most part, this gamble to implement before approval pays off, but 
every once in a while it doesn’t. It’s your call as to how you want to proceed; just be very 
clear with your team about whether they should start, stop, or continue to implement the 
change before the CCB approval is obtained. 

Project Management Basics
57
 Iterate Schedule Updates  
 In the Planning Phase, you built a solid schedule, so now, during the Execution 
Phase, you need to keep it updated. Depending on the pace of work for your 
project, you will need to update your schedule on a regular cadence. In many 
cases weekly updates are the way to go. There are two categories of updates 
you will need to incorporate: progress against the planned work and addi-
tional, unplanned work. However you update your schedule, it is imperative 
that it model the project reality as closely as possible. Therefore, if you deter-
mine during your weekly team meeting that the database analyst is working 
on a major task that’s not in the schedule, then you need to incorporate 
it into the existing workflow. You may not like what that does to the pro-
jected completion date, but there’s no benefit to ignoring the fact that that 
work has to be done. Ignoring this extra work and its potential impact on the 
completion date is disingenuous and irresponsible. Your job is to monitor the 
project’s progress and manage the execution, which you can’t do if you don’t 
understand what is really going on. 
 
■Caution  It is imperative that the schedule model the project reality as closely as possible. 
 The first category of updates is the progress of the planned work. In PM-speak 
you will hear this referred to as “Progress Against Schedule” (PAS), and we will 
talk more about that later when we get to the metrics discussion. Basically, 
this is where you update each task in the schedule based on the work updates 
your team provides. Your first choice to capture these updates should always 
be an automated system. The predominant schedule management software 
packages have advanced features that allow individuals to submit schedule 
updates via a web tool and cloud solution: the Microsoft Project Server solu-
tion is one example. Unfortunately, these advanced features come with a steep 
IT overhead, so you may not have access to them. The next-best option is to 
meet individually with each team member to discuss their work and capture 
their progress for all of the tasks they own. Note that this is often impractical 
due to the size of the project team and the team members’ time constraints. 
So this leaves you with Door Number 3: capturing updates in your weekly 
team meeting. The wrong way to do this is to drag the entire team through 
a grueling step-by-step inspection of each task on the schedule. This is mind-
numbingly boring for the team and unproductive in general, so stay away from 
this option. The better way to collect task updates in the meeting is to guide 
the discussion during the team updates to the major work that’s going on. 
Ask things like  “So how’s that wiring diagram coming along? Do you think you’ll be 
done this week or is it going to push into next week?” In this scenario, you should 
be sharing the project schedule so that everyone on the team can “see” it as 
they provide updates or as you walk through the schedule during the meeting. 

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
58
Note that you will need to schedule in some time on your calendar to review 
the task-in-progress before the meeting so that you are ready to ask those 
sorts of questions. In short, collect the info you need to update the schedule 
organically through actual discussion rather than putting each team member 
on the spot while the others sit around twiddling their thumbs. If you chose to 
use mind-mapping software to develop your schedule, it’s easy to facilitate this 
type of discussion. The main objective here is to avoid grilling your teammates 
like sausages at a convenience store food service area. Finally, the absolute 
worst way to collect progress updates it to set up a separate file that your 
team needs to update each week. Here you must monitor who has provided 
updates and transfer those updates to the actual project schedule. Why is this 
the worst way to do this job? Because your teammates will sporadically forget 
to update their tasks and you’ll have to go nag them to provide their updates. 
You are now also stuck with a separate file you need to keep in synch with the 
schedule. Trust me, this is a huge time sink, so avoid collecting your schedule 
updates this way.   
 That’s the “how” to capture the progress updates; now let’s talk about what 
information you’re actually going to grab and use to update your schedule. 
Depending on the organization you work in, this can be completely up to you 
as the project manager or it can be mandated that you collect the actual hours 
spent on executing your particular project. The good news is that if the organi-
zation cares and actually uses actual hours, then systems are in place to capture 
that information, which in turn makes the job of updating the schedule easier. It’s 
actually harder to determine what you need if there’s no expectations or man-
dates you have to follow. If you have access to those advanced software pack-
age features, then the best way to go is to collect the actual hours applied to 
each task. This information is extremely valuable for estimating future projects 
and managing an organization’s project pipeline. However, as a junior project 
manager you may only use this information to monitor the project costs and 
some execution metrics. The difficulty with collecting actual hours, however, is 
that it’s extremely challenging for your teammates to track these hours unless 
there’s some infrastructure in place for them to do so. In summary, if the orga-
nization has the tools to track actual hours, then go for it; if they don’t have 
that infrastructure then there’s a simpler way to go. The simpler way to go is 
to forego the accuracy of actual hours in favor of the “good-enough” accuracy 
of percentage of the work complete. Here’s how it works: if a task is started 
give it a 25% completion rating; once the task owner indicates that the work 
is “halfway done,” the task gets updated to 50%; and of course, when the task 
is complete it’s set to 100% complete. That’s it; each task gets four options for 
percentage complete: 0%, 25%, 50%, and 100%. The problem with this method is 
that it’s entirely subjective and based on the task owner’s estimate of how much 
work remains to be done. Percentage complete is also a reactive metric as it 
does not forecast when the task will be done; it’s simply a snapshot in time, and 
projecting out a completion date with percentage complete metrics assumes 

Project Management Basics
59
that the future work will continue at the same pace. In fact, many project man-
agement experts will tell you that using percentage complete to track progress 
against the schedule is weak and inaccurate. They are right, of course, but here’s 
the thing: it’s good enough for what you’re doing, so relax and use percentage 
complete if that’s what’s reasonable for your project environment. Remember, 
the goal is to use the schedule to monitor the project execution, and if percent-
age complete gets the job done, then use it.   
 The second category of schedule updates is tracking any unplanned work that 
gets added into the workflow throughout execution. As change requests are 
approved and unexpected work gets added, it’s important to incorporate those 
tasks into the schedule so that you have a realistic projected completion date. 
Each time some of this unplanned work pops up, determine if it can be absorbed 
without impacting the current project timeline. If it can be absorbed, note it in 
the project team meeting minutes only; there’s no need to update the schedule. 
If this unplanned work is going to be significant or impact the team’s ability to 
continue to execute to the schedule, then it needs to be added to the project 
schedule. Note that if the work can be absorbed because you’ve done a great 
job and added strategic buffers to the schedule, you still need to incorporate 
this unplanned work into the schedule; it just may not have any impact to the 
customer commits. To do this, create a separate section in the schedule labeled 
“Unplanned Work.” Under this section, add line items to represent each added 
task. Be sure to update the schedule logic so that this added work is fully inte-
grated into the workflow. Once this schedule is updated, recommit the final 
completion date to your stakeholders and save another schedule baseline. This 
is your new, committed execution timeline. By incorporating this unplanned 
work into the schedule you have a good way to collect the cumulative effect to 
the expected release date. Further, you will use this information while reporting 
out project status during the Execution Phase and in the Closing Phase as you 
and your team perform a post-release retrospective of the project execution.   
 Monitoring Metrics  
 Project execution metrics are perhaps the least understood and most ignored 
mechanics of the job, so now let’s spend some time talking about what you 
should be tracking and how to use this important data. There are two basic 
categories of metrics in my mind; Earned Value Management (EVM) metrics 
and the less sophisticated but no less useful metrics like percentage complete 
and milestone dates. 
 If you work in an organization where actual project hours are tracked, then 
the chances are good that you will be expected to monitor Earned Value (EV) 
metrics. There are a few formulas that define EVM, so you should take the time 
to talk to your resident experts and understand exactly how the EVM data is 
calculated for your organization. These metrics are directly calculated from 

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
60
the data in your project schedule so it’s important to keep your schedule cur-
rent and synch your updates to the publish dates for these metrics. The key to 
understanding EV metrics is to realize that they are simply ratios of executed 
work versus planned work. The formulas are fraught with long acronyms for 
what is essentially a simple formula. Think of EV metrics as the percentage of 
actual work that was done versus what was planned to be done at a particular 
point in time. Therefore, an EV metric of less than one means that less work 
was actually done than you’d planned to be done by that point in time: in other 
words, you’re behind schedule. The flip side is also true; an EV metric of greater 
than one means that the project is ahead of schedule. Pretty simple, right? 
EV metrics are calculated on a “per-task” basis, and then the total project EV 
metrics are weighted averages of all of the individual task EV metrics. The thing 
that throws many PMs about EV metrics is that they are calculated within the 
dark depths of your scheduling software, so while your instincts and what your 
team is telling you indicate that the project is on track, the EV metrics may say 
that you are behind schedule. This can be frustrating and distracting, especially 
if your project gets flagged to management as being behind due to “red” EV 
metrics. As I mentioned, many PMs don’t understand the logic behind EVM, so 
they get stuck when their scheduling software tells them the project is behind 
schedule yet their gut says that everything is good to go. Having been stuck 
in this madhouse many times, I can tell you categorically that the scheduling 
software doesn’t lie. So if the EV metrics are less than one, and you think the 
project is on track, then you need to troubleshoot your schedule logic. To do 
this, you first verify that all of the work that has been done to date is updated 
correctly in the schedule. Next, you look for tasks with EV metrics less than 
one, especially any on the critical path. Are these tasks properly updated? Does 
the connecting schedule logic look right? What’s the task projected finish date 
and how does it compare to the baseline finish date? Gotcha! If the logic is 
right, the status is updated, and the projected finish date is beyond the base-
line date, then, yes, my friend that task is behind schedule. Sorry . . . I told you 
that the software doesn’t lie. The good news is that if you did a careful job of 
constructing your schedule as we discussed in Chapter   3 , then this trouble-
shooting is pretty quick and painless. As you can see from walking through the 
troubleshooting process, EV metrics can be very helpful to the project man-
ager because they give you an overall sense of how closely the work is tracking 
to the baseline at the project level and they allow you to pinpoint trouble early 
at the task level. Honestly, the only hard part of EVM is wrapping your brain 
around the calculations and having a well-constructed project schedule. 
 Now let’s talk about the metrics I monitor for every project, those less sophis-
ticated but still useful ones such as percentage complete and milestone dates. 
Percentage complete can be a very useful metric despite its limitations which 
we discussed earlier. Your team and your stakeholders can comprehend exactly 
what  “60% complete” means; it’s an intuitive and illustrative metric. It’s also the 
easiest metric to get, since its right there in your scheduling software! The 
other metrics I always monitor are the major milestone dates. If you recall 

Project Management Basics
61
during the schedule development work, we added in milestones to differentiate 
major work packages. Each of these major milestones can be tracked by com-
paring the baseline dates with the actual, trending dates. The more these two 
dates diverge, the further off-track the schedule is. Obviously, if the trend dates 
are earlier than the baseline dates, that’s goodness, whereas trend dates that 
exceed the baseline dates indicate that a major work package is behind sched-
ule and most likely needs intervention. One of the most useful views in any 
scheduling software is one which allows the PM to compare these dates in real 
time, letting you spot troubled tasks before they become major show-stoppers.  
 Speaking of spotting major show-stoppers early; that’s the whole point of col-
lecting this data in the first place! Monitoring these metrics is one of the pri-
mary jobs of any PM during the Execution Phase. This work is what PMI refers 
to as “Monitor and Control.” Ironically, I often see junior project managers so 
distracted by the drama of managing the project that they completely forget 
about the metrics. That’s a mistake because this data is your early warning 
system. I can tell you the percentage complete and which of the major work 
packages are trending behind for every project I manage, at any point in time, 
and you should be able to do that too. Reacting to what the metrics are tell-
ing you is a big part of controlling the project, and you can’t lead the team to 
proactively deal with problems if you can’t see them coming. This monitoring 
work is one of the unique values the PM brings to the team. No one else 
on the project team is looking at performance against the plan and progress 
toward the customer commit, so it’s doubly important that the PM be actively 
monitoring the project metrics. Monitoring and controlling the project met-
rics are key factors in leading fire-less, drama-free projects, so if you haven’t 
been paying attention to this data, it really is time to start.   
 Implementing Risk  Reviews  
 If you will recall, during the Planning Phase you and your team built the proj-
ect risk register and embedded the risk management plans into your project 
schedule. For smaller, shorter projects this is sufficient risk management and 
nothing further needs to be done. However, for larger, longer-duration proj-
ects, it’s a good practice to review the risk plans and identify any new risks 
periodically during the Execution Phase of the project work. To do this, you 
set up a risk review meeting at strategic points in the execution of the proj-
ect, such as at the completion of major work packages. Consider doing a risk 
review after the design is completed but before validation starts, for instance. 
 During these reviews, you want to accomplish two things: review/validate 
the existing risk management plans and identify any new risks that the team 
should consider. This can usually be done in an hour but may require more 
time if the review of the existing risk management plans takes a while. To do 
this review, as a team step through each of the three to five risks you selected 

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
62
to plan for during Planning. Has a risk been triggered? If the answer is “yes,” 
then assess the adequacy of the risk management plans for that risk. Were 
they sufficient? Does the team need to do more work? Did new, associated 
risks pop up as a result of dealing with the original risk? If the risk has not 
been triggered, are the risk and the plans to deal with it still valid? This review 
should result in a few action items and possibly some new tasks to add into 
the schedule. These tasks should be tracked under the “Unplanned Work” 
section of your schedule. 
 Next, as a team, review the risks you originally identified but chose to accept 
rather than plan for. Are there any risks that the team needs to take seri-
ously now? Brainstorm as a team to come up with new risks that you didn’t 
originally consider. Rate and rank these new risks just like you did during the 
Planning Phase. As a team, decide whether or not you need to address more 
risks, always keeping in mind the available bandwidth of the team. Remember, 
the keys to realistic risk management are to limit the additional work your 
teammates need to do by limiting the number of risks they address and by 
embedding the tasks into the project schedule. Do not inadvertently over-
load your teammates by committing to more risk management activities than 
the team can reasonably do. At the end of the risk review, update your risk 
register and update the project schedule by placing any new tasks under the 
“Unplanned Work” section. Repeat this review process as many times as 
seems reasonable for the duration of the project. Yes, I realize that “as seems 
reasonable” is rather fuzzy, but there really are no hard-and-fast rules here. 
You have to use your judgment and consider when the team has time to do 
this work. Consider these reviews as preventative maintenance for the proj-
ect work and fit them in on a regular cadence.   
 Generate Project Status Report-Outs 
 Reporting  out the status of your project is one of the expected project man-
agement tasks, and while there’s a certain amount of “art” to the work, there 
are some basic mechanics you should understand. In my first book,  Managing 
Projects in the Real World (Apress, 2013), I spent an entire chapter on this artistry, 
but here we will focus on the basics, the mechanics of building a status report. 
One purpose of these report-outs is to communicate the project status to a 
larger audience, but an even more important and primary purpose is to man-
age your stakeholders’ expectations. Therefore, the content should provide the 
consumer of this information with a clear picture of the project work at that 
point in time. It should answer these key questions: is the work on track, are 
there any changes to the Plan of Record (POR), and is there any help needed. 
Because this information is consumed by a broad audience, many of whom are 
key stakeholders, it’s important that it be accurate and properly curated. 

Project Management Basics
63
 The first question that comes to mind is what information needs to be included. 
The status report must include those execution metrics you are monitoring 
which we discussed above. Simply state  “The project is 78% complete.” You should 
also include EVM metrics if those are well understood by your status report 
consumers. It should be noted that while the project management community 
within your organization may deeply understand these metrics, the rank and 
file may not. The report-out must also contain the trend dates for the major 
milestones and customer commits. It is a best practice to include the baseline/
commit dates plus the trending dates for only the specific milestones your 
status consumers care about, which will be a subset of the major milestones 
you track within your schedule. These dates plus the execution metrics are the 
quantitative data of your status report. Quantitative data points are great for 
representing project status because they lend credibility to your overall update 
and demonstrate that you are actively monitoring and controlling the project 
execution. Other quantitative date to consider including in your report are 
things like defect statistics, conversion rates, user acceptance metrics, budget 
data, buffer consumption, etc. Beyond the quantitative data, the status report 
must include a brief summary of any highlights, lowlights, potential risks to the 
project, key decisions, help needed, and next steps. This information should be 
timely and succinct; representing the work that has been done since the last 
report-out. In addition to these elements, I typically include a stoplight graphic 
(green, yellow, red) to represent my subjective assessment of the state of the 
project taking into account all of the forces in play. This provides the status con-
sumers with a quick assessment of whether the project is on track (green), in 
jeopardy (yellow), or missing commit (red). This is a lot of information to con-
vey, and the key to successfully communicating your project status lies in keep-
ing the update succinct and at an appropriate level of detail for the audience.   
 Once you understand what information you need to communicate with your 
status report, it’s time to think about what format would be most appropri-
ate. When deciding what format to use, you need to take into account any 
organizational requirements, how your stakeholders prefer to communicate, 
and how this information will be utilized. In organizations with mature project 
management practices it’s likely that you will be required to provide your sta-
tus data via a specific tool. In more informal organizations a brief e-mail is often 
sufficient. Some organizations prefer to make use of online collaboration tools, 
so you may find yourself posting your status to an online forum or blog. If your 
status report consumers will be embedding your update into broader presen-
tations, then it might make sense to construct your update in a PowerPoint 
format. The thing to remember here is that the format doesn’t matter; what 
matters is that the information be accurate, clear, and succinct. I should also 
point out that it may be necessary to develop your project status in more than 
one format, depending on the needs of your key stakeholders. (Figure  4-1 )  

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
64
 Stage Escalations  
 New project managers often shy away from deliberately escalating issues due 
to a desire to stay “under the radar,” when in fact it’s their job to resolve any 
roadblocks impending the project execution. I would go so far as to say that 
this is one of their most important jobs as project team leaders, and failing to 
escalate is failing the team. So how do you escalate an issue to remove a road-
block anyway? Oh, and it would be nice to be able to do this without bringing 
down a world of hurt on your head, right? 
 There are a few  tricks   to effectively escalating issues. First, it’s all about the 
data. If you’ve had trouble escalating issues in the past, take a look at the sup-
porting data you provided. Is it quantitative, accurate, and clear? If not, well, 
there’s your trouble. To be effective at escalating issues, you need to provide 
supporting data that is conclusive and quantitative, so go off and find that as 
a first step. The second trick to effective escalation is this: escalate the effect 
not the cause (i.e., address the impact of the crappy deliverable versus the 
slacker providing that deliverable). Here you want to go with something like 
 “Unfortunately, we’ve found ten more defects with the CAD files, which has delayed 
the board availability 2 full weeks” instead of  “Melanie is doing such a sloppy job 
 Figure 4-1.  Project status report  example 
 

Project Management Basics
65
on the layout that we have to go back and rework everything she delivers.” The first 
statement is quantitative and addresses the real problem for the project team, 
whereas the second is unsubstantiated and sounds like whining. It’s always 
more effective to position the issue around the consequences of someone’s 
actions than it is to directly criticize that person. The third “trick” to effective 
escalation is to have a recommendation in your back pocket. It’s naïve to go 
to the decision-makers and say  “Hey, you know we are behind schedule, so we 
need more heads to be able to deliver to our original customer commit” and expect 
any help. Instead, you need to provide the data to the decision-makers; that is, 
you need to tell them how to solve the problem. Don’t expect them to divine 
the best course of action on the fly, during a confrontational meeting. At a 
minimum, you need to articulate a couple of options for solving the problem 
so that those decision-makers can make a call; after all, you and your team 
are the subject matter experts here, right? Finally, the last trick, and honestly 
it’s the most important, is to remain professional. Getting angry or frustrated 
doesn’t help and in fact can serve to inflame the discussion further. Present 
your issue, the supporting data, and the team’s recommendations in a calm 
manner and stay above the hissing and spitting your less-evolved colleagues 
indulge in. If you do these things, then your chances of positively resolving 
the roadblock go up dramatically. The hard part of escalating issues is the soft 
skills challenges; laying the groundwork by collecting the data and developing 
alternatives is the easy part. Here’s another case where the mechanics of the 
job are easy, so master them to give yourself more time and mental bandwidth 
to deal with the soft skills challenges.  
 Checklist #3—The Execution Phase 
 The  Execution Phase   of the project is where all of that planning you did in 
Chapter   3 gets applied. In this phase, project managers create artifacts in 
the service of performing the project work; these artifacts include change 
requests, meeting minutes, and project status updates. Here you also maintain 
the schedule and risk register by regularly updating them as the work evolves. 
Checklist 3 is a bit different from the previous two you’ve used because 
these items are recurring, meaning that you will do these tasks multiple times 
throughout this phase. The important thing to keep in mind is that you should 
be doing all of these tasks; they represent the minimum tasks you need to 
perform during Execution. 

Chapter 4 | Executing Your First Project
66
 Checklist #3—The Execution Phase 
 □  Standing team meetings are effective and held regularly with a stated agenda 
 □  Changes to the POR are managed effectively through the project and program-level CCBs 
 □  The project schedule is updated regularly, incorporating unplanned work as needed 
 □  Project execution metrics have been established, are monitored regularly, and drive 
corrective actions as needed 
 □  Project risks are reviewed regularly with new risks identified and action plans updated 
as needed 
 □  Project status updates are provided to key stakeholders at a regular cadence 
 □  Problems impeding the team’s ability to execute the project plan are efficiently escalated 
 The Execution Phase is the longest phase of the project lifecycle, and you 
will find yourself regularly performing the tasks we’ve discussed and updating 
the artifacts you originally created during planning all throughout this phase. 
Typically, this phase represents 60–70% of the total project duration, so you’ll 
be hanging out here a while. It’s a good idea to drop a couple of placeholders 
onto your work calendar to remind yourself to go do some of these tasks 
such as the risk reviews so that they don’t drop through the cracks. For other 
tasks, such as producing the project status updates, you will find yourself falling 
into a regular cadence naturally. Next we will move into releasing your project 
deliverables and closing out the project.   

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_5
 C H A P T E R 
 Releasing Your 
First Project 
 If you will recall, in Chapter   4  I mentioned that the  Execution Phase  of any proj-
ect is the longest. In fact you should think of the Execution Phase as having two 
parts; one part of the work is the execution of the project work and the other 
is the actual release of the project deliverables. Traditional project management 
training materials gloss over, or completely ignore, the second part because it’s 
such a small part of the overall execution of the project work. Here’s the thing: 
the release work is the home stretch, the last mile, the final shot, the last piece 
of chicken, etc., and if your team chokes on the release it’s entirely possible to 
turn what was a successful project into a hot mess with a bad reputation. So as 
a project manager, how do you avoid that career-deadening move? You carefully 
plan for, and execute, the release of the deliverables, and I’m going to show you 
just how to do that here.  
5

Chapter 5 | Releasing Your First Project
68
 To avoid becoming the poster child for “Help Needed,” you need to leverage 
the work you and your team did in the Planning Phase and those relationships 
with your key stakeholders that you’ve nurtured all through the Execution 
Phase. Here I’ll walk you through how to use that Release Readiness Checklist 
you built in Planning, we’ll refine the release approval decision criteria, I’ll walk 
you through what you need to do to get that approval, and we’ll talk a bit 
about how to plan that execution. You see, a well-planned, carefully executed 
release plan is a critical component of any successful project. 
 
DIALING DOWN THE DRAMA
 Apart from a major risk being triggered, there’s no other situation in the project lifecycle 
more stressful and drama-inducing than the release activities. This is the point in time 
where the project team’s work has to stand alone: it’s their professional reputation on the 
line and no one wants to hear that their baby is ugly. Further, your major stakeholders 
have a vested interest in a successful release, so they are going to be all up in your 
business if you’re not careful. Mix a bunch of people with their professional reputations at 
stake with a tight timeline and you’re bound to get some major drama that will negatively 
impact both your team’s ability to execute and your reputation as a leader. 
Initiating
Planning
Execution
•Complete the Release Readiness Checklist
•Plan the Release Activities
•Release "Go /No Go" Decision
•Complete the Release Activity
•Formal Release Approval
Release
Closing

Project Management Basics
69
 So, how do you avoid a Wild West show of a release and instead turn it into something 
as sedate and controlled as doing your laundry? First, you start with your demeanor 
and project calm confidence. The team will follow your lead here, so if you run around 
like your hair is on fire because someone forgot to post the Marketing collateral, then 
chances are your team will behave similarly. Second, you work with your team to 
develop a solid release plan, carefully laying out who needs to do what and when it 
must get done. Often, these release plans are more detailed than the project schedule, 
but that’s okay, because in this instance, the team needs to understand exactly what 
work will be done, possibly down to the hour or minute. Third, you must control the 
messaging so that what your stakeholders hear is what you want them to know, namely, 
that the release work is progressing and it’s on track to an actual plan. By this point in 
the project, since you’ve been following, and refining, that communication plan you built 
during Planning, you have a good handle on what your key stakeholders care about. 
Don’t leave this to chance and don’t let someone else co-opt the reputation of your 
project team at this point in the game. 
 Do these three things and even if your release activities encounter major problems, 
your team will be able to focus on solving the problems instead of riding an emotional 
roller coaster that’s about to jump the tracks. The goal here is to orchestrate a release 
event so smooth and controlled that it’s almost boring in its execution. Let me give you a 
real-world example of what I’m talking about. Take your average high school graduation 
ceremony. Here’s a case where the participants are wildly excited and barely paying 
attention to what’s going on. The high school staff executing the event, on the other 
hand, know exactly what to do and when it needs to happen. They are calm and in 
control of the event. What could have been utter madness is instead mind-numbingly 
boring, except for that brief moment when “your” student walks across the stage. That’s 
what you’re aiming for, a release event so smoothly executed it’s almost boring, and the 
only way to get there is to actively dial down the  drama . 
 Assessing the Release Readiness 
 Now it’s time to get into the nuts and bolts of that “carefully executed” 
release plan, and we start with an old friend, the  Release Readiness Checklist  . 
If you will recall, you developed this checklist during the Planning Phase, back 
in Chapter   3 . This checklist consists of those items deemed to be absolutely 
required. It represents the due diligence your team has done to ensure that 
the deliverable is safe, legal, and compliant. Basically what you will do now is 
go through the checklist and ensure that each item has been completed, but 
there are a few nuances with respect to how you actually do this, so that’s 
what we’ll talk about next. 
 You want to review your Release Readiness Checklist early enough to have 
time to go back and complete anything that has slipped through the cracks 
but late enough in the Execution Phase that the majority of the work is 

Chapter 5 | Releasing Your First Project
70
completed. Exactly when this should be done is a bit tricky, and you will get 
a better feel for it as you gain experience. For now, since you baked each of 
these items into your project schedule, aim to do a first-pass review of the 
checklist 3 to 4 weeks prior to the release activity. One week before you plan 
to do the review, send the Release Readiness Checklist out to your team and 
assign them the task to complete their sections prior to the team meeting 
in the following week. Sure, not everyone will actually do this task, but it’s a 
good policy to give them the opportunity to excel. Use that block of time in 
your weekly team meeting agenda reserved for special topics to review the 
Release Readiness Checklist and tick off any items that have been completed. 
Specifically note when any open items will be closed and who owns that work 
in the checklist. It’s common for there to be a few open items when you do 
this first review, so don’t worry, just continue to review this checklist in your 
standing team meetings until all items are closed. Note that any item that can-
not be completed should be considered a “show-stopper” and its resolution 
should be your top priority at this point in the project. Explicit stakeholder 
approval that the release can go forward without all items on the checklist 
completed is needed before the actual release activity kicks off. If you can’t get 
this approval, then it’s your responsibility as the project manager to postpone 
the release until this matter can be resolved. Since these items are considered 
to be the bare minimum due diligence requirements, it’s a matter of profes-
sional integrity that you not allow the release to go forward until each item is 
completed or appropriate waivers have been obtained.  
 Plan the Release 
 Now that you have the  Release Readiness Checklist   in hand, it’s time to turn 
your attention to developing a plan for the release activities. Teams do this 
in a variety of ways, so there are no hard and fast rules here. The basic idea 
is to figure out all of the release tasks and when they need to be done. You 
and your team can do this with a simple spreadsheet, a complicated schedule, 
or something in the middle. Often, the project collateral dictates the release 
process, or your organization may have specific requirements that outline the 
steps the release activity has to take. If you’re not sure where to start, con-
sider developing a WBS and a Network Diagram just like you did when you 
built your project schedule. To do this, get your team together and first iden-
tify all of the release tasks, then lay them out in an efficient flow. It’s important 
to get your team’s buy-in to the workflow so that everyone is on the same 
page about what needs to be done. Now that you’ve got the release workflow 
identified, consider whether or not you need to coordinate with other teams. 
It’s not uncommon to need an upstream or downstream team to provide 
inputs or validate outputs of your project deliverables. 

Project Management Basics
71
 After you’ve figured out the work of the release and how long it should take, 
it’s time to schedule these activities. As you calendar the release activities, 
consider who the required personnel are, and who only needs to be aware of 
the work going on. You may need to send out two separate notices: a calendar 
item for the folks actually doing the work and a “for your information” e-mail 
to let interested stakeholders know when the release work will be done. As 
you go about setting these events up, pay careful attention to who must par-
ticipate and be sure to confirm that these critical people are going to be avail-
able. The last thing you want to happen is a delay in the release work because 
a critical participant has to leave early to pick up their child from soccer 
practice. It’s a good practice to verify one last time, the day before, that each 
of the critical players is planning to attend. Remember, you want your release 
activities to be so well coordinated that the actual execution seems boring. 
 Finally, be sure to arrange any logistics needed for the release. Do you need 
to reserve lab space or a large conference room? If the team will be working 
through lunch or long into the night, do you need to arrange for food to be 
brought in? Establish a communication plan for the release itself, making sure 
that those critical stakeholders know when and how they will get updates 
on the release work. Create an update communication template so that in 
the fury of the release activity, all you have to do is pull up that template and 
start typing. Draft up a couple of announcements that you can send out if the 
release goes well and if it tanks. Having these drafts in your back pocket makes 
it much easier to quickly craft concise, well-written updates even if the release 
activities are grueling.  
 Confirming Your Go/No Go Criteria 
 Okay, now we’re going to backtrack a little and make sure that all of the key 
stakeholders are in agreement about what  constitutes  a successful release. In 
a perfect world, the project success criteria are requirements that explicitly 
spell out quantifiable metrics that, if achieved, warrant a “Go” decision on the 
release of the project deliverables. Stop rolling your eyes! I get it! You don’t 
work in that “perfect” world; you work in the real world where requirements 
are squishy and the ecosystem can change dramatically over the course of 
the project, which is why you need to do a little backtracking here. This is the 
time to meet with each of your major stakeholders and confirm that your 
understanding of the release approval criteria matches theirs and that each 
stakeholder is aligned with their fellow stakeholders. 
 Now there’s an efficient way to do this and then there’s the effective way to 
go about it. It can seem more efficient to handle this task with an e-mail or a 
meeting. In my experience, the e-mail just doesn’t work, since you will either 
get no thoughtful responses or instigate a dialog that meanders around and 
doesn’t conclusively confirm the understanding of the “Go” criteria. Holding a 

Chapter 5 | Releasing Your First Project
72
meeting is a crapshoot; it can be extremely effective if all of the major stake-
holders attend and engage in the discussion. Unfortunately, this kind of meet-
ing can be challenging to organize logistically and has the potential to turn 
into a venue for interoffice politics that have little to do with your project. 
It’s far more effective to have informal conversations with each of your major 
stakeholders. You should already be meeting with these people on a regular 
basis, so sometime before the release, as part of your regular update to these 
stakeholders, verify that criteria for a “Go” decision. 
 To be honest, if you’ve been actively managing your stakeholders’ expectations 
and impressions of the project work, then there’s very little to do here. It’s 
a good idea to do this sort of backchannel confirmation prior to the actual 
release approval so that there are no surprises at the last minute. Remember, 
your goal is to have a boring, completely predictable release, so don’t leave 
this understanding of what will get your team that “Go” decision to chance.   
 Executing the Release 
 By this point in time, all of the  Release Readiness Checklist  items are com-
pleted, the team has a plan to execute the release, and all of your decision-
makers are aligned on what constitutes success for the release. It’s time to 
rock and roll! If you and your team have developed a solid plan for the release 
activities, then chances are there’s very little for you, as the project manager, 
to do. Your job now is to enable the team to execute the release. This is an 
important point, so let’s elaborate on it a bit. Your job now is to make sure 
the work happens by removing roadblocks, ensuring that the team has the 
resources they need to do the work, and, frankly, keeping management off 
their backs by providing regular updates.  Your job is not to do the actual work 
of releasing the deliverable, that is, it’s not to troubleshoot that installer bug or 
hang out at the back of the lab offering “helpful” suggestions on what to do 
next. You are the conductor of your motley crew, not that overly enthusiastic 
tuba player, so stay out of their way and let them do what they do best. 
 The trick then is to remain available to your team, quietly smoothing the way 
behind the scenes. One of the best ways to do this is to actively manage the 
team morale. Kick off the release activities with your team by giving them 
a little pep talk. Remind them of all of the work they’ve done, express your 
confidence that they are up to any challenge that comes their way during the 
release, and let them know that you will be there to remove any roadblocks. 
This is an excellent time to dial down the drama and infuse the team with a 
sense of purpose, so don’t miss this opportunity because you’re uncomfort-
able doing these kinds of morale builders. It may feel hokey to you, and it may 
seem hokey to some of your teammates, but trust me, doing this definitely 
impacts how the release activities will proceed. 

Project Management Basics
73
 To actively manage your team’s morale, pay attention to how things are going 
and how the team interacts. If things start slipping and the tension is ratchet-
ing up, then perhaps it’s time to break for lunch. It’s a good idea to introduce 
some small break every couple of hours so that your team has the chance to 
mentally recover, especially if the work is particularly intense. Obviously, you 
don’t want to distract them, but you can often lighten the mood and provide 
that mental break simply by checking in to see how things are going. Finally, if 
the work is going badly, the team is frustrated, and team members are starting 
to turn on each other, then it’s time to step in and actively dial down the drama. 
Refocus the team on a plan of action with specific tasks so that they can start 
making progress on solving whatever problems are blocking the execution of 
the release plan. This is when you need to manage the stakeholders and the 
messaging so that the team can focus on their work instead of that screaming 
director who wants someone’s head on a pike. All of these behind-the-scenes 
actions matter; they are what make that boring, well-executed release possible.  
 Gaining Release Approval 
 Final approval for your project release can come at several different points 
in the project lifecycle, and when it  happ  ens is dependent on your particular 
organization. Some organizations have a formal approval process that happens 
before the team can start the release activities, some hold the approval to 
the end of the release, while others require approval at both points in time. 
No matter when it happens, there are a few things you need to do. You will 
be expected to present evidence that due diligence was done and that the 
requirements of the project are fulfilled by the deliverables and associated 
release process. This is the easy part and typically consists of getting on the 
agenda of the approval board, submitting a change request, and completing 
some checklist or form; it may also require you to pull together a presenta-
tion. Remember, you incorporated these approval criteria in your project plan 
during Planning, so all that’s really left is to share the evidence that this work 
was done. That’s the formal part of the work, and if your organization is very 
mature with respect to project management, then this process is well docu-
mented. I’ll specifically address what to do if no such approval process exists 
later in Chapter   7  . 
 That’s the formal process for gaining release approval; now let’s talk about 
the  informal but no less important process. Similar to what you did earlier to 
confirm the “Go for release” criteria, you want to sit down with each of the 
release approval decision-makers to review the project work and the deliver-
ables. The goal is to make sure that each person is comfortable approving the 
release ahead of the actual release decision. If any of the stakeholders have 
concerns about the release, now’s the time to go address them. Since these are 
the people you’ve spent the life of the project building relationships with, these 

Chapter 5 | Releasing Your First Project
74
should be easy and comfortable discussions. Infrequently, a few stakeholders 
will have issues with the release whose resolutions are mutually exclusive. 
Here’s where you need to take action. To end run this potential gate to the 
release approval, set up a separate meeting with the stakeholders who are not 
aligned. Open the meeting by asking for their help to resolve the issue, stressing 
the fact that their misalignment is gating factor for successfully completing the 
project. It’s important for the project manager to remain neutral here and pro-
vide the facts for these decision-makers. If asked for a recommendation, state 
your position and back it up with quantifiable data. The objective here is to get 
these stakeholders to resolve their differences without impacting the project 
team. If you take care of these disconnects and preload approvals with your 
stakeholders, then the release approval becomes nothing more than a rubber 
stamp, which is exactly what you’re aiming for, isn’t it?   
 Holding the Go/No Go Meeting 
 There are some subtle differences between the formal release approval and a “Go/
No Go”  decision  , so let me break them down for you now. The formal release 
approval is just that: formal. It’s also the point in time where you prove that your 
team has done due diligence and that the deliverables meet the expected out-
comes. This approval frequently comes before the actual release activity. There 
are documented processes and approval boards you must satisfy to release your 
project deliverables. “Go/No Go” decisions are used a bit differently. 
 There are two scenarios where you find this type of decision. In the first, 
there’s less organizational structure around release approvals, so you would 
use a “Go/No Go” decision point to put some formality into the approval to 
release. I’ll talk more about this particular use in Chapter   7 . The second sce-
nario where you find “Go/No Go” decision-making is within the project team. 
Here each team member provides their recommendations to a decision-maker 
who then makes a decision on whether or not they are ready to proceed with 
the release activities. As you can imagine, these types of decisions are fairly 
easy to facilitate but you should keep in mind that these are important project 
decisions, so there’s bound to be a lot of emotional investment in the outcome. 
 When facilitating a “Go/No Go” meeting, it’s best to follow a strict process to 
help dial down the drama and keep the discussion focused on the main topic 
of the meeting, whether or not the release is approved. Follow the decision-
making methodology the team agreed to during the Initiating Phase. For con-
sultative decision-making, it looks like this. Start the meeting by having the 
most senior team member who was involved in the release work summarize 
the release activities. Next, go “around the table” and collect recommenda-
tions from each team member. Each recommender is to provide their “Go/
No Go” recommendation, and if the recommendation is “No Go,” then they 
must provide their primary concern. Actively facilitate the discussion to limit 

Project Management Basics
75
the discussion to the recommendation and primary concerns; do not allow 
it to drift into problem-solving or finger-pointing. If necessary, reiterate the 
purpose of the meeting, which is to reach a release decision, and let the team 
know that anything else will be addressed in a separate meeting. The project 
manager should provide their recommendation to the decision-maker last, 
and then ask for any questions. After any questions have been answered to 
the decision-maker’s satisfaction, they should make the “Go/No Go” decision.  
 Communicating the Release Status 
 During the release activity, you need to keep your key stakeholders informed 
of the work and how it’s progressing. It’s a rookie mistake to “go dark” during 
the release because the rumor mill will be working overtime and you need 
to be in front of any negative impressions that will affect your team’s ability 
to problem-solve and complete the work. While planning for the release, you 
figured out how often, and in what format, you would provide regular updates, 
so all you really need to do is execute that  communication plan  . 
 While writing up the status report, take care to manage the information you 
provide; it should be at the appropriate level of detail for your key stakeholders 
and it should be actionable by them. Spare these senior leaders the gory details 
of the hoops the team had to jump through to install the application because 
the documentation was crap; instead, simply mention that “the application was 
successfully installed and some documentation updates were identified.” By pro-
viding regular updates, you are doing two key things: first, you are establishing 
that your team has a plan and that they know what they are doing, and second, 
by communicating openly and regularly you are building trust with these stake-
holders. Nothing escalates an already floundering release like the impression 
that the team has no clue how to solve an unexpected show-stopper defect or 
that it is actively hiding information. Remember, your goal is a boring, predictable 
release, so just do yourself and the team a favor and send out regular updates.   
 Once the “Go/No Go” decision is made, then you need to let everyone affected 
know. Here you only need to pull up that pre-written announcement you cre-
ated while planning the release, tweak the wording a bit, and hit “send.” If the 
release went badly and the decision was “No Go,” then summarize what was 
accomplished, succinctly describe the show-stopper issue, and clearly articulate 
the next steps the team will take. Finally, be sure to both thank those who have 
assisted the team so far and specifically ask for any help needed to execute 
those next steps. If the release was successfully boring, then summarize what 
was accomplished, reiterate the business impact or value this project enables, 
and be sure to thank the team and your stakeholders for a successful release. 
 Okay, right now you’re probably thinking something like  “Gee that sure is a 
lot of hand-holding. I don't see why I have to pander to my stakeholders that much 
and of course I'm going to be in the middle of troubleshooting any bugs during the 

Chapter 5 | Releasing Your First Project
76
release.” Here’s the thing: if you really want to execute that predictably boring 
release, then yes, you really do need to do all of that work. These backchannel 
conversations that preload the release approval and that ability to enable your 
team without having to be the one to identify the root cause of that monster 
bug are what separates the often-successful project managers from the rock 
stars. It’s a matter of initiative and effort. Remember, your job as the project 
manager is to enable the team to execute, which means that you need to 
make sure that they have the space, both physical and mental, to do their best 
work. By laying the groundwork for that predictable, boring release, you are 
actually helping your team go faster. Trust them to handle the troubleshoot-
ing while you handle management. This is one of the easiest ways to improve 
your project management effectiveness, so if you’ve struggled to get through 
project releases in the past, next time create an actual release plan and focus 
on stakeholder management while your team takes care of the actual release 
activities. I think you’ll be pleasantly surprised with the results.  
 Checklist #4—Releasing the Project 
Deliverables 
 The release work in the Execution Phase  is  a special subset of the work you 
do to execute the project. Here you leveraged the work done in the Planning 
Phase to evaluate whether or not the team is ready to release the project 
deliverable. You pave the way with your major stakeholders to ensure that 
the release approval is “in the bag” as long as the release activities go well. You 
enable your team to complete the release activities by establishing and main-
taining a low-drama environment. Finally, you successfully navigate the release 
approval process. The following checklist identifies the major tasks you need to 
complete as you lead your team to release the project deliverables. The impor-
tant thing to keep in mind is that you should be doing all of these tasks; they 
represent the minimum tasks you need to perform during the release process. 
 Checklist #4—Releasing the Project Deliverables 
 □  Ensure all items on the Release Readiness Checklist have been completed 
 □  For Release Readiness Checklist items that cannot be completed prior to the release, 
obtain the necessary waivers and stakeholder approval prior to the release 
 □  Complete the release plan (all work identified and organized into a logical flow, event 
scheduled, communication plan ready) 
 □  Confirm release approval/“Go/No Go” decision criteria with key stakeholders 
 □  Complete release activity 
 □  Obtain formal release approval 
 □  Provide formal notification of release status to key stakeholders 

Project Management Basics
77
 Congratulations! You’ve just completed the execution of your project and 
wrapped up the bulk of the project work! It’s all over but the cryin’ now. You 
and your team have developed and executed a plan to release the project 
deliverables. Because you worked diligently to leverage those stakeholder 
relationships you’ve been building, the release approval was smooth and 
anticlimactic. Good job! You have one last bit of work to complete, and that’s 
officially closing out the project, which we’ll address next, in Chapter   6 .  

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_6
 C H A P T E R 
 Closing Your 
First Project 
 By now you should be feeling pretty good; you and your team have success-
fully released the  project deliverables and the project is practically over. All 
that remains to do is the closure activities, so hang on for a few more check-
list items, which once completed, will allow you to pull an Elvis . . . and leave 
the building! There’s actually not much work to be done during Closing, but 
the work there is needs to be done in a timely manner. To properly close the 
project, you and your team need to review the team’s performance and iden-
tify areas of improvement for future projects. You will do that by facilitating a 
project retrospective. You also need to ensure that your team cleans house by 
disposing of leftover material, publishing any collateral that may still be out-
standing, and making sure that all of the project work is appropriately archived. 
As part of closing down the project, you will also need to create a project 
summary and review it with your key stakeholders to ensure that each one 
agrees that all of the committed project work is complete. Finally, you need 
to take care of your team by formally recognizing their accomplishments and 
celebrating the successful release. Note that unlike the other project lifecycle 
phases, much of the closing work is done simultaneously and is quick to com-
plete. Depending on how complicated your project is, you should expect to 
spend 1 to 2 weeks closing out the project. Getting this work done before 
the team is fully involved in another project is the hardest challenge for this 
phase of the project, so you will need to execute the Closing work as quickly 
as possible. Let’s break down what you need to do.  
6

Chapter 6 | Closing Your First Project
80
 Facilitate a Project  Retrospective  
 Any organization that has some project management infrastructure in place 
will expect you to do a proper project retrospective at the end of the proj-
ect. Some organizations even require this at each phase gate. Further, it really 
is a best practice for the team to step back and dispassionately review their 
work to identify areas of improvement to carry forward to future projects. 
This process goes by many names (“Lessons Learned,” “Retrospective,” “Post 
Mortem,” etc.), but these all describe essentially the same beast, and it’s likely 
that you are already familiar with them. Essentially, the objective here is for 
the team to review their performance relative to their plan to identify what 
worked well, what needs improvement, and any key learnings they need to 
pass along to other teams doing similar work. This is actually a pretty straight-
forward activity, but it does require some preparation by the project manager, 
so let’s talk about that next. 
Initiating
Planning
Execution
Release
•Conduct a Project Retrospective
•Disposition Leftover HW
•Archive SW and Documentation
•Publish Project Summary
•Obtain agreement that the project work is complete 
•Celebrate the project completion
•Recognize the team
•Release resources from the project 
Closing

Project Management Basics
81
 To run a productive  retrospective  , you need to do some upfront work. First, 
pull together the project metrics to provide some insight into how thorough 
the planning work was. Create a table of the major milestones with their 
planned completion dates, their actual completion dates, and any relevant 
notes. Note that you want to compare your original plan with your actual 
outcome. Now go dig around in your schedule notes and meeting minutes to 
understand any differences between these two dates. It’s not uncommon to 
replan or adjust the commitments for these dates as the project progresses, 
so it’s okay for there to be some variation in these milestone dates. What 
you’re really looking for here is why those dates vary. This will tell you and 
your team a lot about how good your plan really was. For example, did you 
miss the “Design Complete” milestone by 3 weeks? Could that be due to the 
fact that you had a large number of change requests from the program? If so, 
then that’s actually useful information for planning the next project that sup-
ports the same program. Next time, you’ll add some buffer for change requests 
initiated at the program level. It’s also useful feedback for the program team, 
allowing them to comprehend the impact of their CCB decisions. Next, pull 
in any other project metrics you’ve been tracking and do a similar analysis. 
To understand how much the scope of work changed, review your change 
log and see if there are some major changes or trends that help explain any 
differences between the planned scope of work and what was actually deliv-
ered. To evaluate the effectiveness of your  risk management planning  , review 
the risk register generated in the Planning Phase and consider how well the 
risk management plans worked. Other good metrics to look into are effort, 
a.k.a. “hours,” and any validation metrics you tracked as part of controlling 
the project execution. As you can see, there’s quite a bit of data out there to 
pull from, so this is mostly an exercise in data mining. The important thing to 
keep in mind here is that you should let the data speak for itself. Be objective 
when collecting this information and be open to whatever it’s telling you. For 
instance, it’s entirely possible to deliver something your customer absolutely 
loves but whose execution was extremely messy and took significantly longer 
than expected. Is that project a success? I don’t know, but it’s definitely some-
thing the team should dissect during the  retrospective.   
 The actual retrospective meeting can be done in the same timeslot as your 
standing team update meetings; just devote the entire meeting to this topic. 
As you schedule the retrospective, pay attention to who accepts the meet-
ing invite. It’s very important to the overall quality of the output that each 
functional area be represented and that your core team contributes to the 
discussion. If key players can’t attend the meeting, then reschedule it to a bet-
ter time. The most important thing here is that you hold this meeting as soon 
after the release as possible; shoot for 1 to 2 weeks out from the release 
activity. To conduct the retrospective, start by walking through the metrics and 
data you collected up front. Keep this part of the discussion objective and let 
the data speak for itself. This does two important things. First, it level-sets the 

Chapter 6 | Closing Your First Project
82
team on the scope of the discussion. This is important because your team is 
probably still ruminating over the release activity, and as we know that’s only a 
small part of the project work. Reviewing the metrics helps reset everyone to 
consider the execution of the entire project. The second thing reviewing the 
data up front often does is to uncover trends that the team missed in the fog 
of war. For instance, it’s common for the team to simply not see the amount 
of unplanned work they’ve knocked out or understand how long the project 
spent in a “red” state. Reviewing this data helps the entire team appreciate the 
work that was done and the obstacles that were overcome. Now comes the 
brainstorming portion of the program. Walk your team through brainstorm-
ing what went particularly well for this project, then segue into what did not 
go well. Care should be taken to actively facilitate this discussion, as you will 
find that your team is quite passionate about these items. You need to ensure 
that everyone gets the chance to contribute while maintaining a collaborative 
team dynamic. Next, discuss the key learnings: those things that need to be 
passed along to other teams or incorporated into established processes to 
improve future performance. You will publish those key learnings as part of 
the final project summary, which we will cover later in this chapter. Finally, end 
the discussion on a high note by congratulating the team on everything they 
achieved. This is doubly important if the release was difficult, and really, isn’t 
that how you’d like to be treated as well? The goal here is to leave this team 
feeling like winners. A big part of project leadership is the ability to motivate 
and influence your teammates, so don’t let them walk away from this project 
with negative associations about the project or your leadership abilities. You 
will likely work with these people again, and ending this project on a high note 
will go a long way to enhancing your ability to motivate and influence them 
in the future. Ideally, you want them to be excited about the next project 
because you are leading it.   
 Clean House  
 A big part of the closing activities revolves around cleaning house, and by that 
I mean putting things back where they belong. There’s likely to be leftover 
hardware, discs full of code, collateral that needs to be published to its final 
resting place, architecture and assorted design documentation that all needs 
to be dealt with, etc. Fail to put this stuff up and you’ll create problems down 
the road for other teams. I’d bet my lunch money that you’ve had the experi-
ence of working on a new project where some piece of documentation about 
the product is out of date or just flat-out missing. Kinda frustrating, isn’t it? 
Luckily, this is a quick and easy thing to take care of while you and your team 
are closing out the project. 

Project Management Basics
83
 One lesson I learned early in my career is that hardware leftover from a 
project acts like  Star Trek Tribbles; it multiplies like rabbits when you’re not 
looking and soon you’re getting nasty notes exhorting you to get those boxes 
out of your cube because they’ve now become a fire hazard. Have your team 
do a clean-up of their office and lab spaces, appropriately dispositioning this 
material so that it doesn’t have a chance to breed. If the project involves a 
lot of leftover hardware, assign someone to collect the leftover material and 
process it for scrap, reintroduce it into inventory, or find some other home 
for it. Software projects tend to generate a lot of CDs, USB drives, and files 
on servers that are no longer needed. Have your team members do a scrub of 
this data and clean this up as well. Send a note to your team asking that each 
person archive any important project data. Have someone double-check that 
all of the project collateral has been moved to its permanent home. In short, 
set the expectation with your team that everyone cleans up after themselves. 
These will be the last of the project tasks they have to complete.   
 Publish a Project Summary 
 It’s now time to  summarize  the entire project, and that can be a daunting task. 
The goal of the project summary is to provide a “soundbite”-worthy story that 
describes what your project team accomplished. You will use this summary to 
ensure that your key stakeholders agree that all of the project work is done, 
you and your teammates will incorporate pieces of the summary into your 
annual performance reviews, and perhaps most importantly, it’s your final bit of 
project PR, so it’s important to take the time to craft a well-written message. 
 Start with a brief explanation of what the team achieved, and remember to 
keep this focused on the business objectives that were met by the project 
deliverables. Next, summarize the data you pulled together for the retrospec-
tive. This data should adequately explain the scope of work and the cost to 
execute it (hours, budget, etc.). Keep this part of the summary data-based and 
objective. Finally, wrap up the summary with another brief explanation; this 
time, cover what the successful completion of this project enables and why it 
matters to the organization, the company, and its customers. Remember, this 
should be a “soundbite,” not  Beowulf , so keep it short, sweet, and data driven.  
 Close Out with Your  Key Stakeholders  
 Once you have a well-crafted summary, you need to review it with the key 
stakeholders and gain their agreement that the work is complete. This is actu-
ally a very important step that’s easy to forget or blow off. Unfortunately, if 
you don’t confirm that each of the key stakeholders agrees that the work 

Chapter 6 | Closing Your First Project
84
is complete, you run the risk of owning a project that just won’t die. Here’s 
what happens. Two months later you get a call from one of those stakeholders 
asking you to have the project team tweak a deliverable or do some further 
work. Unfortunately, by this time, all of your team members have been reas-
signed to other work and are no longer available. You’re going to have to tell 
this stakeholder “no,” and that’s going to create problems with no easy solu-
tion for you. Do yourself and your teammates a favor by meeting with each 
stakeholder one last time to confirm that they agree the project is completed 
and that any further work would need to be requested and funded separately. 
Since you’ve spent the entire project meeting regularly with these folks, this 
is another easy discussion to have, and it serves as a nice excuse for one last 
check-in with these stakeholders to ensure that they have a positive impres-
sion of you, your team, and the work you’ve done. 
 One thing to keep in mind as you are closing out the project with your key 
stakeholders is that you want to continue these professional relationships 
long after this project is put to bed. These people are now part of your profes-
sional network, and you can tap them for advice, resources, or opportunities 
as long as you take the time to maintain the connection. It’s always a good idea 
to let these people know that you enjoyed working with them and that you’re 
receptive to helping them out in the future. In some cases, you may want to 
set up a more formal mentorship or even just a standing lunch date once a 
month to keep the connection going. You’ve spent the entire project nurturing 
these relationships, so don’t let them go once the project is over. In our highly 
matrixed world, having a robust and diverse network is a key success factor 
for anyone but especially for project managers, who are constantly looking for 
ways to enable their teams.   
 Take Care of Your Team 
 There’s one more area you need to concern yourself with as you wrap up your 
project, and that’s taking care of your  team  . These people have followed where 
you led, done tremendous work, and expect you to acknowledge it. How you 
recognize your team at this point in the project goes a long way to enhanc-
ing your ability to motivate and lead these same people on future projects, so 
make sure that you are taking care of your team during the Closing Phase. 
 It’s important to celebrate the completion of the project with your team. This 
does two important things; first, it provides a visible and tangible recognition 
of the work the team has done, and second, it provides a sense of closure, 
which is particularly important for long projects. Celebrations can be tricky to 
execute in part due to organizational culture and budget limitations. It’s impor-
tant to note that these celebrations don’t have to be elaborate or expensive. 
I’ve held project celebrations with nothing more than some cheap takeout pizza 
and a few words from key stakeholders in a conference room over lunch. If 

Project Management Basics
85
the organization isn’t willing to pay for it, I’ll dip into my own pocket to pay for 
those pizzas. This is not about getting free lunch out of my boss; it’s about rec-
ognizing the hard work the team has done and laying the groundwork for more 
and better collaboration with these people in the future. Sure, it may require a 
little more creativity on your part if your team is virtual, but even then is likely 
that you already know another colleague who can help you out here. I partner 
with a fellow PM colleague located at another site who is willing to bring in 
treats for my team members there, and I do the same for his team members 
located at my site. If you’ve got access to a more generous budget, then go for 
it. The important thing here is to take the time to celebrate the team’s work. 
Trust me, your team will appreciate any gesture and they will definitely notice 
if their work seems to be taken for granted. Don’t forget the value in having 
those key stakeholders come meet the team and express their congratulations 
in person. Everyone likes to hear happy news, and most senior leaders enjoy the 
opportunity to congratulate teams on successful projects. Providing this oppor-
tunity to those key stakeholders further strengthens those relationships you’ve 
been building all along. In today’s globally interconnected environment, there’s a 
strong likelihood that you will be working with all of these people again, so it’s 
worth your time and energy to improve your ability to motivate and influence 
them in the future by recognizing their contributions now.   
 In addition to a team celebration, it’s a good idea to individually recognize your 
teammates, especially those who were particularly instrumental to the project’s 
overall success. There are several ways to do this, and which way you choose is 
primarily dependent on their manager and the organizational culture. The sim-
plest, and probably most effective, way to recognize an individual is by sending 
a short note to the team member’s manager expressing your appreciation for 
their contributions. Take care to highlight those contributions the manager will 
value most and be sure to copy your teammate on the note. Many organizations 
have formal recognition programs, and these are also a great way recognize the 
team. Finally, it’s a nice touch to provide some specific feedback to your team-
mates’ managers as they are collecting input for the yearly performance reviews. 
Note that if you want to do this, you will probably need to set a reminder in 
your own calendar lest you forget to take care of it when performance evalua-
tion time comes around, since many organizations do this only once a year. 
 The last thing you need to do for your teammates is to release them from 
the project work. Here you are clearly declaring the project finished and let-
ting them know that they can move on to focus on other work. In PM-centric 
organizations, there’s usually a specific process or tool the PM needs to uti-
lize to indicate that the project resources are now available for other work. 
However, not all organizations are so organized and this release happens 
informally. In those circumstances, simply send out the project summary, once 
again thanking the team for their hard work, and wish them good luck on their 
next project. It’s also a nice gesture to offer to help out if they have challenges 
with their next project so that you keep that professional relationship going 
long after this project wraps up. 

Chapter 6 | Closing Your First Project
86
 You’ve probably noticed that all of the discussion so far has been focused on 
the scenario where the project was successfully executed, but what about 
those instances where the work got done, but you can’t really call it a suc-
cess? Sometimes you close out a project knowing that it wasn’t successful and 
the best you can do is call it done and move on. What do you do then? Well 
obviously, you’re not going to throw a big party, and those glowing recom-
mendations for departmental awards are out, but you still need to take care 
of your team. Even in the epic failure scenario, there are probably a few stand-
out team members who deserve recognition, so be sure to send that note to 
their manager highlighting their contributions. In this kind of situation, as the 
team leader, it’s incumbent upon you to help the team understand what went 
wrong and whether or not they could have prevented the downhill slide. You 
will need to own up to your failures as well. Did you pay enough attention 
to monitoring the project execution? Could you have spotted the slipping 
schedule, the increasing scope, and/or the additional risks sooner? Sadly, this is 
a common failure when projects derail, as they often could have been put back 
on the tracks if someone had recognized what was going on earlier. Finally, 
be sure to let your team know that despite how it turned out, you genuinely 
appreciate all of their hard work to get the project done. It may not have been 
the best project any of you will ever work on, but don’t forget that you got 
the job done in the end, and that’s worth something, isn’t it?   
 
YOU STILL FAILED
 There’s a weird scenario that you will likely encounter if the release did not go well. This 
is what happens: you’re cleaning up the mess, you’ve let the team know that despite 
obstacles they did some good work, and you’ve wrapped things up on a high note, but 
now someone thinks that the team should be rewarded in some way. This is usually a 
manager, or one of the teammates, and it’s tempting to fall into the trap of rewarding 
failure, so be careful. The fact of the matter is that the team failed. Sure, they may have 
snatched this one from the jaws of death, but the truth is that they should never have 
gotten within chomping distance of those jaws in the first place. I won’t punish you for a 
failure if you learned something, but I sure as heck won’t reward you . . . because you still 
failed! So what do you do when your manager sidles up to you and says something like 
this:  “So, Melanie, can you write up that division recognition for the project team since 
they finally got that new product out the door?” Similarly, how do you respond when one 
of your teammates says,  “Now that we’ve completed the release, is there going to be a 
celebration lunch?”  Here’s what you do: you lead with the data and say something like 
this: “ I’m not sure that that reward is warranted this time. We missed our commitment to 
deliver the product by 3 months/we ended up $50k over budget/the product doesn’t meet 
the heat resistance threshold/etc., so while we did accomplish a lot, we didn’t achieve the 

Project Management Basics
87
business need this project was supposed to fulfill. The good news is that we learned a lot 
and are well positioned to be successful on the next project. Let’s knock that one outta 
the park and then we can celebrate .” Everyone likes to get recognized and no one is sad 
when lunch is free, but it’s not a good idea to get in the habit of rewarding failure or even 
mediocre performance. At its core, a reward is meant to motivate future behavior, so be 
sure that you’re rewarding the behavior you want to see in the future. Last, understand 
that if every accomplishment is rewarded, regardless of difficulty or impact, then the 
overall value of this kind of recognition is devalued across the organization. Resist the 
temptation to reward failure, but be sure that you acknowledge the significant effort 
required to execute the project even if it was a failure.   
 Checklist  #5—Closing the Project 
 It’s interesting to me that even experienced project managers cut corners 
when it comes to the Closing Phase. You see, they get so distracted by the 
cool, flashy newness of their next project that they neglect to clean house 
between projects. This is sloppy and it creates problems down the road. Close 
out your projects all the way by conducting a retrospective, cleaning up after 
yourselves, publishing a summary of what the project team achieved, closing 
out with your key stakeholders, and taking care of your team. 
 The following checklist identifies the major tasks you need to complete as 
you and your team wrap up the project. Many of these items will be done 
simultaneously. Again, the important thing to keep in mind is that you should 
be doing all of these tasks; they represent the minimum tasks you need to 
perform during the closure  process  . 
 Checklist #5—Closing the Project 
 □  Facilitate the project retrospective 
 □  Clean house 
 □ 
 Appropriately disposition all project material (HW & SW) 
 □ 
 Post all collateral to their permanent locations 
 □ 
 Archive important project artifacts 
 □  Publish project summary 
 □  Obtain key stakeholder agreement that the project work is complete 
 □  Hold a celebration for the team (if warranted) 
 □  Recognize individual team members for their contributions (if warranted) 
 □  Release resources from the project to be available for other work 

Chapter 6 | Closing Your First Project
88
 That’s it! You’re done with the project. Take a few minutes to reflect back 
on the work you’ve done in the Initiating, Planning, Executing, and Closing 
Phases. I hope by now you deeply understand what I meant at the beginning 
when I stated that the hard part of project management is not mastering the 
mechanics of the job. I’ve walked you through the tasks and processes that 
are absolutely critical to successful project execution. They are not overly 
difficult or complicated to perform. You probably need a bit more practice in 
some areas, but you’re well on your way to mastery. For your next project, 
you should be able to use the checklists provided to stay on track, and we will 
talk more about that in Chapter   9 . Next up, I’m going to walk you through 
that minefield of a low project management maturity organization, where we 
will discuss just what you should do if you’re managing projects in a truly Wild 
Wild West  environment  .  

 Reality Check 
 Applying the Mechanics in the  Real World  
 It’s not enough to understand how to execute a process or produce an arti-
fact; you have to be able to do those things within the chaotic circus that is 
your real job, not that mythical “made-for–TV” job you wish you had. Now we 
move into that gray area between the best practices we’ve just discussed and 
what it takes to get the job done in the real world.  
P A R T
II

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_7
 C H A P T E R 
  Chopping Down 
Your Project 
Mechanics 
 Now that you understand what solid project management looks like when the 
 mechanics  of the job—things like the schedule, risk management, and com-
munications planning—are executed properly, it’s tempting to believe that’s the 
best way to manage any project. Okay, it really is, but let’s not forget that proj-
ects are still executed in organizations where project management discipline 
is as ephemeral as dandelion fluff. What do you do if the mere words “Work 
Breakdown Structure” cause instant rebellion? How do you convince people to 
devote time to planning the project work when they are wild-eyed and twitchy, 
just chomping at the bit to get started on the “real work”? Let me teach you 
what experienced project managers already know: how to go into stealth mode! 
 Seasoned project  managers know that there’s more than one way to achieve 
their objectives, be it planning the project or orchestrating change control, 
and the key to their success is an accumulation of tools for performing the 
mechanics of project management. If you’re just starting out, you should 
absolutely focus on learning how to develop these plans and tools as we’ve 
discussed. As you master your craft, you will encounter different tools and 
processes that will also work. Learn those techniques, building up your project 
management toolbox as you go. There will come a time in your career when 
you will be smack-dab in dandelion fluff territory, so it’s best to be prepared. 
7

Chapter 7 | Chopping Down Your Project Mechanics
92
 Stealth Mode  
 The first thing you need to understand when you’re asked to lead a project 
in a low-PM-maturity organization is that your fancy, dancy project manage-
ment words are gonna freak ’em out. People hear “Network Diagram” and 
think “busywork,” because they’re not like you . . . they haven’t read this book! 
Seriously, they don’t understand the mechanics of building a realistic schedule, 
so all of this brainstorming and playing around with sticky notes just looks like 
a waste of time to them. Further, it’s probable that they have had bad experi-
ences with poorly developed schedules that only contributed ambiguity and 
frustration to a past failed project. They have project management baggage. 
You deal with this by simply not using works like “Network Diagram” and 
instead say something like this:  “Okay, now that we’ve got a good understanding of 
all of the work we need to do, let’s lay it out on a timeline.” You basically convince 
them to do the work of creating the WBS and the Network Diagram without 
actually making a big deal of the process. See, I told you this was stealthy. 
 The other stealthy thing to do when confronted with mass resistance is to 
take care of some of the mechanics yourself and present them to the team 
as something you were fooling around with on the side. Here I’m talking 
about things like the Release Readiness Checklist. You can do a fair job of it by 
yourself during planning and simply bring up the items you think need to be 
addressed in an offhand manner. Try something like this:  “So, since these instruc-
tions are for our external customers, do we need to get Legal to buy off on them 
beforehand?” Here’s the really cool part about this approach: you look brilliant! 
It’s likely that that Legal review would have slipped through the cracks in a 
low-PM-maturity organization and someone would have had a last-minute 
scramble to get it done before the release. By bringing up these due diligence 
items early, they are easily accepted as work that needs to be done, you get 
kudos for thinking of them, and the team has one less fire during the release 
process. You don’t actually have to tell them that you created a specific check-
list during planning, especially when you have reason to think that this will 
distract the team from the work at hand. You simply pull out the checklist a 
few weeks before release as something you pulled together to  “double-check 
that we’re on track for the release in 2 weeks.”  
 What Project Management Processes Are 
Absolutely Necessary? 
 If you’re going into stealth mode, then it helps to be very clear on what 
 project management processes  and artifacts are absolutely necessary, so 
let’s talk about those now. In Chapters   2 through   6 , I’ve repeatedly empha-
sized that those processes and artifacts discussed are the absolute minimum 
work you need to do to properly manage a project, but that assumes that 

Project Management Basics
93
you’re working in an organization that is receptive to project management 
discipline. This is not always the case, and while you can be stealthy about 
executing these processes, it’s good to understand which artifacts are criti-
cal to managing any project, in any environment. Think of this as project 
management triage. 
 In my opinion, the most critical artifact necessary for managing any project 
is the project schedule. I  always build one. There are certainly times when 
that schedule isn’t as detailed or as comprehensive as I’d prefer, but even 
a half-baked schedule is better than none at all. Think of it this way: you’re 
the navigator for the team and you need to be able to give them directions 
on where to go. No, you can’t tell them to go jump in a lake! You have to 
provide actionable directions with respect to the work and when it needs 
to be done. If no one is providing this information to the team, then they are 
essentially wandering around lost in the desert, constantly seduced by the 
mirage of a finish date. You can always create a schedule even in the most 
ambiguous of environments; it’s just not always fun. 
 The most critical process for managing any project is executing the stake-
holder management plan. The process of creating the stakeholder manage-
ment plan is simple and provides invaluable insights to the project manager. 
The work to build these critical relationships will not be viewed as “work” in 
low project management maturity organizations, so you need to balance this 
relationship building with the perception that you’re a social butterfly. The 
stronger your relationships with the key stakeholders are, the more likely it is 
that the project will be successful. Unfortunately, this area is fraught with soft 
skills challenges which we do not cover in this book. Once you master the 
mechanics of project management, then I strongly encourage you to focus on 
building your soft skills toolbox next. This work is something you can plan and 
execute by yourself, so don’t cut this corner. 
 The last process I consider critical to any project is that of controlling changes. 
Here I’m not so worried about stopping changes, or the wild churn of scope 
that’s common in low-PM-maturity organizations, as I am in ensuring that the 
team and stakeholders understand the impact of these changes. There will 
always be changes to the scope of work, the underlying assumptions, and the 
expected timeline, no matter the project environment. In organizations where 
the PM discipline is low, the rate of change and the magnitude of these changes 
are higher than in more mature organizations that are actively controlling the 
project pipeline. This is reality, so you need to be able to lead a team in that 
environment, and the only way to contain the madness is to set up a process 
for understanding the inevitable changes to the Triple Constraint. This is one 
piece of structured process that I insist on, and while I’ve had teams push 
back on a formal process, they all eventually see the value in a change control 
process by the time the project is done. 

Chapter 7 | Chopping Down Your Project Mechanics
94
 Now here’s the cool part about stealthily introducing some project management 
discipline into a wild and crazy environment: you look like a rock star! All of a 
sudden, you come in as the project manager, and people know what to work on 
and when it needs to be done. Management gets clear and timely updates about 
the project work. There’s a sense that this project is “under control,” and you’re 
the brilliant one who was able to wrangle that wild bunch of mustang devel-
opers. Obviously you can’t solve big, systemic problems with just one project, 
but even a little of your mad PM skills will result in more successful, better-run 
projects, especially in a world where project management is viewed suspiciously 
as overhead. You build some credibility on that first project, which allows you to 
introduce more project management best practices in the next one, and eventu-
ally you find yourself leading project teams that execute smoothly and success-
fully every time. Sure, you probably can’t fix an entire organization, but you can 
lead drama-free projects that allow your teammates to do their best work, and 
at the end of the day, isn’t that what you are working toward?   
 Streamlining for Low-PM-Maturity 
Organizations 
 Going into stealth mode and focusing on only the most critical processes and 
artifacts will take you far in  low-PM-maturity organizations  . To go even further, 
you can deliberately streamline some of the project management mechanics 
we’ve discussed so far. Note that I’m not advocating stripping all of your project 
management skills down to the bone; rather, I’m suggesting that in organizations 
that do not understand the discipline necessary to effectively lead successful 
projects, there are some shortcuts you can take, so let’s discuss those now. 
 The first thing to slash is the project charter. The sad truth is that many organiza-
tions barely pay lip service to this document, which PMI sees as the cornerstone 
of any project. If your organization doesn’t even understand the concept of a 
charter, that’s okay. The important thing to do is gather the information that the 
charter is supposed to convey. In Chapter   2 , we covered this strategy in detail, 
so I won’t repeat it here; just know that it’s perfectly fine to ditch the charter as 
long as you make sure that the key stakeholders and the project team are all in 
alignment on the high-level Triple Constraints of the project. 
 There’s a streamlined way to create a schedule in a highly ambiguous environ-
ment. Start with milestones and major work packages. Ask the team to help 
define those and tell them to be “conservative” on their estimates, stressing 
that you can always “optimize” the schedule later. Note that you want to use 
those specific words so that your team doesn’t feel pressured to give you 
an unrealistically short estimates or freak out about the idea of pulling the 
schedule in. If you’re in this situation, you may find it necessary to make some 
assumptions about major deliverables or receivables. Simply create a mile-
stone where it makes the most sense, then spin the rest of the dates around 

Project Management Basics
95
it, moving that milestone to where it fits logically in the timeline as you and 
the team learn more about the workflow you need to execute. It’s also a good 
idea to dial down the complexity of the schedule itself, so consider using a 
spreadsheet or even—gasp!—PowerPoint to build the schedule. The goal here 
is to create something that you and your team can use, so while a spreadsheet 
means more work for you, it may be the best choice for your team and the 
particular environment you find yourself in at the time.   
 As I mentioned, strong change control is essential, but you can also chop that 
process down to something realistic to execute in a low-PM-maturity envi-
ronment as well. First, focus your attention on the project-level changes and 
create a simple change request form. This should include what the change is, 
why it’s needed, and who is impacted. Make the intake process for this form 
painless by posting it in a common area and even going so far as to fill it out as 
a team when a change is introduced. Review this form as a team and capture 
the impact of the change by collecting the work estimate to implement (don’t 
forget validation and documentation work!) and when the team expects it to 
be implemented. If the change affects anyone outside the team, then simply 
communicate the change plus its impact to them.  
 For program-level changes, sidestep the peer pressure by agreeing to look 
at the impact and report back. Once your team has evaluated the change, 
do that: report back. The key here is to give the program team data they can 
then use to make a decision about whether or not they want to go forward 
with the change. Even if your organization is really low on the ole PM maturity 
meter, it’s important to report back the impact of any changes. Sure, this may 
not change the decision to execute the change, but you have a professional 
responsibility to make the implications of the change clear to the decision-
makers. Later, when you’re getting hammered for slipping the schedule, you 
can clearly articulate the amount of unplanned work the team took on as a 
result of these changes. It may not save you from the verbal harangue, but it 
will educate the decision-makers on the consequences of their decisions, and 
that impact analysis will likely be taken more seriously the next time. 
 The key to streamlining the risk management process is simplicity. Keep the 
initial meeting to identify, rate, and rank the risks short: no more than an hour. 
Dial down the tracking of the risk management plans by integrating those tasks 
into the project schedule so that the team doesn’t have to update a separate 
file. Focus only on the top three to five risks that your team can actually affect. 
If you take care of the most likely risks that your team can prevent, then that’s 
good enough. Oh, and it should be noted that you need to be careful about 
over-communicating your risk register, since the team can’t honestly address 
all of the project risks they identified. It’s not uncommon for key stakeholders 
to push you to manage all of the identified risks in organizations that aren’t 
familiar with formal risk management. To these people, all of these risks sound 
scary, but they can’t balance that fear with the reality of the available headcount.  

Chapter 7 | Chopping Down Your Project Mechanics
96
 Finally, don’t forget to just downplay the formality of project management. If 
the organization doesn’t have a gate review at the end of Planning, requiring 
approval to move into Execution, then don’t make a big deal of that transition. 
Release planning is another area where you can downplay the mechanics of 
the task and get buy-in from your team. Instead of a 2-hour meeting to plan 
the release, bring up the topic in your weekly team meeting. Start the ball 
rolling with questions like  “what are the steps to the release process and who 
will execute each one?” and  “do we need to request any additional lab space or 
special equipment for the release?” You will find that your team is receptive to 
this advanced planning, especially if you don’t make it feel like additional work 
to them. Simply integrate it into the normal team updates well ahead of the 
release and then go from there.  
 What to Do If There’s No Formal Approval 
Process for Your Project Release 
 There is one area where you can’t afford to streamline or cut corners, and 
that’s with the approval to release the project deliverables. If you find yourself 
in an organization that doesn’t have a defined process for approving releases, 
then you need to create one for your project. Similarly, if your organization’s 
process is rather loose, then you need to formalize it. Over the years, I’ve 
found that senior leaders purely love to be the final approver, but they may not 
want to be held accountable for the results of those decisions. There’s a whole 
pile of work in the field of psychology trying to explain why people behave 
that way, but for now, understand that this is what you may be up against. In 
these situations, you need to use a defined decision-making process complete 
with actual data and peer pressure. 
 To formalize a  release approval decision  , use the Go/No Go decision process 
we discussed in Chapter   6 . Before the actual decision-making meeting, you need 
to explain the Go/No Go decision process that will be used and clarify who 
actually gets to make that decision with your key stakeholders. You should also 
meet individually with each decision-maker to review the project deliverables 
and the due diligence that the team has done prior to the actual decision meet-
ing; addressing any concerns they may have before the Go/No Go meeting. At 
the start of the meeting, clearly articulate who the decision-recommenders are, 
who is affected by the decision, and who will actually make the decision. From 
there, follow the process outlined previously. The trick here is to subtly use peer 
pressure to get to a decision. After everyone has provided a recommendation, 
you put the decision-maker on the spot to actually do their job and approve (or 
disapprove) the release. You’re basically stroking their ego when you emphasize 
their role as the bigwig decision-maker while applying peer pressure by having 
the team present and waiting for said decision. Infuse this meeting with gravitas 
and formality; project seriousness and professionalism yourself and the others 

Project Management Basics
97
will behave the same. Something interesting happens when you do this: peo-
ple take this decision-making process more seriously. After a while, you won’t 
even have to badger people to attend these meetings; the organizations’ culture 
changes such that these  meetings   are required and important. 
 Not all organizations are at the same level of maturity when it comes to 
project management discipline, and you will eventually find yourself challenged 
to lead a team in a space that doesn’t value project management. You can 
still be successful at the job, but you may need to tweak your mechanics and 
processes to best fit the environment. Remember that no matter the organi-
zation’s culture or tolerance for project management shenanigans, you should 
always create a project schedule, actively manage stakeholder expectations, 
and manage changes to the Triple Constraint. As you gain experience, you 
will learn new and hopefully more efficient ways to perform the mechanics 
of project management. These ideas will inform your choices for how you 
go about managing projects in any environment, but they all start with a firm 
grounding in the basics, covered here in Chapters   2  through   6 . 

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_8
 C H A P T E R 
 PMP-ing 
Your Project 
with Flashy 
Methodologies 
 In the previous chapter, we discussed specific strategies for leading projects 
in an environment that is unfamiliar or unsupportive of project management 
discipline. In that type of environment, you need to dial down the PM termi-
nology and streamline  processes  . Now let’s flip the coin and talk about the 
opposite side: some ways to go beyond the basic mechanics we’ve covered 
so far when you find yourself in a PM-friendly organization. Yes, my friend, 
this chapter is all about bringing some PMP skills to the table. If you’re feeling 
pretty comfortable with the fundamental mechanics we’ve been discussing so 
far or if you find yourself awash in a sea of senior PMs and aren’t quite sure 
how to stand out, then this chapter is for you. Here we will cover some easy-
to-adopt strategies for taking your project management to the next level by 
integrating some advanced techniques, creating and leveraging metrics to help 
you better predict your team’s performance, and starting to build a foundation 
8

Chapter 8 | PMP-ing Your Project with Flashy Methodologies
100
of historical data that will become your treasure chest of knowledge later. You 
don’t need to hold a PMP to employ these strategies. Heck, you don’t even 
have to be that experienced to use them: and that’s the point! Remember 
way back in Chapter   1 , I told you that the mechanics of project management 
aren’t that hard and that you can master them with a little effort? Well, the 
same goes for these next techniques; they are simple to implement and will 
significantly improve your project management effectiveness. 
 A Sprinkle of Agile, a Dash of TOC….How 
About a  Hybrid Model  ? 
 Way back in Chapter   3 , we discussed the most popular project management 
methodologies, but the one we trekked through, exploring all its secrets, was 
the Waterfall method. Certainly, the Theory of Constraints (TOC) and Agile 
methodologies are excellent methods for managing projects on their own, but 
that doesn’t mean that you can’t borrow a few tidbits from each to up your 
game. You don’t need to be a seasoned project manager to pull this off if you’re 
judicious about which bits and pieces you borrow, so let’s talk about that now. 
 One tidbit from the  Agile methodology  that can be leveraged within a 
Waterfall lifecycle is the concept of a burndown chart. Here’s the basic idea: 
the burndown chart is a running list of requirements that the team needs to 
implement. Think of it as a backlog or bin list of requirements that need to be 
estimated and prioritized. I find it particularly useful to use this technique while 
planning a complex project. New requirements get plunked into the backlog 
to be analyzed and incorporated into the evolving  Network Diagram  during 
Planning. Using this technique can help you keep track of new requirements 
as they are realized while keeping the team focused on the work of systemati-
cally gathering requirements. Once you get comfortable with the mechanics 
of building a WBS and a Network Diagram, you can push the envelope a little 
further. You can do a first pass at these to artifacts using larger work pack-
ages to build the schedule. Then, during the Execution Phase, you can use that 
backlog list to populate those larger work packages in the schedule, thereby 
providing a level of flexibility in arranging the workflow that Waterfall typically 
doesn’t support. This technique is a simplified version of rolling wave planning, 
and it will provide your team with the ability to rapidly react and respond to 
a changing environment while maintaining that overall project schedule and 
associated customer commitments. Here you’re mixing some of the goodness 
of Agile (flexibility to arrange the work to focus on what’s most important) 
into the structure and predictability of Waterfall. 
 To leverage some of the goodness of TOC, you need only employ schedule 
buffers and change your mindset. If you will recall, there’s a subtle difference 
between the Waterfall and the TOC methodologies. While employing the  TOC 
methodology  , the team focuses on the rate of schedule buffer consumption, 

Project Management Basics
101
not the completion of each individual work package. If you’ve built your proj-
ect schedule as we discussed in Chapter   3  , then you’ve already baked in these 
buffers. The mindset change is this: instead of focusing on the specific work 
package deliverables, you lead your team to focus on the buffer consumption. 
Some tasks will finish early, while others will take longer than planned, but 
as long as you’ve got buffer left in the schedule then the team remains on 
track. This technique delivers a significant advantage to the project manager 
by fundamentally changing the team dynamic. Your team will feel empowered 
to do their best work because you’ve provided them with a schedule safety 
net. What you find is that team members are less distracted by the possibility 
of unanticipated, show-stopping defects or more-complicated-than-expected 
designs, and are instead focused on the work at hand. You aren’t sidestepping 
the need to drive to a specific completion date for each work package; you’ve 
just adjusted that completion date to include some accommodation for reality.  
 Your Newest Secret Weapon . . . More  Metrics  ! 
 This next technique a dead-simple extension of what you are already doing 
during the Execution Phase. In Chapter   4 , we covered the minimum metrics 
you should be actively monitoring during the Execution Phase of your project, 
so now let’s expand on that a bit to bring a whole other level to your game. 
If you’re already tracking Earned Value (EV) metrics, then you are familiar with 
the Schedule Performance Index ( SPI ) and the  Cost Performance Index (CPI).  
You can think of both of these metrics as a ratio of executed work/incurred 
cost versus what was planned to be executed/incurred at any point in time. 
They are very useful metrics, as you saw in Chapter   4 , but there’s a simple 
way to gain even more insight into your project performance. It’s sufficient 
to be able to understand your EV metrics at any given point, but what you 
really need is the ability to comprehend the  EV trends  over time. To do this, 
you simply graph SPI and/or CPI versus time, and in fact, many scheduling 
software packages will do this for you automatically. EV metrics won’t change 
much from week to week, so you may miss seeing a slow-moving decline in 
execution unless you are paying attention to the data trends. Remember, this 
trend is a reflection of how well your team is executing the project plan, so if 
you see 3 weeks of declining SPI, then it’s definitely time to figure out what’s 
slowing the team down. What you want to see is a mostly straight SPI/CPI line 
somewhere above the 0.9–0.85 level. (Figures  8-1 and  8-2 ) That straight line 
means that your team is executing the work at 85–90% of the rate that was 
planned for the work. That’s pretty respectable performance, especially when 
you consider that your schedule already has some buffer baked in.  

Chapter 8 | PMP-ing Your Project with Flashy Methodologies
102
 Figure 8-1.  On track project SPI versus Time example. Note that while the SPI line is not 
perfectly straight, it remains well within the 90–100 band, which can be interpreted to mean 
that the team is executing at least 90% of the planned work on time  
 Figure 8-2.   SPI versus Time  example for a troubled project. Note that while the SPI remains 
within the 0.9–0.85 SPI band, the trend is clearly indicating that the team’s ability to execute the 
work as planned is degrading. Immediate intervention is needed to keep this project on track  
 
 

Project Management Basics
103
 You can do the same thing with the percentage complete metric. Simply graph 
the percentage of the total work completed versus time. Here you should 
expect to see another straight line with increasing slope. (Figure  8-3 ) This 
indicates that the team is constantly making progress but that’s all it tells you. 
What you don’t want to see is a squiggly or flat line. If your trend line bounces 
around like a toddler in a bounce house, this indicates that there’s a lot of 
churn in the scope of work and your team is executing a lot of unplanned 
work. (Figure  8-4 ) In that scenario, it’s time to replan the project. If your trend 
flatlines, then this basically means that your team is no longer making progress. 
(Figure  8-5 ) This could mean that they are executing unplanned work, they 
hit a snag in the execution and the work is taking longer than expected, they 
simply lost focus on completing work packages, or everyone is on vacation. 
This graph doesn’t tell you anything about how the team is performing rela-
tive to the baseline plan, because percentage complete is a pretty simplistic 
metric. However, the trend of percentage complete over time does give you 
some valuable insights that allow you to get in front of major problems early 
and course correct or replan as needed.  
 Figure 8-3.   On-track project percentage complete (% Comp) vs. Time example. Note the 
steadily increasing slope of the % Comp line. This project team is consistently making progress; 
however, you cannot tell if the rate of work completed is aligned to that of the project plan  
 

Chapter 8 | PMP-ing Your Project with Flashy Methodologies
104
 Figure 8-4.  Excess unplanned project work %  Comp vs. Time  example. Note rapid swings 
in % Comp in this example. This project team is executing a significant amount of unplanned 
work. Immediate action is needed to get this project back on track, and it’s likely that you will 
need to replan and recommit this phase of the project work. To do this update the WBS, the 
Network Diagram, and the schedule to incorporate this unplanned work  
 Figure 8-5.  Stalled project work %  Comp vs. Time  example. Note the flatline behavior 
starting 12-Feb. This project team has stopped making progress and immediate action is 
needed to get this project back on track. Again, this graph does not comprehend the project 
plan, so it could be that no work has been planned for this timeframe. All the graph tells you 
is that work has essentially stopped  
 
 

Project Management Basics
105
 The thing is, most PMs don’t dig this next level down when they are consider-
ing their EV or percentage complete metrics. Instead they pay lip service to 
the data while focusing on other things, all the while completely missing an 
easy opportunity to understand whether or not their projects are tracking to 
the baseline plan and customer commitments. These simple graphs tell you a 
lot about how your team is doing, take mere minutes to update, and will set 
you apart from your less focused peers, even if they have more experience.  
 Your  Historical Data Treasure Chest  
 Data about how past projects performed is incredibly useful to project managers. 
It allows you to improve work estimates for new projects, it validates assump-
tions about how long certain work packages take to complete, and it can become 
the cornerstone of the scoping efforts for new projects. Most agree that histori-
cal data is important, but for many organizations, high-quality, relevant historical 
project performance data can be like the Holy Grail. Either the tools for collect-
ing this information are too simplistic, yielding lots of data that is time-consuming 
to digest, or they are so complicated that real meaning is impossible to extract. 
 I hear it over and over again:  “I can’t predict my team’s future performance because 
we just don’t have any usable historical data.” I’m sure that you don’t have that his-
torical data, but frankly that’s a weak cop-out, especially if you’ve been managing 
projects in the same organization for a while. The truth is that there’s a pretty 
small subset of this data that you need to dramatically improve your effective-
ness, and you probably already have it on your laptop or PC. First, let’s deep-dive 
into just what that subset of data is; then we’ll figure out how to get it. 
 So, what data would be useful to you and your team during scoping? What his-
torical data do you really need? First, you need data about how long past proj-
ects took to execute, a.k.a. their duration. Second, you need to understand a 
little about the scope of those projects so that you can extrapolate perfor-
mance metrics of similar projects in the future. Third, it’s useful to break down 
how long each phase of the project took. Fourth, it’s very useful to understand 
how long major work packages took to execute. Honestly, if all you have are 
the first two pieces of data about enough past projects, you can do a lot of 
damage during scoping. If you can obtain all four data sets, you can dramatically 
improve estimation of effort and overall duration for future projects. 
 This list may seem overwhelming, but there’s a dirty little secret I need to 
clue you into right about now: .almost all of that data is hidden in your e-mail 
archive! Yep, what you really need to do is just dive in, create a spreadsheet, 
and spend a couple of hours data mining your own e-mail. First, create a 
simple spreadsheet to collect your mining results. You will need some columns 
like “Project Name,” “High-Level Scope,” “Start Date,” “End Date,” and “Total 
Duration.” Now start climbing through your e-mail to uncover that informa-
tion for every project you’ve worked on in the past few years. Don’t worry 

Chapter 8 | PMP-ing Your Project with Flashy Methodologies
106
about how precise the dates are, because what you’re really interested in is 
the total duration, and whether its 55 days or 60 doesn’t matter that much. 
To obtain the “Total Duration,” you merely count backwards from the finish 
date to the start date. 
 Once you’ve exhausted your own e-mail archive, you can also go look at 
archived project schedules that might help you further add to your growing list 
of past projects. These schedules can yield good data on how long each phase 
of the project took to execute and how long common work packages took as 
well. Once you’ve populated your spreadsheet initially, keep updating it every 
time you finish a project. It won’t take too long before you do have that pool 
of good, relevant historical data to use during scoping and estimation. The trick 
really is to just block out some time and go find this data. If you’re just starting 
out, well then just start off on the right foot by building that spreadsheet and 
collecting this information each time you complete a project.   
 If you really want to go for the gold, you need to understand how the execu-
tion of these projects went so that you and your team can do a better job 
with risk identification on future projects. This information is captured in the 
retrospectives for past projects. The challenge with this data set is that it’s 
usually hard to extract usable information from these reports. Most organiza-
tions adopt key learnings either organically or through a formal, systematic 
process, so there’s often not a lot of actionable items to be found by review-
ing past project retrospectives. That said, if you and your team are tackling a 
new project that closely resembles a past one or is a further improvement on 
previous project, then it can’t hurt to walk through those retrospectives as 
a team to see if there’s anything useful to be found. Do this during a regular 
weekly team meeting in that “special topics” timeslot in the agenda. As you 
can see, this is pretty quick and it just might turn up some risks that need to 
be managed in your new project.  
 Find More Flashy Ideas 
 I’ve given you just a few easy ideas to increase  your  PM effectiveness, but don’t 
stop there. You see, in the field of project management, there are always multiple 
ways to solve problems, and since the mechanics of the job are so straightfor-
ward, people are always coming up with tweaks and improvements. How do 
you tap into these new and improved techniques? One way to do this is to get 
involved in the PM community within your own company. Most large organiza-
tions have internal communities of practice focused on sharing project manage-
ment knowledge. These folks hold regular meetings, publish newsletters, conduct 
training, etc., so all you need to do is tap into the information flow. Ironically, many 
senior PMs tend to ignore these forums or simply don’t prioritize participation 
in these communities, so this is a great way to learn new tools and approaches 
that will differentiate yourself from some of your more experienced colleagues. 

Project Management Basics
107
 Another way to tap into new and improved techniques is to go hang out with 
your local PMI chapter. These professional organizations hold regular member 
meetings, coordinate training opportunities, and often host seminars and con-
ferences. These events provide you with the unique opportunity to network 
with other PMs in a variety of industries and disciplines, so not only do you 
get exposed to new ideas, you also have the opportunity to build your profes-
sional network. 
 The widespread adoption of formal project management discipline means that 
there’s a good chance you are, or soon will be, working in an organization 
with strong processes and controls to manage project work. In this chapter, 
we’ve discussed some pretty simple techniques you can use to increase your 
effectiveness as a project manager. I gave you some ideas about how to tweak 
the project lifecycle model to improve the team’s ability to react to a dynamic 
environment.  We also talked about a few simple metrics you can incorporate 
into your practice right now that will allow you to get ahead of potential 
problems that could derail your team’s execution. By data mining your own 
e-mail, you can dig up a treasure chest of historical data that will make scop-
ing your next project so much easier and more accurate. Finally, don’t forget 
to participate in the various PM-centric communities around you. They are a 
great way to uncover fresh new ideas that will help you improve your game 
for your own projects. One thing all of these ideas have in common is that 
none of them are hard or time-consuming. In fact, it’s the simple act of doing 
a little bit more than the next PM that will help you stand apart, lead more 
effective teams, and grow your skill set, especially when you’re lost in a sea of 
much more experienced PMs.  

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_9
 C H A P T E R 
 Steering 
Your Project 
with Flexible 
Checklists 
 At this point, you should feel pretty comfortable with your understanding 
of the basic mechanics of project management, so let’s talk a little bit about 
how to leverage the checklists you find at the end of Chapters   2 – 6 . You can 
certainly use these checklists as they stand today to guide your work, but 
don’t stop there! I’ll give you some ideas on how to augment the content of 
the checklists to further improve your overall effectiveness, and we’ll discuss 
some tips and tricks for managing multiple projects using these checklists. 
Think of them as a map and yourself as the wilderness guide for the project 
team. Your goal is to be able to figure out where to go or what to do next to 
ensure that the team is able to complete the work of the project, and these 
 checklists  will help you do just that. 
9

Chapter 9 | Steering Your Project with Flexible Checklists
110
 Using Checklists to  Guide  Your Work 
 The first thing to understand is that these checklists contain the essential ele-
ments needed to lead a project team to deliver the expected outcome. You 
really need to do all of them if you want to be successful. Trust me! I’ve come to 
understand the value of each element of these checklists the hard way, by either 
skipping them or doing them halfheartedly, and I’ve paid the piper. Every single 
time you skip one of these items you pay, and often you pay for the duration 
of that project. As an old college professor used to say,  “Pay me now, or pay me 
later.” For example, when I don’t explicitly do risk management, I consistently 
see my teams consumed with firefighting even if it’s only occasionally. This is 
wasted time and energy that the team could put to better use, but because we 
didn’t come up with some basic risk management plans, we pay that piper. 
 You will also encounter bad advice from a boss or more experienced coworker. 
If they tell you that you really don’t need to build a schedule because “the 
team already knows what to do,” smile and nod ….then go off and get crankin’ 
on that WBS. In case you’re wondering, this actually happened to a colleague 
of mine! She went ahead and built the schedule because she honestly couldn’t 
manage the project without one.   
 The beauty of using checklists is that they leverage the work and experience of 
someone else. In their book  Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work 
(Crown Business, 2013), Chip and Dan Heath (Chapter   4 , page 79) talk about this 
idea of using checklists as a way to leverage someone else’s work. Checklists con-
tain someone else’s solution to your problem. In short, by using these checklists 
you’re reaping the benefit of someone else figuring out the best practices for man-
aging projects. They are deliberately prescriptive, and if followed, keep you from 
forgetting an important artifact or process. In short, these checklists will keep you 
on track and give you the best shot at being effective as a project manager. 
 All of the checklists are collected together in Appendix A.  You can 
download them at this book’s page on Apress.com (   www.apress.
com/9781484220856   ). Print them out and hang them up where you can see 
them. Create a set of checklists for each project you manage. In short, inte-
grate the process of checking each item off into your project management 
practice. Even the most experienced of us get distracted or lazy and forget to 
do some of these things, especially the easy ones! Utilize the checklists here 
to keep yourself on track every time, and soon you’ll see dramatic improve-
ments in your overall effectiveness as a project manager.  
 Augmenting  the Checklists 
 These checklists represent PMI’s best practices coupled with my own experi-
ence, but that doesn’t mean you can’t improve on them. I would caution you 
not to delete any item, but you can, and should, be adding to them as you gain 

Project Management Basics
111
more experience and understanding of what’s required of you within your 
own organization. So, let’s talk a bit more about what kinds of additions you 
can make to customize the checklists here for your practice. 
 Throughout this book, I’ve pointed out the nuances of working in an organiza-
tion with a  strong project management  culture and ecosystem. These are the 
organizations with formal PMOs and good project management infrastruc-
ture. If you find yourself practicing in such an organization, then there’s a good 
chance that you will need to augment your checklists with specific items. If you 
will recall, back in Chapter   3 we talked about figuring out any organizational 
requirements or required artifacts. These items were incorporated into the 
WBS and ultimately ended up in your project schedule. These are the kinds of 
things you want to add to your checklists. For example, often you will find that 
the gate review between Initiating and Planning requires a formal review and 
approval of the scoping results. In that instance, you will probably be required 
to fill out a form capturing the forecasted budget, resource requirements, 
deliverables, and a timeline. Add this form to your Initiating checklist. In short, 
update these checklists with any required processes or artifacts that your 
organization requires. This will help you remember to do them and avoid that 
late-night scramble to create the required artifact at the last minute. 
 You can, and should, do the same thing if you work in a less formal organization, 
but here the items you add to your checklist may be more, shall we say . . .  nuanced . 
In organizations with little or no formal project management infrastructure, I’ve 
found that you have to create some formality yourself for key deliverables. For 
instance, you really should have your key stakeholders and any decision-makers 
sign off on the proposed project budget, especially in a low-PM-maturity orga-
nization. This may mean that you hold a budget review meeting with the key 
stakeholders or that you meet with them individually, depending on the culture of 
your organization. Since no one is making you do this review, you need to add it 
to your  Planning  checklist to make sure that you don’t forget this important step. 
 Further, there may be some “hidden” tasks that you unearth yourself that you 
don’t want to forget to do for each project. Here I’m talking about things like 
making sure that you review the architecture with that highly influential but 
not formally involved stakeholder. You know, those key stakeholders that can 
tank your project, or make life very difficult for your team, even though they 
don’t have any formal association with your project? You probably want to 
add a checklist item to the Planning checklist to ensure that those influential 
individuals are cool with the approach your team plans to take before exiting 
Planning. If you forget to do this task, then you and your team will have to 
negotiate that swamp of internal politics for the entire project because you 
didn’t get this key stakeholder on board early enough. 
 It should be noted that if you’re going to add these types of items to your 
checklist—and you absolutely should!—you need to word them in a generic 
way. Instead of a checklist item like  “Make sure that Melanie blesses the design 

Chapter 9 | Steering Your Project with Flexible Checklists
112
before you exit Planning,” use something like  “Review the design in the weekly 
Architecture Forum” in the Planning checklist. If you call me out by name in your 
checklist, then you’re implicitly giving me more power over your project’s des-
tiny than I probably should have. It’s always better to have a generic checklist 
that you can share freely with your project team, your peers, and management. 
 Last, as you gain experience, you can add checklist  items  that are specific to your 
leadership style or that represent key learnings from past projects. For example, 
if you really got burned by a supplier that couldn’t deliver to their commits, then 
perhaps you add a specific process around supplier selection to your Planning 
checklist. If you figure out a faster, more efficient way to ship material between 
sites, then you can augment your Execution checklist with that process as well. 
As you gain experience, you will learn new techniques and approaches that get 
the job done more efficiently or more effectively. By incorporating those learn-
ings into your checklists, you continually improve your effectiveness. 
 The idea here is that the checklists you use should evolve over time to help 
you become more efficient and effective. By using these new and improved 
checklists, you don’t have to stop and think each time:  “So how did we keep 
Melanie from endlessly nitpicking our design last time?” You already know what the 
best practice is and when to execute it, because it’s right there with a checkbox 
in front of it. One thing to note, however, is that you don’t want to remove any 
of the core checklist items we’ve covered previously in Chapters   2 –  6 . Keep 
in mind that these are the   absolute minimum processes  and artifacts you need 
to execute in order to lead a successful project. Augment the checklists as you 
refine your craft but don’t lose sight of the core practices that are required to 
lead a successful project. It will be tempting to cut corners and ditch some of 
them as you gain some confidence, so when you do it—and you know that you 
will!—pay attention to what happens. My money’s on the core checklist items. 
If you cut out the stakeholder management process once, I’ll bet that you don’t 
do it a second time because the results are so painful to deal with. So add to 
the checklist but don’t cut any of the core items we’ve walked through.  
 Managing Multiple Projects with Checklists 
 Checklists really prove their value when you find yourself  managing multiple 
projects  simultaneously. When you find yourself in this situation, it can be dif-
ficult to keep track of where each project is in the lifecycle and which of the 
processes and artifacts you’ve executed for them. Here’s where checklists will 
save your bacon. When you find yourself leading multiple projects, create a set 
of checklists for each and keep them in an accessible place. There will be meet-
ings where you need to provide an off-the-cuff update, and by referring to your 
current checklist, you can easily skim it and give a respectable update. If you’ve 
got more than two projects to manage, or if your projects have similar work 
packages, then you need to go a step further to help keep them straight. Here’s 

Project Management Basics
113
where I employ color-coding. I assign a specific color to each project then I add 
a small color-coded graphic to the header of each checklist. You can get fancy 
with that graphic, but honestly I just use a circle with the specific color fill. In 
this way, you can quickly see which project you’re working on at that point. You 
can extend this color-coding to your calendar and note-taking to help center 
your brain on whichever project you’re working on at any given time. 
 I’ve found that when I manage multiple, similar projects simultaneously, these 
checklists are the only way I can keep up and ensure that I don’t drop any balls. 
In extreme cases, I’ve also created a quick chart in a spreadsheet with a stop-
light (red, yellow, green) color-coding scheme to track each checklist item for 
each project. It’s the only way I can keep all of that similar work straight, since 
it’s so easy to mistake work done on one project for that done on another. So 
if you find yourself with several projects to manage, then do yourself a huge 
favor and create those color-coded checklists. Trust me, it will help immensely. 
 Utilizing checklists takes a lot of the ambiguity out of the work, since it’s clear 
what you need to focus on next. There’s plenty of basic project management 
instruction to be had out there, but that in itself is part of the problem. How 
do you know what to do next when you’re bombarded with information? 
These checklists are there to help you navigate your way through any project, 
and the core items on them represent the essential best practices. You should 
be augmenting these core items with processes and artifacts your organization 
requires, and those that they don’t require but you still need to do, and with 
those tips and tricks you learn as you grow your own project management 
capability. Further, these checklists are indispensable when managing multiple 
projects at once, especially if the work contents are similar. Print them out and 
hang them on your office wall. Share them with your PM colleagues. Following 
these checklists is the best way to ensure that you’ve covered all the bases 
and done due diligence in the management of your project.   

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_10
 C H A P T E R 
  Hitting the Open 
Road 
 We’ve gone through the mechanics of project management all the way from 
the flick of your key stakeholders’ wrist, starting the project engine to Initiate 
the project, down through the valley of Planning and over the hills of Executing, 
drifting sideways through the Release and ending with a slick, skidding, park-
ing-brake stop at Closing. Whew, what a rush! Okay, what that really means is 
that you’ve read through this book and are ready to tackle that next project, 
so again, where do you start? Once you’re on that journey to focus on the 
mechanics of project  management  , how do you start immediately injecting 
some of the learning now without waiting until you kick off another project? 
Are there any road hazards you need to be watching out for? Further, let’s 
inject a little reality here and talk about what you do when your project is 
a failure, shall we? Last, what’s over that next rise, or in other words, where 
should you take your PM practice once you master the mechanics? Hold on, 
folks, those are the topics we’ll be covering next. 
 Putting It in Drive, a.k.a. What to Do Next 
 Now that you know what good project management mechanics looks like, 
where do you start? The obvious and easiest answer is with your next proj-
ect. Start that next project with Checklist #1— Initiating Phase  in hand and 
meticulously check off each item. You will start by figuring out just what it is 
10

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
116
that your new project is supposed to achieve, any existing constraints, and 
who the major players are. Now, you honestly didn’t need me to tell you that, 
did you? No, what you really want are some ideas and advice for integrating 
this focus on the mechanics into your in-flight projects. 
 There are a few of these practices and artifacts that you can integrate into 
your current project and realize some benefits right away, so let’s talk about 
those now. Focused stakeholder management is a great place to start no 
matter where you are in the project lifecycle, and it’s relatively easy to get 
started. Begin by building that  stakeholder management tool  we talked about 
in Chapter   2 . Basically, you want to sit down and think about who the  key 
stakeholders  are, what they care about, and how they prefer to communicate. 
You probably already have a good feel for this if your project is already well 
into the Execution Phase. However, I’d bet my lunch money that you haven’t 
really focused on actively managing those relationships yet, so now’s as good 
a time as any to get started. Carve out an hour without distractions and go 
build that spreadsheet. Take it a step further and coordinate some regular 
meetings with those key stakeholders for the duration of the project. Simply 
by setting up regular synch-up sessions, you will go a long way to improving 
communication with those stakeholders; you’ll start getting your arms around 
what their perception of the project work is and have opportunities to get in 
front of their concerns before they become show-stoppers. Remember that 
not all of these synch-ups will be formally scheduled with the other person, 
so don’t forget to put placeholders on your calendar to remind you to meet 
up with your stakeholders informally. Oh, and since you were smart and cal-
endared these sessions out through the life of the project, you won’t forget 
about them and find yourself at the Go/No Go meeting with no idea how the 
decision will go. 
 Another bit of mechanics you can insert midstream is  change control  . In 
Chapter   2 we discussed what you need to do to set up your team for a 
Change Control Board, but that doesn’t mean that you can’t institute one 
anytime during Execution. If you find that the scope of work for the project 
morphs around like a psychedelic kaleidoscope, then putting some discipline 
in place to communicate and control changes is a very good idea. If you’re 
attempting to add a new process to an already chaotic project environment, 
you want to lead with the value proposition. Go with something like this: 
“ Folks, since the scope of work seems to be pretty dynamic right now, I’d like us to 
start tracking these changes more formally so that everyone knows what’s changing 
and what the plan of record is at any given time.” 

Project Management Basics
117
 Here the value to the team is improved  communication  about what they should 
be working on right now, but the value-add to the project manager is a pro-
cess for assessing these changes and comprehending their impact to customer 
commitments. By formalizing this process, you can start to control the rate of 
change and you will definitely improve communication across the team and pos-
sibly the program your project supports. The key to winning your team over to 
a more formal process is to make it easy to follow, so don’t make the change 
request form too complicated and steer the focus of any discussion of the 
change away from the process and toward understanding the potential impact. 
 Unless you’re going into a major replan and are going to recommit the  proj-
ect deliverables  , it doesn’t make sense to do a major overhaul of your project 
schedule. If you’ve already got a mess on your hands, that is, the schedule doesn’t 
model reality enough to be predictive of the actual project work, then your best 
bet is to do some triage and muddle through as you have been doing. You and 
your team should attempt to identify missing work packages, but the problem 
becomes what to do about them. In many organizations, there’s little appetite 
for pushing out the project release date, so you have to cut the scope of work 
or get additional resources. Realize that if the gap between reality and what 
you’ve already committed is significant, then you have a professional responsibil-
ity to notify your stakeholders. It won’t be fun but you still have to do your job. 
If you do find yourself in a replan situation, then build the WBS and the Network 
Diagram. It may be necessary to start fresh and build a new schedule from the 
Network Diagram altogether if your current one is beyond saving.  
 There Will Be Bumps in the Road 
 Okay, I’d be remiss if I didn’t talk about what you do when your project is 
a failure. It happens to the best of us and even if you’ve done your best to 
execute the mechanics properly, something could go horribly wrong. Often, 
what’s gone wrong could have been prevented by solid mechanics and execu-
tion, but remember, we’re still dealing with people who are the real wild cards 
in project management. When you deliver a Titanic of a project, you need to 
step back and reassess the effectiveness of your management of the project. 
This is a personal exercise and it requires you to look at the outcome and 
objectively understand what could have prevented the failure. To help you out, 
see Table  10-1 for some common root causes of  poor project execution  that 
can be directly linked back to the mechanics.  

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
118
 As you can see, a whole lotta  pain   and suffering can be avoided simply by 
mastering the mechanics of project management. This is exactly why you need 
to focus on these simple, foundational processes and practices. By honestly 
evaluating what went wrong on a failing project, you can pinpoint areas to focus 
on next time. Once you understand that your projects are missing commits 
because the team isn’t doing a good-enough job identifying all of the work 
involved up front in Planning, you can start focusing on building the WBS. This 
one simple task can alleviate most of your sources of slipping project schedules. 
It really is that simple. As I’ve said multiple times throughout this book, it’s not 
the mechanics that are the hard part of project management, so sharpen your 
skills on them to allow you more time to focus on the truly challenging part; 
dealing with the people.  
 Table 10-1.  Common Root Causes of Project Failure Linked to Poor Execution of the 
Project Management Mechanics  
 Failure Characteristics 
 Breakdown in the PM Mechanics 
 Schedule slips due to significant amount of 
unplanned work 
 Incomplete or missing WBS 
 Incomplete or missing Network Diagram 
 No explicit buffers included in the schedule 
 Poor change control process 
 Significant amount of firefighting 
 Inadequate risk management (risk 
identification, response plans, tracking) 
 Final deliverable wasn’t what was expected 
 Poor stakeholder management 
 Inadequate requirements gathering 
 Insufficient change control 
 Surprise “No Go” decision 
 Insufficient stakeholder management 
 “No Go” decision due to a failure to meet 
compliance requirements (legal, regulatory, 
privacy, etc.) 
 Inadequate release readiness planning 
 Late realization that the team cannot deliver 
on time 
 Weak or insufficient schedule 
 Inadequate monitoring of project 
performance metrics 
 Insufficient change control 

Project Management Basics
119
 Watch Out for Those Hairpin Curves and 
Steep Inclines 
 Exiting the  Planning Phase  with a strong project plan isn’t a total guarantee that 
your project will be successful, but it’s a good start. The Real World isn’t that 
predictable and you will find yourself faced with dramatic changes in the scope of 
work or unexpected reductions in resources from time to time. Back in the dark 
days of the Dotcom Bust, I found myself having to deal with unexpectedly can-
celled project regularly; today I often find myself figuring out how to add some bit 
of capability to enable a radically new market or highly influential new customer. 
Sometimes the economy goes bust, or your customers come from somewhere 
else, or you figure out that the solution you found doesn’t fit the problem you 
need to solve right now. That’s reality, and project managers need to be able to 
adapt to these unexpected curves and deceleration of their projects. 
 The good news here is that if you’ve got well-developed project artifacts and 
the team is executing in a controlled manner, then adjusting to these chang-
ing road conditions is much easier. When your boss pulls you aside and says, 
 “Melanie, I need to know how quickly we can shut this project down and what it 
could save in projected spending . . . and I need it tomorrow,” you’ve already got 
the tools to pull together some options for ramping down the project work. 
You make a copy of your project schedule and do “what-if” modeling to iden-
tify options for your boss. You can look at your risk register and be able to 
articulate what risks the company can avoid (or not) by shutting this project 
down. If you’re tracking spending, then you can roll that information into the 
analysis as well. To be sure, this kind of analysis is no fun to do, but having the 
tools available to do it quickly and accurately does make it easier. Likewise, if 
your boss pulls you aside and asks what it would take to add a new feature to 
enable a new, adjacent market, you’ve got the tools to do that analysis as well. 
The key thing here is that this analysis is data-based and will provide your boss 
with the kind of factual information she needs to make some critical decisions, 
and really, those aren’t  th e kinds of decisions you want made without real data. 
 The ability to adapt quickly to dynamic environment is just one of the rea-
sons why it’s important to follow these basic processes and generate the 
project artifacts outlined by the checklists in this book. Today’s project teams 
need that adaptability to be able to quickly capitalize on the changes in their 
environment. Effective project management, having a strong foundation based 
on solid planning and processes, enables that adaptability by maximizing the 
amount of time your team can spend on the work that delivers actual value to 
the company and its customers.  

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
120
 Beyond the Mechanics 
 Once you feel like you’ve got a firm hand on the wheel with respect to these foun-
dational processes and artifacts, what should you focus on next? Well you could 
continue down the path of refining and building your tool kit for the mechanics 
of the job. However, I think you’ll get more effective at  managing projects  if you 
focus on building your soft skills next. So what exactly do I mean by “soft skills”? 
Let me break it down for you. Soft skills are things like communication and influ-
ence; they represent those intangible abilities that every leader needs to master 
to be effective and revolve around interpersonal communication. 
 Project managers need to get work done through other people, and to do that 
you need to be able to communicate the work that needs to be done, moti-
vate others to perform that work, and influence them to do it better, faster, 
and with fewer resources. Sure, you can simply use a dictatorial approach to 
working with others, and that coupled with positional power will get some 
work done, but it’s not sustainable. To lead team after team to successfully 
complete work, any leader needs to be able to connect with their teams 
to understand how to enable them. You can’t get that information by simply 
standing around yelling at them. 
 The problem with soft skills of course is that these terms are vague and how 
you improve any given skill is deeply personal. If I tell you that you need to go 
focus on improving your influence skills, do you know what to do? Nope! We 
need a little more here to get started on our journey, right? We need to drill 
down a bit to get to some actionable ideas for how to improve your soft skills. 
There are a handful of areas that are particularly useful for project managers, 
so here’s where we will focus: communication styles, empathy, difficult conver-
sations, and holding others accountable. 
 Understanding  Communication Styles  
 If you got feedback on your last performance review that you need to improve 
your communication skills, understanding the four communication styles 
should be your first stop. The idea here is that we all have a default communi-
cation style that we employ and even if we can move between the four styles 
comfortably we always return to that default style under stress. If you’ve come 
across this concept before, the names may sound slightly different to you but 
the idea is the same. Here are the four communication styles:
• 
 Amiable—relationship-driven communicator; values feel-
ings and inclusion above completing the task at hand; 
excellent team player and connector; open/approachable 
body language  

Project Management Basics
121
• 
 Analytical—data-driven communicator; values data over 
emotion; can appear cold and uninterested in personal 
connection; focused on the details  
• 
 Driver—achievement-oriented communicator; values 
progress and control over personal connection; does not 
like to be surprised; gets frustrated when others aren’t 
moving “fast enough”  
• 
 Expressive—animated communicator; values the “big pic-
ture” over the details; often uses big hand gestures; pro-
vides plenty of non-verbal  feedback  
 Based on these brief descriptions, can you tell which one you are? You may 
exhibit a combination of some of these styles, but you will definitely have one 
specific default. The point I want you to walk away with is that these communi-
cation styles are intrinsic to each of us and we can no more turn them off than 
we can change the length of our toes. What you can do is learn to recognize 
others’ communication styles and then morph your own to mirror theirs. 
 Let me give you an example of what I’m talking about. You may be able to tell by 
my writing that I fall into the Expressive communication camp, so I’m all about 
telling a good story, waving my hands while I do it, and glossing over those pesky 
details. Many years ago I had an Analytical communicator for a second-level 
manager and had to deliver a project status update every week. Week after 
week these updates did not go well, and I could tell that this person thought I 
was a bubblehead with no clue what was going on with my project. During this 
time, I was introduced to this concept of communication styles and the idea that 
you can change your own style to improve communication. Being extremely 
frustrated and having nothing left to lose, I decided to give this idea of manipu-
lating my own communication style a try. Imagine my surprise when it worked! 
 Here’s what happened. I sent the project status to him so that he could con-
sume the data before our meeting. During the meeting I forced myself to 
stick to the facts and I sat on my hands. I literally sat on my hands to keep 
from waving them around and to remind myself to stay focused on the data. 
The results were immediate and shocking. I could tell right away that we 
were actually having a productive discussion about the project and that I did 
not come across as a bubblehead. The second time I deliberately mirrored 
the Analytical’s communication style, I was told that he was glad to see that 
I’d “turned the project around.” As any PM will tell you, the project status 
doesn’t change that much from week to week, so the data I was sharing hadn’t 
changed but this person’s perception of the work had, all because I’d changed 
my communication style to better interact with him. 
 Over the years, I’ve seen this play out over and over again. This ability to 
morph your own communication style to improve communication is a game-
changer, and you will see your overall effectiveness at dealing with so-called 

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
122
“difficult” people dramatically improve. Now think about someone you have 
trouble getting along with. What is their default style? No, lying weasel does 
not count! The next time you have to interact with this person, try chang-
ing your style to match theirs and see how it goes. I’d bet my lunch money 
that you will be impressed by the results. To help you get started with this, 
Table  10-2 contains some suggestions for how you can adapt to the various 
communication styles:  
 This technique is so powerful that I always start anyone who would like me to 
mentor them off on it. They create a list of everyone who is involved with their 
project and then they identify each person’s communication style. We then 
brainstorm ways to improve communication with each person based on their 
style. Over time, as you focus on identifying other’s styles and then adjusting 
your own, you will find that this becomes second nature; that is, you just don’t 
have to think about it or sit on your hands. The other thing you will find is that 
the number of “difficult” people you have to deal with magically diminishes. Oh, 
they don’t go away, to be sure; you just get better at communicating with them.  
 Build Your Empathy 
 Now let’s switch gears and talk about  empathy  . The ability to empathize with 
others will help you tremendously as you work to improve your ability to 
influence and lead. The ability to understand another person’s position from 
their perspective is called empathy. This is not the same thing as sympathy, 
which is the ability to feel pity or sorrow for another’s situation. This is a 
subtle but important difference. This technique of putting yourself in someone 
else’s shoes to understand what’s going on behind the scenes helps you under-
stand how to motivate and influence them. If you are trying to figure out how 
 Table 10-2.  Ideas for How to Adjust Your Own Style to Improve Communication with 
Someone Else  
 Their Communication Style 
 How to Morph Your Own 
 Analytical 
 Send data ahead of time for them to review 
 Focus the communication on the data 
 Driver 
 Project a sense of urgency and a commitment to the task 
 Be direct and succinct in your word choices 
 Amiable 
 Start the conversation with some social chit-chat to 
build connection 
 Focus on the impact to others 
 Expressive 
 Focus the discussion on the “big picture” 
 Provide details and backup data offline 

Project Management Basics
123
to influence me to complete those assembly instructions on time, you need to 
figure out why I’m slacking. You can take the empathetic approach with some-
thing like this:  “Melanie, I get it that you have three other projects of higher priority 
than mine, but we still need to get those assembly instructions done. How can we 
do that?” Or you can go with the sympathetic approach this way:  “Melanie, I’m 
so, so sorry that you have so much work, but we still need to get those assembly 
instructions done. How can we do that?” Now if you’re me, which appeal is more 
likely to result in some realistic suggestions for how to get those assembly 
instructions done? The empathetic approach, right? 
 The trick to strengthening your ability to empathize with others is this: always 
assume that your coworkers have the best intentions and believe they are 
doing the right thing from their perspective. I honestly believe that none of 
my teammates come to work every day hatching evil plots to thwart me or 
derail my projects. Therefore, something else has to be behind that late bug or 
poor-quality deliverable, and this is where empathy comes in. 
 Let me give you a real-world example of what I’m talking about here. I lead 
a lot of product development projects, and every once in a while a team will 
find a major defect late in the test cycle or even during the release activities. 
Inevitably, when that happens, the question  “Why wasn’t this caught in valida-
tion?” comes up. It’s like a knee-jerk reaction by engineering managers. If you 
believe that those validation engineers are doing their best with the best 
intentions, then you can start to figure out the real root cause of that defect. 
It could be that there were missing or vague requirements, there could be 
valid engineering reasons why it wasn’t found, and of course it could be that 
someone dropped a ball somewhere. The point is that if you can put yourself 
in the shoes of that beleaguered validation engineer and try to see the situa-
tion from their point of view, then you will have deeper insight into what could 
have gone wrong. Further, by expressing that empathy you reinforce a collab-
orative team dynamic and help the team focus on solving the actual problem. 
All too often, those situations devolve into a witch-hunt for the “guilty” party, 
who presumable will be punished in some fashion, but all that really does is 
distract the team from solving the problem at hand, that critical defect.   
 Having  Difficult Conversations  
 Improving your ability to have difficult conversations with stakeholders is 
another way to get some major bang for your buck while working to improve 
your soft skills. Many people avoid having conversations that they know will 
turn into unpleasant confrontations and do it without even realizing it. No one 
believes that they actively avoid confrontation, but it’s human nature to avoid 
situations where we feel threatened. So how do you know if this is something 
you should work on? It’s not really a question of whether you should work 
on improving your ability to have these conversations, but rather of when you 
can squeeze in the time to learn how to do them properly. 

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
124
 Think back to your last failed project. Would the outcome have been different 
if you’d directly addressed the fact that the team could not pull in the schedule 
without sacrificing scope or increasing resources? Did you walk away from a 
difficult conversation saying something like  “we’ll just have to make it happen” ? 
Trust me, there’s not a PM on the planet who hasn’t had a similar experience, so 
now let’s discuss how to deal with these challenging conversations differently. 
 The first thing you need to understand about difficult conversations is that you 
don’t go into them cold. You have to do some prep work ahead of time. Well 
before the confrontation, find some time and a place where you can think to 
prepare. First, you need to understand what problem you are trying to address 
with this conversation. It helps to write this down, so type up, or scribble down, 
a succinct sentence that describes the problem you want to deal with. Next, 
figure out what points you need to make in this upcoming discussion. Again, the 
discipline of capturing your thoughts in succinct sentences really helps clarify 
your thinking. Then put yourself in the other person’s shoes and think about 
the problem from their point of view. Yeah, it’s that empathy thing again. If you 
believe that they are doing the “right” thing from their perspective, then what’s 
motivating that behavior? How is their perspective different from yours? What 
are the key points they care about with respect to this problem?   
 Now go review and refine your problem statement and the points you want 
to make based on your insights into the other person’s perspective. Last, dig 
up any supporting data you will need to define the problem and reinforce the 
points you want to make. Impartial data can often make the gravity of the issue 
to be addressed clear without resorting to blame or accusation. For instance, 
if you want to address the issue of my continually missing your weekly project 
team meetings, then simply stating that I’ve missed eight of the last ten meet-
ings is pretty self-explanatory, so there’s no need to open with the accusatory 
 “Melanie, you keep missing my project meetings!” 
 How you conduct that difficult discussion is as important as the preparation 
work. If you are initiating the conversation, then the first thing you need to 
do is establish a sense of safety for the other person. Do this by choosing a 
neutral place to hold the discussion and by projecting a calm demeanor and 
explaining that the purpose of the meeting is to resolve the problem. You 
need to maintain your professionalism; do not detour into accusation. Most 
of the time, if you approach this conversation calmly from a problem-solving 
position, the other person will respond in a similar manner. If you’ve set up a 
meeting to discuss the problem, then understand that who you invite to the 
meeting can greatly influence how the other person reacts. If you’ve invited 
my boss to this meeting to discuss why I’m not attending your weekly team 
meetings, then you should understand that that fact alone will automatically 
put me on the defensive, and I definitely won’t feel safe discussing the problem. 
You’d be much better off to attempt this discussion with me alone first. 

Project Management Basics
125
 If during this discussion I become this angry defensive hot mess, it’s important 
for you to remain professional. Don’t let the other person’s drama suck you into 
behaving badly, as that only escalates the drama and blocks any kind of progress 
toward resolving the problem. Finally, wrap up the discussion by restating any 
agreements, or failures to agree, so that the other person is clear where the 
resolution stands. If you feel that this problem has not been resolved, then also 
be very clear about your next steps. It’s completely okay to say something like 
this:  “Okay, Melanie, clearly we can’t agree on the importance of your attendance in 
the weekly project meetings. I still believe that it is important for you to be there due 
to the critical role you play on  the project. Therefore, I want you to understand that 
my next step will be to discuss this issue with your manager.” Don’t throw that  “I’m 
gonna go talk to your manager” card out there as a threat; instead, treat it as a 
professional courtesy to let them know what your next steps will be. 
 Okay, now what do you do about those difficult conversations you get sucked 
into? First, if you think there’s a possibility of a meeting veering off into a difficult 
discussion, do the prep work we discussed ahead of time. In all honestly, there 
are should be very few surprise difficult conversations if you’re actively managing 
your stakeholder’s expectations. If you do get blindsided by such a conversation, 
remember to remain calm and use your professional voice. Stay away from accu-
sation and pay attention to your own emotional reaction. If the other person 
is deep into the drama of the situation, try to re-establish a sense of safety or 
empathy. Try to understand what is really driving their anger and or frustration.   
 This is the time to do more listening than talking, so be sure that when you 
do talk your statements are factual and delivered with neutral emotion. In the 
example of my inability to attend your meetings, if you were to angrily confront 
the issue with me, I should respond with something like  “I completely under-
stand your frustration with my lack of attendance. What I’d like you to understand 
is that I haven’t been attending your meetings because they conflict with those of 
another, higher priority project.” This statement delivered in a calm, neutral tone 
can de-escalate the conversation while acknowledging the legitimacy of your 
frustration. The key to success in these situations is to remain in control of 
your own emotions and to not get sucked into the other person’s drama. This, 
however, is very difficult to do, especially when the other person is locked into 
their own emotional response. If the conversation gets to the point where it’s 
not productive or it becomes abusive, then it’s time to disengage. 
 There are plenty of suggestions for how to disengage, but over the years 
I’ve found that the best way to do this is to calmly restate my position, 
acknowledge that we are at a stalemate, advise the other parties that I need 
to leave the conversation, and then physically disengage from the conversa-
tion. All too often people continue to justify their position when they’ve 
reached a stalemate, but this only serves to convince the other party that 
if they can just find a hole in your logic, then you will agree. At some point 
neither party can agree or come to a collaborative solution; that’s when it’s 
best to simply state your position and disengage.   

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
126
 Holding Others Accountable 
 The ability to effectively hold others  accountable  to the commitments they 
make is a tricky one to master. Most people think they are pretty good at 
this, but the reality is that we aren’t. You see, holding someone accountable 
requires us to have those difficult conversations when our colleague fails to 
meet their commitments, and this is definitely one area where there’s a ten-
dency to avoid that confrontation altogether. However, to be effective as a 
project manager you definitely need to master this soft skill. 
 The first thing you need to understand is the two factors at play here: abil-
ity and motivation. To be able to effectively hold someone accountable, you 
must first establish ability. You will get nowhere fast if you’re trying to hold 
me accountable to complete a task I have no clue how to execute. Similarly, 
if I think I know how to do the job but I don’t understand the work involved, 
then again, holding me to a completion date is fruitless. Therefore, the first 
thing you need to do when you identify a teammate who is falling behind on a 
deliverable is to establish that they have the ability to complete the task. This 
sounds simplistic, but trust me, there’s a lot more going on under the hood. 
 A good bit of the time, when I’m trying to figure out why someone is late with 
a deliverable, the root cause is related to ability. Either they are waiting on a 
deliverable themselves, they don’t really know how to execute the work and 
don’t feel comfortable admitting it, they are executing the work in an overly 
complicated way, they don’t have the tools or training they need to do the 
work, or they haven’t managed their time such that they can get the work 
done on time. Trying to get someone to meet a commitment when they don’t 
have the ability to do so is the equivalent of beating your head against the wall; 
all you end up with is a headache. You must establish that the other person has 
the ability to do the work before you can hold them accountable. 
 The second factor you need to address is the other person’s motivation, and 
this is where it gets hard. When we talk about holding someone accountable, 
what we are really talking about is influencing them to complete a task. To 
influence this person, you need to understand their motivation and then go 
attempt to increase their willingness to complete the work. Remember, you 
want this person to actually complete the task, so you have to deal with their 
motivation to complete it. If you haven’t done so already, then you need to 
have an actual conversation with this person and try to understand what’s 
really going on. Are they distracted by other assignments? Do they feel valued 
and listened to? Do they really comprehend why this work is important not 
just to themselves but to the organization? Are they dealing with tough per-
sonal issues? Once you understand what’s motivating their current behavior, 
then you can take steps to influence a change. You can empathize with their 
situation, revamp the task, provide context to help them understand why this 
work is important, help them see the consequences of their actions (loss of 

Project Management Basics
127
trust, increased work for teammates, etc.), and you can explain the conse-
quences of failing to meet the commitment, all with the goal of increasing their 
motivation to complete the task.   
 Once you’ve established ability and done what you could to affect motivation, 
it’s time to get down to the business of holding them accountable. Right out of 
the gate, you need to confirm that both of you have the same understanding of 
what was committed. Often, there’s a fundamental communication breakdown 
here and you are not on the same page as to what was committed. At this point, 
you may need to accept a new commitment to get the work done. Whenever 
you are discussing an important commitment with a colleague, establish a fol-
low-up session with clear expectations. By formalizing the follow-up, you are 
emphasizing the importance of the deliverable and signaling to the other per-
son that you are paying attention to their work. If the other person doesn’t 
meet this revised commitment, then it’s time for that difficult conversation. 
 You should be very clear about the consequences of this missed commitment, 
and these things are not necessarily tangible. While I may be very aware of the 
impact to the project if I fail to deliver, what I’m probably missing is the impact 
to my professional reputation. A good PM will make sure that I understand 
those implications well before I miss the commit, and they will work with me 
to either recommit or provide some additional resources, if the work turns 
out to be more difficult that expected.   
 When you are trying to hold others accountable, it’s imperative that you not 
lose sight of the real goal, which is to complete the work. Accountability should 
not be synonymous with punishment, nor should it be done after the com-
mitment is missed. This needs to be an ongoing process; an integral part of 
monitoring the progress of the project work. What you’re striving for is a team 
dynamic where issues are raised early and commitments aren’t missed because 
they are adjusted in real time as needed. You can’t get your team to that state 
if you’re constantly using accountability as a club to beat them into submission. 
 Let me be clear here: I’m not advocating that you ignore a poor performer nor 
am I suggesting that there’s really no negative consequence to missed commit-
ments. What I am saying is that you should be overseeing the work in such a 
way that everyone on the team feels accountable to complete their work, and 
that means that you need to step in and help your teammates figure out what’s 
blocking their progress from time to time. If you find yourself having to deliver 
negative consequences for a missed commit, then you should understand that 
at some level you failed to influence this person to complete their work on 
time. Perhaps this slacker really is a lyin’ weasel and you did all that you could 
to turn the situation around before having to drop the hammer down on them. 
That’s okay, because sometimes that’s your reality; just be sure to take some 
time to think about what you could have done differently and understand what 
you would do differently next time. See, I told you this was tricky stuff! 

Chapter 10 | Hitting the Open Road
128
 In this chapter, I’ve tried to give you some ideas for where to take your project 
management practice next. I firmly believe that by taking the time to master 
those foundational processes and artifacts of the job will dramatically improve 
your effectiveness as a PM. Once you’re comfortable with the mechanics of 
the job, it’s time to start improving your soft skills. If you’d like to learn more 
or need some ideas on where to go next, please see Appendix D for a list of 
additional resources for improving your soft skills.   

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_11
 C H A P T E R 
 The End of the 
Road 
 We come now to the end of this particular road, and I truly hope that you’re 
able to see the light at the end of the project management tunnel now. When 
you’re new to this game it’s easy to be overwhelmed with the amount of infor-
mation out there and it’s hard to figure out where to start. Throughout this book 
I’ve preached a basic concept:  the quickest way to improve your project manage-
ment efficiency is to focus on the mechanics of  project management . Mastering these 
foundational processes will absolutely improve your skills and your confidence, 
resulting in increased effectiveness as a project manager. This does take some 
focused effort on your part but the return on your time is immediately realized. 
People are often confused about what it is that makes project management 
so hard. It’s not the actual work of planning a project, for instance; it’s the soft 
skills needed to get all of your stakeholders on the same page that’s hard. Once 
you’ve figured out these foundational processes and how to do them, you’ll have 
more time to devote to leading your team and managing your stakeholders. 
 To start our tutorial on the mechanics of project management, we broke down 
the  project lifecycle  by phase and identified the specific mechanics that apply. 
In Chapter   2 , we talked about how to figure out what you’re supposed to 
deliver, with or without a charter, and we started building the tools to manage 
your stakeholder’s expectations. Then we moved on to the meat of the work 
in Chapter   3 , where we discussed all of the processes and artifacts that make 
up the project plan. Here we delved into the systematic process for develop-
ing a schedule to ensure that all of the project work is captured and that the 
overall timeline is realistic, balancing the elements of the Triple Constraint. 
11

Chapter 11 | The End of the Road
130
Next, we moved on to executing the project in Chapter   4 , and here we dis-
cussed how to monitor the progression of work and to take actions to get the 
work back on track as needed. In Chapter   5 , we talked about that special sub-
set of the Execution work, the release process. To wrap things up, we covered 
closing the project in Chapter   6 ; it should be noted that the Closing processes 
are pretty simple to execute, so don’t forget about them. 
 Moving on, beyond the mechanics of project management, we ventured into real-
ity. Because you don’t work in a perfect world where every PM is lauded and the 
management chain showers your project with resources, you need some help 
figuring out how to integrate these basic processes into your actual work. In 
Chapter   7  , I provided some ideas for how to adjust if you’re leading projects in an 
organization that perhaps doesn’t value project management as much as it should. 
Here we talked about how to streamline the mechanics even more and how 
to inject some formal accountability into the release process. In Chapter   8  , we 
flipped the coin and talked about some more advanced, yet still simple, techniques 
you can bring to bear when you find yourself working in a sophisticated project 
management shop. These ideas will help you stand out when you find yourself 
swimming with the PM sharks to set yourself apart from your peers. Chapter   9  
provided a quick tutorial on how to use the checklists you find here and how to 
evolve them as your practice matures. Finally, in Chapter   10 , we wrapped it up 
with a discussion of what the heck you actually do next. Here we covered some 
ideas for integrating the mechanics right into your in-flight projects, and we con-
nected some of the common project failure modes with specific processes so that 
you can focus your continuous improvement energy where it’s needed most. We 
also dipped a toe into the roiling waters of mastering soft skills, with some sugges-
tions for where to take your improvement efforts next. 
 Beyond improving your  effectiveness   by mastering the mechanics of the job, 
there’s a side benefit that you shouldn’t overlook. If you’ve got the mechanics 
down cold, you will find these skills are your secret weapon when it comes to 
building credibility. By mastering the processes necessary to plan a project and 
integrating the monitoring and control mindset, every project you lead will 
execute more predictably. When you commit to deliver that new web portal by 
the end of July, guess what? The chances of that happening on time dramatically 
improve as your project management competency improves, and this is  inde-
pendent of the environment the project team has to live in. Each time you meet 
a project release commit, your credibility improves, because while executing 
successfully is important, I’d argue that executing predictably is much more 
important. Believe it or not, your management chain  does  know that not every 
project is going to be a home run, so what they really value is the predictabil-
ity of the project execution. Most of the time, your project is part of a bigger 
initiative, and delivering when you say you will allows others to better plan and 
execute their own work. To be clear, it’s very important to deliver successful 
projects, but you don’t want to lose sight of the bigger picture either, and you 
need to understand that delivering predictably is what matters the most.   

Project Management Basics
131
 Along with greatly improving the predictability of your project releases, mastery 
of the PM mechanics  also  helps you look like a rock star when it’s time to change 
jobs. Project management is a highly transferable skill set that spans all major 
industries and whose mechanics are industry/disciple independent. This means 
that when you’re ready to branch out into a new field or just a new organization, 
having these project management mechanics in your back pocket can make all 
the difference. Personally, I’ve successfully changed fields and engineering disci-
plines, and I’ve switched from highly technical organizations to more operation-
ally focused teams mostly because I’m good at the mechanics of the job. What 
I’ve found is that since I already know the steps and processes necessary to 
properly plan for a project, I can focus my energies on building relationships with 
key stakeholders, developing a collaborative team dynamic, and spinning up on 
this new area. There’s no way I could have made even one of those job jumps if I 
hadn’t first mastered the mechanics of managing projects; the learning curve of a 
new organization would have been too much to overcome if I was still struggling 
with how to build a comprehensive project schedule. 
 Altogether, this body of work should set any new project manager off on the 
right foot, and it will help junior project managers improve their effectiveness 
with straightforward instructions and advice to fill in any gaps they may have 
in their project management knowledge. Good luck out there!  

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_12
 C H A P T E R 
 Appendix A: 
Project 
Management 
Checklists 
 
•Checklist #1
Initiating
•Checklist #2
Planning
•Checklist #3
Execution
•Checklist #4
Release
•Checklist #5
Closing
 
12

Chapter 12 | Appendix A: Project Management Checklists 
134
 Checklist #1—Initiating Phase 
 The  Initiating Phase  of the project is where it all starts. Key information is 
gathered, scoping is performed, and the project kick-off meeting is conducted. 
Complete these major tasks and you are ready to enter the project’s Planning 
Phase. These items are arranged in chronological order, but note that you may 
end up completing them in any order; the important thing is to do them all 
before proceeding to the next phase of the project. 
 Checklist #1—The Initiating Phase 
   Capture the objective of the project in 1 complete, succinct sentence 
   High-level project schedule milestones identified 
   High-level scope of work identified 
   High-level project resources (budget and people) identified 
   1st draft of the stakeholder management tool developed 
   Complete the project charter (if needed) 
   Hold the project kick-off  meeting  
 Checklist #2—Planning 
 The  Planning Phase   of the project is where the work really happens when it 
comes to project mechanics. The team develops the requirements and iden-
tifies work that must be completed as part of the project work. This infor-
mation is then used to develop the risk management plans and the release 
readiness criteria, and then all of these components are folded into a project 
schedule. While all of this work is going on the communication plans are 
developed and stakeholder expectations are actively being managed. These 
items are arranged in chronological order, but you may end up completing 
them in any order; the important thing is to do them all before proceeding to 
the next phase of the project. 

Project Management Basics
135
 Checklist #2—The Planning Phase 
   Regular team meetings have been scheduled for the expected duration of the project 
   The communication plan has been completed 
   Project lifecycle model has been identified 
   Project requirements are frozen and formal change control is now in effect 
   Change Control Board has been established 
   The Release Readiness Checklist has been developed 
   The risk register has been developed and the top risks have active risk management 
plans identified 
   All stakeholders agree to the project timeline milestones 
   Schedule has been baselined 
   The committed project schedule has been communicated to the  organization  
 Checklist #3—Execution Phase 
 The  Execution Phase of the  project is where all of that planning you did in 
Chapter   3 gets applied. In this phase, project managers create artifacts in the 
service of performing the project work; these artifacts include change requests, 
meeting minutes, and project status updates. Here you also maintain the schedule 
and risk register by regularly updating them as the work evolves. Checklist 3 is a 
bit different from the previous two you’ve used because these items are recur-
ring, meaning that you will do these tasks multiple times throughout this phase. 
The important thing to keep in mind is that you should be doing all of these tasks; 
they represent the minimum tasks you need to perform during Execution. 
 Checklist #3—The Execution Phase 
   Standing team meetings are effective and held regularly with a stated agenda 
   Changes to the POR are managed effectively through the project and program-level 
CCBs 
   The project schedule is updated regularly, incorporating unplanned work as needed 
   Project execution metrics have been established, are monitored regularly, and drive 
corrective actions as needed 
   Project risks are reviewed regularly, with new risks identified and action plans updated 
as needed 
   Project status updates are provided to key stakeholders at a regular cadence 
   Problems impeding the team’s ability to execute the project plan are efficiently 
 escalated   

Chapter 12 | Appendix A: Project Management Checklists 
136
 Checklist #4—Releasing the Project 
Deliverables 
 The release work in  the  Execution Phase is a special subset of the work you 
do to execute the project. Here you leveraged the work done in the Planning 
Phase to evaluate whether or not the team is ready to release the project 
deliverable. You pave the way with your major stakeholders to ensure that the 
release approval is “in the bag” as long as the release activities go well. You 
enable your team to complete the release activities by establishing and main-
taining a low-drama environment. Finally, you successfully navigate the release 
approval process. The following checklist identifies the major tasks you need 
to complete as you lead your team to release the project deliverables. The 
important thing to keep in mind is that you should be doing all of these tasks; 
they represent the minimum tasks you need to perform during the release 
process. 
 Checklist #4—Releasing the Project Deliverables 
   Ensure all items on the Release Readiness Checklist have been completed 
   For Release Readiness Checklist items that cannot be completed prior to the release, 
obtain the necessary waivers and stakeholder approval, prior to the release 
   Complete the release plan (all work identified and organized into a logical flow, event 
scheduled, communication plan ready) 
   Confirm release approval/“Go/No Go” decision criteria with key stakeholders 
   Complete release activity  
   Obtain formal release approval  
   Provide formal notification of release status to key stakeholders 

Project Management Basics
137
 Checklist #5—Closing the Project 
 Here are the major tasks you need to complete as you and your team wrap 
up the project during the  Closing Phase  . Many of these items will be done 
simultaneously. Again, the important thing to keep in mind is that you should 
be doing all of these tasks; they represent the minimum tasks you need to 
perform during the release process. 
 Checklist #5—Closing the Project 
   Facilitate the project retrospective 
   Clean house 
  
 Appropriately disposition all project material (HW & SW) 
  
 Post all collateral to their permanent locations 
  
 Archive important project artifacts 
   Publish project summary 
   Obtain key stakeholder agreement that the project work is complete 
   Hold a celebration for the team (if warranted) 
   Recognize individual team members for their contributions (if warranted) 
   Release resources from the project to be available for other work 

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_13
 C H A P T E R 
 Appendix B: 
Estimation 
Considerations 
 During the Planning Phase as part of the work to build the Network Diagram, 
you and your team need to estimate just how long each task in the WBS 
will take to perform. This is a quagmire of drama and frustration for the 
unprepared project manager, so I thought I’d share some ideas and simple 
techniques to help you chart the quickest route through the swamp that is 
estimation. 
 A Few Things to Consider Before You Start 
 The first thing to understand is that there are a wide range of techniques you 
could use, so you should pick the estimation technique that best fits your 
particular project. Some organizations will require you to use a specific esti-
mation method; if that’s your situation, then the good news is that training on 
how to use that technique is likely readily available. However, if you’ve got to 
figure out how to do it on your own, your first step is to  figure out  which one 
to use. A simple web search will return a huge number of hits on this topic, 
and that’s just overwhelming. The good news is that you can start with the 
13

Chapter 13 | Appendix B: Estimation Considerations
140
simple techniques and gradually work up to the more advanced methods—
lookin’ at you, Modified Wideband Delphi!—as you gain experience and a 
desire to do more in-depth estimation. 
 
HELPFUL TIP WHEN SEARCHING FOR PM BEST 
PRACTICES
 When  searching for project management resources on the Web, my recommendation is 
to start with any links associated with the Project Management Institute (PMI) as these 
are peer-reviewed postings and publications representing what are considered to be the 
best practices in project management. 
 If the first thing to understand is to not get freaked out by all of the literature 
about estimation processes and techniques, then the second is to understand 
what type of output you need from the estimation. Here you should think 
about what order of magnitude your work estimates need to be. For instance, 
if I’m planning a wedding, then some of the work only needs to be estimated 
in days; however, for the actual ceremony, I may need to estimate tasks in 
minutes. It may take 10 days to secure a caterer but only 3 minutes for the 
bridesmaids to walk down the aisle. See the difference? 
 The other  consideration  here is how members of your team will be tracking 
their own work. The tasks in the WBS need to be small enough that each 
task owner can wrap their head around how much work remains at any given 
point in the execution of a particular task. When I ask the mechanical engi-
neer in our weekly team meeting how long he’s got left on the chassis design, 
I need him to be able to tell me that he’s got 4 more days of work. If that 
particular task is estimated at 6 weeks and I’m asking the question in week 2, 
then it’s very difficult for him to answer that question. The point here is that 
your WBS tasks need to be broken down into meaningful work packages that 
can be estimated and updated throughout the project execution. The unit of 
measure your team will provide their estimates in needs to align with how the 
work will be planned and updated. 
 The last  consideration  when determining what unit of measure to use for 
your project estimates is what will be done with the data, a.k.a. the actual 
work applied to the project. In some organizations, this data is collected and 
used for billing or budgeting, while in others only the duration of the project 
is of importance. Whichever type of organization you work in, it’s important 
to understand the unit of measure for the work estimates. In the absence of 
any specific requirement, a good rule of thumb is to estimate work in days and 
limit the minimum estimate to 1 full day and the maximum of 1 to 2 weeks. 

Project Management Basics
141
 Okay, we have one more thing to cover before we move into some specific 
estimation techniques: the difference between  effort- and  duration- driven tasks. 
Effort-driven tasks are defined by how much, well,  effort they take to complete. 
A good example of this is my lawn care service. If I do the yard work myself 
it takes me 2 to 3 hours to cut the grass, prune the shrubbery, deal with the 
weeds, sweep the walk, etc. If my lawn care service does it they get the same 
work done in less than an hour, but they use several guys to do it. The actual 
amount of work is the same in both cases, but the lawn care service gets it 
done faster because they deploy more resources. My yard work task is an 
example of an effort-driven task. A duration-driven task is something like bak-
ing a cake. Once you put the cake batter into the oven, it takes a set amount of 
time to bake. Adding another baker into the mix to eagerly stand beside you 
and peer through that tiny oven window does not make the cake bake faster. 
It takes as long as it takes to get to that delicious baked goodness because this 
is a duration-driven task. See the difference? While you really care about these 
different types of tasks when you’re building the actual schedule, it’s helpful to 
understand the differences when estimating the work as well.  
 Two Easy  Estimation  Techniques 
 Okay, now we get to the good stuff, actual estimation. There are two tech-
niques that are easy to use and will yield respectable results: basic and  Project 
Estimation Review Tool (PERT)  . When you simply ask your teammates to 
determine how long it will take to perform each task in the WBS, you are 
performing basic estimation. On the surface, this basic approach appears to 
be the easiest  and  most straightforward but it’s actually pretty challenging 
for your team to do. Each team member must make a subjective assessment 
of how long it will take to complete the tasks, but how they adjust their 
estimates for the project environment and any uncertainty associated with a 
particular task is left open to interpretation. 
 If the team doing the estimation is experienced and familiar with the type of 
work, then basic estimation can be a reasonable reflection of how long it will 
take to complete the work, but you still need to level set the team on how 
buffers will be incorporated into the finished schedule. For instance, if your 
team estimates that it will take 6 days to complete the schematic changes, 
does that include any padding for the time it might take to reroute some 
of the existing design? Or do you need to add a buffer to your schedule to 
account for this potential delay? It should be noted that this basic estimation 
process yields a decent ballpark estimate, but if your organization is tracking 
actual effort expended on the project, then this basic estimate is not going 
to be accurate enough. This basic approach can be the fastest, most efficient 
way to get to work estimates for an experienced team; just be careful with 
this one. 

Chapter 13 | Appendix B: Estimation Considerations
142
 A better option, especially for less experienced teams, is the PERT method, 
which factors in the reality of the project environment while still leveraging 
the experience of the team. Think of PERT as a weighted average where you 
are balancing the team’s best estimate with reality. The PERT formula is 
 PERT Estimate
B
M
W
=
+
+
(
)
4
6
/
 
 where  B is the best-case scenario work estimate ,  M is the most likely scenario work 
estimate , and  W is the worst-case scenario work estimate . Here you are weighting 
the most likely scenario by a factor of 4 but balancing it out with the corner 
cases. Make sense? To perform this estimation, you create a spreadsheet list-
ing all of the  WBS tasks and ask the team to estimate the best case, the most 
likely case, and the worst case. Then, using the simple formula above, you 
calculate the PERT Estimate. I find that experienced team members prefer 
to use the PERT methodology and the consideration of the three scenarios 
makes estimation easier for the less experienced members of the team. PERT 
is a good “all-round” estimation tool, and it’s definitely one you should master. 
If in doubt, go with a PERT estimation method. Also, since the PERT method 
does account for the worst-case scenario, you will not need as much explicit 
buffer in the schedule.  
 A Couple of Pitfalls 
 I’d be remiss if I didn’t clue you into a couple of big  pitfalls  when it comes to 
 estimation  . First, your best approach is always to have the person doing the 
actual work estimate it. Often, during scoping or even during the estimation 
process, an experienced subject matter expert ( SME ) will figure out the work 
estimates, and that’s a big problem. You see, the SME will inherently estimate 
how long she thinks it will take  herself to complete the work with her years 
of experience and familiarity with the best tools to do the work. If you have 
a less experienced team member actually performing the work, then it’s just 
naturally going to take longer. Always strive to have the person who will per-
form the work estimate how long that work will take them to complete. 
 Further, when the team is discussing the work estimates, it’s not uncommon 
for the experienced SME to disagree with the junior team member’s esti-
mates, again because her perception of how much effort the task will take is 
biased by her own experience. As the PM, you need to be able to referee that 
discussion so that the junior member feels like she has enough time to com-
plete the task and so that the SME understands her teammate’s capabilities. 
 The second pitfall to be aware of is this: the members of the  team  will focus 
on how long they’ve been given to execute the project versus how long the 
work actually takes. There’s a tendency to shoehorn the work estimates into 
a timeline that meets the expected project release date, and that’s a mistake, 

Project Management Basics
143
especially early in Planning. Yes, you will eventually have to optimize the sched-
ule, but you and your team absolutely need to understand the actual effort 
required to execute the desired scope of work. I’d bet that you don’t have to 
think too long to come up with a memory of being badgered into agreeing to a 
work estimate that was too short just because that was what was needed 
to “fit” the schedule into the expected timeframe. Heck, early in my career, 
I was the one doing that badgering before I really understood what a bad 
practice that was. It’s what we do when we’re so distracted by the urgency of 
hitting that market window that we lose sight of reality. 
 The problem with  this   scenario is that while on the surface that schedule 
you cobbled together looks like it hits the expected commit, in reality it’s just 
stage makeup, and underneath all that paint is the ugly visage of reality. Sure, 
you can browbeat me into “agreeing” that it will only take 2 days to develop 
the marketing collateral, but I know in my heart that it’s going to take 2 weeks, 
so while your schedule hits the commit, there’s really a 2-week slip in the 
schedule baked in. To counter this tendency to force fit the estimates into a 
desired timeframe, I always position the estimation efforts with my team as 
our best attempt to figure out what it will really take to execute the work. 
I also emphasize the fact that we will deal with optimizing and pulling in the 
schedule later, so the goal is to fully understand the work needed. As I see it, 
allowing yourself to believe that false estimate is you fooling yourself; the task 
still takes 2 weeks.   
 Obviously, I’ve just brushed the surface of all of the estimation  tools and tech-
niques  out there. You should absolutely master the  PERT method  and then 
look for other tools that will improve the team’s estimation accuracy. How 
do you know when you need to look around for a more accurate method? 
Simple, just start keeping track of how accurate your estimates are by com-
paring them to the actual effort or duration it takes to complete the work. 
Estimation methods can get pretty complicated so just keep in mind how you 
will be using the output and what order of magnitude you need to get the 
work done. For instance, if all your organization cares about is whether or 
not the project will take 2 months or 8 to complete, then you may not need 
to know that it will take 450 man-hours to complete. On the other hand, if 
someone’s paycheck depends on whether it takes 450 or 475 man-hours to 
complete, then your estimation tool needs to be more precise. Estimation, like 
the other mechanics of project management we’ve been discussing here, can 
be straightforward to execute; it just takes a little time and energy to master. 
Calculating the PERT estimates is pretty easy; getting the SME and the junior 
team member to agree on a work estimate might be a bit more of a challenge. 
Master a few simple estimation techniques to free yourself up for more 
“referee” work.  

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_14
 C H A P T E R 
 Appendix C: 
Decision-Making 
Models                          
 Project teams need to make many  decisions  of various magnitudes constantly 
throughout the life of the project so it’s a good idea to agree on a decision-
making methodology early. This methodology should be identified and agreed 
upon near the end of the Initiating Phase or at the beginning of the Planning 
Phase, so let’s talk about the four most commonly used methods for making 
decisions. Here, we will cover the strengths and weaknesses of the models 
and provide some guidance on when to use each one. 
 Authoritative Decision Model 
 First, let’s talk about a decision model you are no doubt very familiar with: the 
 Authoritative model  . In this decision-making process, there’s just one deci-
sion-maker, it’s usually associated with positional authority, and they hold all 
the cards. This decision-maker is solely accountable for the consequences of 
the decision and owns all of the responsibility for the quality of it. 
 This method will generate the fastest decisions, which is good; however, it drives 
the least amount of buy-in from the team. This is dictator leadership, and while 
the team may appreciate the fact that the accountability rests completely with 
14

Chapter 14 | Appendix C: Decision-Making Models
146
the decision-maker, it does not promote a collaborative team dynamic. Use this 
method when immediate and decisive action needs to be taken quickly. In fact, 
I strongly recommend that you utilize Authoritative decision-making as little as 
possible to preserve the team dynamic. Of course, there are pitfalls you need 
be aware of with this one. 
 First, there’s the reality that simply telling a team to do something doesn’t 
necessarily mean that they will do it. It’s all too easy to delude yourself into 
thinking that if you had more positional power you could “make” the team 
execute your decisions, but that’s a fallacy. Because the team buy-in is so low 
with this decision-making method, you must provide additional motivation 
for the team to execute the decision when it’s made authoritatively. Realize 
that in many instances that additional motivation is the belief that you as the 
decision-maker will take the heat if it results in a bad outcome. 
 The second pitfall, and it’s a big one, is that since only one person is making 
the decision with limited input from the team, this method does not result 
in the best-quality decision. You see, it’s made from one perspective without 
consideration of the alternatives other team members, with different perspec-
tives and experiences, could contribute to the analysis.  
 Consensus Decision Model 
 The  Consensus decision-making method  , on the other hand, overempha-
sizes the various perspectives and experiences of the team. Here, everyone 
needs to agree on the decision and there’s no strictly defined decision-maker. 
Utilizing this method means that you have to broker a compromise across the 
team but it also means that there’s no one accountable for the quality of the 
decision. 
 The pitfalls here are pretty obvious. It can take time for the team to come to 
consensus and since the goal is to coalesce on a solution everyone can live 
with, the resulting decision may not be the best alternative for the project. 
This method has a pretty poor reputation for these reasons, but here’s the 
thing: this method results in the strongest support from the team for the deci-
sion. If it’s critical that everyone agree to the decision outcome, then this is the 
methodology you need to use. 
 One place where Consensus decision-making is useful in project management 
is in the final team assessment of readiness before the release activity starts. As 
the team gets closer to the actual release date, I ask each team member if they 
are comfortable proceeding with the release. Every single time I’ve ignored a 
teammate’s concern or “No Go” response, the team struggled to complete 
the release or it was a failure. Here’s a scenario where you want everyone to 
be confident that everything is in place for the release activity, and if it’s not, 
then the team needs to scramble to close any gaps before proceeding. 

Project Management Basics
147
 Voting Decision Model 
 The Voting decision-making  methodology  is similar to the Consensus method 
in that everyone has an equal say in the final decision. Yes, this is exactly what 
you think of when you hear “voting”; everyone gets a chance to cast their vote 
for the option they feel is the best solution. This method is quick and gener-
ates moderate-level buy-in from the team. The catch of course is that the 
decision is only as good as the voting options, and it doesn’t really leverage the 
collective perspectives and experience of the team. You simply cast your vote 
for whatever solution makes the most sense to you and the option with the 
most votes becomes the decision. Like the Consensus method, the account-
ability for the quality of that decision is diluted and amorphous. Yes, the “team” 
is accountable for the decision, but hey, I didn’t vote to get donuts for lunch . . . 
don’t look at me! Joking aside, this is actually a very good method for deciding 
low-value questions such as “where should we go for lunch?” and “should we 
do the all-day planning session next Wednesday or next Thursday?”   
 Many office management software packages allow you to automate the voting, 
making this an extremely efficient method for making those low-impact deci-
sions. One final thing to keep in mind with the Voting model is that you need 
to understand whether or not anonymity is important in the process. If you 
believe there’s an expectation of privacy with respect to how each member 
votes, then you probably need to consider one of the other decision-making 
methods discussed here.  
 Consultative Decision Model 
 The fourth decision-making methodology is the  Consultative  one. Here, there 
is a designated decision-maker, but unlike the Authoritative model, the team 
provides input to the decision. The decision-maker carefully considers all of 
the input from the team and then makes the decision. This model is a good 
balance of the Authoritative model and the Consensus model, leveraging 
strengths from both. The decision is reached relatively quickly with good com-
mitment from the team, and the decision-maker is the single person account-
able for the quality and outcome. It should be noted that this one requires 
that the decision-maker be knowledgeable enough about the decision to ask 
good questions and seek the right supporting data. 
 Many organizations use this method for big decisions made by review and 
approval boards. This is actually my favorite decision-making method and the 
one I use most frequently to keep the project work moving. The primary pitfall 
of the Consultative decision-making method is that it’s not uncommon for a 
teammate to disagree with the decision. The business needs and the objec-
tives of the project often trump the pet solution passionate team members 
advocate for. When this happens, the project manager needs to take pains to 

Chapter 14 | Appendix C: Decision-Making Models
148
explain their rationale and the context that informed the decision. In case 
a team member is adamant about their position, the project manager may 
need to negotiate a “disagree and commit” conclusion so that the work can 
continue once the decision is finalized. As you might expect, the other pitfall 
with this methodology is that it’s all too easy to slide into Consensus decision-
making inadvertently. 
 The main take-away here is that these four methods are tools in your PM 
toolbox, and you always need to ensure that you are picking the right tool 
for the job. I mentioned that I use Consultative decision-making a lot in my 
practice, but what I didn’t tell you is that I have to be constantly on guard, 
asking myself if that’s the best tool for the job. Here’s an example of what I’m 
talking about: the planner may ask in the team meeting if she should purchase 
some additional switches because we seem to be going through them faster 
than expected due to the current troubleshooting work. If these switches are 
low cost and the PM has the authority to authorize that level of purchase, 
then the decision really doesn’t need to  be made consultatively; instead the 
Authoritative method is just fine. If however, these switches are specialized 
components with a hefty price tag, then it makes sense to consult with the 
rest of the team before making the decision. This ability to sense the best 
decision-making tool to use and then to seamlessly apply it is an extremely 
useful skill for any PM.  

© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3_15
 C H A P T E R 
 Appendix D: 
Additional 
Resources 
 Project Management Mechanics Resources 
 When you do a web search for project management resources, you will find a 
bewildering array of information sources, which can be completely paralyzing. 
When searching for project management resources on the Web, my recom-
mendation is to start with any links associated with the Project Management 
Institute (PMI)  , as these are peer-reviewed postings and publications repre-
senting what are considered to be the best practices in project management. 
 Project Management Institute (   www.pmi.org  )   
 Project Management Body of Knowledge , a.k.a. the “PMBOK” (   www.pmi.org/
PMBOK-Guide-and-Standards.aspx   ) 
15

Chapter 15 | Appendix D: Additional Resources
150
 Beyond the Mechanics 
 Ferrazzi, Keith, and Tahl Raz.  Never Eat Alone: And Other Secrets to Success, One 
Relationship at a Time. Expanded and updated. New York: Crown Business, 2014. 
(   www.amazon.com/Never-Eat-Alone-Expanded-Updated-ebook/dp/
B00H6JBFOS?ie=UTF8&keywords=love%20is%20the%20killer%20app&qid
=1463158569&ref_=sr_1_2&s=books&sr=1-2   ) 
 Gilbert, Daniel.  Stumbling on Happiness. New York: Knopf, 2006. (   www.amazon.
com/Stumbling-Happiness-Daniel-Gilbert-ebook/dp/B000GCFW0A/ref
=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1463159186&sr=1-1&keywords=stumbli
ng+on+happiness+by+daniel+gilbert   ) 
 Heath, Chip, and Dan Heath.  Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work. 
New York: Crown Business, 2013. (   www.amazon.com/Decisive-Make-
Better-Choices-Life-ebook/dp/B009JU6UPG/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8
&qid=1463158952&sr=1-1&keywords=decisive   ) 
 McBride, Melanie.  Managing Projects in the Real World: The Tips and Tricks No 
One Tells You About When You Start. New York: Apress, 2013. (  https://www.
amazon.com/Managing-Projects-Real-World-Tricks/dp/1430265116/
ref=sr_1_fkmr0_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1467132723&sr=8-1-fkmr0&keywords=
Managing+Projects+iIn+tThe+Real+World%3A%3B+The+Tips+and+Trick
s+No+One+Tells+You+About+When+You+Start  ) 
 Patterson, Kerry, Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, and Al Switzler.  Crucial 
Confrontations: Tools for Resolving Broken Promises, Violated Expectations, and 
Bad Behavior. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2004. (   www.amazon.com/Crucial-
Confrontations-Resolving-Promises-Expectations/dp/0071446524   ) 
 Patterson, Kerry, Joseph Grenny, Ron McMillan, and Al Switzler.  Crucial 
Conversations: Tools for Talking When Stakes Are High. New York: McGraw-
Hill 
Professional, 
2011. 
(   www.amazon.com/Crucial-Conversations-
Talking-Stakes-Second-ebook/dp/B005K0AYH4?ie=UTF8&btkr=1&ref_
=dp-kindle-redirect   ) 
 Sanders, Tim, and Gene Stone.  Love Is the Killer App: How to Win Business and 
Influence Friends. New York: Crown Business, 2002. (   www.amazon.com/
Love-Killer-App-Business-Influence-ebook/dp/B000Q9F140?ie=
UTF8&keywords=love%20is%20the%20killer%20app&qid=1463158569&ref_=
sr_1_1&s=books&sr=1-1   ) 

I
© Melanie McBride 2016 
M. McBride, Project Management Basics, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4842-2086-3
 A, B 
 Agile methodology , 26 
 Authoritative model , 145 
 C 
 Change Control Board (CCB) 
 execution phase , 51–52 
 project , 32 
 higher-level CCB , 54–56 
 Checklists , 109 
 augmentation , 110  
 absolute minimum processes , 112 
 items , 112 
 planning phase , 111 
 strong project management , 111 
 guide , 110 
 managing multiple projects , 112–113 
 Closing project , 79 
 checklist , 87–88 
 clean house , 82–83 
 key stakeholders , 83–84 
 phase checklist , 137 
 retrospective , 80–82 
 summarization , 83 
 team production , 84–86 
 Consensus decision-making method , 146 
 Consultative decision making models , 147–148  
 Cost Performance Index (CPI) , 101 
 D 
 Decision making models , 145  
 authoritative model , 145  
 consensus method , 146  
 consultative , 147–148  
 voting methodology , 147  
 Draft schedule development , 39–41  
 E, F, G 
 Estimation techniques 
 consideration , 140  
 figure out , 139  
 method 
 PERT method , 143  
 pitfalls , 142–143  
 scenarios , 143  
 SME , 142  
 tools and techniques , 143  
 PERT , 141  
 searching project , 140  
 WBS tasks , 142  
 Execution phase , 51, 67  
 Change Control Board , 51  
 checklist , 65–66, 135  
 criteria , 71–72  
 drama , 69  
 Go/No Go decision , 74–75  
 higher-level CCB , 55–56  
 iterate schedule updates , 57–59  
 Index 

152
Index
 meeting facilitation , 54 
 monitoring metrics , 59, 61 
 release readiness checklist , 69 
 approval process , 73–74 
 communication plan , 75 
 execution , 72–73 
 planning , 70 
 project deliverables , 76–77 
 reporting outs , 62–64 
 risk review implementation , 61–62 
 stage escalations , 64 
 standing team meeting , 52–54 
 H 
 High-level project constraints , 15–16 
 resources , 18–19 
 schedule , 16–17 
 scope of work , 17 
 Triple Constraint , 15–16 
 I, J, K 
 Initiating phase , 11 
 checklist , 22, 134 
 high-level  (see also  High-level project 
constraints )  
 project constraints , 16 
 kick-off meeting , 21 
 objective , 14 
 overwhelming , 11 
 players , 19–20 
 project charter , 20–21 
 scoping process , 12–14 
 stakeholders , 15 
 L 
 Low PM maturity organizations , 94–95 
 M 
 Managing multiple projects , 112–113 
 Mechanics phase , 91 
 low PM maturity organizations , 94–95 
 process execution , 9 
 project management processes , 92, 94 
 real world , 89  
 release approval decision , 96–97  
 seasoned project , 91  
 stealth mode , 92  
 Monitoring metrics , 59, 61  
 N, O 
 Network diagram , 38  
 P, Q 
 Planning phase , 23  
 Agile methodology , 26  
 buffered schedule , 47  
 Change Control Board , 32  
 checklist , 49, 134–135  
 communication plan , 29–30  
 gathering requirements , 30–31  
 optimization , 45–46  
 organizational requirements , 33–34  
 project lifecycle/methodology , 24  
 project team , 28–29  
 pull in-release date , 47–48  
 release readiness checklist , 41–42  
 risk management plan , 42–45  
 schedule development 
 draft schedule , 39–41  
 network diagram , 38  
 steps , 35  
 WBS , 36  
 work flow , 35  
 TOC lifecycle model , 27–28  
 Waterfall lifecycle , 25  
 PMP terminology and streamline processes , 99  
 flashy methodologies , 106–107  
 historical data treasure chest , 105–106  
 hybrid model , 100  
 Agile methodology , 100  
 network diagram , 100  
 TOC methodology , 100  
 metrics 
 Comp  vs. Time , 104  
 EV trends , 101  
 execution phase , 101  
 SPI and CPI , 101  
 SPI  vs. Time , 102  
Execution phase (cont.)

153
Index
 Project Estimation Review Tool (PERT) , 141 
 Project management , 1 
 use of , 6 
 effective process , 129–130 
 execution process , 2 
 improvement , 131 
 project lifecycle , 129–130 
 sequences and processes , 2 
 underpinning , 2 
 value-add , 6–7 
 workflow , 3–4 
 Project Management Institute (PMI) 
resources , 149 
 Project management mechanics , 115 
 accountabilities , 126–128 
 change control , 116 
 communication , 117 
 communication styles , 120–122 
 difficult conversations , 123–125 
 empathy , 122–123 
 initiating phase , 115 
 key stakeholders , 116 
 managing projects , 120 
 planning phase , 119 
 poor project execution , 117–118 
 project deliverables , 117 
 stakeholder management tool , 116 
 Project Management Professional (PMP) 
certification , 2 
 R 
 Release readiness checklist , 41–42, 69 
 approval process , 73–74 
 communication plan , 75 
 execution , 72–73 
 phase checklist , 136 
 planning , 70  
 project deliverables , 76–77  
 Retrospective project , 81  
 Risk management plan 
 actions , 45  
 development , 42  
 flow diagram , 44  
 impact rating , 44  
 perception , 43  
 potential risk , 44  
 project planning , 43  
 Risk management planning , 81  
 S 
 Schedule development 
 draft schedule , 39–41  
 network diagram , 38  
 steps , 35  
 WBS , 36  
 Schedule Performance Index (SPI) , 101  
 Subject matter expert (SME) , 142  
 T, U 
 Theory of Constraints (TOC) , 24, 27–28  
 Triple Constraint  . See  High-level project 
constraints  
 V 
 Voting decision-making methodology , 147  
 W, X, Y, Z 
 Waterfall lifecycle , 25  
 Work breakdown structure (WBS) , 36  

