PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT
THE MANAGERIAL PROCESS 7E
ERIK W. LARSON
CLIFFORD F. GRAY
www.ebook3000.com

Connect Insight® 
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-of-a-kind visual 
analytics dashboard—now available for both 
instructors and students—that provides at-a-glance 
information regarding student performance, which is 
immediately actionable. By presenting assignment, 
assessment, and topical performance results together with a time 
metric that is easily visible for aggregate or individual results, 
Connect Insight gives the user the ability to take a just-in-time 
approach to teaching and learning, which was never before available. 
Connect Insight presents data that empowers students and helps 
instructors improve class performance in a way that is eﬃcient and 
eﬀective.
McGraw-Hill Connect®  
Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform that 
is proven to deliver better results for students 
and instructors. 
Connect empowers students by continually 
adapting to deliver precisely what they need, 
when they need it, and how they need it, so your 
class time is more engaging and eﬀective.
Mobile
73% of instructors who use Connect 
require it; instructor satisfaction increases 
by 28% when Connect is required.
Students can view  
their results for any 
Connect course.
Analytics
Connect’s new, intuitive mobile interface gives students and 
instructors ﬂexible and convenient, anytime–anywhere access to 
all components of the Connect platform.
Required=Results
®
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 
Using Connect improves retention 
rates by 19.8%, passing rates by  
12.7%, and exam scores by 9.1%.

SmartBook®  
Proven to help students improve grades and 
study more eﬃciently, SmartBook contains the 
same content within the print book, but actively 
tailors that content to the needs of the individual. 
SmartBook’s adaptive technology provides 
precise, personalized instruction on what the 
student should do next, guiding the student to 
master and remember key concepts, targeting 
gaps in knowledge and oﬀering customized 
feedback, and driving the student toward 
comprehension and retention of the subject 
matter. Available on tablets, SmartBook puts 
learning at the student’s ﬁngertips—anywhere, 
anytime.
Adaptive
Over 8 billion questions have been 
answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE ADAPTIVE 
READING EXPERIENCE 
DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM 
THE WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and 
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com
www.ebook3000.com

The McGraw-Hill Series Operations and Decision Sciences
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT
Beckman and Rosenfield,
Operations, Strategy: Competing in the 
21st Century,
First Edition
Benton,
Purchasing and Supply Chain 
Management,
Second Edition
Bowersox, Closs, Cooper, and Bowersox,
Supply Chain Logistics Management,
Fourth Edition
Brown and Hyer,
Managing Projects: A Team-Based 
Approach,
First Edition
Burt, Petcavage, and Pinkerton,
Supply Management,
Eighth Edition
Cachon and Terwiesch,
Operations Management
First Edition
Cachon and Terwiesch,
Matching Supply with Demand:  
An Introduction to Operations 
Management,
Third Edition
Cooper and Schindler,
Business Research Methods,
Twelfth Edition
Finch,
Interactive Models for Operations and 
Supply Chain Management,
First Edition
Fitzsimmons, Fitzsimmons, and Bordoloi,
Service Management: Operations, 
Strategy, Information Technology,
Eighth Edition
Gehrlein,
Operations Management Cases,
First Edition
Harrison and Samson,
Technology Management,
First Edition
Hayen,
SAP R/3 Enterprise Software:  
An Introduction,
First Edition
Hill,
Manufacturing Strategy: Text & Cases,
Third Edition
Hopp,
Supply Chain Science,
First Edition
Hopp and Spearman,
Factory Physics,
Third Edition
Jacobs, Berry, Whybark, and Vollmann,
Manufacturing Planning & Control for 
Supply Chain Management,
Sixth Edition
Jacobs and Chase,
Operations and Supply Management: 
The Core,
Fourth Edition
Jacobs and Chase,
Operations and Supply Management,
Fifteenth Edition
Jacobs and Whybark,
Why ERP?
First Edition
Larson and Gray,
Project Management: The Managerial 
Process,
Seventh Edition
Leenders, Johnson, and Flynn,
Purchasing and Supply Management,
Fourteenth Edition
Nahmias,
Production and Operations Analysis,
Sixth Edition
Olson,
Introduction to Information Systems 
Project Management,
Second Edition
Schroeder, Goldstein, Rungtusanatham,
Operations Management: Contemporary 
Concepts and Cases,
Seventh Edition
Seppanen, Kumar, and Chandra,
Process Analysis and Improvement,
First Edition
Simchi-Levi, Kaminsky, and
Simchi-Levi,
Designing and Managing the Supply 
Chain: Concepts, Strategies, Case 
Studies,
Third Edition
Sterman,
Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking 
and Modeling for Complex World,
First Edition
Stevenson,
Operations Management,
Thirteenth Edition
Swink, Melnyk, Cooper, and Hartley,
Managing Operations Across the Supply 
Chain,
Third Edition
Thomke,
Managing Product and Service 
Development: Text and Cases,
First Edition
Ulrich and Eppinger,
Product Design and Development,
Fourth Edition
Zipkin,
Foundations of Inventory Management,
First Edition
QUANTITATIVE METHODS AND 
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Hillier and Hillier,
Introduction to Management Science: A 
Modeling and Case Studies Approach 
with Spreadsheets,
Fifth Edition
Stevenson and Ozgur,
Introduction to Management Science 
with Spreadsheets,
First Edition

Project  
Management:
The Managerial Process 
Seventh Edition
Erik W. Larson
Clifford F. Gray
Oregon State University
www.ebook3000.com

PROJECT MANAGEMENT: THE MANAGERIAL PROCESS, SEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2018 by McGraw-Hill 
Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions © 2014 and 2011. No 
part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or 
retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in 
any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the 
United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 LWI 21 20 19 18 17 
ISBN  978-1-259-66609-4
MHID 1-259-66609-3
Chief Product Officer, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Marty Lange
Managing Director: James Heine
Brand Manager: Dolly Womack
Product Developer: Christina Holt
Marketing Manager: Britney Hermsen
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Linda Avenarius
Program Manager: Mark Christianson
Content Project Managers: Melissa M. Leick, Bruce Gin, Karen Jozefowicz
Buyer: Jennifer Pickel
Design: Egzon Shaqiri
Content Licensing Specialists: Melissa Homer, Beth Thole
Cover Design: Jessica Cuevas
Cover Image: © Getty Images/Georgijevic
Compositor: Aptara®, Inc.
Printer: LSC Communications
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the  
copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Gray, Clifford F., author. | Larson, Erik W., 1952 author.
Title: Project management : the managerial process / Erik W. Larson, Oregon State University,  
 Clifford F. Gray, Oregon State University.
Description: Seventh edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, [2018]  
 | Clifford F. Gray is the first named author on the earlier editions.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016040029 | ISBN 9781259666094 | ISBN 1259666093 (alk. paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Project management. | Time management. | Risk management.
Classification: LCC HD69.P75 G72 2018 | DDC 658.4/04—dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/
2016040029
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does 
not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not 
guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

Erik W. Larson
ERIK W. LARSON is professor of project management at the College of Business, 
Oregon State University. He teaches executive, graduate, and undergraduate courses 
on project management and leadership. His research and consulting activities focus on 
project management. He has published numerous articles on matrix management, 
product development, and project partnering. He has been honored with teaching 
awards from both the Oregon State University MBA program and the University of 
Oregon Executive MBA program. He has been a member of the Portland, Oregon, 
chapter of the Project Management Institute since 1984. In 1995 he worked as a Ful-
bright scholar with faculty at the Krakow Academy of Economics on modernizing 
Polish business education. He was a visiting professor at Chulalongkorn University in 
Bangkok, Thailand, and at Baden-Wuerttemberg Cooperative State University in Bad 
Mergentheim, Germany. He received a B.A. in psychology from Claremont McKenna 
College and a Ph.D. in management from State University of New York at Buffalo. He 
is a certified project management professional (PMP) and Scrum Master.
Clifford F. Gray
CLIFFORD F. GRAY is professor emeritus of management at the College of Busi-
ness, Oregon State University. He has personally taught more than 100 executive 
development seminars and workshops. Cliff has been a member of the Project Man-
agement Institute since 1976 and was one of the founders of the Portland, Oregon, 
chapter. He was a visiting professor at Kasetsart University in Bangkok, Thailand, in 
2005. He was the president of Project Management International, Inc. (a training and 
consulting firm specializing in project management) 1977–2005. He received his B.A. 
in economics and management from Millikin University, M.B.A. from Indiana Univer-
sity, and doctorate in operations management from the College of Business, University 
of Oregon. He is certified Scrum Master.
About the Authors
vii 
www.ebook3000.com

“Man’s mind, once stretched by a new idea, never regains 
its original dimensions.”
Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.
To my family, who have always encircled me with love 
and encouragement—my parents (Samuel and 
Charlotte), my wife (Mary), my sons and their wives 
(Kevin and Dawn, Robert and Sally) and their children 
(Ryan, Carly, Connor and Lauren).
C.F.G.
“We must not cease from exploration and the end of all 
exploring will be to arrive where we began and to know the 
place for the first time.”
T. S. Eliot
To Ann, whose love and support have brought out the 
best in me. To our girls Mary, Rachel, and Tor-Tor for 
the joy and pride they give me. And to our grandkids, 
Mr. B, Livvy, and Xmo, whose future depends upon 
effective project management. Finally, to my muse, 
Neil—Walk on!
E.W.L
viii

Our motivation in writing this text continues to be to provide a realistic, socio-technical 
view of project management. In the past, textbooks on project management focused 
almost exclusively on the tools and processes used to manage projects and not the 
human dimension. This baffled us since people not tools complete projects! While we 
firmly believe that mastering tools and processes is essential to successful project 
management, we also believe that the effectiveness of these tools and methods is 
shaped and determined by the prevailing culture of the organization and interpersonal 
dynamics of the people involved. Thus, we try to provide a holistic view that focuses 
on both of these dimensions and how they interact to determine the fate of projects.
 
The role of projects in organizations is receiving increasing attention. Projects are 
the major tool for implementing and achieving the strategic goals of the organization. 
In the face of intense, worldwide competition, many organizations have reorganized 
around a philosophy of innovation, renewal, and organizational learning to survive. 
This philosophy suggests an organization that is flexible and project driven. Project 
management has developed to the point where it is a professional discipline having its 
own body of knowledge and skills. Today it is nearly impossible to imagine anyone at 
any level in the organization who would not benefit from some degree of expertise in 
the process of managing projects.
Audience
This text is written for a wide audience. It covers concepts and skills that are used by 
managers to propose, plan, secure resources, budget, and lead project teams to suc-
cessful completions of their projects. The text should prove useful to students and 
prospective project managers in helping them understand why organizations have 
developed a formal project management process to gain a competitive advantage. 
Readers will find the concepts and techniques discussed in enough detail to be imme-
diately useful in new-project situations. Practicing project managers will find the text 
to be a valuable guide and reference when dealing with typical problems that arise in 
the course of a project. Managers will also find the text useful in understanding the 
role of projects in the missions of their organizations. Analysts will find the text useful 
in helping to explain the data needed for project implementation as well as the opera-
tions of inherited or purchased software. Members of the Project Management Insti-
tute will find the text is well structured to meet the needs of those wishing to prepare 
for PMP (Project Management Professional) or CAPM (Certified Associate in Project 
Management) certification exams. The text has in-depth coverage of the most critical 
topics found in PMI’s Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK). People at 
all levels in the organization assigned to work on projects will find the text useful not 
only in providing them with a rationale for the use of project management processes 
but also because of the insights they will gain on how to enhance their contributions to 
project success.
 
Our emphasis is not only on how the management process works, but more impor-
tantly, on why it works. The concepts, principles, and techniques are universally 
Preface
ix 
www.ebook3000.com

x Preface
applicable. That is, the text does not specialize by industry type or project scope. 
Instead, the text is written for the individual who will be required to manage a variety 
of projects in a variety of different organizational settings. In the case of some small 
projects, a few of the steps of the techniques can be omitted, but the conceptual frame-
work applies to all organizations in which projects are important to survival. The 
approach can be used in pure project organizations such as construction, research orga-
nizations, and engineering consultancy firms. At the same time, this approach will 
benefit organizations that carry out many small projects while the daily effort of deliv-
ering products or services continues.
Content
In this and other editions we continue to try to resist the forces that engender scope creep 
and focus only on essential tools and concepts that are being used in the real world. We 
have been guided by feedback from practitioners, teachers, and students. Some changes 
are minor and incremental, designed to clarify and reduce confusion. Other changes are 
significant. They represent new developments in the field or better ways of teaching 
project management principles. Below are major changes to the seventh edition.
∙ Learning objectives have been established for each chapter and the corresponding 
segment has been marked in the text.
∙ Chapter 16 Oversight has been eliminated and critical information on project matu-
rity models is now part of Chapter 14.
∙ Chapter 18 Project Management Career Paths has been eliminated and essential 
information from this chapter is now in Chapter 1.
∙ A new set of network exercises have been developed for Chapter 6.
∙ A new set of crashing exercises have been developed for Chapter 9 which introduce 
crashing concepts in a developmental way.
∙ The Chapter 2 Appendix on Request for Proposal is now part of Chapter 12.
∙ Terms and concepts have been updated to be consistent with the sixth edition of the 
Project Management Body of Knowledge (2015).
∙ New student exercises and cases have been added to chapters.
∙ The Snapshot from Practice boxes feature a number of new examples of project 
management in action as well as new Research Highlights that continue to promote 
practical application of project management.
∙ The Instructor’s Manual contains a listing of current YouTube videos that corre-
spond to key concepts and Snapshots from Practice.
 
Overall the text addresses the major questions and challenges the authors have 
encountered over their 60 combined years of teaching project management and con-
sulting with practicing project managers in domestic and foreign environments. These 
questions include:  What is the strategic role of projects in contemporary organiza-
tions? How are projects prioritized? What  organizational and managerial styles will 
improve chances of project success? How do project managers orchestrate the complex 
network of relationships involving vendors, subcontractors, project team members, 
senior management, functional managers, and customers that affect project success? 
What factors contribute to the development of a high-performance project team? What 
project management system can be set up to gain some measure of control? How do 
managers prepare for a new international project in a foreign culture? 

Preface xi
 
Project managers must deal with all these concerns to be effective. All of these 
issues and problems represent linkages to an integrative project management view. 
The chapter content of the text has been placed within an overall framework that inte-
grates these topics in a holistic manner. Cases and snapshots are included from the 
experiences of practicing managers. The future for project managers appears to be 
promising. Careers will be determined by success in managing projects.
Student Learning Aids
Student resources include study outlines, online quizzes, PowerPoint slides, videos, 
Microsoft Project Video Tutorials and web links. These can be found in Connect.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Scott Bailey for building the end-of-chapter exercises for 
 Connect and Tracie Lee for reviewing them; Pinyarat Sirisomboonsuk for revising 
the PowerPoint slides; Oliver F. Lehmann for providing access to PMBOK study 
questions; Ronny Richardson for updating the Instructor’s Manual; Angelo Serra for 
updating the Test Bank; and Pinyarat Sirisomboonsuk for providing new Snapshot 
from Practice questions.
 
Next, it is important to note that the text includes contributions from numerous stu-
dents, colleagues, friends, and managers gleaned from professional conversations. We 
want them to know we sincerely appreciate their counsel and suggestions. Almost 
every exercise, case, and example in the text is drawn from a real-world project. 
 Special thanks to managers who graciously shared their current project as ideas for 
exercises, subjects for cases, and examples for the text. Shlomo Cohen, John A. 
 Drexler, Jim Moran, John Sloan, Pat Taylor, and John Wold, whose work is printed, 
are gratefully acknowledged. Special gratitude is due Robert Breitbarth of Interact 
Management, who shared invaluable insights on prioritizing projects. University stu-
dents and managers deserve special accolades for identifying problems with earlier 
drafts of the text and exercises.
 
We are indebted to the reviewers of past editions who shared our commitment to 
elevating the instruction of project management. The reviewers include Paul S. Allen, 
Rice University; Denis F. Cioffi, George Washington University; Joseph D. DeVoss, 
DeVry University; Edward J. Glantz, Pennsylvania State University; Michael Godfrey, 
University of Wisconsin–Oshkosh; Robert Key, University of Phoenix; Dennis Krum-
wiede, Idaho State University; Nicholas C. Petruzzi, University of Illinois–Urbana/
Champaign; William R. Sherrard, San Diego State University; S. Narayan Bodapati, 
Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville; Warren J. Boe, University of Iowa; 
 Burton Dean, San Jose State University; Kwasi Amoako-Gyampah, University of 
North Carolina–Greensboro; Owen P. Hall, Pepperdine University; Bruce C. Hartman, 
University of Arizona; Richard Irving, York University; Robert T. Jones, DePaul 
 University; Richard L. Luebbe, Miami University of Ohio; William Moylan, Lawrence 
Technological College of  Business; Edward Pascal, University of Ottawa; James H. 
Patterson, Indiana University; Art Rogers, City University; Christy Strbiak, U.S. Air 
Force Academy; David A. Vaughan, City University; and Ronald W. Witzel, Keller 
Graduate School of Management. Nabil Bedewi, Georgetown University; Scott Bailey, 
Troy University; Michael Ensby, Clarkson University; Eldon Larsen, Marshall University; 
Steve Machon, DeVry University–Tinley Park; William Matthews, William Patterson 
www.ebook3000.com

xii Preface
University; Erin Sims, DeVry University–Pomona; Kenneth Solheim, DeVry 
 University–Federal Way; and Oya Tukel, Cleveland State University.  Gregory Anderson, 
Weber State University; Dana Bachman, Colorado Christian University; Alan Cannon, 
University of Texas, Arlington; Susan Cholette, San Francisco State; Michael Ensby, 
Clarkson University; Charles Franz, University of Missouri, Columbia; Raouf Ghattas, 
DeVry University; Robert Groff, Westwood College; Raffael  Guidone, New York City 
College of Technology; George Kenyon, Lamar University; Elias Konwufine, Keiser 
University; Rafael Landaeta, Old Dominion University; Muhammad Obeidat, Southern 
Polytechnic State  University; Linda Rose, Westwood College; Oya Tukel,  Cleveland 
State University; and Mahmoud Watad, William  Paterson University.
 
Victor Allen, Lawrence Technological University; Mark Angolia, East Carolina 
University; Alan Cannon, University of Texas at Arlington; Robert Cope, Southeastern 
Louisiana University; Kenneth DaRin, Clarkson University; Ron Darnell, Amberton 
University; Jay Goldberg, Marquette University; Mark Huber, University of Georgia; 
Marshall Issen, Clarkson University; Charles Lesko, East Carolina University; Lacey 
McNeely, Oregon State University; Donald Smith, Texas A&M University; Peter 
Sutanto, Prairie View A&M University; Jon Tomlinson, University of Northwestern 
Ohio. We thank you for your many thoughtful suggestions and for making our book 
better. Of course we accept responsibility for the final version of the text.
 
In addition, we would like to thank our colleagues in the College of Business at 
Oregon State University for their support and help in completing this project. In par-
ticular, we recognize Lacey McNeely, Prem Mathew, Keith Leavitt and Pauline Schlip-
zand for their helpful advice and suggestions. We also wish to thank the many students 
who helped us at different stages of this project, most notably Neil Young, Saajan 
Patel, Katherine Knox, Dat Nguyen, and David Dempsey. Mary Gray deserves special 
credit for editing and working under tight deadlines on earlier editions. Special thanks 
go to Pinyarat (“Minkster”) Sirisomboonsuk for her help in preparing the last four 
editions.
 
Finally, we want to extend our thanks to all the people at McGraw-Hill Education for 
their efforts and support. First, we would like to thank Dolly Womack, and Christina 
Holt, for providing editorial direction, guidance, and management of the book’s devel-
opment for the seventh edition. And we would also like to thank Melissa Leick, 
 Jennifer Pickel, Egzon Shaqiri, Bruce Gin, and Karen Jozefowicz for managing the 
final production, design, supplement, and media phases of the seventh edition.
Erik W. Larson
Clifford F. Gray

xiii
Guided Tour
Established Learning Objectives
Learning objectives have been added to this edition to help stu-
dents target key areas of learning. Learning objectives are listed 
both at the beginning of each chapter and are called out as mar-
ginal elements throughout the narrative in each chapter.
End-of-Chapter Content
Both static and algorithmic end-of-chapter content, including Review Questions and Exercises, are now 
assignable in Connect.
SmartBook
The SmartBook has been updated with new 
highlights and probes for optimal student 
learning.
Snapshots
The Snapshot from Practice boxes have been 
updated to include a number of new exam-
ples of project management in action. New 
questions based on the Snapshots are also 
now assignable in Connect.
New and Updated Cases
Included at the end of each chapter are between one and five cases which demonstrate key ideas from the text 
and help students understand how Project Management comes into play in the real world. New cases have 
been added across several chapters in the 7th edition.
Organization Strategy 
and Project Selection
2
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
2-1 Explain why it is important for project managers to 
understand their organization’s strategy.
2-2 Identify the significant role projects contribute to 
the strategic direction of the organization.
2-3 Understand the need for a project priority system.
2-4 Apply financial and nonfinancial criteria to assess 
the value of projects.
2-5 Understand how multi-criteria models can be 
used to select projects.
2-6 Apply an objective priority system to project 
selection.
2-7 Understand the need to manage the project 
portfolio.
OUTLINE
2.1 
The Strategic Management Process: An 
Overview
2.2 The Need for a Project Priority System
2.3 A Portfolio Management System
2.4 Selection Criteria
2.5 Applying a Selection Model
2.6 Managing the Portfolio System
Summary
Why Project Managers Need to Understand Strategy
Project management historically has been preoccupied solely with the planning and exe-
cution of projects. Strategy was considered to be under the purview of senior manage-
ment. This is old-school thinking. New-school thinking recognizes that project 
management is at the apex of strategy and operations. Aaron Shenhar speaks to this issue 
when he states, “. . . it is time to expand the traditional role of the project manager from 
an operational to a more strategic perspective. In the modern evolving organization, proj-
ect managers will be focused on business aspects, and their role will expand from getting 
the job done to achieving the business results and winning in the marketplace.”1
 
There are two main reasons why project managers need to understand their organiza-
tion’s mission and strategy. The first reason is so they can make appropriate decisions 
and adjustments. For example, how a project manager would respond to a suggestion to 
modify the design of a product to enhance performance will vary depending upon 
whether his company strives to be a product leader through innovation or to achieve 
operational excellence through low cost solutions. Similarly, how a project manager 
would respond to delays may vary depending upon strategic concerns. A project man-
ager will authorize overtime if her firm places a premium on getting to the market first. 
Explain why it is impor-
tant for project managers 
to understand their orga-
nization’s strategy.
2-1
LO
In 2016 Google Inc. topped Fortune 
magazine’s list of best companies to 
work at for the seventh time in the 
past ten years. When one enters the 
24-hour Googleplex located in 
Mountain View, California, you feel that you are 
walking through a new-age college campus rather 
than the corporate office of a billion-dollar business. 
The collection of interconnected low-rise buildings 
with colorful, glass-encased offices feature upscale 
trappings—free gourmet meals three times a day, 
free use of an outdoor wave pool, indoor gym and 
large child care facility, private shuttle bus service to 
and from San Francisco and other residential  areas—
that are the envy of workers across the Bay area. 
These perks and others reflect Google’s culture of 
keeping people happy and thinking in unconven-
tional ways.
 
The importance of corporate culture is no more evi-
dent than in the fact that the head of Human Resources, 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  3 . 4
Google-y*
teams typically have daily “stand-up” meetings seven min-
utes after the hour. Why seven minutes after the hour? 
Because Google cofounder Sergey Brin once estimated 
that it took seven minutes to walk across the Google cam-
pus. Everybody stands to make sure no one gets too com-
fortable and no time is wasted during the rapid-fire 
update As one manager noted “The whole concept of
© Caiaimage/Glow Images
www.ebook3000.com

xiv
Note to Student
You will find the content of this text highly practical, relevant, and current. The con-
cepts discussed are relatively simple and intuitive. As you study each chapter we sug-
gest you try to grasp not only how things work, but why things work. You are 
encouraged to use the text as a handbook as you move through the three levels of 
competency:
I know.
I can do.
I can adapt to new situations.
 
Project management is both people and technical oriented. Project management 
involves understanding the cause-effect relationships and interactions among the 
sociotechnical dimensions of projects. Improved competency in these dimensions will 
greatly enhance your competitive edge as a project manager.
 
The field of project management is growing in importance and at an exponential 
rate. It is nearly impossible to imagine a future management career that does not 
include management of projects. Résumés of managers will soon be primarily a 
description of the individual’s participation in and contributions to projects.
 
Good luck on your journey through the text and on your future projects.
Chapter-by-Chapter Revisions for the Seventh Edition
Chapter 1: Modern Project Management
∙ New Snapshot: Project Management in Action 2016.
∙ Information updated.
∙  New Snapshot: Ron Parker replaced Research Highlight: Works well with others.
∙  New case: The Hokie Lunch Group.
Chapter 2: Organization Strategy and Project Selection
∙  New Snapshot: Project Code Names replaced HP’s Strategy Revision.
Chapter 3: Organization: Structure and Culture
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  Snapshot: Google-y updated.
∙  Snapshot: Skunk Works at Lockheed Martin updated.
Chapter 4: Defining the Project
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  New case: Home Improvement Project.

Note to Student xv
Chapter 5: Estimating Project Times and Costs
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  New Snapshot: London 2012 Olympics: Avoiding White Elephant curse.
∙  Expanded discussion of Mega Projects including the emergence of white 
elephants.
Chapter 6: Developing a Project Schedule
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  New Exercises 2-15 and Lag Exercises 18-21.
∙  Shoreline Stadium case replaces Greendale Stadium case.
Chapter 7: Managing Risk
∙  Learning objectives established.
Chapter 8 Appendix 1: The Critical-Chain Approach
∙  Learning objectives established.
Chapter 9: Reducing Project Duration
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  Snapshot: Smartphone Wars updated.
∙  New exercises 1-7.
Chapter 10: Leadership: Being an Effective Project Manager
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  New Research Highlight: Give and Take.
∙  Ethics discussion expanded.
Chapter 11: Managing Project Teams
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  Expanded discussion on project vision.
Chapter 12: Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
∙  Learning objectives established.
∙  Discussion of RFP process.
∙  New Snapshot: U.S. Department of Defense’s Value Engineering Awards 2015.
Chapter 13 Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
∙  Learning Objectives established.
∙  Discussion of milestone schedules.
∙  New Snapshot: Guidelines for Setting Milestones.
∙  Discussion of Management Reserve Index.
∙  New case: Shoreline Stadium Status Report.
www.ebook3000.com

xvi Note to Student
Chapter 14: Project Closure
∙  Major Revision of chapter with more attention to project audit and closing 
activities.
∙  New Snapshot: The Wake.
∙  New Snapshot: 2015 PMO of the Year.
∙  New Snapshot: Operation Eagle Claw.
∙  Project Management Maturity model introduced.
Chapter 15: International Projects
∙  Learning Objectives established.
Chapter 16: An Introduction to Agile Project Management
∙  Learning Objectives established.
∙  New Snapshot: Kanban.

xvii
Preface ix
 1. Modern Project Management 2
 2. Organization Strategy and Project 
Selection 26
 3. Organization: Structure and Culture 66
 4. Defining the Project 100
 5. Estimating Project Times and Costs 128
 6. Developing a Project Plan 162
 7. Managing Risk 206
 8. Scheduling Resources and Costs 250
 9. Reducing Project Duration 304
 10. Being an Effective Project Manager 338
 11. Managing Project Teams 374
 12. Outsourcing: Managing 
Interorganizational Relations 418
Brief Contents
 13. Progress and Performance Measurement 
and Evaluation 458
 14. Project Closure 514
 15. International Projects 544
 16. An Introduction to Agile Project 
Management 578
APPENDIX
 One Solutions to Selected Exercises 603
 Two Computer Project Exercises 616
GLOSSARY 633
ACRONYMS 640
PROJECT MANAGEMENT EQUATIONS 641
CROSS REFERENCE OF PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 642
SOCIO-TECHNICAL APPROACH TO 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 643
INDEX 644
www.ebook3000.com

xviii
Contents
Preface ix
Chapter 1
Modern Project Management 2
1.1 What Is a Project? 6
What a Project Is Not 7
Program versus Project 7
The Project Life Cycle 8
The Project Manager 9
Being Part of a Project Team 11
1.2 Current Drivers of Project Management 12
Compression of the Product Life Cycle 12
Knowledge Explosion 12
Triple Bottom Line (Planet, People, Profit) 12
Increased Customer Focus 12
Small Projects Represent Big Problems 15
1.3 Project Governance 15
Alignment of Projects with Organizational 
Strategy 16
1.4 Project Management Today: A Socio-Technical 
Approach 17
Summary 18
Chapter 2
Organization Strategy and Project  
Selection 26
2.1 The Strategic Management Process:  
An Overview 29
Four Activities of the Strategic Management 
Process 29
2.2 The Need for a Project Priority System 34
Problem 1: The Implementation Gap 34
Problem 2: Organization Politics 35
Problem 3: Resource Conflicts and Multitasking 36
2.3 A Portfolio Management System 37
Classification of the Project 37
2.4 Selection Criteria 38
Financial Criteria 38
Nonfinancial Criteria 40
2.5 Applying a Selection Model 43
Project Classification 43
Sources and Solicitation of Project Proposals 44
Ranking Proposals and Selection of Projects 46
2.6  Managing the Portfolio System 48
Senior Management Input 48
The Governance Team Responsibilities 49
Balancing the Portfolio for Risks and Types  
of Projects 50
Summary 51
Chapter 3
Organization: Structure and Culture 66
3.1  Project Management Structures 68
Organizing Projects within the  
Functional Organization 68
Organizing Projects as Dedicated Teams 71
Organizing Projects within a Matrix  
Arrangement 75
Different Matrix Forms 76
3.2  What Is the Right Project Management 
Structure? 79
Organization Considerations 79
Project Considerations 79
3.3  Organizational Culture 81
What Is Organizational Culture? 81
Identifying Cultural Characteristics 83
3.4  Implications of Organizational Culture for 
Organizing Projects 86
Summary 89
Chapter 4
Defining the Project 100
4.1  Step 1: Defining the Project Scope 102
Employing a Project Scope Checklist 103
4.2  Step 2: Establishing Project Priorities 106
4.3  Step 3: Creating the Work Breakdown 
Structure 108
Major Groupings Found in a WBS 108
How WBS Helps the Project Manager 108
A Simple WBS Development 109
4.4  Step 4: Integrating the WBS with the 
Organization 113
4.5  Step 5: Coding the WBS for the Information 
System 113
4.6  Process Breakdown Structure 116

Contents xix
4.7  Responsibility Matrices 117
4.8  Project Communication Plan 119
Summary 121
Chapter 5
Estimating Project Times  
and Costs 128
5.1  Factors Influencing the Quality of  
Estimates 130
Planning Horizon 130
Project Complexity 130
People 131
Project Structure and Organization 131
Padding Estimates 131
Organization Culture 131
Other Factors 131
5.2  Estimating Guidelines for Times, Costs,  
and Resources 132
5.3  Top-Down versus Bottom-Up  
Estimating 134
5.4 Methods for Estimating Project Times  
and Costs 136
Top-Down Approaches for Estimating Project Times 
and Costs 136
Bottom-Up Approaches for Estimating Project  
Times and Costs 140
A Hybrid: Phase Estimating 141
5.5 Level of Detail 143
5.6  Types of Costs 144
Direct Costs 145
Direct Project Overhead Costs 145
General and Administrative (G&A) Overhead 
Costs 145
5.7  Refining Estimates 146
5.8  Creating a Database for Estimating 148
5.9  Mega Projects: A Special Case 149
Summary 151
Appendix 5.1: Learning Curves for  
Estimating 157
Chapter 6
Developing a Project Plan 162
6.1  Developing the Project Network 163
6.2  From Work Package to Network 164
6.3  Constructing a Project Network 166
Terminology 166
Basic Rules to Follow in Developing Project  
Networks 166
6.4  Activity-on-Node (AON) Fundamentals 167
6.5  Network Computation Process 171
Forward Pass—Earliest Times 171
Backward Pass—Latest Times 173
Determining Slack (or Float) 175
6.6  Using the Forward and Backward Pass 
Information 177
6.7  Level of Detail for Activities 178
6.8  Practical Considerations 178
Network Logic Errors 178
Activity Numbering 179
Use of Computers to Develop Networks 179
Calendar Dates 182
Multiple Starts and Multiple Projects 182
6.9  Extended Network Techniques to Come Closer  
to Reality 182
Laddering 182
Use of Lags to Reduce Schedule Detail and Project 
Duration 183
An Example Using Lag Relationships—The Forward 
and Backward Pass 186
Hammock Activities 188
Summary 189
Chapter 7
Managing Risk 206
7.1  Risk Management Process 208
7.2  Step 1: Risk Identification 210
7.3  Step 2: Risk Assessment 212
Probability Analysis 215
7.4  Step 3: Risk Response Development 216
Mitigating Risk 216
Avoiding Risk 217
Transferring Risk 217
Accept Risk 218
7.5  Contingency Planning 219
Technical Risks 220
Schedule Risks 222
Cost Risks 222
Funding Risks 222
7.6  Opportunity Management 223
7.7  Contingency Funding and Time Buffers 223
Budget Reserves 224
Management Reserves 224
Time Buffers 225
7.8  Step 4: Risk Response Control 225
7.9  Change Control Management 226
Summary 230
Appendix 7.1: PERT and PERT Simulation 240
www.ebook3000.com

xx Contents
Chapter 8
Scheduling Resources and Costs 250
8.1  Overview of the Resource Scheduling 
Problem 252
8.2  Types of Resource Constraints 254
8.3  Classification of a Scheduling  
Problem 255
8.4  Resource Allocation Methods 255
Assumptions 255
Time-Constrained Project: Smoothing Resource 
Demand 256
Resource-Constrained Projects 257
8.5  Computer Demonstration of Resource-
Constrained Scheduling 262
The Impacts of Resource-Constrained  
Scheduling 266
8.6  Splitting Activities 269
8.7  Benefits of Scheduling Resources 270
8.8  Assigning Project Work 271
8.9  Multiproject Resource Schedules 272
8.10 Using the Resource Schedule to Develop a 
Project Cost Baseline 273
Why a Time-Phased Budget Baseline  
Is Needed  273
Creating a Time-Phased Budget 274
Summary 279
Appendix 8.1: The Critical-Chain Approach 294
Chapter 9
Reducing Project Duration 304
9.1 Rationale for Reducing Project  
Duration 306
9.2  Options for Accelerating Project  
Completion 307
Options When Resources Are Not Constrained 308
Options When Resources Are Constrained 310
9.3  Project Cost–Duration Graph 313
Explanation of Project Costs 313
9.4  Constructing a Project Cost–Duration  
Graph 314
Determining the Activities to Shorten 314
A Simplified Example 316
9.5  Practical Considerations 318
Using the Project Cost–Duration Graph 318
Crash Times 319
Linearity Assumption 319
Choice of Activities to Crash Revisited 319
Time Reduction Decisions and Sensitivity 320
 9.6  What If Cost, Not Time, Is the Issue? 321
Reduce Project Scope 322
Have Owner Take on More Responsibility 322
Outsourcing Project Activities or Even the Entire 
Project 322
Brainstorming Cost Savings Options 322
Summary 323
Chapter 10
Being an Effective Project Manager 338
10.1 Managing versus Leading a Project 340
10.2 Managing Project Stakeholders 341
10.3 Influence as Exchange 345
Task-Related Currencies 345
Position-Related Currencies 346
Inspiration-Related Currencies 347
Relationship-Related Currencies 347
Personal-Related Currencies 348
10.4 Social Network Building 348
Mapping Stakeholder Dependencies 348
Management by Wandering Around (MBWA) 350
Managing Upward Relations 351
Leading by Example 353
10.5 Ethics and Project Management 356
10.6 Building Trust: The Key to Exercising  
Influence 357
10.7 Qualities of an Effective Project Manager 359
Summary 362
Chapter 11
Managing Project Teams 374
11.1 The Five-Stage Team Development Model 377
11.2 Situational Factors Affecting Team 
Development  379
11.3  Building High-Performance Project Teams 381
Recruiting Project Members 381
Conducting Project Meetings 383
Establishing Team Norms 385
Establishing a Team Identity 387
Creating a Shared Vision 388
Managing Project Reward Systems 391
Orchestrating the Decision-Making Process 392
Managing Conflict within the Project 394
Rejuvenating the Project Team 398
11.4  Managing Virtual Project Teams 399
11.5  Project Team Pitfalls 403
Groupthink 403
Bureaucratic Bypass Syndrome 404

Contents xxi
Team Spirit Becomes Team Infatuation 404
Going Native 404
Summary 405
Chapter 12
Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational 
Relations 418
12.1 Outsourcing Project Work 420
12.2 Request for Proposal (RFP) 424
Selection of Contractor from Bid Proposals 425
12.3 Best Practices in Outsourcing Project Work 426
Well-Defined Requirements and Procedures 426
Extensive Training and Team-Building Activities 428
Well-Established Conflict Management Processes  
in Place 429
Frequent Review and Status Updates 431
Co-Location When Needed 432
Fair and Incentive-Laden Contracts 432
Long-Term Outsourcing Relationships 433
12.4 The Art of Negotiating 434
1. Separate the People from the Problem 435
2. Focus on Interests, Not Positions 436
3. Invent Options for Mutual Gain 437
4. When Possible, Use Objective Criteria 138
Dealing with Unreasonable People 438
12.5 A Note on Managing Customer Relations 439
Summary 442
Appendix 12.1: Contract Management 451
Chapter 13
Progress and Performance Measurement 
and Evaluation 458
13.1 Structure of a Project Monitoring Information 
System 460
What Data Are Collected? 460
Collecting Data and Analysis 460
Reports and Reporting 460
13.2 The Project Control Process 461
Step 1: Setting a Baseline Plan 461
Step 2: Measuring Progress and Performance 461
Step 3: Comparing Plan against Actual 462
Step 4: Taking Action 462
13.3 Monitoring Time Performance 462
Tracking Gantt Chart 463
Control Chart 463
Milestone Schedules 464
13.4 Development of an Earned Value Cost/Schedule 
System 467
Percent Complete Rule 467
What Costs Are Included in Baselines? 467
Methods of Variance Analysis 468
13.5 Developing a Status Report: A Hypothetical 
Example 470
Assumptions 470
Baseline Development 470
Development of the Status Report 471
13.6 Indexes to Monitor Progress 475
Performance Indexes 477
Project Percent Complete Indexes 474
Software for Project Cost/Schedule Systems 477
Additional Earned Value Rules 478
13.7 Forecasting Final Project Cost 476
13.8 Other Control Issues 481
Technical Performance Measurement 481
Scope Creep 483
Baseline Changes 483
The Costs and Problems of Data Acquisition 485
Summary 486
Appendix 13.1: The Application of Additional Earned 
Value Rules 505
Appendix 13.2: Obtaining Project Performance 
Information from MS Project 2010  
or 2015 511
Chapter 14
Project Closure 514
14.1 Types of Project Closure 516
14.2 Wrap-up Closure Activities 518
14.3 Project Audits 521
The Project Audit Process 522
Project Retrospectives 525
Project Audits: The Bigger Picture 529
14.4 Post-Implementation Evaluation 532
Team Evaluation 532
Individual, Team Member, and Project Manager 
Performance Reviews 534
Summary 537
Appendix 14.1: Project Closeout Checklist 539
Appendix 14.2: Euro Conversion—Project Closure 
Checklist 541
Chapter 15
International Projects 544
15.1 Environmental Factors 546
Legal/Political 546
Security 547
Geography 548
www.ebook3000.com

xxii Contents
Economic 549
Infrastructure 550
Culture 551
15.2 Project Site Selection 553
15.3 Cross-Cultural Considerations:  
A Closer Look 554
Adjustments 555
Working in Mexico 556
Working in France 559
Working in Saudi Arabia 560
Working in China 562
Working in the United States 563
Summary Comments about Working in Different 
Cultures 565
Culture Shock 565
Coping with Culture Shock 567
15.4 Selection and Training for International 
Projects 568
Summary 571
Chapter 16
An Introduction to Agile Project 
Management 578
16.1 Traditional versus Agile Methods 580
16.2 Agile PM 582
16.3 Agile PM in Action: Scrum 585
Roles and Responsibilities 586
Scrum Meetings 587
Product and Sprint Backlogs 588
Sprint and Release Burndown Charts 589
16.4 Applying Agile PM to Large Projects 592
16.5 Limitations and Concerns 593
Summary 595
Appendix One:  Solutions to Selected 
Exercise 603
Appendix Two:  Computer Project 
Exercises 616
Glossary 633
Acronyms 640
Project Management Equations 641
Cross Reference of Project 
Management 642
Socio-Technical Approach to Project 
Management 643
Index 644

Project  
Management:
The Managerial Process
www.ebook3000.com

2
Modern Project Management
1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
1-1 
Understand why project management is crucial in 
today’s world.
1-2 Distinguish a project from routine operations.
1-3 Identify the different stages of project life cycle.
1-4 Understand the importance of projects in 
 implementing organization strategy.
1-5 Understand that managing projects involves 
 balancing the technical and sociocultural 
 dimensions of the project.
OUTLINE
1.1 
What Is a Project?
1.2 Current Drivers of Project Management
1.3 Project Governance
1.4 Project Management Today—A Socio-Technical 
Approach
Summary
Text Overview
C H A P T E R  O N E

3
All of mankind’s greatest accomplishments—from building the great pyra-
mids to discovering a cure for polio to putting a man on the moon—began 
as a project.
This is a good time to be reading a book about project management. Business leaders 
and experts have proclaimed that project management is critical to sustainable eco-
nomic growth. New jobs and competitive advantage are achieved by constant innova-
tion, developing new products and services, and improving both productivity and 
quality of work. This is the world of project management. Project management pro-
vides people with a powerful set of tools that improves their ability to plan, implement, 
and manage activities to accomplish specific objectives. But project management is 
more than just a set of tools; it is a results-oriented management style that places a 
premium on building collaborative relationships among a diverse cast of characters. 
Exciting opportunities await people skilled in project management.
 
The project approach has long been the style of doing business in the construction 
industry, U.S. Department of Defense contracts, and Hollywood, as well as big con-
sulting firms. Now project management has spread to all avenues of work. Today, 
Understand why project 
management is crucial in 
today’s world.
1-1
LO
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

4  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
project teams carry out everything from port expansions to hospital restructuring to 
upgrading information systems. They are creating next-generation fuel-efficient vehi-
cles, developing sustainable sources of energy, and exploring the farthest reaches of 
outer space. The impact of project management is most profound in the electronics 
industry, where the new folk heroes are young professionals whose Herculean efforts 
lead to the constant flow of new hardware and software products.
 
Project management is not limited to the private sector. Project management is also 
a vehicle for doing good deeds and solving social problems. Endeavors such as provid-
ing emergency aid to areas hit by natural disasters, devising a strategy for reducing 
crime and drug abuse within a city, or organizing a community effort to renovate a 
public playground would and do benefit from the application of modern project man-
agement skills and techniques.
 
Perhaps the best indicator of demand for project management can be seen in the 
rapid expansion of the Project Management Institute (PMI), a professional organiza-
tion for project managers. PMI membership has grown from 93,000 in 2002 to more 
than 478,000 currently. See Snapshot from Practice 1.1 for information regarding pro-
fessional certification in project management.
 
It’s nearly impossible to pick up a newspaper or business periodical and not find 
something about projects. This is no surprise! Approximately $2.5 trillion (about 25 per-
cent of the U.S. gross national product) is spent on projects each year in the United States 
alone. Other countries are increasingly spending more on projects. Millions of people 
around the world consider project management the major task in their profession.
 
Most of the people who excel at managing projects never have the title of project 
manager. They include accountants, lawyers, administrators, scientists, contractors, pub-
lic health officials, teachers, and community advocates whose success depends upon 
being able to lead and manage project work. For some, the very nature of their work is 
project driven. Projects may be cases for lawyers, audits for accountants, events for 
The Project Management Institute (PMI) 
was founded in 1969 as an international 
society for project managers. Today PMI 
has members from more than 180 coun-
tries and more than 478,500 members. 
PMI professionals come from virtually every major indus-
try, including aerospace, automotive, business manage-
ment, construction, engineering, financial services, 
information technology, pharmaceuticals, health care, and 
telecommunications.
 
PMI provides certification as a Project Management 
Professional (PMP)—someone who has documented 
sufficient project experience, agreed to follow the PMI 
code of professional conduct, and demonstrated mas-
tery of the field of project management by passing a 
comprehensive examination. The number of people 
earning PMP status has grown dramatically in recent 
years. In 1996 there were fewer than 3,000 certified 
project management professionals. By 2016 there were 
more than 695,000 Professional credential holders.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 .1
The Project Management Institute*
 
Just as the CPA exam is a standard for accountants, 
passing the PMP exam may become the standard for 
project managers. Some companies are requiring that 
all their project managers be PMP certified. Moreover, 
many job postings are restricted to PMPs. Job seekers, 
in general, are finding that being PMP certified is an 
advantage in the marketplace.
 
PMI added a certification as a Certified Associate 
in Project Management (CAPM). CAPM is designed for 
project team members and entry-level project manag-
ers, as well as qualified undergraduate and graduate 
students who want a credential to recognize their mas-
tery of the project management body of knowledge. 
CAPM does not require the extensive project manage-
ment experience associated with the PMP. For more 
details on PMP and CAPM, google PMI to find the cur-
rent website for the Project Management Institute.
*PMI Today, March 2016, p. 4.

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  5
artists, and renovations for contractors. For others, projects may be a small, but critical 
part of their work. For example, a high school teacher who teaches four classes a day is 
responsible for coaching a group of students to compete in a national debate competition. 
A store manager who oversees daily operations is charged with developing an employee 
retention program. A sales account executive is given the additional assignment of team 
lead to launch daily deals into a new city. A public health official who manages a clinic 
is also responsible for organizing a Homeless Youth Connect event. For these and others, 
project management is not a title, but a critical job requirement. It is hard to think of a 
profession or a career path that would not benefit from being good at managing 
projects.
 
Not only is project management critical to most careers, the skill set is transferable 
across most businesses and professions. At its core, project management fundamentals are 
universal. The same project management methodology that is used to develop a new prod-
uct can be adapted to create new services, organize events, refurbish aging operations, and 
so forth. In a world where it is estimated that each person is likely to experience three to 
four career changes, managing projects is a talent worthy of development.
 
The significance of project management can also be seen in the classroom. 
Twenty years ago major universities offered one or two classes in project management, 
primarily for engineers. Today, most universities offer multiple sections of project man-
agement classes, with the core group of engineers being supplemented by business stu-
dents majoring in marketing, management information systems (MIS), and finance, as 
well as students from other disciplines such as oceanography, health sciences, computer 
sciences, and liberal arts. These students are finding that their exposure to project man-
agement is providing them with distinct advantages when it comes time to look for jobs. 
More and more employers are looking for graduates with project management skills. 
1.  Business information: Join a proj-
ect team charged with installing 
new data security system.
2.  Physical education: Design and 
 develop a new fitness program for 
 
senior citizens that combines principles of yoga and 
aerobics.
3. Marketing: Execute a sales program for new home 
air purifier.
4. Industrial engineering: Manage a team to create a 
value chain report for every aspect of key product 
from design to customer delivery.
5. Chemistry: Develop a quality control program for 
organization’s drug production facilities.
6. Management: Implement a new store layout design.
7. Pre-med neurology student: Join project team link-
ing mind mapping to an imbedded prosthetic that 
will allow blind people to function near normally.
8. Sports communication: Join Olympic project team 
that will promote women’s sports products for the 
2016 Games in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
 ""9. Systems engineer: Become a project team member 
of a project to develop data mining of medical pa-
pers and studies related to drug efficacy.
10. Accounting: Work on an audit of a major client.
 11. Public health: Research and design a medical mari-
juana educational program.
12. English: Create a web-based user manual for new 
electronics product.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 . 2
A Dozen Examples of Projects  
Given to Recent College Graduates
© John Fedele/Blend Images LLC, RF
www.ebook3000.com

6  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
See the nearby Snapshot from Practice 1.2 for examples of projects given to recent col-
lege graduates. The logical starting point for developing these skills is understanding 
the uniqueness of a project and of project managers.
1.1 What Is a Project?
What do the following headlines have in common?
Millions watch Olympic Opening Ceremony
Citywide WiFi System Set to Go Live
Hospitals Respond to New Healthcare Reforms
Apple’s New iPhone Hits the Market
City Receives Stimulus Funds to Expand Light Rail System
All of these events represent projects.
© McGraw-Hill Education
The Project Management Institute provides the following definition of a project:
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.
Like most organizational efforts, the major goal of a project is to satisfy a customer’s 
need. Beyond this fundamental similarity, the characteristics of a project help 
 Distinguish a project 
from routine operations.
1-2
LO

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  7
differentiate it from other endeavors of the organization. The major characteristics of a 
project are as follows:
1. An established objective.
2. A defined life span with a beginning and an end.
3. Usually, the involvement of several departments and professionals.
4. Typically, doing something that has never been done before.
5. Specific time, cost, and performance requirements.
First, projects have a defined objective—whether it is constructing a 12-story apart-
ment complex by January 1 or releasing version 2.0 of a specific software package as 
quickly as possible. This singular purpose is often lacking in daily organizational life 
in which workers perform repetitive operations each day.
 
Second, because there is a specified objective, projects have a defined endpoint, 
which is contrary to the ongoing duties and responsibilities of traditional jobs. In many 
cases, individuals move from one project to the next as opposed to staying in one job. 
After helping to install a security system, an IT engineer may be assigned to develop a 
database for a different client.
 
Third, unlike much organizational work that is segmented according to functional 
specialty, projects typically require the combined efforts of a variety of specialists. 
Instead of working in separate offices under separate managers, project participants, 
whether they be engineers, financial analysts, marketing professionals, or quality con-
trol specialists, work closely together under the guidance of a project manager to com-
plete a project.
 
The fourth characteristic of a project is that it is nonroutine and has some unique 
elements. This is not an either/or issue but a matter of degree. Obviously, accomplish-
ing something that has never been done before, such as building an electric automobile 
or landing two mechanical rovers on Mars, requires solving previously unsolved prob-
lems and using breakthrough technology. On the other hand, even basic construction 
projects that involve established sets of routines and procedures require some degree 
of customization that makes them unique.
 
Finally, specific time, cost, and performance requirements bind projects. Projects 
are evaluated according to accomplishment, cost, and time spent. These triple con-
straints impose a higher degree of accountability than you typically find in most jobs. 
These three also highlight one of the primary functions of project management, which 
is balancing the trade-offs among time, cost, and performance while ultimately satisfy-
ing the customer.
What a Project Is Not
Projects should not be confused with everyday work. A project is not routine, repeti-
tive work! Ordinary daily work typically requires doing the same or similar work over 
and over, while a project is done only once; a new product or service exists when the 
project is completed. Examine the list in Table 1.1 that compares routine, repetitive 
work and projects. Recognizing the difference is important because too often resources 
can be used up on daily operations which may not contribute to longer range organiza-
tion strategies that require innovative new products.
Program versus Project
In practice the terms project and program cause confusion. They are often used syn-
onymously. A program is a group of related projects designed to accomplish a 
www.ebook3000.com

8  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
common goal over an extended period of time. Each project within a program has a 
project manager. The major differences lie in scale and time span.
 
Program management is the process of managing a group of ongoing, interdepen-
dent, related projects in a coordinated way to achieve strategic objectives. For example, 
a pharmaceutical organization could have a program for curing cancer. The cancer pro-
gram includes and coordinates all cancer projects that continue over an extended time 
horizon (Gray, 2011). Coordinating all cancer projects under the oversight of a cancer 
team provides benefits not available from managing them individually. This cancer 
team also oversees the selection and prioritizing of cancer projects that are included in 
their special “Cancer” portfolio. Although each project retains its own goals and scope, 
the project manager and team are also motivated by the higher program goal. Program 
goals are closely related to broad strategic organization goals.
The Project Life Cycle
Another way of illustrating the unique nature of project work is in terms of the project 
life cycle. Some project managers find it useful to use the project life cycle as the cor-
nerstone for managing projects. The life cycle recognizes that projects have a limited 
life span and that there are predictable changes in level of effort and focus over the life 
of the project. There are a number of different life-cycle models in project management 
literature. Many are unique to a specific industry or type of project. For example, a new 
software development project may consist of five phases: definition, design, code, inte-
gration/test, and maintenance. A generic cycle is depicted in Figure 1.1.
 
The project life cycle typically passes sequentially through four stages: defining, 
planning, executing, and delivering. The starting point begins the moment the project 
is given the go-ahead. Project effort starts slowly, builds to a peak, and then declines to 
delivery of the project to the customer.
1. Defining stage: Specifications of the project are defined; project objectives are 
established; teams are formed; major responsibilities are assigned.
2. Planning stage: The level of effort increases, and plans are developed to determine 
what the project will entail, when it will be scheduled, whom it will benefit, what 
quality level should be maintained, and what the budget will be.
3. Executing stage: A major portion of the project work takes place—both physical 
and mental. The physical product is produced (a bridge, a report, a software pro-
gram). Time, cost, and specification measures are used for control. Is the project on 
schedule, on budget, and meeting specifications? What are the forecasts of each of 
these measures? What revisions/changes are necessary?
4. Closing stage: Closing includes three activities: delivering the project product to 
the customer, redeploying project resources, and post-project review. Delivery of 
Identify the different 
stages of project life 
cycle.
1-3
LO
TABLE 1.1 Comparison of Routine Work with Projects
Routine, Repetitive Work 
Projects
Taking class notes 
Writing a term paper
Daily entering sales receipts into the 
Setting up a sales kiosk for a professional accounting 
 accounting ledger 
 meeting
Responding to a supply-chain request 
Developing a supply-chain information system
Practicing scales on the piano 
Writing a new piano piece
Routine manufacture of an Apple iPod 
 Designing an iPod that is approximately 2 × 4 inches,  
 interfaces with PC, and stores 10,000 songs
Attaching tags on a manufactured product 
Wire-tag projects for GE and Walmart 

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  9
the project might include customer training and transferring documents. Redeploy-
ment usually involves releasing project equipment/materials to other projects and 
finding new assignments for team members. Post-project reviews include not only 
assessing performance but also capturing lessons learned.
 
In practice, the project life cycle is used by some project groups to depict the timing 
of major tasks over the life of the project. For example, the design team might plan a 
major commitment of resources in the defining stage, while the quality team would 
expect their major effort to increase in the latter stages of the project life cycle. Because 
most organizations have a portfolio of projects going on concurrently, each at a differ-
ent stage of each project’s life cycle, careful planning and management at the organiza-
tion and project levels are imperative.
The Project Manager
At first glance project managers perform the same functions as other managers. That 
is, they plan, schedule, motivate, and control. However, what makes them unique is 
that they manage temporary, nonrepetitive activities, to complete a fixed life project. 
Unlike functional managers, who take over existing operations, project managers cre-
ate a project team and organization where none existed before. They must decide what 
and how things should be done instead of simply managing set processes. They must 
meet the challenges of each phase of the project life cycle, and even oversee the dis-
solution of their operation when the project is completed.
 
Project managers must work with a diverse troupe of characters to complete proj-
ects. They are typically the direct link to the customer and must manage the tension 
between customer expectations and what is feasible and reasonable. Project managers 
provide direction, coordination, and integration to the project team, which is often 
made up of part-time participants loyal to their functional departments. They often 
must work with a cadre of outsiders—vendors, suppliers, subcontractors—who do not 
necessarily share their project allegience.
Level of effort
1. Goals
2. Speciﬁcations
3. Tasks
4. Responsibilities
1. Schedules
2. Budgets
3. Resources
4. Risks
5. Staffing
1. Status reports
2. Changes
3. Quality
4. Forecasts
1. Train customer
2. Transfer documents
3. Release resources
4. Evaluation
5. Lessons learned
Deﬁning
Deﬁning
Start
Time
End
Planning
Planning
Executing
Executing
Closing
Closing
FIGURE 1.1
Project Life Cycle
www.ebook3000.com

10  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
 
Project managers are ultimately responsible for performance (frequently with too 
little authority). They must ensure that appropriate trade-offs are made among the 
time, cost, and performance requirements of the project. At the same time, unlike their 
functional counterparts, project managers generally possess only rudimentary techni-
cal knowledge to make such decisions. Instead, they must orchestrate the completion 
of the project by inducing the right people, at the right time, to address the right issues 
and make the right decisions.
 
While project management is not for the timid, working on projects can be an 
extremely rewarding experience. Life on projects is rarely boring; each day is different 
from the last. Since most projects are directed at solving some tangible problem or 
pursuing some useful opportunity, project managers find their work personally mean-
ingful and satisfying. They enjoy the act of creating something new and innovative. 
Project managers and team members can feel immense pride in their accomplishment, 
whether it is a new bridge, a new product, or needed service. Project managers are 
often stars in their organization and well compensated.
 
Good project managers are always in demand. Every industry is looking for effective 
people who can get the right things done on time. See Snapshot from Practice 1.3: 
Ron Parker for an example of a former student who leveraged his ability to manage 
1986 
 B.S. Business  
Administration–Oregon 
State University
1986–1990 
 Food Products 
Manufacturing
1990–1994 
Wood Products Manufacturing
1994–Current 
Glass Products Manufacturing
Upon completion of my business degree at OSU, I was 
recruited by a Fortune 100 food products company for a 
first line production supervisor position. In that role, an 
opportunity came up for me to manage a project that 
involved rolling out a new statistical package-weight-
control program throughout the factory. Successfully 
completing that project was instrumental in accelerating 
my career within the company, advancing from supervi-
sor to product manager in less than three years.
 
After four years in food products I accepted an offer to 
join a wood products manufacturing company. Initially my 
role in this company was Human Resources Manager. My 
HR responsibilities included managing several projects to 
improve safety and employee retention. Successful com-
pletion of these projects led to a promotion to Plant Man-
ager. In the Plant Manager role, I was tasked with building 
and managing a new wood door manufacturing factory. 
After successfully taking that factory to full production, I 
was promoted again to Corporate Manager of Continuous 
Improvement. This “culture change” project involved 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 . 3
Ron Parker
implementing Total Quality Management throughout 13 
different manufacturing factories as well as all the indirect 
and support functions within the corporation. Shortly after 
we successfully ingrained this new culture in the company, 
the owner passed away, leading me to look for other 
employment.
 
I was able to leverage my previous experience and 
success to convince the owner of a struggling glass fab-
rication company to hire me. In this new role as General 
Manager, I was tasked with turning the company 
around. This was my largest project yet. Turning a com-
pany around involves a myriad of smaller improvement 
projects spanning from facilities and equipment 
improvements to product line additions and deletions to 
sales and marketing strategy and everything in 
between. In four years, we successfully turned the com-
pany around to the extent that the owner was able to 
sell the company and comfortably retire.
 
Successfully turning that glass company around got 
the attention of a much larger competitor of ours, resulting 
in an offer of employment. This new offer involved the 
start-up of a $30M high-tech glass manufacturing facility in 
another state. We were able to take that facility from a dirt 
field to the highest volume manufacturing facility of its 
kind in the world in just three years. After building and 
operating this factory at a world-class benchmark level for 
eight years, I came across a new and exciting opportunity 
to help expand a strong glass fabrication company in 

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  11
Canada. I spent four years successfully transitioning this 
Canadian company from a medium-size glass fabrication 
facility to one of the largest and most successful of its kind 
in North America.
 
After tiring of the “Great White North,” I found an 
opportunity to tackle the largest and most impactful 
project of my career. I’m currently VP of Operations in a 
venture-funded high-tech start-up company. In this 
role, I’m overseeing the construction and start-up of 
the first full-scale, high-volume electrochromic glass 
fabrication factory in the world. This new project 
involves building a company from the ground up and 
taking an exciting new technology from the lab to full-
scale commercialization. Success in this role, although 
still far from being certain, will eventually revolutionize 
the glass industry through the introduction of a product 
that dramatically improves the energy efficiency and 
occupant comfort of buildings around the world.
 
Looking back on my career, it is apparent that my 
degree of success has largely been the result of taking 
on and successfully completing successively larger and 
increasingly impactful projects.
 
There’s a saying that’s always resonated with me: 
“If your only tool is a hammer, all your problems look 
like nails.” Good tools are hard to come by and heavy 
to carry around. I like my tool bag filled with generalist 
tools; things like communication skills, leadership, 
common sense, judgment, reasoning, logic and a 
strong sense of urgency. I often wonder how much 
more I could have accomplished had I actually studied 
project management and had more of that toolset in 
my bag. With a bag full of strong generalist tools, you 
can tackle any problem in any business. Project man-
agement is clearly one of those skills where the better 
you are at it, the higher your chances of success in any 
business environment. Having the tools is only part of 
the equation though. To be successful, you must also 
be willing to run at problems/opportunities when every-
one else is running away from them.
projects to build a successful career in the glass products industry. Clearly, project man-
agement is a challenging and exciting profession. This text is intended to provide the 
necessary knowledge, perspective, and tools to enable students to accept the challenge.
Being Part of a Project Team
Most people’s first exposure to project management occurs while working as part of a team 
assigned to complete a specific project. Sometimes this work is full-time, but in most cases, 
people work part-time on one or more projects. They must learn how to juggle their day-to-
day commitments with additional project responsibilities. They may join a team with a 
long history of working together, in which case roles and norms are firmly established. 
Alternatively, their team may consist of strangers from different departments and organiza-
tions. As such, they endure the growing pains of a group evolving into a team. They need 
to be a positive force in helping the team coalesce into an effective project team.
 
Not only are there people issues, but project members are also expected to use proj-
ect management tools and concepts. They develop or are given a project charter or 
scope statement that defines the objectives and parameters of the project. They work 
with others to create a project schedule and budget that will guide project execution. 
They need to understand project priorities so they can make independent decisions. 
Courtesy of Ron Parker
www.ebook3000.com

12  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
They must know how to monitor and report project progress. Although much of this 
book is written from the perspective of a project manager, the tools, concepts, and 
methods are critical to everyone working on a project. Project members need to know 
how to avoid the dangers of scope creep, manage the critical path, engage in timely 
risk management, negotiate, and utilize virtual tools to communicate.
1.2 Current Drivers of Project Management
Project management is no longer a special-need management. It is rapidly becoming a 
standard way of doing business. See Snapshot from Practice 1.4: Project Management 
in Action: 2016. An increasing percentage of the typical firm’s effort is being devoted 
to projects. The future promises an increase in the importance and the role of projects 
in contributing to the strategic direction of organizations. Several reasons why this is 
the case are briefly discussed below.
Compression of the Product Life Cycle
One of the most significant driving forces behind the demand for project management 
is the shortening of the product life cycle. For example, today in high-tech industries 
the product life cycle is averaging six months to three years. Only 30 years ago, life 
cycles of 10 to 15 years were not uncommon. Time to market for new products with 
short life cycles has become increasingly important. A common rule of thumb in the 
world of high-tech product development is that a six-month project delay can result in 
a 33 percent loss in product revenue share. Speed, therefore, becomes a competitive 
advantage; more and more organizations are relying on cross-functional project teams 
to get new products and services to the market as quickly as possible.
Knowledge Explosion
The growth in new knowledge has increased the complexity of projects because proj-
ects encompass the latest advances. For example, building a road 30 years ago was a 
somewhat simple process. Today, each area has increased in complexity, including 
materials, specifications, codes, aesthetics, equipment, and required specialists. Simi-
larly, in today’s digital, electronic age it is becoming hard to find a new product that 
does not contain at least one microchip. Product complexity has increased the need to 
integrate divergent technologies. Project management has emerged as an important 
discipline for achieving this task.
Triple Bottom Line (Planet, People, Profit)
The threat of global warming has brought sustainable business practices to the fore-
front. Businesses can no longer simply focus on maximizing profit to the detriment of 
the environment and society. Efforts to reduce carbon imprint and utilize renewable 
resources are realized through effective project management. The impact of this move-
ment toward sustainability can be seen in changes in the objectives and techniques 
used to complete projects. See Snapshot from Practice 1.5: Dell Children’s Becomes 
World’s First “Green” Hospital.
Increased Customer Focus
Increased competition has placed a premium on customer satisfaction. Customers no 
longer simply settle for generic products and services. They want customized products 
Understand the impor-
tance of projects in im-
plementing organization 
strategy.
1-4
LO

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  13
Businesses thrive 
and survive based 
on their ability to 
manage projects 
that produce pro-
ducts and services that meet mar-
ket needs. Below is a small sample 
of projects that are important to 
their company’s future.
Panama: The Third Set of Locks 
Project
The expansion of the Panama Canal 
is scheduled to be operational in 
2016. The project doubles the capac-
ity of the Panama Canal by creating a 
new lane of traffic and allowing more and larger ships, 
the new Panamax size, which are about one and a half 
times bigger than the current size and can carry over 
twice as much cargo. With the third sets of locks, the 
canal will be able to manage traffic demand beyond 
2025 with a predicted inflationary adjusted revenue of 
over $6.2 billion per year.
Molinski, D., “Panama Canal, Consortium Reach Deal to 
Complete Work,” The Wall Street Journal, February 28, 
2014.
Google: Autonomous-Vehicle Project
Google has contracted Roush Enterprises of Detroit, 
Michigan, to build 150 self-driving car prototypes. With 
more than 90 percent of U.S. road collisions caused 
by human error, self-driving cars could prevent over 
$190 billion in annual damages and health costs as well 
as greatly reduce fuel consumption.
Parsi, N., “No Driver Necessary,” PM Network, August 
2015, pp. 7–9.
Studio Roosegaarde: Smog Free Tower
The Smog Free tower, which stands 23 feet tall, sucks 
and cleans 1 million cubic feet of polluted air an hour. 
Innovator Daan Roosegaarde began working on out-
door air purification after a particularly smoggy 2013 
trip to China.
Karif, O., “Innovation: Smog Eater,” Bloomberg Business-
Week, October 15, 2015, p. 22.
Facebook: Oculus Rift Virtual Reality Project
Facebook paid over $2 billion for virtual-reality start-up 
Oculus, which will release its Rift virtual reality headset 
in 2016. Video games will spur early sales of Rift, but 
mass adoption is likely to depend upon Hollywood. 
Lions Gate Entertainment and 21st Century Fox have 
agreed to sell movies via Oculus’s online store and  
Netflix will make its streaming service available on  
VR headsets.
Shaw, L., “Virtual Reality Goes to the Movies,” Bloom-
berg BusinessWeek, Special Issue: Year Ahead 2016, 
p. 74.
CogniToys: Dino Project
Rather than repeating catchphrases, as “talking” toys 
have done in the past, this dinosaur taps IBM’s Watson 
technology to engage kids ages 5 to 9 in a more mean-
ingful way. The wi-fi-enabled figurine talks back and 
learns from kids’ responses, helping them hone their 
math skills by asking harder questions. The trick, 
according to CogniToys CEO Donald Coolidge, is to 
make education seem like a “cool, fun experience.”
“The Toy That Talks Back,” Time, November 30/Decem-
ber 7, 2015, p. 81.
Coca-Cola Co.: Replenish Africa Initiative (RAIN)
The global beverage company aims to provide at least 
2 million people with safe water by the end of 2020. 
The firm is investing over $30 million in community-
based water projects across Africa. Greg Koch, senior 
director of global water stewardship says, “We know 
that to do business we need water. And when commu-
nities have access to safe water, you have the founda-
tion of a thriving community, which is a better place for 
everyone to do business.”
“Water Works,” PMNetwork, September, 2015, p. 53.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 . 4
Project Management  
in Action: 2016
© Asif Islam/Shutterstock
www.ebook3000.com

14  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
Dateline 1/7/2009, Austin Texas: Dell 
Children’s Medical Center becomes 
the first hospital in the world to 
receive platinum LEED (Leadership in 
Energy & Environmental Design) certi-
fication. Platinum certification is the highest award 
granted by the U.S. Green Building Council.
 
Dell Children’s occupies nearly one-half-million 
square feet on 32 acres that were once part of Austin’s 
old Mueller Airport. Its environmentally sensitive design 
not only conserves water and electricity, but positively 
impacts the hospital’s clinical environment by improv-
ing air quality, making natural sunlight readily avail-
able, and reducing a wide range of pollutants.
 
In order to receive LEED certification, buildings are 
rated in five key areas: sustainable site development, 
water savings, energy efficiency, materials selection, 
and environmental quality. Listed below are some of 
the accomplishments in each LEED category:
Sustainable Site
΄
47,000 tons of Mueller Airport runway material was 
reused on site.
΄
About 40 percent fly ash instead of Portland cement 
in concrete yields a drop in carbon dioxide emissions 
equivalent to taking 450 cars off the road.
΄
925 tons of construction waste was recycled on site.
Water Efficiency and Water Conservation
΄
Reclaimed water is used for irrigation; xeriscaped 
landscaping uses native plants, which require less 
water.
΄
Low-flow plumbing fixtures.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 . 5
Dell Children’s Becomes  
World’s First “Green” Hospital*
Energy Efficiency and Energy Conservation
΄
An on-site natural gas turbine supplies all electric-
ity, which is 75 percent more efficient than coal-
fired plants.
΄
Converted steam energy from a heating/cooling 
plant supplies all chilled water needs.
Indoor Environment Quality and Lighting
΄
Most interior spaces are within 32 feet of a 
window.
΄
Motion and natural light sensors shut off unneeded 
lights.
Conservation of Materials and Resources
΄
Use of local and regional materials saves fuel for 
shipping.
΄
Special paints and flooring emit low levels of vola-
tile organic compounds (VOCs).
“Even before the first plans were drawn up, we set our 
sight on creating a world-class children’s hospital, and 
becoming the first LEED Platinum hospital in the world 
was definitely part of that,” said Robert Bonar, presi-
dent and CEO, Dell Children’s Medical Center of Central 
Texas. “Our motivation to pursue LEED Platinum was 
not just environmental. Being a ‘green’ hospital has a 
profound, measurable effect on healing. What’s good 
for the environment and good for our neighbors is also 
good for our patients.”
and services that cater to their specific needs. This mandate requires a much closer 
working relationship between the provider and the receiver. Account executives and 
sales representatives are assuming more of a project manager’s role as they work with 
their organization to satisfy the unique needs and requests of clients.
 
Increased customer attention has also prompted the development of customized 
products and services. For example, 15 years ago buying a set of golf clubs was a rela-
tively simple process: You picked out a set based on price and feel. Today, there are 
golf clubs for tall players and short players, clubs for players who tend to slice the ball 
and clubs for those who hook the ball, high-tech clubs with the latest metallurgic dis-
covery guaranteed to add distance, and so forth. Project management is critical both to 
development of customized products and services and to sustaining lucrative relation-
ships with customers.
*Austin Business Journal, January 11, 2009,  
www.dellchildrens.net/about_us/news/2009/01/08.

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  15
Small Projects Represent Big Problems
The velocity of change required to remain competitive or simply keep up has created an 
organizational climate in which hundreds of projects are implemented concurrently. This 
climate has created a multiproject environment and a plethora of new problems. Sharing 
and prioritizing resources across a portfolio of projects is a major challenge for senior 
management. Many firms have no idea of the problems involved with inefficient man-
agement of small projects. Small projects typically carry the same or more risk as do 
large projects. Small projects are perceived as having little impact on the bottom line 
because they do not demand large amounts of scarce resources and/or money. Because 
so many small projects are going on concurrently and because the perception of the inef-
ficiency impact is small, measuring inefficiency is usually nonexistent. Unfortunately, 
many small projects soon add up to large sums of money. Many customers and millions 
of dollars are lost each year on small projects in product and service organizations. Small 
projects can represent hidden costs not measured in the accounting system.
 
Organizations with many small projects going on concurrently face the most diffi-
cult project management problems. A key question becomes one of how to create an 
organizational environment that supports multiproject management. A process is 
needed to prioritize and develop a portfolio of small projects that supports the mission 
of the organization.
 
In summary, there are a variety of environmental forces interacting in today’s busi-
ness world that contribute to the increased demand for good project management 
across all industries and sectors. Project management appears to be ideally suited for a 
business environment requiring accountability, flexibility, innovation, speed, and con-
tinuous improvement. These environmental and other factors have created the neces-
sity for major oversight of all organization projects.
1.3 Project Governance
Competing in a global market influenced by rapid change, innovation, and time to 
market means organizations manage more and more projects. Some means for coordi-
nating and managing projects in this changing environment is needed. Centralization 
of project management processes and practices has been the practical outcome. For 
example, Google, Apple, General Electric, and Sony all have over 1,000 projects being 
implemented concurrently every day of the year across borders and differing cultures. 
Questions: How do these organizations oversee the management of all these projects? 
How were these projects selected? How do they ensure performance measurement and 
accountability? How can project management continually improve? Centralization 
entails governance of all project processes and practices to improve project 
management.
 
Governance is designed to improve project management in the whole organization 
over the long haul. The rationale for integration of project management was to provide 
senior management with:
∙ An overview of all project management activities;
∙ A big picture of how organizational resources are being used;
∙ An assessment of the risk their portfolio of projects represents;
∙ A rough metric for measuring the improvement of managing projects relative to 
others in the industry;
∙ Linkages of senior management with actual project execution management.
www.ebook3000.com

16  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
Full insight of all components of the organization is crucial for aligning internal busi-
ness resources with the requirements of the changing environment. Governance 
enables management to have greater flexibility and better control of all project man-
agement activities.
 
Operationally, what does project management integration mean? It necessitates 
combining all of the major dimensions of project management under one umbrella. 
Each dimension is connected in one seamless, integrated domain. Governance means 
applying a set of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to a collection of projects in 
order to move the organization toward its strategic goals. This integrative movement 
represents a major thrust of project-driven organizations across all industries. See Fig-
ure 1.2, Integrated Management of Projects.
Alignment of Projects with Organizational Strategy
Today, projects are the modus operandi for implementing strategy. Yet in some 
organizations, selection and management of projects often fail to support the strate-
gic plan of the organization. Strategic plans are written by one group of managers, 
projects selected by another group, and projects implemented by another. These 
independent decisions by different groups of managers create a set of conditions 
leading to conflict, confusion, and frequently an unsatisfied customer. Under these 
conditions, resources of the organization are wasted in non-value-added activities/
projects.
 
Since projects are the modus operandi, strategic alignment of projects is of major 
importance to conserving and effective use of organization resources. Selection crite-
ria need to ensure each project is prioritized and contributes to strategic goals. Any-
thing less is a waste of scarce organizational resources—people, capital, and 
equipment. Ensuring alignment requires a selection process that is systematic, open, 
consistent, and balanced. All of the projects selected become part of a project portfolio 
that balances the total risk for the organization. Management of the project portfolio 
ensures that only the most valuable projects are approved and managed across the 
entire organization.
Organizational Culture
Environment
Strategic
Alignment
Portfolio
Management
Project
Management
FIGURE 1.2
Integrated 
Management of 
Projects 

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  17
1.4 Project Management Today: A Socio-Technical Approach
Senior management is often involved in selecting projects but seldom involved in 
implementing them. Implementing the project is the challenge.
 
Managing a project is a multidimensional process (see Figure 1.3, A Socio-Technical 
Approach to Project Management). The first dimension is the technical side of the 
management process, which consists of the formal, disciplined, purely logical parts of 
the process. This technical dimension includes planning, scheduling, and controlling 
projects. Clear project scope statements are written to link the project and customer 
and to facilitate planning and control. Creation of the deliverables and work break-
down structures facilitates planning and monitoring the progress of the project. The 
work breakdown structure serves as a database that links all levels in the organization, 
major deliverables, and all work—right down to the tasks in a work package. Effects 
of project changes are documented and traceable. Thus, any change in one part of the 
project is traceable to the source by the integrated linkages of the system. This inte-
grated information approach can provide all project managers and the customer with 
decision information appropriate to their level and needs. A successful project man-
ager will be well trained in the technical side of managing projects.
 
The second and opposing dimension is the sociocultural side of project manage-
ment. In contrast to the orderly world of project planning, this dimension involves the 
much messier, often contradictory and paradoxical world of implementation. It centers 
on creating a temporary social system within a larger organizational environment that 
combines the talents of a divergent set of professionals working to complete the proj-
ect. Project managers must shape a project culture that stimulates teamwork and high 
levels of personal motivation as well as a capacity to quickly identify and resolve prob-
lems that threaten project work. Things rarely go as planned and project managers 
must be able to steer the project back on track or alter directions when necessary.
 
The sociocultural dimension also involves managing the interface between the proj-
ect and external environment. Project managers have to assuage and shape 
 Understand that manag-
ing projects involves bal-
ancing the technical and 
sociocultural dimensions 
of the project.
1-5
LO
FIGURE 1.3 
A Socio-Technical 
Approach to Project 
Management 
Technical
Scope
WBS
Schedules
Resource allocation
Baseline budgets
Status reports
Sociocultural
Leadership
Problem solving
Teamwork
Negotiation
Politics
Customer expectations
www.ebook3000.com

18  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
expectations of customers, sustain the political support of top management, negotiate 
with their functional counterparts, monitor subcontractors, and so on. Overall, the 
manager must build a cooperative social network among a divergent set of allies with 
different standards, commitments, and perspectives.
 
Some suggest that the technical dimension represents the “science” of project manage-
ment while the sociocultural dimension represents the “art” of managing a project. To be 
successful, a manager must be a master of both. Unfortunately, some project managers 
become preoccupied with the planning and technical dimension of project management. 
Often their first real exposure to project management is through project management soft-
ware, and they become infatuated with network charts, Gantt diagrams, and performance 
variances; they attempt to manage a project from a distance. Conversely, there are other 
managers who manage projects by the “seat of their pants,” relying heavily on team dynam-
ics and organizational politics to complete a project. Good project managers balance their 
attention to both the technical and sociocultural aspects of project management.
Summary
Project management is a critical skill set in today’s world. A project is defined as a non-
routine, one-time effort limited by time, resources, and performance specifications de-
signed to meet customer needs. One of the distinguishing characteristics of project 
management is that it has both a beginning and an end and typically consists of four 
phases: defining, planning, executing, and closing. Effective project management begins 
with selecting and prioritizing projects that support the firm’s mission and strategy. Suc-
cessful implementation requires both technical and social skills. Project managers have 
to plan and budget projects as well as orchestrate the contributions of others.
Text Overview
This text is written to provide the reader with a comprehensive, integrative under-
standing of the project management process. The text focuses both on the science of 
project management and the art of managing projects. Following this introductory 
chapter, Chapter 2 focuses on how organizations go about evaluating and selecting 
projects. Special attention is devoted to the importance of aligning project selection to 
the mission and strategy of the firm. The organizational environment in which projects 
are implemented is the focus of Chapter 3. The discussion of matrix management and 
other organizational forms is augmented by a discussion of the role the culture of an 
organization plays in the implementation of projects.
 
The next six chapters focus on developing a plan for the project; after all, project 
success begins with a good plan. Chapter 4 deals with defining the scope of the project 
and developing a work breakdown structure (WBS). The challenge of formulating cost 
and time estimates is the subject of Chapter 5. Chapter 6 focuses on utilizing the infor-
mation from the WBS to create a project plan in the form of a timed and sequenced 
network of activities.
 
Risks are a potential threat to every project, and Chapter 7 examines how organiza-
tions and managers identify and manage risks associated with project work. Resource 
allocation is added to the plan in Chapter 8 with special attention devoted to how re-
source limitations impact the project schedule. After a resource schedule is estab-
lished, a project time-phased budget is developed. Finally, Chapter 9 examines 
strategies for reducing (“crashing”) project time either prior to the initiation of the 
project or in response to problems or new demands placed on the project.
 
Chapters 10 through 12 focus on project implementation and the sociocultural side 
of project management, beginning with Chapter 10, which focuses on the role of the 

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  19
project manager as a leader and stresses the importance of managing project stake-
holders within the organization. Chapter 11 focuses on the core project team; it com-
bines the latest information on team dynamics with leadership skills/techniques for 
developing a high-performance project team. Chapter 12 continues the theme of man-
aging project stakeholders by discussing how to outsource project work and negotiate 
with contractors, customers, and suppliers.
 
Chapter 13 focuses on the kinds of information managers use to monitor project prog-
ress, with special attention devoted to the key concept of earned value. The project life cycle 
is completed with Chapter 14, which covers closing out a project and the important assess-
ment of performance and lessons learned. Two “supplemental” chapters are included to 
augment the project management core. Working on international projects across cultures is 
the focus of Chapter 15. Agile project management, a more flexible approach to managing 
projects where requirements cannot be clearly defined, is the subject of Chapter 16.
 
Throughout this text you will be exposed to the major aspects of the project man-
agement system. However, a true understanding of project management comes not 
from knowing what a scope statement is, or the critical path, or partnering with con-
tractors, but from comprehending how the different elements of the project manage-
ment system interact to determine the fate of a project. If, by the end of this text, you 
come to appreciate and begin to master both the technical and sociocultural dimen-
sions of project management, you should have a distinct competitive advantage over 
others aspiring to work in the field of project management.
Key Terms
Program, 7
Project, 6
Project life cycle, 8
Project Management  
 Professional (PMP), 4
1. Define a project. What are five characteristics that help differentiate projects from 
other functions carried out in the daily operations of the organization?
2. What are some of the key environmental forces that have changed the way projects are 
managed? What has been the effect of these forces on the management of projects?
3. Why is the implementation of projects important to strategic planning and the proj-
ect manager?
4. The technical and sociocultural dimensions of project management are two sides to 
the same coin. Explain.
5. What is the impact of governance on managing an individual project? Why is this 
approach important in today’s environment?
Review 
Questions
1. Review the front page of your local newspaper, and try to identify all the projects 
contained in the articles. How many were you able to find?
2. Individually, identify what you consider to be the greatest achievements of mankind 
in the last five decades. Now share your list with three to five other students in the 
class, and come up with an expanded list. Review these great achievements in terms 
of the definition of a project. What does your review suggest about the importance 
of project management?
3. Individually, identify projects assigned in previous terms. Were both sociocultural 
and technical elements factors in the success or difficulties in the projects?
Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

4. Check out the Project Management Institute’s home page at www.pmi.org.
 
a.  Review general information about PMI as well as membership information.
 
b.  See if there is a PMI chapter in your state. If not, where is the closest one?
 
c.  Use the search function at the PMI home page to find information on Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK). What are the major knowledge 
areas of PMBOK?
 
d.  Explore other links that PMI provides. What do these links tell you about the 
nature and future of project management?
Note: If you have any difficulty accessing any of the Web addresses listed here or else-
where in the text, you can find up-to-date addresses on the home page of Dr. Erik Larson, 
coauthor of this text: http://business.oregonstate.edu/faculty-and-staff-bios/erik-larson
Benko, C., and F. W. McFarlan, Connecting the Dots (Boston: HBS Press, 2003).
Cohen, D. J., and R. J. Graham, The Project Manager’s MBA (San Francisco: 
 Jossey-Bass, 2001).
Darnell, R., “The Emerging Role of the Project Manager,” PM Network, vol. 11, 
no. 7 (1997).
Derby, Charles, and Ofer Zwikael, “The Secret of (Defining) Success,” PM Network, 
vol. 26, no. 8 (August 2012), pp. 20–22.
Gray, Clifford, “Program Management, A Primer,” PM World Today, vol. 13, no. 8 
(August 2011), pp. 1–7.
Jonas, D., “Empowering Project Portfolio Managers: How Management Involvement 
Impacts Project Management Performance,” International Journal of Project Man-
agement, vol. 28, no. 8 (2010), pp. 818–831.
Koh, Aileen, and Lynn Crawford, “Portfolio Management: The Australian Experience,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 43, no. 6 (2012), pp. 33–41.
Peters, T., PM Network, January 2004, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 19.
Project Management Institute, Leadership in Project Management Annual (Newton 
Square, PA: PMI Publishing, 2006).
Project Management Institute, A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK), (Newton Square, PA: PMI Publishing, 2013).
Project Management Institute, PMI Today, July 2011, p. 11.
The Standish Group, CHAOS Summary 2009, pp. 1–4.
Stewart, T. A., “The Corporate Jungle Spawns a New Species: The Project Manager,” 
Fortune, September 1996, pp. 14–15.
References
Case 1.1
A Day in the Life
Rachel, the project manager of a large information systems project, arrives at her 
office early to get caught up with work before her co-workers and project team arrive. 
However, as she enters the office she meets Neil, one of her fellow project managers, 
20  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  21
who also wants to get an early start on the day. Neil has just completed a project over-
seas. They spend 10 minutes socializing and catching up on personal news.
 
It takes Rachel 10 minutes to get to her office and settle in. She then checks her 
voice mail and turns on her computer. She was at her client’s site the day before until 
7:30 p.m. and has not checked her e-mail or voice mail since 3:30 p.m. the previous 
day. There are 7 phone messages, 16 e-mails, and 4 notes left on her desk. She spends 
15 minutes reviewing her schedule and “to do” lists for the day before responding to 
messages that require immediate attention.
 
Rachel spends the next 25 minutes going over project reports and preparing for the 
weekly status meeting. Her boss, who just arrived at the office, interrupts her. They 
spend 20 minutes discussing the project. He shares a rumor that a team member is 
using stimulants on the job. She tells him that she has not seen anything suspicious but 
will keep an eye on the team member.
 
The 9:00 a.m. project status meeting starts 15 minutes late because two of the team 
members have to finish a job for a client. Several people go to the cafeteria to get cof-
fee and doughnuts while others discuss last night’s baseball game. The team members 
arrive, and the remaining 45 minutes of the progress review meeting surface project 
issues that have to be addressed and assigned for action.
 
After the meeting Rachel goes down the hallway to meet with Victoria, another IS 
project manager. They spend 30 minutes reviewing project assignments since the two 
of them share personnel. Victoria’s project is behind schedule and in need of help. 
They broker a deal that should get Victoria’s project back on track.
 
She returns to her office and makes several phone calls and returns several e-mails 
before walking downstairs to visit with members of her project team. Her intent is to follow 
up on an issue that had surfaced in the status report meeting. However, her simple, “Hi 
guys, how are things going?” elicits a stream of disgruntled responses from the “troops.” 
After listening patiently for over 20 minutes, she realizes that among other things several of 
the client’s managers are beginning to request features that were not in the original project 
scope statement. She tells her people that she will get on this right away.
 
Returning to her office she tries to call her counterpart John at the client firm but is 
told that he is not expected back from lunch for another hour. At this time, Eddie drops 
by and says, “How about lunch?” Eddie works in the finance office and they spend the 
next half hour in the company cafeteria gossiping about internal politics. She is sur-
prised to hear that Jonah Johnson, the director of systems projects, may join another 
firm. Jonah has always been a powerful ally.
 
She returns to her office, answers a few more e-mails, and finally gets through to 
John. They spend 30 minutes going over the problem. The conversation ends with 
John promising to do some investigating and to get back to her as soon as possible.
 
Rachel puts a “Do not disturb” sign on her door, and lies down in her office. She 
listens to the third and fourth movement of Ravel’s string quartet in F on headphones.
 
Rachel then takes the elevator down to the third floor and talks to the purchasing 
agent assigned to her project. They spend the next 30 minutes exploring ways of get-
ting necessary equipment to the project site earlier than planned. She finally authorizes 
express delivery.
 
When she returns to her office, her calendar reminds her that she is scheduled to 
participate in a conference call at 2:30. It takes 15 minutes for everyone to get online. 
During this time, Rachel catches up on some e-mail. The next hour is spent exchang-
ing information about the technical requirements associated with a new version of a 
software package they are using on systems projects like hers.
 
Rachel decides to stretch her legs and goes on a walk down the hallway where she 
engages in brief conversations with various co-workers. She goes out of her way to thank 
www.ebook3000.com

22  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
Chandra for his thoughtful analysis at the status report meeting. She returns to find that 
John has left a message for her to call him back ASAP. She contacts John, who informs her 
that, according to his people, her firm’s marketing rep had made certain promises about 
specific features her system would provide. He doesn’t know how this communication 
breakdown occurred, but his people are pretty upset over the situation. Rachel thanks John 
for the information and immediately takes the stairs to where the marketing group resides.
 
She asks to see Mary, a senior marketing manager. She waits 10 minutes before being 
invited into her office. After a heated discussion, she leaves 40 minutes later with Mary 
agreeing to talk to her people about what was promised and what was not promised.
 
She goes downstairs to her people to give them an update on what is happening. 
They spend 30 minutes reviewing the impact the client’s requests could have on the 
project schedule. She also shares with them the schedule changes she and Victoria had 
agreed to. After she says good night to her team, she heads upstairs to her boss’s office 
and spends 20 minutes updating him on key events of the day. She returns to her office 
and spends 30 minutes reviewing e-mails and project documents. She logs on to the 
MS project schedule of her project and spends the next 30 minutes working with 
“what-if” scenarios. She reviews tomorrow’s schedule and writes some personal 
reminders before starting off on her 30-minute commute home.
1. How effectively do you think Rachel spent her day?
2. What does the case tell you about what it is like to be a project manager?
Case 1.2
The Hokies Lunch Group1
PART A
Fatma settled down for lunch at the Yank Sing Chinese restaurant. She was early and 
took the time to catch up on her e-mail. Soon she would be joined by Jasper and 
 Viktoria, two fellow 2014 grads from Virginia Tech in Blacksburg, Virginia. 
 
Jasper worked as a software engineer for a start-up company that wanted to expand the 
boundaries of sharing economy. Viktoria was an electrical engineer who worked for a 
German healthcare company in San Francisco. They had met each other at a Silicon Val-
ley alumni reception hosted by Virginia Tech. Each of them felt a bit like a fish out of 
water on the West Coast, so they decided to have lunch together each month. The lunch 
evolved into a professional support group. A major part of each of their jobs was manag-
ing projects, and they found it useful to share issues and seek advice from each other.
 
Fatma worked for a very successful Internet company whose founders believed that 
everyone in the firm should devote three days a year to community service projects. 
The company was partnering with several companies in the construction industry to 
renovate abandoned buildings for low income families. The next project was the reno-
vation of an empty warehouse into eight two-bedroom apartments. Fatma was part of 
the core team in charge of scheduling and managing work assignments.
 
Viktoria and Jasper entered the restaurant together. Viktoria was the first to 
move to the Bay area. She was currently working on the next-generation neural 
1 Hokies is the name associated with Virginia Tech athletic teams.

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  23
stimulator (“PAX 2”). Neural stimulators are electronic devices that doctors 
implant in patients with wires connected to sources of pain in the patient’s spine. 
In the past, patients would have to have an operation to replace the stimulator bat-
tery every 10 years. PAX 2 was being designed to take advantage of new battery 
technologies and use a rechargeable battery. In concept, this battery system would 
eliminate the need for replacement surgeries and allow the implanted battery to be 
recharged externally. Viktoria’s team had just completed the second prototype and 
was entering a critical testing phase. It had been tricky trying to predict the life 
span of the new rechargeable battery without testing it in real time. She was anx-
ious to begin seeing the test results.
 
Jasper was working for a start-up company after doing contract work for his first 
nine months in San Francisco. He was sworn to secrecy about the project and all Fatma 
and Viktoria knew was that the project had something to do with sharing economy. He 
was working with a small development team that included colleagues from Bangalore, 
India, and Malmo, Sweden.
 
After ordering and chit-chatting a bit, Fatma started the discussion. “I will be glad 
when this week is over,” she said. “We’ve been struggling defining the scope of the 
project. At first glance our project seems relatively simple, build eight two-bedroom 
apartments in an old warehouse. But there are a lot of unanswered questions. What 
kind of community space do we want to have? How efficient should the energy system 
be? What kind of furniture? Everybody wants to do a good job, but when does low 
income housing morph into middle income housing?”
 
Viktoria offered, “Scope defining is one of the things my company does very well. 
Before a project is authorized, a detailed scope statement is developed that clearly 
defines the project objectives, priorities, budget, requirements, limits, and exclusions. 
All of the key stakeholders sign off on it. It is really important to identify priorities up 
front. I know on the PAX 2 project that scope is the number one priority. I know no 
matter how long it takes it is imperative that my work is done right.”
 
Fatma responded, “That’s exactly what my Project manager is preparing for  Friday’s 
meeting. I guess that is one of the things you have to do as a project manager is end 
discussions. He is going to make the tough calls and finalize the project scope so we 
can begin planning.”
 
Jasper interjected, “You guys are so lucky, for the most part your scope remains the 
same. In my work the scope is constantly changing. You show the founders a feature 
they wanted, and they say well if you can do that, can you do this? You know it’s going 
to happen, but you really can’t plan for it.”
 
Jasper went on to say, “We do know what our number one priority is: time. There are 
a lot of players trying to move in to the ‘space’ we are working on. We have to demon-
strate we are ahead of the pack if we are going to continue to get VC funding.”2
 
Jasper said that despite the pressure, his project had been a lot of fun. He especially 
liked working with his Swedish and Indian counterparts, Axel and Raja. They worked 
like a global tag team on their part of the project. Jasper would code and then pass his 
work onto Raja who would work on it and pass it on to Axel, who would eventually 
hand it off to Jasper. Given the time zones, they were able to have at least one person 
working on the code around the clock.
 
Jasper said it was hard at first working with someone you never met personally 
other than on a video screen. Trust was an issue. Everyone was trying to prove them-
selves. Eventually a friendly competition arose across the team. The programmers 
2 New Venture Capital funding.
www.ebook3000.com

24  Chapter 1  Modern Project Management
exchanged funny cartoons and YouTube videos. He showed Fatma and Viktoria a You-
Tube video about scope creep that got a chuckle from everyone.
 
They made plans to meet next at the New Peruvian restaurant on SE 8th Street.
PART B
The Peruvian cilantro/lime ceviche was a big hit at the next lunch. Viktoria began their 
discussion by reporting, “I have good and bad news. The bad news is that our first 
prototype failed its tests miserably. The good news is that I have a smart project man-
ager. She knew this could happen, so she mitigated the risk by having us working on 
two alternative battery technologies. The alternative technology is passing all of the 
tests. Instead of falling behind months we are only days behind schedule.”
 
This precipitated a discussion of risk management. Fatma reported that there had 
been a two-day session on risk management for the renovation project. They spent the 
first day brainstorming what could go wrong, and the second day coming up with strat-
egies for dealing with risks. A big help was the risk report that was generated after the 
last project. The report detailed all of the problems that had occurred on the last reno-
vation project as well as recommendations. Fatma said, “I couldn’t believe how much 
time and attention was devoted to safety, but as my project manager said, ‘all it takes is 
one bad accident to shut down a project for weeks, even months.’ ”
 
Jasper reported that on his project they spent very little time on risk management. 
His project was driven by a build-test mentality. “Everybody assumes that daily testing 
eliminates problems, but when it’s time to integrate different features, that’s when the 
real bugs will emerge,” Jasper said.
 
Jasper went on to say that things were not going well at work. They had missed 
their second straight milestone, and everyone was feeling the pressure to show results. 
“I even slept by my cubicle three nights ago,” Jasper confessed. Fatma asked, “How 
many hours are you working?” “I don’t know, at least 70, maybe 80 hours,” Jasper 
answered. He went on to say, “This is a high stakes project, with a BIG upside if suc-
cessful. I am doing some of my best programming and we’ll just have to see 
what happens.”
 
Jasper showed them a cartoon that was being circulated across his team. The cap-
tion read: “When did you want it done? Yesterday.”
 
Fatma turned to her friends and said, “I need some advice. As you know I’m respon-
sible for scheduling work assignments. Well, some of my colleagues have been pretty 
aggressive lobbying for choice assignments. Everyone wants to work alongside Bruno 
or Ryan. Suddenly I am everyone’s friends, and certain people are going way out of 
their way to do favors for me. I am sure they think it will influence my decisions. It’s 
getting awkward and I am not sure what to do.”
 
“Quid pro quo,” answered Jasper, “that’s how the business world works. You scratch 
my back and I’ll scratch yours. Within reason, I don’t have a problem with someone 
taking advantage of their position to garner favors and build relationships.”
 
Viktoria said, “I disagree. You don’t want to be seen as someone whose influence 
can be bought. You need to think what’s best for the company. You need to ask your-
self what would Bruno and Ryan want you to do? And if you don’t know, ask them.”
 
After much discussion, Fatma left the restaurant leaning towards Viktoria’s advice, 
but she wasn’t sure what the guidelines should be.
PART C
It took two months for the Hokie lunch group to get together again. Jasper had canceled 
the last meeting because of work, so Viktoria and Fatma saw a movie together instead.

Chapter 1  Modern Project Management  25
 
Jasper was the last person to arrive and it was clear from the look on his face that 
things were not going well. He sat down, avoided eye contact, before blurting, “I’m out 
of work.” “What do you mean?” Fatma and Viktoria cried. Jasper explained after 
months and months of work they had been unable to demonstrate a functional product.
 
Jasper went on to say, “Despite our best efforts we couldn’t deliver. The founders 
couldn’t get an ounce of second round venture funding, so they decided to cut their losses 
and kill the project. I just spent the best six months of my programming life for nothing.”
 
Fatma and Viktoria tried to comfort their friend. Fatma asked Jasper how the others 
were taking the news. Jasper said the Swedish programmer, Axel, took the news very 
hard. He went on to say, “I think he was burning a lot of bridges at home with the long 
work hours and now he has nothing to show for it. He started blaming us for mistakes 
we never made.” Raja, his Indian counterpart, was a different story. “Raja seemed to 
shrug his shoulders.” Jasper added, “He said, I know I am a good programmer. There 
are lots of opportunities here in Bangalore.”
 
Fatma broke the silence that followed by saying to Jasper, “Send me your resume. 
My company is always looking for top notch programmers and it is a really great com-
pany. Can you believe it, the two founders, Bruno and Ryan, are working side by side 
with everyone on renovating the warehouse? In fact, people were amazed at how good 
Bruno was with sheet rock. A big part of my job now is scheduling their time so they 
can work with as many different people as possible. They really want to use the project 
to get to know their employees. This hasn’t been easy. I have had to juggle their calen-
dars, their abilities, and work opportunities.”
 
Viktoria interjected, “You’re using Microsoft Project to do this?” “Not really,” 
responded Fatma. “At first I tried scheduling their work in Project, but it was too cum-
bersome and time consuming. Now I just use the Project master schedule and each of 
their calendars to schedule their work. This seems to work best.”
 
Viktoria added, “Yeah, Microsoft Project is a great program, but you can get lost trying 
to get it to do everything. Sometimes all you need is an Excel sheet and common sense.”
 
Viktoria felt awkward, given what had happened to Jasper. She was just wrapping 
up the successful PAX 2 project. She was also getting ready for a well-deserved holi-
day in Vietnam paid for by her project bonus. “I hate closing out a project,” Viktoria 
said. “It’s so boring. Document, document, document! I keep kicking myself for not 
tracking things when they happened. I am spending most of my time scouring my 
computer for files. I can’t wait to take off to Vietnam.”
 
Viktoria went on to say, “The only thing I liked doing was the project retrospective.”
 
Jasper asked, “What’s a project retrospective?” Viktoria answered, “It’s when the project 
team gets together and reviews what went well, what didn’t, and identifies lessons learned 
that we can apply to future projects. For example, one of the things we learned was that we 
needed to bring the manufacturing people on board a lot sooner in the design process. We 
focused on designing the very best product possible, regardless of cost. We found out later 
that there were ways for reducing production costs without compromising quality.”
 
Fatma added, “We do that too at the end of our projects, but we call it an audit.”
 
Fatma asked Viktoria, “Do you know what your next assignment will be?” “No,” 
she replied, “I will probably go back to my department and do some testing. I’m not 
worried. I did good work. I am sure someone will want me for their project.”
 
Jasper chimed in, “I sure hope someone wants me for their next project.” Fatma and 
Viktoria immediately went into action trying to lift their friend’s spirits.
 
A little while later, they walked out of the Tapa restaurant and gave each other hugs. 
Fatma reminded Jasper to send her his latest resume.
1. For each part (A, B, C), what phase of the project life cycle is each project in? Explain.
2. What are two important things you learned about working on projects from the 
case? Why are they important?
www.ebook3000.com

26
Organization Strategy 
and Project Selection
2
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
2-1 Explain why it is important for project managers to 
understand their organization’s strategy.
2-2 Identify the significant role projects contribute to 
the strategic direction of the organization.
2-3 Understand the need for a project priority system.
2-4 Apply financial and nonfinancial criteria to assess 
the value of projects.
2-5 Understand how multi-criteria models can be 
used to select projects.
2-6 Apply an objective priority system to project 
selection.
2-7 Understand the need to manage the project 
portfolio.
OUTLINE
2.1 
The Strategic Management Process: An 
Overview
2.2 The Need for a Project Priority System
2.3 A Portfolio Management System
2.4 Selection Criteria
2.5 Applying a Selection Model
2.6 Managing the Portfolio System
Summary
C H A P T E R  T W O

27
Strategy is implemented through projects. Every significant project should 
have a clear link to the organization’s strategy.
Strategy is fundamentally deciding how the organization will compete. Organizations 
use projects to convert strategy into new products, services, and processes needed for 
success. For example, Intel’s major strategy is one of differentiation. Its projects target 
innovation and time to market. Currently, Intel is directing its strategy toward specialty 
chips for products other than computers, such as autos, security, cell phones, and air 
controls. Another goal is to reduce project cycle times. Procter and Gamble, NEC, 
General Electric, and AT&T have reduced their cycle times by 20–50 percent. For 
example, Toyota and other auto manufacturers are now able to design and develop new 
cars in two to three years instead of five to seven. Projects and project management 
play the key role in supporting strategic goals. It is vital for project managers to think 
and act strategically.
 
Aligning projects with the strategic goals of the organization is crucial for business 
success. Today’s economic climate is unprecedented by rapid changes in technology, 
global competition, and financial uncertainty. These conditions make strategy/project 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources/costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
project duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

28  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
alignment even more essential for success. Ensuring a strong link between the strategic 
plan and projects is a difficult task that demands constant attention from top and mid-
dle management.
 
The larger and more diverse an organization, the more difficult it is to create and 
maintain this strong link. Companies today are under enormous pressure to manage a 
process that clearly aligns projects to organization strategy. Ample evidence still sug-
gests that many organizations have not developed a process that clearly aligns project 
selection to the strategic plan. The result is poor utilization of the organization’s 
resources—people, money, equipment, and core competencies. Conversely, organiza-
tions that have a coherent link of projects to strategy have more cooperation across the 
organization, perform better on projects, and have fewer projects.
 
How can an organization ensure this link and alignment? The answer requires inte-
gration of projects with the strategic plan. Integration assumes the existence of a stra-
tegic plan and a process for prioritizing projects by their contribution to the plan. A 
crucial factor to ensure the success of integrating the plan with projects lies in the 
creation of a process that is open and transparent for all participants to review. This 
chapter presents an overview of the importance of strategic planning and the process 
for developing a strategic plan. Typical problems encountered when strategy and proj-
ects are not linked are noted. A generic methodology that ensures integration by creat-
ing very strong linkages of project selection and priority to the strategic plan is then 
discussed. The intended outcomes are clear organization focus, best use of scarce orga-
nization resources (people, equipment, capital), and improved communication across 
projects and departments.
Why Project Managers Need to Understand Strategy
Project management historically has been preoccupied solely with the planning and exe-
cution of projects. Strategy was considered to be under the purview of senior manage-
ment. This is old-school thinking. New-school thinking recognizes that project 
management is at the apex of strategy and operations. Aaron Shenhar speaks to this issue 
when he states, “. . . it is time to expand the traditional role of the project manager from 
an operational to a more strategic perspective. In the modern evolving organization, proj-
ect managers will be focused on business aspects, and their role will expand from getting 
the job done to achieving the business results and winning in the marketplace.”1
 
There are two main reasons why project managers need to understand their organiza-
tion’s mission and strategy. The first reason is so they can make appropriate decisions 
and adjustments. For example, how a project manager would respond to a suggestion to 
modify the design of a product to enhance performance will vary depending upon 
whether his company strives to be a product leader through innovation or to achieve 
operational excellence through low cost solutions. Similarly, how a project manager 
would respond to delays may vary depending upon strategic concerns. A project man-
ager will authorize overtime if her firm places a premium on getting to the market first. 
Another project manager will accept the delay if speed is not essential.
 
The second reason project managers need to understand their organization’s strat-
egy is so they can be effective project advocates. Project managers have to be able to 
demonstrate to senior management how their project contributes to their firm’s mis-
sion. Protection and continued support come from being aligned with corporate objec-
tives. Project managers also need to be able to explain to team members and other 
Explain why it is impor-
tant for project managers 
to understand their orga-
nization’s strategy.
2-1
LO
1 Shenhar, A., and Dov Dvie, Reinventing Project Management (Harvard Business School, 2007), p. 5.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  29
stakeholders why certain project objectives and priorities are critical. This is essential 
for getting buy-in on contentious trade-off decisions.
 
For these reasons project managers will find it valuable to have a keen understand-
ing of strategic management and project selection processes, which are discussed next.
2.1 The Strategic Management Process: An Overview
Strategic management is the process of assessing “what we are” and deciding and imple-
menting “what we intend to be and how we are going to get there.” Strategy describes how 
an organization intends to compete with the resources available in the existing and perceived 
future environment.
Two major dimensions of strategic management are responding to changes in the 
external environment and allocating scarce resources of the firm to improve its com-
petitive position. Constant scanning of the external environment for changes is a major 
requirement for survival in a dynamic competitive environment. The second dimen-
sion is the internal responses to new action programs aimed at enhancing the competi-
tive position of the firm. The nature of the responses depends on the type of business, 
environment volatility, competition, and the organizational culture.
 
Strategic management provides the theme and focus of the future direction of the 
organization. It supports consistency of action at every level of the organization. It 
encourages integration because effort and resources are committed to common goals 
and strategies. See Snapshot from Practice 2.1: Does IBM’s Watson’s Jeopardy Project 
Represent a Change in Strategy? It is a continuous, iterative process aimed at develop-
ing an integrated and coordinated long-term plan of action. Strategic management posi-
tions the organization to meet the needs and requirements of its customers for the long 
term. With the long-term position identified, objectives are set, and strategies are devel-
oped to achieve objectives and then translated into actions by implementing projects. 
Strategy can decide the survival of an organization. Most organizations are successful 
in formulating strategies for what course(s) they should pursue. However, the problem 
in many organizations is implementing strategies—that is, making them happen. Inte-
gration of strategy formulation and implementation often does not exist.
 
The components of strategic management are closely linked, and all are directed 
toward the future success of the organization. Strategic management requires strong 
links among mission, goals, objectives, strategy, and implementation. The mission 
gives the general purpose of the organization. Goals give global targets within the mis-
sion. Objectives give specific targets to goals. Objectives give rise to formulation of 
strategies to reach objectives. Finally, strategies require actions and tasks to be imple-
mented. In most cases the actions to be taken represent projects. Figure 2.1 shows a 
schematic of the strategic management process and major activities required.
Four Activities of the Strategic Management Process
The typical sequence of activities of the strategic management process is outlined 
here; a description of each activity then follows:
1. Review and define the organizational mission.
2. Analyze and formulate strategies.
3. Set objectives to achieve strategy.
4. Implement strategies through projects.
Identify the significant 
role projects contribute 
to the strategic direction 
of the organization.
2-2
LO
www.ebook3000.com

30  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
IBM’s investment in artificial intelligence 
paid off. In February 2010, millions of 
people were glued to their television 
sets to watch IBM’s Watson outclass 
two former champion contestants on 
the Jeopardy quiz show. Watson performed at human 
expert levels in terms of precision, confidence, and speed 
during the Jeopardy quiz show.
 
Does Watson represent a new strategic direction 
for IBM? Not really. The Watson project is simply a man-
ifestation of the move from computer hardware to a 
service strategy over a decade ago.
WATSON PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Artificial intelligence has advanced significantly in 
recent years. Watson goes beyond IBM’s chess-playing 
supercomputer of the late 1990s. Chess is finite, logical, 
and reduced easily to mathematics. Watson’s space is 
ill-defined and involves dealing with abstraction and the 
circumstantial nature of language. Since Watson’s sys-
tem can understand natural language, it can extend the 
way people interact with computers.
 
The IBM Watson project took three intense years of 
research and development by a core team of about 20. 
Eight university teams working on specific challenge 
areas augmented these researchers.
 
Watson depends on over 200 million pages of 
structured and unstructured data and a program 
capable of running trillions of operations per second. 
With this information backup, it attacks a Jeopardy 
question by parsing the question into small pieces. 
With the question parsed, the program then searches 
for relevant data. Using hundreds of decision rules, 
the program generates possible answers. These 
answers are assigned a confidence score to decide if 
Watson should risk offering an answer and how much 
to bet.
WHAT’S NEXT?
Now that the hype is over, IBM is pursuing their service 
strategy and applying the knowledge gained from the 
Watson project to real business applications. Watson’s 
artificial intelligence design is flexible and suggests a 
wide variety of opportunities in industries such as 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  2 .1
Does IBM’s Watson’s Jeopardy Project 
Represent a Change in Strategy?*
finance, medicine, law enforcement, and defense. Fur-
ther extensions to handheld mobile applications that 
tap into Watson’s servers also hold great potential. IBM 
identified the obvious lowest hanging apples on the 
tree as providing healthcare solutions and has begun 
design of such a program.
 
To create a “doctor’s consultant” program would 
likely follow a design platform similar to Watson’s. For 
example, it would be able to:
΄
5McM\W]RPdaaR]c\RQWPMZQ^Pd\R]cbc^OdWZQM
knowledge base.
΄
;]cRUaMcRW]QWeWQdMZ_McWR]cW]S^a\McW^]͙
΄
GbRbhbcR\ͭbP^\_ZRgM]MZhcWPbc^bRZRPcaRZReM]c
data.
΄
GbRQRPWbW^]adZRbc^_a^eWQR_VhbWPWM]bfWcVQWMU-
nostic options.
΄
DM]Y^_cW^]bfWcVP^]SWQR]PRZReRZbS^aRMPV^_cW^]͙
Creating a doctor’s consultant solution will not replace 
doctors. Although the system holds tremendous poten-
tial, it is man-made and depends on the database, data 
analytics, and decision rules to select options. Given 
the doctor’s consultant input, a trained doctor makes 
the final patient diagnosis to supplement physical 
examination and experience.
 
The Watson project provides IBM with a flexible com-
ponent to continue their decade-old strategy, moving IBM 
from computer hardware to service products.
© Sean Gallup/Getty
*Ferrucci et al., “Building Watson,” AI Magazine, vol. 31, no. 3 
(Fall 2010).

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  31
Review and Define the Organizational Mission
The mission identifies “what we want to become,” or the raison d’être. Mission state-
ments identify the scope of the organization in terms of its product or service. A writ-
ten mission statement provides focus for decision making when shared by 
organizational managers and employees. Everyone in the organization should be 
keenly aware of the organization’s mission. For example, at one large consulting firm, 
partners who fail to recite the mission statement on demand are required to buy lunch. 
The mission statement communicates and identifies the purpose of the organization to 
all stakeholders. Mission statements can be used for evaluating organization 
performance.
 
Traditional components found in mission statements are major products and ser-
vices, target customers and markets, and geographical domain. In addition, statements 
frequently include organizational philosophy, key technologies, public image, and con-
tribution to society. Including such factors in mission statements relates directly to 
business success.
FIGURE 2.1 Strategic Management Process
Projects
1
2
3
4
What are
we now?
What do we
intend to be?
How are we going
to get there?
Internal
environment—
strengths and
weaknesses
Review/revise
mission
Review/revise
mission
External
environment—
opportunities
and threats
Set strategy
and objectives
Portfolio
of strategic choices
Strategy
implementation
Project
selection
www.ebook3000.com

32  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
 
Mission statements change infrequently. However, when the nature of the business 
changes or shifts, revised mission and strategy statements may be required.
 
More specific mission statements tend to give better results because of a tighter 
focus. Mission statements decrease the chance of false directions by stakeholders. For 
example, compare the phrasing of the following mission statements:
Provide hospital design services.
Provide data mining and analysis services.
Provide information technology services.
Provide high-value products to our customer.
Clearly, the first two statements leave less chance for misinterpretation than the others. 
A rule-of-thumb test for a mission statement is, if the statement can be anybody’s mis-
sion statement, it will not provide the guidance and focus intended. The mission sets 
the parameters for developing objectives.
Analyze and Formulate Strategies
Formulating strategy answers the question of what needs to be done to reach objec-
tives. Strategy formulation includes determining and evaluating alternatives that sup-
port the organization’s objectives and selecting the best alternative. The first step is a 
realistic evaluation of the past and current position of the enterprise. This step typi-
cally includes an analysis of “who are the customers” and “what are their needs as they 
(the customers) see them.”
 
The next step is an assessment of the internal and external environments. What are 
the internal strengths and weaknesses of the enterprise? Examples of internal strengths 
or weaknesses could be core competencies, such as technology, product quality, man-
agement talent, low debt, and dealer networks. Managers can alter internal strengths 
and weaknesses. Opportunities and threats usually represent external forces for change 
such as technology, industry structure, and competition. Competitive benchmarking 
tools are sometimes used here to assess current and future directions. Opportunities and 
threats are the flip sides of each other. That is, a threat can be perceived as an opportu-
nity, or vice versa. Examples of perceived external threats could be a slowing of the 
economy, a maturing life cycle, exchange rates, or government regulation. Typical 
opportunities are increasing demand, emerging markets, and demographics. Managers 
or individual firms have limited opportunities to influence such external environmental 
factors; however, in recent years notable exceptions have been new technologies such as 
Apple using the iPod to create a market to sell music. The keys are to attempt to forecast 
fundamental industry changes and stay in a proactive mode rather than a reactive one. 
This assessment of the external and internal environments is known as the SWOT anal-
ysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats).
 
From this analysis, critical issues and strategic alternatives are identified. Critical 
analysis of the strategies includes asking questions: Does the strategy take advantage 
of our core competencies? Does the strategy exploit our competitive advantage? Does 
the strategy maximize meeting customers’ needs? Does the strategy fit within our 
acceptable risk range? These strategic alternatives are winnowed down to a critical few 
that support the basic mission.
 
Strategy formulation ends with cascading objectives or projects assigned to lower 
divisions, departments, or individuals. Formulating strategy might range around 
20 percent of management’s effort, while determining how strategy will be imple-
mented might consume 80 percent.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  33
Set Objectives to Achieve Strategies
Objectives translate the organization strategy into specific, concrete, measurable 
terms. Organizational objectives set targets for all levels of the organization. Objec-
tives pinpoint the direction managers believe the organization should move toward. 
Objectives answer in detail where a firm is headed and when it is going to get there. 
Typically, objectives for the organization cover markets, products, innovation, pro-
ductivity, quality, finance, profitability, employees, and consumers. In every case, 
objectives should be as operational as possible. That is, objectives should include a 
time frame, be measurable, be an identifiable state, and be realistic. Doran created 
the memory device shown in Exhibit 2.1, which is useful when writing 
objectives.2
 
Each level below the organizational objectives should support the higher-level 
objectives in more detail; this is frequently called cascading of objectives. For exam-
ple, if a firm making leather luggage sets an objective of achieving a 40 percent 
increase in sales through a research and development strategy, this charge is passed to 
the marketing, production, and R&D departments. The R&D department accepts the 
firm’s strategy as their objective, and their strategy becomes the design and develop-
ment of a new “pull-type luggage with hidden retractable wheels.” At this point the 
objective becomes a project to be implemented—to develop the retractable wheel lug-
gage for market within six months within a budget of $200,000. In summary, organi-
zational objectives drive your projects.
Implement Strategies through Projects
Implementation answers the question of how strategies will be realized, given avail-
able resources. The conceptual framework for strategy implementation lacks the struc-
ture and discipline found in strategy formulation. Implementation requires action and 
completing tasks; the latter frequently means mission-critical projects. Therefore, 
implementation must include attention to several key areas.
 
First, completing tasks requires allocation of resources. Resources typically repre-
sent funds, people, management talents, technological skills, and equipment. Fre-
quently, implementation of projects is treated as an “addendum” rather than an integral 
part of the strategic management process. However, multiple objectives place conflict-
ing demands on organizational resources. Second, implementation requires a formal 
and informal organization that complements and supports strategy and projects. 
Authority, responsibility, and performance all depend on organization structure and 
culture. Third, planning and control systems must be in place to be certain project 
activities necessary to ensure strategies are effectively performed. Fourth, motivating 
project contributors will be a major factor for achieving project success. Finally, areas 
receiving more attention in recent years are portfolio management and prioritizing 
EXHIBIT 2.1
Characteristics of 
Objectives
S 
Specific 
Be specific in targeting an objective
M 
Measurable 
Establish a measurable indicator(s) of progress
A 
Assignable 
Make the objective assignable to one person for completion
R 
Realistic 
State what can realistically be done with available resources
T 
Time related 
State when the objective can be achieved, that is, duration
2 Doran, G. T., “There’s a Smart Way to Write Management Goals and Objectives,” Management Review, November 1981, 
pp. 35–36.
www.ebook3000.com

34  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
projects. Although the strategy implementation process is not as clear as strategy for-
mulation, all managers realize that, without implementation, success is impossible. 
Although the four major steps of the strategic management process have not been 
altered significantly over the years, the view of the time horizon in the strategy formu-
lation process has been altered radically in the last two decades. Global competition 
and rapid innovation require being highly adaptive to short-run changes while being 
consistent in the longer run.
2.2 The Need for a Project Priority System
Implementation of projects without a strong priority system linked to strategy creates 
problems. Three of the most obvious problems are discussed below. A priority 
driven project portfolio system can go a long way to reduce, or even eliminate, the 
impact of these problems.
Problem 1: The Implementation Gap
In organizations with short product life cycles, it is interesting to note that frequently 
participation in strategic planning and implementation includes participants from all 
levels within the organization. However, in perhaps 80 percent of the remaining product 
and service organizations, top management pretty much formulates strategy and leaves 
strategy implementation to functional managers. Within these broad constraints, more 
detailed strategies and objectives are developed by the functional managers. The fact 
that these objectives and strategies are made independently at different levels by func-
tional groups within the organization hierarchy causes manifold problems.
 
Some symptoms of organizations struggling with strategy disconnect and unclear 
priorities are presented here.
∙ Conflicts frequently occur among functional managers and cause lack of trust.
∙ Frequent meetings are called to establish or renegotiate priorities.
∙ People frequently shift from one project to another, depending on current priority. 
Employees are confused about which projects are important.
∙ People are working on multiple projects and feel inefficient.
∙ Resources are not adequate.
Because clear linkages do not exist, the organizational environment becomes dysfunc-
tional, confused, and ripe for ineffective implementation of organization strategy and, 
thus, of projects. The implementation gap refers to the lack of understanding and con-
sensus of organization strategy among top and middle-level managers.
 
A scenario the authors have seen repeated several times follows. Top management 
picks their top 20 projects for the next planning period, without priorities. Each 
functional department—marketing, finance, operations, engineering, information 
technology, and human resources—selects projects from the list. Unfortunately, 
independent department priorities across projects are not homogenous. A project 
that rates first in the IT department can rate 10th in the finance department. Imple-
mentation of the projects represents conflicts of interest with animosities developing 
over organization resources.
 
If this condition exists, how is it possible to effectively implement strategy? The 
problem is serious. One study found that only about 25 percent of Fortune 500 execu-
tives believe there is a strong linkage, consistency, and/or agreement between the 
Understand the need for 
a project priority system.
2-3
LO

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  35
strategies they formulate and implementation. In another study of Deloitte Consulting, 
Jeff MacIntyre reports, “Only 23 percent of nearly 150 global executives considered 
their project portfolios aligned with the core business.”3 
 
Middle managers considered organizational strategy to be under the purview of oth-
ers or not in their realm of influence. It is the responsibility of senior management to 
set policies that show a distinct link between organizational strategy and objectives 
and projects that implement those strategies. The research of Fusco suggests the imple-
mentation gap and prioritizing projects are still overlooked by many organizations. He 
surveyed 280 project managers and found that 24 percent of their organizations did not 
even publish or circulate their objectives; in addition, 40 percent of the respondents 
reported that priorities among competing projects were not clear, while only 17 per-
cent reported clear priorities.4
Problem 2: Organization Politics
Politics exist in every organization and can have a significant influence on which proj-
ects receive funding and high priority. This is especially true when the criteria and 
process for selecting projects are ill-defined and not aligned with the mission of the 
firm. Project selection may be based not so much on facts and sound reasoning as on 
the persuasiveness and power of people advocating projects.
 
The term “sacred cow” is often used to denote a project that a powerful, high-
ranking official is advocating. Case in point, a marketing consultant confided that he 
was once hired by the marketing director of a large firm to conduct an independent, 
external market analysis for a new product the firm was interested in developing. His 
extensive research indicated that there was insufficient demand to warrant the financ-
ing of this new product. The marketing director chose to bury the report and made the 
consultant promise never to share this information with anyone. The director explained 
that this new product was the “pet idea” of the new CEO, who saw it as his legacy to 
the firm. He went on to describe the CEO’s irrational obsession with the project and 
how he referred to it as his “new baby.” Like a parent fiercely protecting his child, the 
marketing director believed that he would lose his job if such critical information ever 
became known.
 
Project sponsors play a significant role in the selection and successful implemen-
tation of product innovation projects. Project sponsors are typically high-ranking man-
agers who endorse and lend political support for the completion of a specific project. 
They are instrumental in winning approval of the project and in protecting the project 
during the critical development stage. The importance of project sponsors should not 
be taken lightly. For example, a PMI global survey of over 1,000 project practitioners 
and leaders over a variety of industries found those organizations having active spon-
sors on at least 80 percent of their projects/programs have a success rate of 75 percent, 
11 percentage points above the survey average of 64 percent. Many promising projects 
have failed to succeed due to lack of strong sponsorship.5
 
The significance of corporate politics can be seen in the ill-fated ALTO computer 
project at Xerox during the mid-1970s.6 The project was a tremendous technological 
3 MacIntyre, J., PM Network, vol. 20, no. 11 (November 2006), pp. 32–35.
4 Fusco, J. C., “Better Policies Provide the Key to Implementing Project Management,” Project Management Journal, 
vol. 28, no. 3 (1997), pp. 38–41.
5 PMI, “PMI’s Pulse of the Profession,” Project Management Institute, March 2012, p. 7.
6 Smith, D. K., and R. C. Alexander, Fumbling the Future: How Xerox Invented, Then Ignored the First Personal Computer 
(New York: Macmillan, 1988).
www.ebook3000.com

36  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
success; it developed the first workable mouse, the first laser printer, the first user-
friendly software, and the first local area network. All of these developments were five 
years ahead of their nearest competitor. Over the next five years this opportunity to 
dominate the nascent personal computer market was squandered because of internal 
in-fighting at Xerox and the absence of a strong project sponsor. (Apple’s MacIntosh 
computer was inspired by many of these developments.)
 
Politics can play a role not only in project selection but also in the aspirations behind 
projects. Individuals can enhance their power within an organization by managing 
extraordinary and critical projects. Power and status naturally accrue to successful inno-
vators and risk takers rather than to steady producers. Many ambitious managers pursue 
high-profile projects as a means for moving quickly up the corporate ladder.
 
Many would argue that politics and project management should not mix. A more 
proactive response is that projects and politics invariably mix and that effective project 
managers recognize that any significant project has political ramifications. Likewise, 
top management needs to develop a system for identifying and selecting projects that 
reduces the impact of internal politics and fosters the selection of the best projects for 
achieving the mission and strategy of the firm.
Problem 3: Resource Conflicts and Multitasking
Most project organizations exist in a multiproject environment. This environment cre-
ates the problems of project interdependency and the need to share resources. For 
example, what would be the impact on the labor resource pool of a construction com-
pany if it should win a contract it would like to bid on? Will existing labor be adequate 
to deal with the new project—given the completion date? Will current projects be 
delayed? Will subcontracting help? Which projects will have priority? Competition 
among project managers can be contentious. All project managers seek to have the best 
people for their projects. The problems of sharing resources and scheduling resources 
across projects grow exponentially as the number of projects rises. In multiproject envi-
ronments the stakes are higher and the benefits or penalties for good or bad resource 
scheduling become even more significant than in most single projects.
 
Resource sharing also leads to multitasking. Multitasking involves starting and 
stopping work on one task to go and work on another project, and then returning to the 
work on the original task. People working on several tasks concurrently are far less 
efficient, especially where conceptual or physical shutdown and start-up are signifi-
cant. Multitasking adds to delays and costs. Changing priorities exacerbate the multi-
tasking problems even more. Likewise, multitasking is more evident in organizations 
that have too many projects for the resources they command.
 
The number of small and large projects in a portfolio almost always exceeds the 
available resources (typically by a factor of three to four times the available resources). 
This capacity overload inevitably leads to confusion and inefficient use of scarce orga-
nizational resources. The presence of an implementation gap, of power politics, and of 
multitasking adds to the problem of which projects are allocated resources first. 
Employee morale and confidence suffer because it is difficult to make sense of an 
ambiguous system. A multiproject organization environment faces major problems 
without a priority system that is clearly linked to the strategic plan.
 
In essence, to this point we have suggested that many organizations have no mean-
ingful process for addressing the problems we have described. The first and most 
important change that will go a long way in addressing these and other problems is the 
development and use of a meaningful project priority process for project selection.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  37
 
How can the implementation gap be narrowed so that understanding and consensus 
of organizational strategies run through all levels of management? How can power 
politics be minimized? Can a process be developed in which projects are consistently 
prioritized to support organizational strategies? Can the prioritized projects be used to 
allocate scarce organizational resources—for example, people, equipment? Can the 
process encourage bottom-up initiation of projects that support clear organizational 
targets?
 
What is needed is a set of integrative criteria and a process for evaluating and select-
ing projects that support higher-level strategies and objectives. A single-project prior-
ity system that ranks projects by their contribution to the strategic plan would make 
life easier. Easily said, but difficult to accomplish in practice. Organizations that man-
aged independent projects and allocated resources ad hoc have shifted focus to select-
ing the right portfolio of projects to achieve their strategic objectives. This is a 
quickening trend. The advantages of successful project portfolio systems are becoming 
well recognized in project-driven organizations. See Exhibit 2.2, which lists a few key 
benefits; the list could easily be extended.
 
A project portfolio system is discussed next with emphasis on selection criteria, 
which is where the power of the portfolio system is established.
2.3 A Portfolio Management System
Succinctly put, the aim of portfolio management is to ensure that projects are aligned 
with strategic goals and prioritized appropriately. As Foti points out, portfolio manage-
ment asks “What is strategic to our organization?” (2002). Portfolio management pro-
vides information that allows people to make better business decisions. Since projects 
clamoring for funding and people usually outnumber available resources, it is important 
to follow a logical and defined process for selecting the projects to implement.
 
Design of a project portfolio system should include classification of a project, selec-
tion criteria depending upon classification, sources of proposals, evaluating proposals, 
and managing the portfolio of projects.
Classification of the Project
Many organizations find they have three basic kinds of projects in their portfolio: com-
pliance (emergency—must do), operational, and strategic projects. (See Figure 2.2.) 
Compliance projects are typically those needed to meet regulatory conditions required 
to operate in a region; hence, they are called “must do” projects. Emergency projects, 
such as building an auto parts factory destroyed by tsunami, or recovering a crashed 
network, are examples of must do projects. Compliance and emergency projects usu-
ally have penalties if they are not implemented. Operational projects are those that are 
needed to support current operations. These projects are designed to improve 
EXHIBIT 2.2
Benefits of Project 
Portfolio 
Management
΄ 3dWZQbQWbPW_ZW]RW]c^_a^XRPcbRZRPcW^]_a^PRbb͙
΄ >W]Yb_a^XRPcbRZRPcW^]c^bcaMcRUWP\RcaWPb͙
΄ BaW^aWcWjRb_a^XRPc_a^_^bMZbMPa^bbMP^\\^]bRc^SPaWcRaWM͜aMcVRacVM]^]_^ZWcWPb^aR\^cW^]͙
΄ 2ZZ^PMcRbaRb^daPRbc^_a^XRPcbcVMcMZWU]fWcVbcaMcRUWPQWaRPcW^]͙
΄ 3MZM]PRbaWbYMPa^bbMZZ_a^XRPcb͙
΄ <dbcWSWRbYWZZW]U_a^XRPcbcVMcQ^]^cbd__^ac^aUM]WjMcW^]bcaMcRUh͙
΄ ;\_a^eRbP^\\d]WPMcW^]M]Qbd__^acbMUaRR\R]c^]_a^XRPcU^MZb͙
www.ebook3000.com

38  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
efficiency of delivery systems, reduce product costs, and improve performance. Some 
of these projects, given their limited scope and cost, require only immediate manager 
approval, while bigger, more expensive projects need extensive review. Choosing to 
install a new piece of equipment would be an example of the latter while modifying a 
production process would be an example of the former. Total quality management 
(TQM) projects are examples of operational projects. Finally, strategic projects are 
those that directly support the organization’s long-run mission. They frequently are 
directed toward increasing revenue or market share. Examples of strategic projects are 
new products, research, and development. For a good, complete discussion on classifi-
cation schemes found in practice, see Crawford, Hobbs, and Turne (2006).
 
Frequently, these three classifications are further decomposed by product type, 
organization divisions, and functions that will require different criteria for project 
selection. For example, the same criteria for the finance or legal division would not 
apply to the IT (information technology) department. This often requires different 
project selection criteria within the basic three classifications of strategic, operational, 
and compliance projects.
2.4 Selection Criteria
Although there are many criteria for selecting projects, selection criteria are typically 
identified as financial and nonfinancial. A short description of each is given next, fol-
lowed by a discussion of their use in practice.
Financial Criteria
Financial Models   
For most managers financial criteria are the preferred method to evaluate projects. 
These models are appropriate when there is a high level of confidence associated with 
estimates of future cash flows. Two models and examples are demonstrated here—
payback and net present value (NPV).
Project A has an initial investment of $700,000 and projected cash inflows of 
$225,000 for 5 years.
Project B has an initial investment of $400,000 and projected cash inflows of 
$110,000 for 5 years.
1. The payback model measures the time it will take to recover the project invest-
ment. Shorter paybacks are more desirable. Payback is the simplest and most widely 
Apply financial and 
 nonfinancial criteria to 
assess the value of 
projects.
2-4
LO
Compliance
(must do)
projects
Operational
projects
Strategic
projects
FIGURE 2.2
Portfolio of Projects 
by Type 

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  39
used model. Payback emphasizes cash flows, a key factor in business. Some managers 
use the payback model to eliminate unusually risky projects (those with lengthy pay-
back periods). The major limitations of payback are that it ignores the time value of 
money, assumes cash inflows for the investment period (and not beyond), and does not 
consider profitability. The payback formula is
Payback period (yrs) = Estimated Project Cost/Annual Savings
Exhibit 2.3 compares the payback for Project A and Project B. The payback for Project 
A is 3.1 years and for Project B is 3.6 years. Using the payback method, both projects 
are acceptable since both return the initial investment in less than five years and have 
returns on the investment of 32.1 and 27.5 percent. Payback provides especially useful 
information for firms concerned with liquidity and having sufficient resources to man-
age their financial obligations.
 
Exhibit 2.3A presents the payback method.
2. The net present value (NPV) model uses management’s minimum desired rate-
of-return (discount rate, for example, 20 percent) to compute the present value of all 
net cash inflows. If the result is positive (the project meets the minimum desired rate 
EXHIBIT 2.3B
Example Comparing 
Two Projects Using 
Net Present Value 
Method
EXHIBIT 2.3A
Example Comparing 
Two Projects Using 
Payback Method
www.ebook3000.com

40  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
of return), it is eligible for further consideration. If the result is negative, the project is 
rejected. Thus, higher positive NPVs are desirable. Excel uses this formula:
Project NPV = I0 + ∑
n
t=1
Ft
(1 + k)t
where
I0 = Initial investment (since it is an outflow, the number will be negative)
Ft = Net cash inflow for period t
k = Required rate of return
Exhibit 2.3B presents the NPV model using Microsoft Excel software. The NPV 
model accepts Project A, which has a positive NPV of $54,235. Project B is rejected 
since the NPV is negative $31,263. Compare the NPV results with the payback results. 
The NPV model is more realistic because it considers the time value of money, cash 
flows, and profitability.
 
When using the NPV model, the discount rate (return on investment hurdle rate) 
can differ for different projects. For example, the expected ROI on strategic projects is 
frequently set higher than operational projects. Similarly, ROIs can differ for riskier 
versus safer projects. The criteria for setting the ROI hurdle rate should be clear and 
applied consistently.
 
Unfortunately, pure financial models fail to include many projects where financial 
return is impossible to measure and/or other factors are vital to the accept or reject 
decision. One research study by Foti showed that companies using predominantly 
financial models to prioritize projects yielded unbalanced portfolios and projects that 
aren’t strategically oriented (2003).
Nonfinancial Criteria
Financial return, while important, does not always reflect strategic importance. The 
past saw firms become overextended by diversifying too much. Now the prevailing 
thinking is that long-term survival is dependent upon developing and maintaining core 
competencies. Companies have to be disciplined in saying no to potentially profitable 
projects that are outside the realm of their core mission. This requires other criteria be 
considered beyond direct financial return. For example, a firm may support projects 
that do not have high profit margins for other strategic reasons including:
To capture larger market share
To make it difficult for competitors to enter the market
To develop an enabler product, which by its introduction will increase sales in 
more profitable products
To develop core technology that will be used in next-generation products
To reduce dependency on unreliable suppliers
To prevent government intervention and regulation
Less tangible criteria may also apply. Organizations may support projects to restore 
corporate image or enhance brand recognition. Many organizations are committed to 
corporate citizenship and support community development projects.
Two Multi-Criteria Selection Models
Since no single criterion can reflect strategic significance, portfolio management 
requires multi-criteria screening models. Two models, the checklist and multi-
weighted scoring models, are described next.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  41
Checklist Models The most frequently used method in selecting projects has been 
the checklist. This approach basically uses a list of questions to review potential proj-
ects and to determine their acceptance or rejection. Several of the typical questions 
found in practice are listed in Exhibit 2.4. One large, multiproject organization has 250 
different questions!
 
A justification of checklist models is that they allow great flexibility in selecting 
among many different types of projects and are easily used across different divisions 
and locations. Although many projects are selected using some variation of the check-
list approach, this approach has serious shortcomings. Major shortcomings of this 
approach are that it fails to answer the relative importance or value of a potential proj-
ect to the organization and fails to allow for comparison with other potential projects. 
Each potential project will have a different set of positive and negative answers. How 
do you compare? Ranking and prioritizing projects by their importance is difficult, if 
not impossible. This approach also leaves the door open to the potential opportunity 
for power plays, politics, and other forms of manipulation. To overcome these serious 
shortcomings experts recommend the use of a multi-weighted scoring model to select 
projects, which is examined next.
Multi-Weighted Scoring Models A weighted scoring model typically uses several 
weighted selection criteria to evaluate project proposals. Weighted scoring models will 
generally include qualitative and/or quantitative criteria. Each selection criterion is 
assigned a weight. Scores are assigned to each criterion for the project, based on its 
importance to the project being evaluated. The weights and scores are multiplied to get 
a total weighted score for the project. Using these multiple screening criteria, projects 
can then be compared using the weighted score. Projects with higher weighted scores 
are considered better.
 
Selection criteria need to mirror the critical success factors of an organization. For 
example, 3M set a target that 25 percent of the company’s sales would come from 
products fewer than four years old versus the old target of 20 percent. Their priority 
Understand how multi-
criteria models can be 
used to select projects.
2-5
LO
EXHIBIT 2.4
Sample Selection 
Questions Used in 
Practice
Topic 
Question
Strategy/alignment 
What specific organization strategy does this project align with?
Driver 
What business problem does the project solve?
Sponsorship 
Who is the project sponsor?
Risk 
What is the impact of not doing this project?
Risk 
What is the project risk to our organization?
Benefits, value, ROI 
What is the value of the project to this organization?
Benefits, value, ROI 
When will the project show results?
Objectives 
What are the project objectives?
Organization culture 
Is our organization culture right for this type of project?
Resources 
Will internal resources be available for this project?
Approach 
Will we build or buy?
Schedule 
How long will this project take?
Schedule 
Is the time line realistic?
Training/resources 
Will staff training be required?
Finance/portfolio 
What is the estimated cost of the project?
Portfolio 
Is this a new initiative or part of an existing initiative?
Portfolio 
How does this project interact with current projects?
Technology 
Is the technology available or new?
www.ebook3000.com

42  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
system for project selection strongly reflects this new target. On the other hand, failure 
to pick the right factors will render the screening process “useless” in short order. See 
Snapshot from Practice 2.2: Crisis IT.
 
Figure 2.3 represents a project scoring matrix using some of the factors found in 
practice. The screening criteria selected are shown across the top of the matrix (e.g., 
stay within core competencies . . . ROI of 18 percent plus). Management weights each 
criterion (a value of 0 to a high of, say, 3) by its relative importance to the organiza-
tion’s objectives and strategic plan. Project proposals are then submitted to a project 
priority team or project office.
 
Each project proposal is then evaluated by its relative contribution/value added to 
the selected criteria. Values of 0 to a high of 10 are assigned to each criterion for each 
project. This value represents the project’s fit to the specific criterion. For example, 
project 1 appears to fit well with the strategy of the organization since it is given a 
value of 8. Conversely, project 1 does nothing to support reducing defects (its value is 
0). Finally, this model applies the management weights to each criterion by impor-
tance using a value of 1 to 3. For example, ROI and strategic fit have a weight of 3, 
while urgency and core competencies have weights of 2. Applying the weight to each 
In May 2007, Frontier Airlines Hold-
ings hired Gerry Coady as chief infor-
mation officer (CIO). Nearly a year 
later the airline filed for bankruptcy 
under Chapter 11. In an interview Coady 
describes how he managed IT projects during the bank-
ruptcy and recession crisis of 2008–2009.
 
Fundamentally, Coady faced a situation of too 
many projects and too few resources. Coady used a 
strategy of focusing on reducing the number of proj-
ects in the portfolio. He put together a steering com-
mittee of senior management that reviewed several 
hundred projects. The end result was a reduction to 
less than 30 projects remaining in the portfolio.
How Can You Get to a Backlog of over 
100 Projects?
“There are never enough resources to get everything 
done.” Backlogs build over time. Sacred cow projects 
get included in the selection system. Projects proposed 
from people who have left the airline still reside in the 
project portfolio. Non-value-added projects somehow 
make their way into the project portfolio. Soon the 
queue gets longer. With everyone in IT working on too 
many projects concurrently, project completion and 
productivity are slow.
Which Projects Remain?
To cut the number of projects, the steering committee 
used a weighting scheme that reflected the airline’s pri-
orities, which were: fly safe, generate revenue, reduce 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  2 . 2
Crisis IT
costs, and customer service. The weighting scheme eas-
ily weeded out the fluff. Coady noted that “by the time 
you get to the 20s the margin of differentiation gets nar-
rower and narrower.” Of the remaining projects, project 
sponsors had to have solid justification why their project 
is important. Reduction of the number of projects places 
emphasis on high value projects.
What Advice Does Coady Have for Crisis 
Management?
In times of crisis, it is easier to take bold steps to make 
changes. But you need to have a clear vision of what you 
should be focusing on with the resources available. Coady 
suggests, “It comes back to really having a good idea of 
what the initial business case for a project is and what 
resources it is consuming, both people and otherwise.”
Source: Worthen, B., “Crisis IT,” The Wall Street Journal, April 
20, 2009, p. 6.
© PRNewsFoto/Genesis, Inc.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  43
criterion, the priority team derives the weighted total points for each project. For 
example, project 5 has the highest value of 102 [(2 × 1) + (3 × 10) + (2 × 5) + (2.5 × 
10) + (1 × 0) + (1 × 8) + (3 × 9) = 102] and project 2 has a low value of 27. If the 
resources available create a cutoff threshold of 50 points, the priority team would elimi-
nate projects 2 and 4. (Note: Project 4 appears to have some urgency, but it is not clas-
sified as a “must” project. Therefore, it is screened with all other proposals.) Project 5 
would receive first priority, project n second, and so on. In rare cases where resources 
are severely limited and project proposals are similar in weighted rank, it is prudent to 
pick the project placing less demand on resources. Weighted multiple criteria models 
similar to this one are rapidly becoming the dominant choice for prioritizing projects.
 
At this point in the discussion it is wise to stop and put things into perspective. 
While selection models like the one above may yield numerical solutions to project 
selection decisions, models should not make the final decisions—the people using the 
models should. No model, no matter how sophisticated, can capture the total reality it 
is meant to represent. Models are tools for guiding the evaluation process so that the 
decision makers will consider relevant issues and reach a meeting of the minds as to 
which projects should be supported and not supported. This is a much more subjective 
process than calculations suggest.
2.5 Applying a Selection Model
Project Classification   
It is not necessary to have exactly the same criteria for the different types of projects 
discussed above (strategic and operations). However, experience shows most organiza-
tions use similar criteria across all types of projects, with perhaps one or two criteria 
specific to the type of project—e.g., strategic breakthrough versus operational.
Apply an objective prior-
ity system to project 
selection.
2-6
LO
Project 1
Criteria
Weight
Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Project 5
Project 6
...
Project n
1
3
9
3
1
6
5
8
3
5
0
10
5
5
2
2
2
10
5
0
7
6
0
0
0
10
2
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
10
6
5
2
6
8
2
10
5
1
5
0
9
7
8
66
2.0
Stay within
core
competencies
Urgency
25% of sales
from
new products
Reduce
defects to
less than 1%
Improve
customer
loyalty
ROI of 18%
plus
Weighted
total
Strategic
ﬁt
3.0
2.0
2.5
1.0
1.0
3.0
27
56
32
102
55
83
FIGURE 2.3 Project Screening Matrix
www.ebook3000.com

44  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
 
Regardless of criteria differences among different types of projects, the most 
important criterion for selection is the project’s fit to the organization strategy. 
Therefore, this criterion should be consistent across all types of projects and carry a 
high priority relative to other criteria. This uniformity across all priority models 
used can keep departments from suboptimizing the use of organization resources. 
Project proposals should be classified by type, so the appropriate criteria can be 
used to evaluate them.
Selecting a Model
In the past, financial criteria were used almost to the exclusion of other criteria. 
However, in the last two decades we have witnessed a dramatic shift to include 
multiple criteria in project selection. Concisely put, profitability alone is simply not 
an adequate measure of contribution; however, it is still an important criterion, 
especially for projects that enhance revenue and market share such as breakthrough 
R&D projects.
 
Today, senior management is interested in identifying the potential mix of projects 
that will yield the best use of human and capital resources to maximize return on 
investment in the long run. Factors such as researching new technology, public image, 
ethical position, protection of the environment, core competencies, and strategic fit 
might be important criteria for selecting projects. Weighted scoring criteria seem the 
best alternative to meet this need.
 
Weighted scoring models result in bringing projects to closer alignment with stra-
tegic goals. If the scoring model is published and available to everyone in the organi-
zation, some discipline and credibility are attached to the selection of projects. The 
number of wasteful projects using resources is reduced. Politics and “sacred cow” 
projects are exposed. Project goals are more easily identified and communicated 
using the selection criteria as corroboration. Finally, using a weighted scoring 
approach helps project managers understand how their project was selected, how their 
project contributes to organization goals, and how it compares with other projects. 
Project selection is one of the most important decisions guiding the future success of 
an organization.
 
Criteria for project selection are the area where the power of your portfolio starts to 
manifest itself. New projects are aligned with the strategic goals of the organization. 
With a clear method for selecting projects in place, project proposals can be solicited.
Sources and Solicitation of Project Proposals
As you would guess, projects should come from anyone who believes his or her 
project will add value to the organization. However, many organizations restrict 
proposals from specific levels or groups within the organization. This could be an 
opportunity lost. Good ideas are not limited to certain types or classes of organiza-
tion stakeholders. Encourage and keep solicitations open to all sources—internal 
and external sponsors.
 
Figure 2.4A provides an example of a proposal form for an automatic vehicular 
tracking (Automatic Vehicle Location) public transportation project. Figure 2.4B pres-
ents a preliminary risk analysis for a 500-acre wind farm. Many organizations use risk 
analysis templates to gain a quick insight of a project’s inherent risks. Risk factors 
depend on the organization and type of projects. This information is useful in balanc-
ing the project portfolio and identifying major risks when executing the project. Proj-
ect risk analysis is the subject of Chapter 7.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  45
 
In some cases organizations will solicit ideas for projects when the knowledge 
requirements for the project are not available in the organization. Typically, the organi-
zation will issue an RFP (Request for Proposal) to contractors/vendors with adequate 
experience to implement the project. In one example, a hospital published an RFP that 
asked for a bid to design and build a new operating room that uses the latest technol-
ogy. Several architecture firms submitted bids to the hospital. The bids for the project 
were evaluated internally against other potential projects. When the project was 
accepted as a go, other criteria were used to select the best qualified bidder.
Project Proposal Form
Project classiﬁcation?
What business problem does the project solve?
Increase customer satisfaction through kiosk and Web site for bus, streetcar, and fast rail
Enhance driver and traveler safety
Strategic
Infrastructure
Compliance
Date:
Proposal #
Sponsor
Jan 22, 2xxx
11
X
J. Moran
Hyperlink to: AVL.tri-met.org
Increase customer ridership through better passenger travel planning & scheduling decisions
Faster response to accidents
How does this project align with our organization strategy? 
What are the major deliverables of the project?
What is the impact of not doing this project?
What are the three major risks for this project?
Increased ridership
Customer satisfaction
Meeting budget and schedule
How will we measure success?
What is the estimated cost of the project?  
How long will this project take?
Oversight action:
Signature
Accept
XXXXXX
Date: Feb. 7, 2xxx
Return
22
Weeks
$10 million
Will this project require internal resources?
Available?
Yes
No
Yes
Not meeting ridership goals
Cost overruns
Hacking system
Integration of fast rail, bus, and streetcar systems
GPS vehicle tracking system, Internet access, schedule screen
No
X
X
X
FIGURE 2.4A
A Proposal Form for 
an Automatic 
Vehicular Tracking 
(AVL) Public 
Transportation 
Project
www.ebook3000.com

46  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
Ranking Proposals and Selection of Projects
Culling through so many proposals to identify those that add the most value requires a 
structured process. Figure 2.5 shows a flow chart of a screening process beginning with the 
creation of an idea for a project. See Figure 12.3 for a template for evaluating contractors.
 
Data and information are collected to assess the value of the proposed project to the 
organization and for future backup. If the sponsor decides to pursue the project on the 
basis of the collected data, it is forwarded to the project priority team (or the project 
office). Note that the sponsor knows which criteria will be used to accept or reject the 
project. Given the selection criteria and current portfolio of projects, the priority team 
rejects or accepts the project. If the project is accepted, the priority team sets imple-
mentation in motion.
 
Figure 2.6 is a partial example of an evaluation form used by a large company to pri-
oritize and select new projects. The form distinguishes between must and want objec-
tives. If a project does not meet designated “must” objectives, it is not considered and is 
removed from consideration. Organization (or division) objectives have been ranked and 
weighted by their relative importance—for example, “Improve external customer ser-
vice” carries a relative weight of 83 when compared to other want objectives. The want 
objectives are directly linked to objectives found in the strategic plan.
FIGURE 2.4B
Risk Analysis for a 
500-Acre Wind Farm 
Brief Risk Assessment
Risk Intensity Rating
Purpose: To draw attention to apparent project risks that will need management attention.
Rank risks above by “probability” and “impact” on the chart below by High, Medium
or Low.
What are the four major risks of this project?
1.
2.
3.
Government incentives curtailed
Land use injunction
Energy price decrease
4. New import tax
Risk
Probability
Impact
1.
2.
3.
Government incentives curtailed
Land use injunction
Energy price decrease
4. New import tax
High
Medium
Medium
Low
High
High
Medium
High
Check other project risk factors:
Complexity
Resource skills
Technology
Low
Good
Low
Average
Okay
Average
High
Lacking
High
Reviewed by
Date
X
Rachel
April 1, 2xxx
X
X

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  47
 
Impact definitions represent a further refinement to the screening system. They are 
developed to gauge the predicted impact a specific project would have on meeting a 
particular objective. A numeric scheme is created and anchored by defining criteria. To 
illustrate how this works, let’s examine the $5 million in new sales objective. A “0” is 
assigned if the project will have no impact on sales or less than $100,000, a “1” is given 
if predicted sales are more than $100,000 but less than $500,000, a “2” if greater than 
$500,000. These impact assessments are combined with the relative importance of each 
objective to determine the predicted overall contribution of a project to strategic objec-
tives. For example, project 26 creates an opportunity to fix field problems, has no effect 
on sales, and will have major impact on customer service. On these three objectives, 
project 26 would receive a score of 265 [99 + 0 + (2 × 83)]. Individual weighted scores 
are totaled for each project and are used to prioritize projects.
Responsibility for Prioritizing
Prioritizing can be an uncomfortable exercise for managers. But prioritizing projects is 
a major responsibility for senior management. Prioritizing means discipline, account-
ability, responsibility, constraints, reduced flexibility, and loss of power. Top manage-
ment commitment means more than giving a blessing to the priority system; it means 
management will have to rank and weigh, in concrete terms, the objectives and strate-
gies they believe to be most critical to the organization. This public declaration of 
commitment can be risky if the ranked objectives later prove to be poor choices, but 
setting the course for the organization is top management’s job. The good news is, if 
management is truly trying to direct the organization to a strong future position, a good 
project priority system supports their efforts and develops a culture in which everyone 
is contributing to the goals of the organization.
Periodic
reassessment
of priorities
Return for
more
information
Abandon
Reject
Accept
Pursue
Project
proposal
idea
Data
collection
and backup
Self-evaluation
of project
by criteria
Priority team
evaluates proposal
and reviews portfolio
for risk balance
Need
strategic ﬁt
ROI/payback
risk
Assign priority
Assign resources
Assign project manager
Evaluate progress
Hold for
resources
FIGURE 2.5
Project Screening 
Process 
www.ebook3000.com

48  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
2.6 Managing the Portfolio System
Managing the portfolio takes the selection system one step higher in that the merits of 
a particular project are assessed within the context of existing projects. At the same 
time it involves monitoring and adjusting selection criteria to reflect the strategic focus 
of the organization. This requires constant effort. The priority system can be managed 
by a small group of key employees in a small organization. Or, in larger organizations, 
the priority system can be managed by the project office or a governance team of 
senior managers.
Senior Management Input
Management of a portfolio system requires two major inputs from senior management. 
First, senior management must provide guidance in establishing selection criteria that 
Understand the need to 
manage the project 
portfolio.
2-7
LO
Must objectives
All activities meet current
legal, safety, and
environmental standards
All new products will have
a complete market
analysis
Want objectives
Single project
impact deﬁnitions
Provides immediate
response to ﬁeld
problems
Relative
Importance
1-100
Weighted
score
Weighted
score
Weighted
score
Weighted
score
99
88
83
99
yes
n/a
0
166
0    Does not address
1  =  Opportunity to ﬁx
2    Urgent problem
0 <  $100,000
1  =  $100,000–500,000
2 >  $500,000
0    Minor impact
1  =  Signiﬁcant impact
2    Major impact
Create $5 million in
new sales by 20xx
Total weighted score
Priority
Improve external
customer service
Yes-Meets objective
No-Does not meet obj
N/A-No impact
Yes-Meets objective
No-Does not meet obj
N/A-No impact
Must meet if impacts
...26
27
28
29
Project number
FIGURE 2.6
Priority Screening 
Analysis 

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  49
strongly align with the current organization strategies. Second, senior management 
must annually decide how they wish to balance the available organizational resources 
(people and capital) among the different types of projects. A preliminary decision of 
balance must be made by top management (e.g., 20 percent compliance, 50 percent 
strategic, and 30 percent operational) before project selection takes place, although the 
balance may be changed when the projects submitted are reviewed. Given these inputs 
the priority team or project office can carry out its many responsibilities, which include 
supporting project sponsors and representing the interests of the total organization.
The Governance Team Responsibilities
The governance team, or project office, is responsible for publishing the priority of every 
project and ensuring the process is open and free of power politics. For example, most 
organizations using a governance team or project office use an electronic bulletin board to 
disperse the current portfolio of projects, the current status of each project, and current 
issues. This open communication discourages power plays. Over time the governance team 
evaluates the progress of the projects in the portfolio. If this whole process is managed well, 
it can have a profound impact on the success of an organization. See Snapshot from Prac-
tice 2.3: Project Code Names for the rationale behind titles given to projects.
What do Yangtze, Operation Iceberg, 
and Get Blue have in common? They 
are all code names given to projects. 
Project code names are used for sev-
eral reasons:
΄
F^ d]W`dRZh WQR]cWSh cVR _a^XRPc fWcVW] cVR
organization.
 
Apple Corporation used to name major releases of 
MAC OS X after big cats such as Jaguar, Tiger, 
Panther, and Leopard, but now name them after 
national parks (i.e., Yosemite).
΄
F^ MbbWbc W] \MW]cMW]W]U bRPaRPh ^S cVR _a^XRPc
against rival concerns.
 
Oxcart was used by U.S. Department of Defense 
during the height of the cold war for the secret de-
velopment of super sonic fighter jet.
΄
2bM_dOZWPaRZMcW^]bc^^Zc^UMa]Rabd__^acS^a_a^X-
ect objectives
 
Operation Just Cause was the name given by U.S. 
government for the 1989 invasion of Panama, which 
ousted corrupt leader Manual Noriega.
΄
F^W]b_WaRM]QRZReMcR_RaS^a\M]PR͙
 
Revolution was used by Nintendo for groundbreak-
ing Wii video game console.
Often on small projects names convey a playful sense 
of humor. For example, a set of interrelated software 
projects were all named after Smurf Characters (Papa 
Smurf, Handy Smurf, Dreamy Smurf,…). Other times 
the project name reflects an inside joke, for example, 
one software project was named ALINA, which was an 
acronym for At Least It Is Not Access.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  2 . 3
Project Code Names*
© McGraw-Hill Education/Jill Braaten, photographer
*Sieminski, G. C., “The Art of Naming Operations,” Parame-
ters, Autumn 1995, pp. 81-98; “Operation Know-It-All: The 
 Indispensable Guide to Choosing Good Project Names,” 
 articulatemarketing.com, accessed December 20, 2015.
www.ebook3000.com

50  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
 
Constant scanning of the external environment to determine if organizational focus 
and/or selection criteria need to be changed is imperative! Periodic priority review and 
changes need to keep current with the changing environment and keep a unified vision 
of organization focus. Regardless of the criteria used for selection, each project should 
be evaluated by the same criteria. If projects are classified by must do, operation, and 
strategic, each project in its class should be evaluated by the same criteria. Enforcing 
the project priority system is crucial. Keeping the whole system open and aboveboard 
is important to maintaining the integrity of the system and keeping new, young execu-
tives from going around the system. For example, communicating which projects are 
approved, project ranks, current status of in-process projects, and any changes in prior-
ity criteria will discourage people from bypassing the system.
Balancing the Portfolio for Risks and Types of Projects
A major responsibility of the priority team is to balance projects by type, risk, and 
resource demand. This requires a total organization perspective. Hence, a proposed 
project that ranks high on most criteria may not be selected because the organization 
portfolio already includes too many projects with the same characteristics—e.g., proj-
ect risk level, use of key resources, high cost, nonrevenue producing, long durations. 
Balancing the portfolio of projects is as important as project selection. Organizations 
need to evaluate each new project in terms of what it adds to the project mix. Short-
term needs need to be balanced with long-term potential. Resource usage needs to be 
optimized across all projects, not just the most important project.
 
Two types of risk are associated with projects. First are risks associated with the 
total portfolio of projects, which should reflect the organization’s risk profile. Second 
are specific project risks that can inhibit the execution of a project, such as schedule, 
cost, and technical. In this chapter we look only to balancing the organizational risks 
inherent in the project portfolio, such as market risk, ability to execute, time to market, 
and technology advances. Project-specific risks will be covered in detail in Chapter 7.
 
David and Jim Matheson studied R&D organizations and developed a classification 
scheme that could be used for assessing a project portfolio.7 They separated projects in 
terms of degree of difficulty and commercial value and came up with four basic types 
of projects:
Bread-and-butter projects are relatively easy to accomplish and produce modest 
commercial value. They typically involve evolutionary improvements to current 
products and services. Examples include software upgrades and manufacturing 
cost reduction efforts.
Pearls are low risk development projects with high commercial payoffs. They 
 represent revolutionary commercial advances using proven technology. Examples 
include next-generation integrated circuit chip and subsurface imaging to locate 
oil and gas.
Oysters are high risk, high value projects. These projects involve technological 
breakthroughs with tremendous commercial potential. Examples include embry-
onic DNA treatments and new kinds of metal alloys.
White elephants are projects that at one time showed promise but are no longer 
viable. Examples include products for a saturated market or a potent energy source 
with toxic side-effects.
7 Matheson, D., and J. Matheson, The Smart Organization (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), pp. 203–209.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  51
The Mathesons report that organizations often have too many white elephants and too 
few pearls and oysters. To maintain strategic advantage they recommend that organiza-
tions capitalize on pearls, eliminate or reposition white elephants, and balance 
resources devoted to bread-and-butter and oyster projects to achieve alignment with 
overall strategy. Although their research centers on R&D organizations, their observa-
tions appear to hold true for all types of project organizations.
Summary
Multiple competing projects, limited skilled resources, dispersed virtual teams, time to 
market pressures, and limited capital serve as forces for the emergence of project port-
folio management that provides the infrastructure for managing multiple projects and 
linking business strategy with project selection. The most important element of this 
system is the creation of a ranking system that utilizes multiple criteria that reflect the 
mission and strategy of the firm. It is critical to communicate priority criteria to all 
organizational stakeholders so that the criteria can be the source of inspiration for new 
project ideas.
 
Every significant project selected should be ranked and the results published. Se-
nior management must take an active role in setting priorities and supporting the prior-
ity system. Going around the priority system will destroy its effectiveness. The project 
governance team needs to consist of seasoned managers who are capable of asking 
tough questions and distinguishing facts from fiction. Resources (people, equipment, 
and capital) for major projects must be clearly allocated and not conflict with daily 
operations or become an overload task.
 
The governance team needs to scrutinize significant projects in terms of not only 
their strategic value but also their fit with the portfolio of projects currently being im-
plemented. Highly ranked projects may be deferred or even turned down if they upset 
the current balance among risks, resources, and strategic initiatives. Project selection 
must be based not only on the merits of the specific project but also on what it contrib-
utes to the current project portfolio mix. This requires a holistic approach to aligning 
projects with organizational strategy and resources.
 
The importance of aligning projects with organization strategy cannot be over-
stated. We have discussed two types of models found in practice. Checklist models are 
easy to develop and are justified primarily on the basis of flexibility across different 
divisions and locations. Unfortunately, questionnaire checklist models do not allow 
comparison of the relative value (rank) of alternative projects in contributing toward 
organization strategy. The latter is the major reason the authors prefer multi-weighted 
scoring models. These models keep project selection highly focused on alignment with 
organization strategy. Weighted scoring models require major effort in establishing the 
criteria and weights.
Key Terms
Implementation gap, 34
Net present value  
(NVP), 38
Organization politics, 35
Payback, 38
Priority system, 34
Priority team, 42
Project portfolio, 34
Project sponsor, 35
Sacred cow, 35
Strategic management, 29
www.ebook3000.com

52  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
1. Describe the major components of the strategic management process.
2. Explain the role projects play in the strategic management process.
3. How are projects linked to the strategic plan?
4. The portfolio of projects is typically represented by compliance, strategic, and oper-
ations projects. What impact can this classification have on project selection?
5. Why does the priority system described in this chapter require that it be open and 
published? Does the process encourage bottom-up initiation of projects? Does it 
discourage some projects? Why?
6. Why should an organization not rely only on ROI to select projects?
7. Discuss the pros and cons of the checklist versus the weighted factor method of 
selecting projects.
1. You manage a hotel resort located on the South Beach on the Island of Kauai in 
Hawaii. You are shifting the focus of your resort from a traditional fun-in-the-sun 
destination to eco-tourism. (Eco-tourism focuses on environmental awareness and 
education.) How would you classify the following projects in terms of compliance, 
strategic, and operational?
a.  Convert the pool heating system from electrical to solar power.
b.  Build a four-mile nature hiking trail.
c.  Renovate the horse barn.
d.  Launch a new promotional campaign with Hawaii Airlines.
e.  Convert 12 adjacent acres into a wildlife preserve.
f.  Update all the bathrooms in condos that are 10 years old or older.
g.  Change hotel brochures to reflect eco-tourism image.
h.  Test and revise disaster response plan.
i.  Introduce wireless Internet service in café and lounge areas.
 
How easy was it to classify these projects? What made some projects more difficult 
than others? What do you think you now know that would be useful for managing 
projects at the hotel?
2.* Two new software projects are proposed to a young, start-up company. The Alpha 
project will cost $150,000 to develop and is expected to have annual net cash flow of 
$40,000. The Beta project will cost $200,000 to develop and is expected to have annual 
net cash flow of $50,000. The company is very concerned about their cash flow. Using 
the payback period, which project is better from a cash flow standpoint? Why?
3. A five-year project has a projected net cash flow of $15,000, $25,000, $30,000, 
$20,000, and $15,000 in the next five years. It will cost $50,000 to implement the 
project. If the required rate of return is 20 percent, conduct a discounted cash flow 
calculation to determine the NPV.
4. You work for the 3T company, which expects to earn at least 18 percent on its 
investments. You have to choose between two similar projects. The following chart 
shows the cash information for each project. Which of the two projects would you 
fund if the decision is based only on financial information? Why?
Exercises
Review 
Questions
*The solution to these exercises can be found in Appendix One.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  53
Omega 
 
 
 
Alpha 
Year 
Inflow 
Outflow 
Netflow 
Year 
Inflow 
Outflow 
Netflow
Y0 
             0 
$225,000 
−225,000 
Y0 
             0 
$300,000 
−300,000
Y1 
             0 
 190,000 
−190,000 
Y1 
  $ 50,000 
  100,000 
  −50,000
Y2 
$ 150,000 
           0 
  150,000 
Y2 
   150,000 
            0 
   150,000
Y3 
   220,000 
   30,000 
  190,000 
Y3 
   250,000 
   50,000 
   200,000
Y4 
   215,000 
           0 
  215,000 
Y4 
   250,000 
           0 
   250,000
Y5 
   205,000 
   30,000 
  175,000 
Y5 
   200,000 
   50,000 
   150,000
Y6 
  197,000 
           0 
  197,000 
Y6 
   180,000 
            0 
   180,000
Y7 
   100,000 
   30,000 
    70,000 
Y7 
   120,000 
   30,000 
     90,000
Total 
1,087,000 
 505,000 
  582,000 
Total 
1,200,000 
  530,000 
   670,000
5.* You are the head of the project selection team at SIMSOX. Your team is consider-
ing three different projects. Based on past history, SIMSOX expects at least a rate 
of return of 20 percent. 
 
Given the following information for each project, which one should be SIMSOX’s 
first priority? Should SIMSOX fund any of the other projects? If so, what should be 
the order of priority based on return on investment?
Project: Dust Devils
Year 
Investment 
Revenue Stream
0 
$500,000 
0
1 
 
50,000
2 
 
250,000
3 
 
350,000
Project: Osprey
Year 
Investment 
Revenue Stream
0 
$250,000 
0
1 
 
75,000
2 
 
75,000
3 
 
75,000
4 
 
50,000
Project: Voyagers
Year 
Investment 
Revenue Stream
0 
$75,000 
0
1 
 
15,000
2 
 
25,000
3 
 
50,000
4 
 
50,000
5 
 
150,000 
*The solution to these exercises can be found in Appendix One.
www.ebook3000.com

54  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
6. You are the head of the project selection team at Broken Arrow records. Your team 
is considering three different recording projects. Based on past history, Broken 
Arrow expects at least a rate of return of 20 percent. 
 
Given the following information for each project, which one should be Broken 
Arrow’s first priority? Should Broken Arrow fund any of the other projects? If so, 
what should be the order of priority based on return on investment?
Recording Project: Time Fades Away
Year 
Investment 
Revenue Stream
0 
$600,000 
0
1 
 
600,000
2 
 
75,000
3 
 
20,000
4 
 
15,000
5 
 
10,000
Recording Project: On the Beach
Year 
Investment 
Revenue Stream
0 
$400,000 
0
1 
 
400,000
2 
 
100,000
3 
 
25,000
4 
 
20,000
5 
 
10,000
Recording Project: Tonight’s the Night
Year 
Investment 
Revenue Stream
0 
$200,000 
0
1 
 
200,000           
2 
 
125,000           
3 
 
75,000         
4 
 
20,000         
5 
 
10,000        
7. The Custom Bike Company has set up a weighted scoring matrix for evaluation of 
potential projects. Below are five projects under consideration.
 
a.  Using the scoring matrix in the following chart, which project would you rate 
highest? Lowest?
 
b.  If the weight for “Strong Sponsor” is changed from 2.0 to 5.0, will the project 
selection change? What are the three highest weighted project scores with this 
new weight?
 
c.  Why is it important that the weights mirror critical strategic factors?

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  55
Project Screening Matrix
Project 1
Criteria
Weight
Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Project 5
9
3
6
1
3
5
7
8
0
10
2
2
2
5
10
0
0
3
10
1
2
5
6
6
8
5
1
8
9
0
2.0
Strong
sponsor
Urgency
10% of
sales from
new products
Competition
Fill market
gap
Supports
business
strategy
5.0
4.0
3.0
1.0
3.0
Weighted 
total
Adler, P. S., et al., “Getting the Most Out of Your Product Development Process,” 
Harvard Business Review, vol. 74, no. 2, pp. 134–52.
Benko, C., and F. W. McFarlan, Connecting the Dots: Aligning Projects With Objec-
tives in Unpredictable Times (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2003).
Bigelow, D., “Want to Ensure Quality? Think Project Portfolio Management,” PM 
Network, vol. 16, no. 1 (April 2002), pp. 16–17.
Bloomberg Businessweek, “IBM Wants to Put Watson in Your Pocket,” September 
17–23, 2012, pp. 41–42.
Boyer, C., “Make Profit Your Priority,” PM Network, vol. 15, no. 10 (October 2003), 
pp. 37–42.
Cohen, D., and R. Graham, The Project Manager’s MBA (San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass, 2001), pp. 58–59.
Crawford, L., B. Hobbs, and J. R. Turne, “Aligning Capability with Strategy: Catego-
rizing of Projects to Do the Right Projects and Do Them Right,” Project Management 
Journal, vol. 37, no. 2 (June 2006), pp. 38–50.
Descamps, J. P., “Mastering the Dance of Change: Innovation as a Way of Life,” 
Prism, Second Quarter, 1999, pp. 61–67.
Doran, G. T., “There’s a Smart Way to Write Management Goals and Objectives,” 
Management Review, November 1981, pp. 35–36.
Floyd, S. W., and B. Woolridge, “Managing Strategic Consensus: The Foundation 
of Effectiveness Implementation,” Academy of Management Executives, vol. 6, 
no. 4  (1992), pp. 27–39.
References
www.ebook3000.com

56  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
Foti, R., “Louder Than Words,” PM Network, December 2002, pp. 22–29. Also see 
Foti, R., “Make Your Case, Not All Projects Are Equal,” PM Network, vol. 31, no. 7 
(2003), pp. 35–43.
Frank, L., “On Demand,” PM Network, vol. 18, no. 4 (April 2004), pp. 58–62.
Friedman, Thomas L., Hot, Flat, and Crowded (New York: Farrar, Straus, and 
 Giroux, 2008).
Fusco, J. C., “Better Policies Provide the Key to Implementing Project Management,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 28. no. 3 (1997), pp. 38–41.
Helm, J., and K. Remington, “Effective Project Sponsorship: An Evaluation of the 
Executive Sponsor in Complex Infrastructure Projects by Senior Project Managers,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 36, no. 1 (September 2005), pp. 51–61.
Hutchens, G., “Doing the Numbers,” PM Network, vol. 16, no. 4 (March 2002), p. 20.
Johnson, R. E., “Scrap Capital Project Evaluations,” Chief Financial Officer, 
May 1998, p. 14.
Kaplan, R. S., and D. P. Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard—Measures That Drive 
Performance,” Harvard Business Review, January–February 1992, pp. 73–79. Also 
see Kaplan, Robert, http;//balancedscorecard.org.
Kenny, J., “Effective Project Management for Strategic Innovation and Change in an 
Organizational Context,” Project Management Journal, vol. 34, no. 1 (2003), pp. 45–53.
Kharbanda, O. P., and J. K. Pinto, What Made Gertie Gallop: Learning from Project 
Failures (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1996), pp. 106–11, 263–83.
Korte, R. F., and T. J. Chermack, “Changing Organizational Culture with Scenario 
Planning,” Futures, vol. 39, no. 6 (August 2007), pp. 645–56.
Leifer, R., C. M. McDermott, G. C. O’Connor, L. S. Peters, M. Price, and R. W. 
Veryzer, Radical Innovation: How Mature Companies Can Outsmart Upstarts 
 (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2000).
MacIntyre, J., PM Network, vol. 20, no. 11 (November 2006), pp. 32–35.
Magretta, Joan, Understanding Michael Porter: The Essential Guide to Competition 
and Strategy (Boston: Harvard Business Press Book, 2011).
Matheson, D., and J. Matheson, The Smart Organization (Boston: Harvard Business 
School Press, 1998), pp. 203–9.
Milosevic, D. Z., and S. Srivannaboon, “A Theoretical Framework for Aligning Proj-
ect Management with Business Strategy,” Project Management Journal, vol. 37, no. 3 
(August 2006), pp. 98–110.
Morris, P. W., and A. Jamieson, “Moving from Corporate Strategy to Project Strategy,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 36, no. 4 (December 2005), pp. 5–18.
Motta, Silva, and Rogério Hermida Quintella, “Assessment of Non-Financial Criteria 
in the Selection of Investment Projects for Seed Capital Funding: The Contribution of 
Scientometrics and Patentometrics,” Journal of Technology Management Innovation, 
vol. 7, no. 3 (2012).
PMI, “PMI’s Pulse of the Profession,” March 2012, Project Management Institute, p. 7.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  57
Raskin, P., et al., Great Transitions: The Promise and Lure of the Times Ahead, 
retrieved June 3, 2008, www.gtinitiative.org/documents/Great_Transitions.pdf
Schwartz, Peter, and Doug Randall, “An Abrupt Climate Change Scenario and its 
Implications for United States National Security,” Global Business Network, Inc., 
October 2003.
Shenhar, A., “Strategic Project Leadership: Focusing Your Project on Business 
 Success,” Proceedings of the Project Management Institute Annual Seminars & 
 Symposium, San Antonio, Texas, October 3–10, 2002, CD. Also see Shenhar, Aaron, 
Reinventing Project Management (Harvard Business School, 2007).
Sieminski, G. C., “The Art of Naming Operations,” Parameters, Autumn 1995, pp. 81–98.
Smith, D. K., and R. C. Alexander, Fumbling the Future: How Xerox Invented, Then 
Ignored the First Personal Computer (New York: Macmillan, 1988).
Swanson, S., “All Things Considered,” PM Network, vol. 25, no. 2 (February 2011), 
pp. 36–40.
Woodward, H., “Winning in a World of Limited Project Spending,” Proceedings of 
the Project Management Institute Global Congress North America, Baltimore, 
 Maryland, September 18–12, 2003, CD.
Case 2.1
Hector Gaming Company
Hector Gaming Company (HGC) is an educational gaming company specializing in 
young children’s educational games. HGC has just completed their fourth year of oper-
ation. This year was a banner year for HGC. The company received a large influx of 
capital for growth by issuing stock privately through an investment banking firm. It 
appears the return on investment for this past year will be just over 25 percent with 
zero debt! The growth rate for the last two years has been approximately 80 percent 
each year. Parents and grandparents of young children have been buying HGC’s prod-
ucts almost as fast as they are developed. Every member of the 56-person firm is 
enthusiastic and looking forward to helping the firm grow to be the largest and best 
educational gaming company in the world. The founder of the firm, Sally Peters, has 
been written up in Young Entrepreneurs as “the young entrepreneur to watch.” She has 
been able to develop an organization culture in which all stakeholders are committed 
to innovation, continuous improvement, and organization learning.
 
Last year, 10 top managers of HGC worked with McKinley Consulting to develop 
the organization’s strategic plan. This year the same 10 managers had a retreat in 
Aruba to formulate next year’s strategic plan using the same process suggested by 
McKinley Consulting. Most executives seem to have a consensus of where the firm 
should go in the intermediate and long term. But there is little consensus on how this 
should be accomplished. Peters, now president of HGC, feels she may be losing con-
trol. The frequency of conflicts seems to be increasing. Some individuals are always 
requested for any new project created. When resource conflicts occur among projects, 
each project manager believes his or her project is most important. More projects are 
www.ebook3000.com

58  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
not meeting deadlines and are coming in over budget. Yesterday’s management meet-
ing revealed some top HGC talent have been working on an international business 
game for college students. This project does not fit the organization vision or market 
niche. At times it seems everyone is marching to his or her own drummer. Somehow 
more focus is needed to ensure everyone agrees on how strategy should be imple-
mented, given the resources available to the organization.
 
Yesterday’s meeting alarmed Peters. These emerging problems are coming at a bad 
time. Next week HGC is ramping up the size of the organization, number of new prod-
ucts per year, and marketing efforts. Fifteen new people will join HGC next month. 
Peters is concerned that policies be in place that will ensure the new people are used 
most productively. An additional potential problem looms on the horizon. Other gam-
ing companies have noticed the success HGC is having in their niche market; one com-
pany tried to hire a key product development employee away from HGC. Peters wants 
HGC to be ready to meet any potential competition head on and to discourage any new 
entries into their market. Peters knows HGC is project driven; however, she is not as 
confident that she has a good handle on how such an organization should be managed—
especially with such a fast growth rate and potential competition closer to becoming a 
reality. The magnitude of emerging problems demands quick attention and resolution.
 
Peters has hired you as a consultant. She has suggested the following format for 
your consulting contract. You are free to use another format if it will improve the 
effectiveness of the consulting engagement.
 
What is our major problem?
 
Identify some symptoms of the problem.
 
What is the major cause of the problem?
Provide a detailed action plan that attacks the problem. Be specific and provide exam-
ples that relate to HGC.
Case 2.2
Film Prioritization
The purpose of this case is to give you experience in using a project priority system 
that ranks proposed projects by their contribution to the organization’s objectives and 
strategic plan.
COMPANY PROFILE
The company is the film division for a large entertainment conglomerate. The main 
office is located in Anaheim, California. In addition to the feature film division, the 
conglomerate includes theme parks, home videos, a television channel, interactive 
games, and theatrical productions. The company has been enjoying steady growth over 
the past 10 years. Last year total revenues increased by 12 percent to $21.2 billion. The 
company is engaged in negotiations to expand its theme park empire to mainland 
China and Poland. The film division generated $274 million in revenues, which was an 
increase of 7 percent over the past year. Profit margin was down 3 percent to 16 per-
cent because of the poor response to three of the five major film releases for the year.

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  59
COMPANY MISSION
The mission for the firm:
Our overriding objective is to create shareholder value by continuing to be the world’s pre-
mier entertainment company from a creative, strategic, and financial standpoint.
The film division supports this mission by producing four to six high-quality, family 
entertainment films for mass distribution each year. In recent years, the CEO of the 
company has advocated that the firm take a leadership position in championing envi-
ronmental concerns.
COMPANY “MUST” OBJECTIVES
Every project must meet the must objectives as determined by executive management. 
It is important that selected film projects not violate such objectives of high strategic 
priority. There are three must objectives:
1. All projects meet current legal, safety, and environmental standards.
2. All film projects should receive a PG or lower advisory rating.
3. All projects should not have an adverse effect on current or planned operations 
within the larger company.
COMPANY “WANT” OBJECTIVES
Want objectives are assigned weights for their relative importance. Top management is 
responsible for formulating, ranking, and weighting objectives to ensure that projects 
support the company’s strategy and mission. The following is a list of the company’s 
want objectives:
1. Be nominated for and win an academy award for Best Animated Feature or Best 
Picture of the Year.
2. Generate additional merchandise revenue (action figures, dolls, interactive games, 
music CDs).
3. Raise public consciousness about environmental issues and concerns.
4. Generate profit in excess of 18 percent.
5. Advance the state of the art in film animation, and preserve the firm’s reputation.
6. Provide the basis for the development of a new ride at a company-owned theme park.
ASSIGNMENT
You are a member of the priority team in charge of evaluating and selecting film pro-
posals. Use the provided evaluation form to formally evaluate and rank each proposal. 
Be prepared to report your rankings and justify your decisions.
 
Assume that all of the projects have passed the estimated hurdle rate of 14 percent 
ROI. In addition to the brief film synopsis, the proposals include the following finan-
cial projections of theater and video sales: 80 percent chance of ROI, 50 percent 
chance of ROI, and 20 percent chance of ROI.
 
For example, for proposal #1 (Dalai Lama) there is an 80 percent chance that it will 
earn at least 8 percent return on investment (ROI), a 50-50 chance the ROI will be 
18 percent, and a 20 percent chance that the ROI will be 24 percent.
www.ebook3000.com

60  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
FILM PROPOSALS
PROJECT PROPOSAL 1: MY LIFE WITH DALAI LAMA
An animated, biographical account of the Dalai Lama’s childhood in Tibet based on 
the popular children’s book Tales from Nepal. The Lama’s life is told through the eyes 
of “Guoda,” a field snake, and other local animals who befriend the Dalai and help 
him understand the principles of Buddhism.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
  8% 
18% 
24%
PROJECT PROPOSAL 2: HEIDI 
A remake of the classic children’s story with music written by award-winning compos-
ers Syskle and Obert. The big-budget film will feature top-name stars and breathtaking 
scenery of the Swiss Alps.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
  2% 
20% 
30%
PROJECT PROPOSAL 3: THE YEAR OF THE ECHO
A low-budget documentary that celebrates the career of one of the most influential 
bands in rock-and-roll history. The film will be directed by new-wave director Elliot 
Cznerzy and will combine concert footage and behind-the-scenes interviews spanning 
the 25-year history of the rock band the Echos. In addition to great music, the film will 
focus on the death of one of the founding members from a heroin overdose and reveal 
the underworld of sex, lies, and drugs in the music industry.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
12% 
14% 
18%
PROJECT PROPOSAL 4: ESCAPE FROM RIO JAPUNI
An animated feature set in the Amazon rainforest. The story centers around Pablo, a 
young jaguar who attempts to convince warring jungle animals that they must unite 
and escape the devastation of local clear cutting.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
15% 
20% 
24%
PROJECT PROPOSAL 5: NADIA! 
The story of Nadia Comaneci, the famous Romanian gymnast who won three gold 
medals at the 1976 Summer Olympic Games. The low-budget film will document her 
life as a small child in Romania and how she was chosen by Romanian authorities to 
join their elite, state-run, athletic program. The film will highlight how Nadia main-
tained her independent spirit and love for gymnastics despite a harsh, regimented 
training program.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
8% 
15% 
20%

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  61
Must objectives
Meets all safety and
environmental standards
No adverse effect
on other operations
PG or G rating
Want
objectives
Single project
impact deﬁnitions
Win Best Picture
of the Year
Relative
Importance
1–100
Weighted
Score
Weighted
Score
Weighted
Score
Weighted
Score
Weighted
Score
Weighted
Score
Weighted
Score
70
60
55
70
40
10
0 = No potential
1  = Low potential
2 = High potential
0 = No potential
1  = Low potential
2 = High potential
10
0 = No potential
 1  = Low potential
2 = High potential
0 = No potential
1  = Low potential
2 = High potential
0 < 18%
1  = 18–22%
2 > 22%
0 = No impact
1  = Some impact
2 = Great impact
0 = No potential
1  = Low potential
2 = High potential
Total weighted score
Priority
Win Best
Animated
Feature Film
Generate
additional
merchandise
Raise
environmental
concerns
Generate proﬁt
greater than 18%
Y = yes
N = no
N/A = not applicable
Y = yes
N = no
N/A = not applicable
Y = yes
N = no
N/A = not applicable
Must meet
if impacts
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Advance state of
ﬁlm animation
Provide basis for
new theme ride
Project Priority 
Evaluation Form 
PROJECT PROPOSAL 6: KEIKO—ONE WHALE OF A STORY
The story of Keiko, the famous killer whale, will be told by an imaginary offspring 
Seiko, who in the distant future is telling her children about their famous grandfather. 
The big-budget film will integrate actual footage of the whale within a realistic ani-
mated environment using state-of-the-art computer imagery. The story will reveal how 
Keiko responded to his treatment by humans.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
  6% 
18% 
25%
www.ebook3000.com

62  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
PROJECT PROPOSAL 7: GRAND ISLAND 
The true story of a group of junior-high biology students who discover that a fertilizer 
plant is dumping toxic wastes into a nearby river. The moderate-budget film depicts 
how students organize a grassroots campaign to fight local bureaucracy and ultimately 
force the fertilizer plant to restore the local ecosystem.
Probability 
80% 
50% 
20%
ROI 
  9% 
15% 
20%
Case 2.3
Fund Raising Project Selection case
The purpose of this “case exercise” is to provide you with experience in using a project 
selection process that ranks proposed projects by their contribution to an organiza-
tion’s mission and strategy.
FUND RAISING PROJECT
Assume you are a member of a class on project management. Each student will join a 
team of 5–7 students who will be responsible for creating, planning, and executing a 
fund raising project for a designated charity. The fund raising project has two goals: 
(1) raise money for a worthy cause and (2) provide an opportunity for all team mem-
bers to practice project management skills and techniques.
 
In addition to completing the project a number of deliverables are required to com-
plete this assignment. These deliverables include:
a. Project Proposal
b. Implementation Plan
c. Risk Management Plan
d. Status Report
e. Project Reflections Presentation
f. Project Retrospective/Audit
Approved projects will receive $250 seed money to be reimbursed upon completion of 
the project.
“MUST” OBJECTIVES
Every project must meet the “must” objectives as determined by the instructor. There 
are four must objectives:
1. All projects must be safe, legal and comply with university policies.
2. All projects must be capable of earning at least $500.
3. All projects must be able to be completed within nine weeks.
4. All projects must provide an opportunity for every member of the project team to 
experience and learn about project management.
Among the factors to consider for the last objective would be the extent there is mean-
ingful work for every member of the team, the degree of coordination required, the 

Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection  63
extent the team will have to work with external stakeholders, and the complexity of the 
project.
“WANT” OBJECTIVES
In addition to the must objectives, there are “want” objectives that the instructor would 
like to achieve. The following is a list of these objectives:
1. Earn more than $500 for a charity
2. Increase public awareness of the charity
3. Provide a resume worthy experience for students
4. Be featured on local TV news
5. Be fun to do
ASSIGNMENT
You are a member of the class priority team in charge of evaluating and approving 
fund raising projects. Use the provided proposal evaluation form to formally evaluate 
and rank each proposal. Be prepared to report your rankings and justify your decision. 
You should assume that these projects would be held at your university or college.
FUND RAISING PROPOSALS
PROJECT PROPOSAL 1: HOOPS FOR HOPE
The project is a three-on-three basketball tournament to raise money for the Down 
Syndrome Association. The tournament will consist of three brackets: Co-ed, Male, 
and Female teams. There will be a $40 entry fee per team and additional funds will be 
derived from the sale of commemorative T-shirts ($10). Winning teams will receive 
gift baskets consisting of donations from local businesses and restaurants. The event 
will be held at the university recreational center.
PROJECT PROPOSAL 2: SINGING FOR SMILES
The project will hold a karaoke competition with celebrity judges at a popular campus 
night spot. Funds will be raised by $5 admission at the door and a raffle for prizes 
donated by local businesses. Funds will be donated to Smile Train, an international 
organization that performs cleft lip surgery at a cost of $250 per child. The event will 
feature pictures of children born with cleft lips and with every $50 earned a piece of a 
picture puzzle will be added until the original picture is covered with a smiling face.
PROJECT PROPOSAL 3: HALO FOR HEROES
The project will be a Halo video game competition to be held over the weekend utiliz-
ing the College’s big screen electronic classrooms. Teams of 4 players will play each 
other in a single elimination tournament with the grand prize being a Sony Play Sta-
tion 3 donated by a local video game store. Entry fee is 24$ per team and individual 
players will be able to play in a loser’s bracket for 5$. All proceeds will go to the 
National Military Family Association.
PROJECT PROPOSAL 4: RAFFLE FOR LIFE
Organize a raffle contest. Raffle tickets will be sold for 3$ apiece with the winning 
ticket worth $300. Each of the six team members will be responsible for selling 50 
raffle tickets. All profits will go to the American Cancer Society.
www.ebook3000.com

64  Chapter 2  Organization Strategy and Project Selection
PROJECT PROPOSAL 5: HOLD’EM FOR HUNGER 
Organize a Texas Hold’em poker tournament at a campus dining facility. It will 
cost $20 to enter the tournament with a $15 buy-in in fee. Prizes include $300, $150, 
and $50 gift certificates to a large department store. Gift certificates purchased from 
entry fees. All players will be eligible to win two donated tickets to Men and Women 
basketball games. Funds raised will go to local county food shelter.
PROJECT PROPOSAL 6: BUILD YOUR OWN BOX
The purpose of this project is to raise awareness of plight of homeless. Students will 
donate 10 dollars to participate in building and living in a cardboard city on the univer-
sity quad for one night. Building materials will be provided by local recycling centers 
and hardware stores. Hot soup will be provided by the team at midnight to all partici-
pants. Proceeds go to the local homeless shelter.
Must objectives
Be safe, legal,
& comply with University
Policies
Can be completed within
9 weeks 
Earn at least $500
Want
objectives
Single project
impact deﬁnitions
Earning potential
Relative
Importance
1–100
90
30
40
40
0: 500–750
 1: 750–1500
2: >$1500
3: >$2000
0: None
 1: Some fun
2: A lot of fun
30
0: No potential
 1: Low potential
2: High potential
0: No potential
 1: Low potential
2: High potential
0: No potential
 1: Low potential
2: High potential
Total weighted score
Priority
Fun
Increase
awareness
of charity
Resume worthy
Be featured on
local TV news
Y = yes
N = no
Y = yes
N = no
Y = yes
N = no
Opportunity to learn
Project Management
Y = yes
N = no
Must meet
if impacts
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Project Priority 
Evaluation Form 

www.ebook3000.com

66
Organization: Structure 
and Culture
3
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
3-1 Identify different project management structures 
and understand their strengths and weaknesses.
3-2 Distinguish three different types of matrix 
 structures and understand their strengths and 
weaknesses.
3-3 Understand organizational and project consider-
ations that should be considered in choosing an 
appropriate project management structure.
3-4 Appreciate the significant role that organizational 
culture plays in managing projects.
3-5 Interpret the culture of an organization.
3-6 Understand the interaction between project 
 management structure and the culture of an 
organization.
OUTLINE
3.1 
Project Management Structures
3.2 What Is the Right Project Management 
Structure?
3.3 Organizational Culture
3.4 Implications of Organizational Culture for 
Organizing Projects
Summary
C H A P T E R  T H R E E

67
Matrix management works, but it sure is difficult at times. All matrix man-
agers must keep up their health and take Stress-Tabs.
—A Project Manager
Once management approves a project, then the question becomes, how will the project 
be implemented? This chapter examines three different project management structures 
used by firms to implement projects: functional organization, dedicated project teams, 
and matrix structure. Although not exhaustive, these structures and their variant forms 
represent the major approaches for organizing projects. The advantages and disadvan-
tages of each of these structures are discussed as well as some of the critical factors 
that might lead a firm to choose one form over others.
 
Whether a firm chooses to complete projects within the traditional functional organiza-
tion or through some form of matrix arrangement is only part of the story. Anyone who 
has worked for more than one organization realizes that there are often considerable dif-
ferences in how projects are managed within certain firms even with similar structures. 
Working in a matrix system at AT&T is different from working in a matrix environment 
at Hewlett-Packard. Many researchers attribute these differences to the organizational 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

68  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
culture at AT&T and Hewlett-Packard. A simple explanation of organizational culture is 
that it reflects the “personality” of an organization. Just as each individual has a unique 
personality, so each organization has a unique culture. Toward the end of this chapter, we 
examine in more detail what organizational culture is and the impact that the culture of the 
parent organization has on organizing and managing projects.
 
Both the project management structure and the culture of the organization constitute 
major elements of the enterprise environment in which projects are implemented. It is 
important for project managers and participants to know the “lay of the land” so that 
they can avoid obstacles and take advantage of pathways to complete their projects.
3.1 Project Management Structures
A project management system provides a framework for launching and implementing 
project activities within a parent organization. A good system appropriately balances 
the needs of both the parent organization and the project by defining the interface 
between the project and parent organization in terms of authority, allocation of 
resources, and eventual integration of project outcomes into mainstream operations. 
With this in mind, we will start the discussion of project management structures.
Organizing Projects within the Functional Organization
One approach to organizing projects is to simply manage them within the existing func-
tional hierarchy of the organization. Once management decides to implement a project, 
the different segments of the project are delegated to the respective functional units with 
each unit responsible for completing its segment of the project (see Figure 3.1). Coordi-
nation is maintained through normal management channels. For example, a tool manu-
facturing firm decides to differentiate its product line by offering a series of tools 
specially designed for left-handed individuals. Top management decides to implement 
the project, and different segments of the project are distributed to appropriate areas. 
The industrial design department is responsible for modifying specifications to conform 
Identify different project 
management structures 
and understand their 
strengths and 
weaknesses.
3-1
LO
Delta Manufacturing, Inc.
President
Human
resources
Project
coordination
Marketing
Engineering
Electronics
engineering
Software
engineering
Mechanical
engineering
Customer
service
Domestic
sales
International
sales
Design
FIGURE 3.1
Functional 
Organizations

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  69
to the needs of left-handed users. The production department is responsible for devising 
the means for producing new tools according to these new design specifications. The 
marketing department is responsible for gauging demand and price as well as identify-
ing distribution outlets. The overall project will be managed within the normal hierar-
chy, with the project being part of the working agenda of top management.
 
The functional organization is also commonly used when, given the nature of the 
project, one functional area plays a dominant role in completing the project or has a 
dominant interest in the success of the project. Under these circumstances, a high-
ranking manager in that area is given the responsibility of coordinating the project. For 
example, the transfer of equipment and personnel to a new office would be managed 
by a top-ranking manager in the firm’s facilities department. Likewise, a project 
involving the upgrading of the management information system would be managed by 
the information systems department. In both cases, most of the project work would be 
done within the specified department and coordination with other departments would 
occur through normal channels.
 
There are advantages and disadvantages for using the existing functional organiza-
tion to administer and complete projects (Larson, 2004). The major advantages are the 
following:
1. No Change. Projects are completed within the basic functional structure of the par-
ent organization. There is no radical alteration in the design and operation of the 
parent organization.
2. Flexibility. There is maximum flexibility in the use of staff. Appropriate specialists 
in different functional units can temporarily be assigned to work on the project and 
then return to their normal work. With a broad base of technical personnel available 
within each functional department, people can be switched among different projects 
with relative ease.
3. In-Depth Expertise. If the scope of the project is narrow and the proper functional 
unit is assigned primary responsibility, then in-depth expertise can be brought to 
bear on the most crucial aspects of the project.
Manufacturing
Procurement
Purchasing
Receiving and
inspection
Fabrication
Assembly
Testing
Production
scheduling
Finance and
administration
www.ebook3000.com

70  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
4. Easy Post-Project Transition. Normal career paths within a functional division 
are maintained. While specialists can make significant contributions to projects, 
their functional field is their professional home and the focus of their professional 
growth and advancement.
Just as there are advantages for organizing projects within the existing functional orga-
nization, there are also disadvantages. These disadvantages are particularly pro-
nounced when the scope of the project is broad and one functional department does 
not take the dominant technological and managerial lead on the project:
1. Lack of Focus. Each functional unit has its own core routine work to do; sometimes 
project responsibilities get pushed aside to meet primary obligations. This difficulty 
is compounded when the project has different priorities for different units. For 
example, the marketing department may consider the project urgent while the oper-
ations people consider it only of secondary importance. Imagine the tension if the 
marketing people have to wait for the operations people to complete their segment 
of the project before they proceed.
2. Poor Integration. There may be poor integration across functional units. Func-
tional specialists tend to be concerned only with their segment of the project and 
not with what is best for the total project.
3. Slow. It generally takes longer to complete projects through this functional arrange-
ment. This is in part attributable to slow response time—project information and 
FIGURE 3.2
Dedicated Project 
Team
Zeus Electronics, Inc.
President
Human
resources
Marketing
Engineering

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  71
decisions have to be circulated through normal management channels. Furthermore, 
the lack of horizontal, direct communication among functional groups contributes to 
rework as specialists realize the implications of others’ actions after the fact.
4. Lack of Ownership. The motivation of people assigned to the project can be 
weak. The project may be seen as an additional burden that is not directly linked to 
their professional development or advancement. Furthermore, because they are 
working on only a segment of the project, professionals do not identify with the 
project.
Organizing Projects as Dedicated Teams
At the other end of the structural spectrum is the creation of a dedicated project team. 
These teams operate as separate units from the rest of the parent organization. Usually 
a full-time project manager is designated to pull together a core group of specialists 
who work full time on the project. The project manager recruits necessary personnel 
from both within and outside the parent company. The subsequent team is physically 
separated from the parent organization and given marching orders to complete the proj-
ect (see Figure 3.2).
 
The interface between the parent organization and the project teams will vary. In some 
cases, the parent organization maintains a tight rein through financial controls. In other 
cases, firms grant the project manager maximum freedom to get the project done as he 
Finance and
administration
Manufacturing
Project manager
Project team
Procurement
www.ebook3000.com

72  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
sees fit. Lockheed Martin has used this approach to develop next-generation jet airplanes. 
See Snapshot from Practice 3.1: Skunk Works.
 
In the case of firms where projects are the dominant form of business, such as a con-
struction firm or a consulting firm, the entire organization is designed to support project 
teams. Instead of one or two special projects, the organization consists of sets of quasi-
independent teams working on specific projects. The main responsibility of traditional 
functional departments is to assist and support these project teams. For example, the 
marketing department is directed at generating new business that will lead to more proj-
ects, while the human resource department is responsible for managing a variety of 
personnel issues as well as recruiting and training new employees. This type of organi-
zation is referred to in the literature as a projectized organization and is graphically 
portrayed in Figure 3.3. It is important to note that not all projects are dedicated project 
teams; personnel can work part-time on several projects.
 
As in the case of functional organization, the dedicated project team approach has 
strengths and weaknesses (Larson, 2004). The following are recognized as strengths:
1. Simple. Other than taking away resources in the form of specialists assigned to the 
project, the functional organization remains intact with the project team operating 
independently.
2. Fast. Projects tend to get done more quickly when participants devote their full 
attention to the project and are not distracted by other obligations and duties. Fur-
thermore, response time tends to be quicker under this arrangement because most 
decisions are made within the team and are not deferred up the hierarchy.
In project management folklore, skunk 
works is code for a small, dedicated 
team assigned to a breakthrough proj-
ect. The first skunk works was created 
more than a half a century ago by 
Clarence L. “Kelly” Johnson at Lockheed Aerospace 
Corporation. Kelly’s project had two objectives: (1) to 
create a jet fighter, the Shooting Star, and (2) to do it as 
fast as possible. Kelly and a small band of engineering 
mavericks operated as a dedicated team unencum-
bered by red tape and the bureaucratic delays of the 
normal R&D process. The name was coined by team 
member Irvin Culver after the moonshine brewery deep 
in the forest in the popular cartoon strip Lil’Abner. The 
homemade whisky was euphemistically called kickapoo 
joy juice.
 
The project was a spectacular success. In just 
43 days, Johnson’s team of 23 engineers and teams of 
support personnel put together the first American 
fighter to fly at more than 500 miles per hour. Lockheed 
has continued to use skunk works to develop a string of 
high speed jets, including the F117 Nighthawk Stealth 
Fighter as well as jet drone prototypes. Lockheed Mar-
tin has an official Skunk Works Division. Their charter is:
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  3 .1
The Skunk Works is a concentration of a few good 
people solving problems far in advance—and at a 
fraction of the cost—by applying the simplest, most 
straightforward methods possible to develop and 
produce new products.
© Monty Rakusen/Getty Images
Skunk Works at Lockheed Martin*
*J. Miller, Lockheed Martin’s Skunk Works (New York: Special-
ity Publications, 1996); “Lockheed Martin Skunk Works,”  
www.lockheedmartin.com/us/aeronautics/skunkworks.html, 
accessed 1/22/2015.

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  73
3. Cohesive. A high level of motivation and cohesiveness often emerges within the 
project team. Participants share a common goal and personal responsibility toward 
the project and the team.
4. Cross-Functional Integration. Specialists from different areas work closely 
together and, with proper guidance, become committed to optimizing the project, 
not their respective areas of expertise.
In many cases, the project team approach is the optimum approach for completing a 
project when you view it solely from the standpoint of what is best for completing the 
project. Its weaknesses become more evident when the needs of the parent organiza-
tion are taken into account:
1. Expensive. Not only have you created a new management position (project man-
ager), but resources are also assigned on a full-time basis. This can result in dupli-
cation of efforts across projects and a loss of economies of scale.
2. Internal Strife. Sometimes dedicated project teams become an entity in their own 
right and conflict emerges between the team and the remainder of the organization 
(see Snapshot from Practice 3.2: The Birth of the Mac). This divisiveness can 
undermine not only the integration of the eventual outcomes of the project into 
mainstream operations but also the assimilation of project team members back into 
their functional units once the project is completed.
3. Limited Technological Expertise. Creating self-contained teams inhibits maxi-
mum technological expertise being brought to bear on problems. Technical 
FIGURE 3.3 Projectized Organization Structure
Central Engineering Systems, Inc.
President
Marketing
Alpha Project
Project Manager
Manufacturing
Engineering
Procurement
Engineering
Subcontractors
Other
projects
Other
projects
Manufacturing
Procurement
Systems
Hardware
Software
Assembly
Test
Electrical
Mechanical
Software
Fabrication
Assembly
Test
Subcontractor X
Subcontractor Y
Subcontractor Z
Beta Project
Project Manager
Human
resources
Finance and
administration
Legal
www.ebook3000.com

74  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
One of the advantages of creating ded-
icated project teams is that project par-
ticipants from different functional areas 
can develop into a highly cohesive 
work team that is strongly committed 
to completing the project. While such teams often pro-
duce Herculean efforts in pursuit of project completion, 
there is a negative dimension to this commitment that is 
often referred to in the literature as projectitis. A we–
they attitude can emerge between project team mem-
bers and the rest of the organization. The project team 
succumbs to hubris and develops a holier-than-thou atti-
tude that antagonizes the parent organization. People 
not assigned to the project become jealous of the atten-
tion and prestige being showered on the project team, 
especially when they believe that it is their hard work 
that is financing the endeavor. The tendency to assign 
project teams exotic titles such as “Silver Bullets” and 
“Tiger Teams,” as well as give them special perks, tends 
to intensify the gap between the project team and the 
parent organization.
 
Such appears to have been the case with Apple’s 
highly successful Macintosh development team. Steve 
Jobs, who at the time was both the chairman of Apple 
and the project manager for the Mac team, pampered 
his team with perks including at-the-desk massages, 
coolers stocked with freshly squeezed orange juice, a 
Bosendorfer grand piano, and first-class plane tickets. 
No other employees at Apple got to travel first class. 
Jobs considered his team to be the elite of Apple and 
had a tendency to refer to everyone else as “Bozos” 
who “didn’t get it.” Engineers from the Apple II division, 
which was the bread and butter of Apple’s sales, 
became incensed with the special treatment their col-
leagues were getting.
 
One evening at Ely McFly’s, a local watering hole, 
the tensions between Apple II engineers seated at one 
table and those of a Mac team at another boiled over. 
Aaron Goldberg, a long-time industry consultant, 
watched from his barstool as the squabbling escalated. 
“The Mac guys were screaming, ‘We’re the future!’ The 
Apple II guys were screaming, ‘We’re the money!’ Then 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  3 . 2
there was a geek brawl. Pocket protectors and pens 
were flying. I was waiting for a notebook to drop, so 
they would stop and pick up the papers.”
 
Although comical from a distance, the discord 
between the Apple II and Mac groups severely hampered 
Apple’s performance during the 1980s. John Sculley, who 
replaced Steve Jobs as chairman of Apple, observed that 
Apple had evolved into two “warring companies” and 
referred to the street between the Apple II and Macintosh 
buildings as “the DMZ” (demilitarized zone).
© McGraw-Hill Education/Jill Braaten
expertise is limited somewhat to the talents and experience of the specialists 
assigned to the project. While nothing prevents specialists from consulting with 
others in the functional division, the we–they syndrome and the fact that such help 
is not formally sanctioned by the organization discourage this from happening.
The Birth of the Mac*
 *J. Carlton, Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania, and 
Business Blunders (New York: Random House, 1997), pp. 13–14;  
J. Sculley, Odyssey: Pepsi to Apple . . . A Journey of Adventure, 
Ideas, and the Future (New York: Harper & Row, 1987),  
pp. 270–79.

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  75
4. Difficult Post-Project Transition. Assigning full-time personnel to a project cre-
ates the dilemma of what to do with personnel after the project is completed. If 
other project work is not available, then the transition back to their original func-
tional departments may be difficult because of their prolonged absence and the 
need to catch up with recent developments in their functional area.
Organizing Projects within a Matrix Arrangement
One of the biggest management innovations to emerge in the past 40 years has been 
the matrix organization. Matrix management is a hybrid organizational form in which 
a horizontal project management structure is “overlaid” on the normal functional hier-
archy. In a matrix system, there are usually two chains of command, one along func-
tional lines and the other along project lines. Instead of delegating segments of a 
project to different units or creating an autonomous team, project participants report 
simultaneously to both functional and project managers.
 
Companies apply this matrix arrangement in a variety of different ways. Some orga-
nizations set up temporary matrix systems to deal with specific projects, while 
“matrix” may be a permanent fixture in other organizations. Let us first look at its 
general application and then proceed to a more detailed discussion of finer points. 
Consider Figure 3.4. There are three projects currently under way: A, B, and C. All 
three project managers (PM A-C) report to a director of project management, who 
supervises all projects. Each project has an administrative assistant, although the one 
for project C is only part time.
 
Project A involves the design and expansion of an existing production line to 
accommodate new metal alloys. To accomplish this objective, project A has assigned 
to it 3.5 people from manufacturing and 6 people from engineering. These individuals 
are assigned to the project on a part-time or full-time basis, depending on the project’s 
needs during various phases of the project. Project B involves the development of a 
new product that requires the heavy representation of engineering, manufacturing, and 
marketing. Project C involves forecasting changing needs of an existing customer base. 
While these three projects, as well as others, are being completed, the functional divi-
sions continue performing their basic, core activities.
 
The matrix structure is designed to optimally utilize resources by having individu-
als work on multiple projects as well as being capable of performing normal func-
tional duties. At the same time, the matrix approach attempts to achieve greater 
integration by creating and legitimizing the authority of a project manager. In theory, 
the matrix approach provides a dual focus between functional/technical expertise and 
project requirements that is missing in either the project team or functional approach 
to project management. This focus can most easily be seen in the relative input of 
functional managers and project managers over key project decisions (see Table 3.1).
TABLE 3.1 
Division of Project 
Manager and 
Functional Manager 
Responsibilities in a 
Matrix Structure
Project Manager 
Negotiated Issues 
Functional Manager
What has to be done? 
Who will do the task? 
How will it be done?
When should the task 
Where will the task  
 be done? 
 be done?
How much money is available 
Why will the task be 
How will the project involvement  
 to do the task?  
 done? 
impact normal functional activities?
How well has the total project 
Is the task satisfactorily 
How well has the functional input  
 been done? 
 completed? 
 been integrated?
www.ebook3000.com

76  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
Different Matrix Forms
In practice there are really different kinds of matrix systems, depending on the relative 
authority of the project and functional managers (Larson & Gobeli, 1987; Bowen 
et al., 1994). Here is a thumbnail sketch of the three kinds of matrices:
∙ Weak matrix—This form is very similar to a functional approach with the excep-
tion that there is a formally designated project manager responsible for coordinating 
project activities. Functional managers are responsible for managing their segment 
of the project. The project manager basically acts as a staff assistant who draws the 
schedules and checklists, collects information on status of work, and facilitates 
project completion. The project manager has indirect authority to expedite and 
monitor the project. Functional managers call most of the shots and decide who 
does what and when the work is completed.
∙ Balanced matrix—This is the classic matrix in which the project manager is 
responsible for defining what needs to be accomplished while the functional man-
agers are concerned with how it will be accomplished. More specifically, the proj-
ect manager establishes the overall plan for completing the project, integrates the 
contribution of the different disciplines, sets schedules, and monitors progress. The 
functional managers are responsible for assigning personnel and executing their 
segment of the project according to the standards and schedules set by the project 
manager. The merger of “what and how” requires both parties to work closely 
together and jointly approve technical and operational decisions.
Distinguish three differ-
ent types of matrix struc-
tures and understand 
their strengths and 
weaknesses.
3-2
LO
FIGURE 3.4
Matrix Organization 
Structure
Human
resources
Director of
projects
Engineering
Project A
project
manager
Project A team
Project B team
Project C team
Project
administration
Project B
project
manager
Project C
project
manager
Design
engineering
2
3
1
1
1
1/2
Electronics
engineering
1
1
Software
engineering
1
Mechanical
engineering
2
1
Technical
documentation
1
1
Zeta Manufacturing, Inc.
President

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  77
∙ Strong matrix—This form attempts to create the “feel” of a project team within a 
matrix environment. The project manager controls most aspects of the project, includ-
ing scope trade-offs and assignment of functional personnel. The project manager con-
trols when and what specialists do and has final say on major project decisions. The 
functional manager has title over her people and is consulted on a need basis. In some 
situations a functional manager’s department may serve as a “subcontractor” for 
the project, in which case they have more control over specialized work. For example, 
the development of a new series of laptop computers may require a team of experts 
from different disciplines working on the basic design and performance requirements 
within a project matrix arrangement. Once the specifications have been determined, 
final design and production of certain components (i.e., power source) may be assigned 
to respective functional groups to complete.
Matrix management both in general and in its specific forms has unique strengths and 
weaknesses (Larson & Gobeli, 1987). The advantages and disadvantages of matrix 
organizations in general are noted below, while only briefly highlighting specifics con-
cerning different forms:
1. Efficient. Resources can be shared across multiple projects as well as within func-
tional divisions. Individuals can divide their energy across multiple projects on an 
as-needed basis. This reduces duplication required in a projectized structure.
2. Strong Project Focus. A stronger project focus is provided by having a formally 
designated project manager who is responsible for coordinating and integrating 
Testing
1/2
1
Domestic
sales
2
2
Finance
Manufacturing
Marketing
Assembly
2
1
Quality
1
1
Customer
service
1
1/2
International
sales
1
2
www.ebook3000.com

78  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
contributions of different units. This helps sustain a holistic approach to problem 
solving that is often missing in the functional organization.
3. Easier Post-Project Transition. Because the project organization is overlaid on the 
functional divisions, specialists maintain ties with their functional group, so they 
have a homeport to return to once the project is completed.
4. Flexible. Matrix arrangements provide for flexible utilization of resources and 
expertise within the firm. In some cases functional units may provide individuals 
who are managed by the project manager. In other cases the contributions are moni-
tored by the functional manager.
The strengths of the matrix structure are considerable. Unfortunately, so are the poten-
tial weaknesses. This is due in large part to the fact that a matrix structure is more 
complicated and the creation of multiple bosses represents a radical departure from the 
traditional hierarchical authority system.
 
Furthermore, one does not install a matrix structure overnight. Experts argue that it 
takes 3–5 years for a matrix system to fully mature. So many of the problems described 
below represent growing pains.
1. Dysfunctional Conflict. The matrix approach is predicated on tension between func-
tional managers and project managers who bring critical expertise and perspectives to 
the project. Such tension is viewed as a necessary mechanism for achieving an appro-
priate balance between complex technical issues and unique project requirements. 
While the intent is noble, the effect is sometimes analogous to opening Pandora’s box. 
Legitimate conflict can spill over to a more personal level, resulting from conflicting 
agendas and accountabilities. Worthy discussions can degenerate into heated argu-
ments that engender animosity among the managers involved.
2. Infighting. Any situation in which equipment, resources, and people are being 
shared across projects and functional activities lends itself to conflict and competi-
tion for scarce resources. Infighting can occur among project managers, who are 
primarily interested in what is best for their project.
3. Stressful. Matrix management violates the management principle of unity of com-
mand. Project participants have at least two bosses—their functional head and one 
or more project managers. Working in a matrix environment can be extremely 
stressful. Imagine what it would be like to work in an environment in which you are 
being told to do three conflicting things by three different managers.
4. Slow. In theory, the presence of a project manager to coordinate the project should 
accelerate the completion of the project. In practice, decision making can get 
bogged down as agreements have to be forged across multiple functional groups. 
This is especially true for the balanced matrix.
When the three variant forms of the matrix approach are considered, we can see that 
advantages and disadvantages are not necessarily true for all three forms of matrix. The 
Strong matrix is likely to enhance project integration, diminish internal power struggles, 
and ultimately improve control of project activities and costs. On the downside, technical 
quality may suffer because functional areas have less control over their contributions. 
Finally, projectitis may emerge as the members develop a strong team identity.
 
The Weak matrix is likely to improve technical quality as well as provide a better 
system for managing conflict across projects because the functional manager assigns 
personnel to different projects. The problem is that functional control is often main-
tained at the expense of poor project integration. The Balanced matrix can achieve 

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  79
better balance between technical and project requirements, but it is a very delicate 
system to manage and is more likely to succumb to many of the problems associated 
with the matrix approach.
3.2 What Is the Right Project Management Structure?
There is empirical evidence that project success is directly linked to the amount of 
autonomy and authority project managers have over their projects (Gray et al., 1990; 
Larson & Gobeli, 1988; Larson & Gobeli, 1987). However, most of this research is 
based on what is best for managing specific projects. It is important to remember what 
was stated in the beginning of the chapter—that the best system balances the needs of 
the project with those of the parent organization. So what project structure should an 
organization use? This is a complicated question with no precise answers. A number 
of issues need to be considered at both the organization and project level.
Organization Considerations
At the organization level, the first question that needs to be asked is how important is 
project management to the success of the firm? What percentage of core work involves 
projects? If over 75 percent of work involves projects, then an organization should 
consider a fully projectized organization. If an organization has both standard products 
and projects, then a matrix arrangement would appear to be appropriate. If an organi-
zation has very few projects, then a less formal arrangement is probably all that is 
required. Dedicated teams could be created on an as-needed basis and the organization 
could outsource project work.
 
A second key question is resource availability. Remember, matrix evolved out of the 
necessity to share resources across multiple projects and functional domains while at 
the same time creating legitimate project leadership. For organizations that cannot 
afford to tie up critical personnel on individual projects, a matrix system would appear 
to be appropriate. An alternative would be to create a dedicated team but outsource 
project work when resources are not available internally.
 
Within the context of the first two questions, an organization needs to assess current 
practices and what changes are needed to more effectively manage projects. A strong 
project matrix is not installed overnight. The shift toward a greater emphasis on proj-
ects has a host of political implications that need to be worked through, requiring time 
and strong leadership. For example, we have observed many companies that make the 
transition from a functional organization to a matrix organization begin with a weak 
functional matrix. This is due in part to resistance by functional and department man-
agers toward transferring authority to project managers. With time, these matrix struc-
tures eventually evolve into a project matrix. Many organizations have created Project 
Management Offices to support project management efforts. See Snapshot from Prac-
tice 3.3: POs: Project Offices.
Project Considerations
At the project level, the question is how much autonomy the project needs in order to 
be successfully completed. Hobbs and Ménard (1993) identify seven factors that 
should influence the choice of project management structure:
∙ Size of project.
∙ Strategic importance.
Understand organiza-
tional and project con-
siderations that should 
be considered in choos-
ing an appropriate proj-
ect management 
structure.
3-3
LO
www.ebook3000.com

80  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
Project offices (POs) were originally 
developed as a response to the poor 
track record many companies had in 
completing projects on time, within 
budget, and according to plan. They 
were often established to help matrix systems mature 
into more effective project delivery platforms.
 
Today, POs come in many different shapes and 
forms. One interesting way of classifying POs was set 
forth by Casey and Peck, who describe certain POs in 
terms of being (1) a weather station, (2) a control tower, 
or (3) a resource pool. Each of these models performs a 
very different function for its organization.
΄
Weather Station. The primary function of the 
weather station PO is to track and monitor project 
performance. It is typically created to satisfy top 
management’s need to stay on top of the portfolio 
of projects under way in the firm. Staff provides an 
independent forecast of project performance. The 
questions answered for specific projects include:
΄
How are our projects progressing? Which ones 
are on track? Which ones are not?
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  3 . 3
POs: Project Offices*
΄
How are we doing in terms of cost? Which proj-
ects are over or under budget?
΄
What are the major problems confronting proj-
ects? Are contingency plans in place? What can 
the organization do to help the project?
΄
Control Tower. The primary function of the control 
tower PO is to improve project execution. It consid-
ers project management as a profession to be pro-
tected and advanced. Staff at the PO identify best 
practices and standards for project management ex-
cellence. They work as consultants and trainers to 
support project managers and their teams.
΄
Resource Pool. The goal of the resource pool PO is 
to provide the organization with a cadre of trained 
project managers and professionals. It operates like 
an academy for continually upgrading the skills of a 
firm’s project professionals. In addition to training, 
this kind of PO also serves to elevate the stature of 
project management within the organization.
* W. Casey and W. Peck, “Choosing the Right PMO Setup,” PM 
Network, vol. 15, no. 2 (2001), pp. 40–47.
∙ Novelty and need for innovation.
∙ Need for integration (number of departments involved).
∙ Environmental complexity (number of external interfaces).
∙ Budget and time constraints.
∙ Stability of resource requirements.
The higher the levels of these seven factors, the more autonomy and authority the project 
manager and project team need to be successful.1 This translates into using either a dedi-
cated project team or a project matrix structure. For example, these structures should be 
used for large projects that are strategically critical and are new to the company, thus 
requiring much innovation. These structures would also be appropriate for complex, 
multidisciplinary projects that require input from many departments, as well as for proj-
ects that require constant contact with customers to assess their expectations. Dedicated 
project teams should also be used for urgent projects in which the nature of the work 
requires people working steadily from beginning to end.
 
Many firms that are heavily involved in project management have created a flexible 
management system that organizes projects according to project requirements. For 
example, Chaparral Steel, a mini-mill that produces steel bars and beams from scrap 
1 For a more sophisticated discussion of contingency factors related to managing specific projects see: A. J. Shenhar and 
D. Dvir, Reinventing Project Management: The Diamond Approach to Successful Growth and Innovation (Boston: Harvard 
Press, 2007).

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  81
metal, classifies projects into three categories: advanced development, platform, and 
incremental. Advanced development projects are high-risk endeavors involving the 
creation of a breakthrough product or process. Platform projects are medium-risk proj-
ects involving system upgrades that yield new products and processes. Incremental 
projects are low-risk, short-term projects that involve minor adjustments in existing 
products and processes. At any point in time, Chaparral might have 40–50 projects 
under way, of which only one or two are advanced, three to five are platform projects, 
and the remainder are small, incremental projects. The incremental projects are almost 
all done within a weak matrix with the project manager coordinating the work of func-
tional subgroups. A strong matrix is used to complete the platform projects, while 
dedicated project teams are typically created to complete the advanced development 
projects. More and more companies are using this “mix and match” approach to 
 managing projects.
3.3 Organizational Culture
The decision for combining a discussion of project management structures and orga-
nizational cultures in this chapter can be traced to a conversation we, the authors, had 
with two project managers who work for a medium-sized information technology 
firm.
 
The managers were developing a new operating platform that would be critical to 
the future success of their company. When they tried to describe how this project was 
organized, one manager began to sketch out on a napkin a complicated structure 
involving 52 different teams, each with a project leader and a technical leader! In 
response to our further probing to understand how this system worked, the manager 
stopped short and proclaimed, “The key to making this structure work is the culture in 
our company. This approach would never work at company Y, where I worked before. 
But because of our culture here we are able to pull it off.”
 
This comment, our observations of other firms, and research suggest there is a 
strong connection between project management structure, organizational culture, and 
project success.2 We have observed organizations successfully manage projects within 
the traditional functional organization because the culture encouraged cross-functional 
integration. Conversely we have seen matrix structures break down because the culture 
of the organization did not support the division of authority between project managers 
and functional managers. We have also observed companies relying on independent 
project teams because the dominant culture would not support the innovation and 
speed necessary for success.
What Is Organizational Culture?
Organizational culture refers to a system of shared norms, beliefs, values, and 
assumptions which binds people together, thereby creating shared meanings (Deal & 
Kennedy, 1982). This system is manifested by customs and habits that exemplify the 
values and beliefs of the organization. For example, egalitarianism may be expressed 
in the informal dress worn at a high-tech firm. Conversely, mandated uniforms at a 
department store reinforce respect for the hierarchy.
Appreciate the signifi-
cant role that organiza-
tional culture plays in 
managing projects.
3-4
LO
Interpret the culture of 
an organization.
3-5
LO
2 See, for example: Kerzner, H., In Search of Excellence in Project Management (New York: Von Nostrand Reinhold, 1997); 
Yazici, H. “The Role of Project Management Maturity and Organizational Culture in Perceived Performance”, Project Man-
agement Journal, 2009.
www.ebook3000.com

82  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
 
Culture reflects the personality of the organization and, similar to an individual’s 
personality, can enable us to predict attitudes and behaviors of organizational mem-
bers. Culture is also one of the defining aspects of an organization that sets it apart 
from other organizations even in the same industry.
 
Research suggests that there are 10 primary characteristics which, in aggregate, 
capture the essence of an organization’s culture:3
 1. Member identity—the degree to which employees identify with the organization 
as a whole rather than with their type of job or field of professional expertise.
 2. Team emphasis—the degree to which work activities are organized around groups 
rather than individuals.
 3. Management focus—the degree to which management decisions take into 
account the effect of outcomes on people within the organization.
 4. Unit integration—the degree to which units within the organization are encour-
aged to operate in a coordinated or interdependent manner.
 5. Control—the degree to which rules, policies, and direct supervision are used to 
oversee and control employee behavior.
 6. Risk tolerance—the degree to which employees are encouraged to be aggressive, 
innovative, and risk seeking.
 7. Reward criteria—the degree to which rewards such as promotion and salary 
increases are allocated according to employee performance rather than seniority, 
favoritism, or other nonperformance factors.
 8. Conflict tolerance—the degree to which employees are encouraged to air con-
flicts and criticisms openly.
 9. Means versus end orientation—the degree to which management focuses on out-
comes rather than on techniques and processes used to achieve those results.
10. Open-systems focus—the degree to which the organization monitors and responds 
to changes in the external environment.
As shown in Figure 3.5, each of these dimensions exists on a continuum. Assessing an 
organization according to these 10 dimensions provides a composite picture of the 
organization’s culture. This picture becomes the basis for feelings of shared under-
standing that the members have about the organization, how things are done, and the 
way members are supposed to behave.
 
Culture performs several important functions in organizations. An organization’s 
culture provides a sense of identity for its members. The more clearly an organiza-
tion’s shared perceptions and values are stated, the more strongly people can iden-
tify with their organization and feel a vital part of it. Identity generates commitment 
to the organization and reasons for members to devote energy and loyalty to the 
organization.
 
A second important function is that culture helps legitimize the management sys-
tem of the organization. Culture helps clarify authority relationships. It provides 
reasons why people are in a position of authority and why their authority should be 
respected.
3 Harrison, M. T., and J. M. Beyer, The Culture of Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993); O’Reilly, C. A., J. 
Chatman, and D. F. Caldwell, “People and Organizational Culture: A Profile Comparison Approach to Assessing Person-
Organization Fit,” Academy of Management Journal, vol. 34, no. 3 (September 1991), pp. 487–516; and Schein, E., Organi-
zational Culture and Leadership: A Dynamic View (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2010).

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  83
 
Most importantly, organizational culture clarifies and reinforces standards of 
behavior. Culture helps define what is permissible and inappropriate behavior. These 
standards span a wide range of behavior from dress code and working hours to chal-
lenging the judgment of superiors and collaborating with other departments. Ulti-
mately, culture helps create social order within an organization. Imagine what it would 
be like if members didn’t share similar beliefs, values, and assumptions—chaos! The 
customs, norms, and ideals conveyed by the culture of an organization provide the 
stability and predictability in behavior that is essential for an effective organization. 
See Snapshot from Practice 3.4: Google-y for an example of this.
 
Although our discussion of organizational culture may appear to suggest one cul-
ture dominates the entire organization, in reality this is rarely the case. “Strong” or 
“thick” are adjectives used to denote a culture in which the organization’s core values 
and customs are widely shared within the entire organization. Conversely, a “thin” or 
“weak” culture is one that is not widely shared or practiced within a firm.
 
Even within a strong organizational culture, there are likely to be subcultures often 
aligned within specific departments or specialty areas. As noted earlier in our discus-
sion of project management structures, it is not uncommon for norms, values, and 
customs to develop within a specific field or profession such as marketing, finance, or 
operations. People working in the marketing department may have a different set of 
norms and values than those working in finance.
 
Countercultures sometimes emerge within organizations that embody a different set 
of values, beliefs, and customs—often in direct contradiction with the culture espoused 
by top management. How pervasive these subcultures and countercultures are affects 
the strength of the culture of the organization and the extent to which culture influ-
ences members’ actions and responses.
Identifying Cultural Characteristics
Deciphering an organization’s culture is a highly interpretative, subjective process that 
requires assessment of both current and past history. The student of culture cannot 
Job
Individual
Task
Independent
Loose
Low
Performance
Low
Means
Internal
  1. Member identity
  2. Team emphasis
  3. Management focus
  4. Unit integration
  5. Control
  6. Risk tolerance
  7. Reward criteria
  8. Conﬂict tolerance
  9. Means-ends orientation
10. Open-system focus
Organization
Group
People
Interdependent
Tight
High
Other
High
Ends
External
FIGURE 3.5 
Key Dimensions 
Defining an 
Organization’s 
Culture 
www.ebook3000.com

84  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
In 2016 Google Inc. topped Fortune 
magazine’s list of best companies to 
work at for the seventh time in the 
past ten years. When one enters the 
24-hour Googleplex located in 
Mountain View, California, you feel that you are 
walking through a new-age college campus rather 
than the corporate office of a billion-dollar business. 
The collection of interconnected low-rise buildings 
with colorful, glass-encased offices feature upscale 
trappings—free gourmet meals three times a day, 
free use of an outdoor wave pool, indoor gym and 
large child care facility, private shuttle bus service to 
and from San Francisco and other residential  areas—
that are the envy of workers across the Bay area. 
These perks and others reflect Google’s culture of 
keeping people happy and thinking in unconven-
tional ways.
 
The importance of corporate culture is no more evi-
dent than in the fact that the head of Human Resources, 
Stacy Savides Sullivan, also has the title of Chief Cul-
ture Officer. Her task is to try to preserve the innovative 
culture of a start-up as Google quickly evolves into a 
mammoth international corporation. Sullivan character-
izes Google culture as “team-oriented, very collabora-
tive and encouraging people to think nontraditionally, 
different from where they ever worked before—work 
with integrity and for the good of the company and for 
the good of the world, which is tied to our overall mis-
sion of making information accessible to the world.” 
Google goes to great lengths to screen new employees 
to not only make sure that they have outstanding tech-
nical capabilities but also that they are going to fit 
Google’s culture. Sullivan goes on to define a Google-y 
employee as somebody who is “flexible, adaptable, 
and not focusing on titles and hierarchy, and just gets 
stuff done.”
 
Google’s culture is rich with customs and traditions 
not found in corporate America. For example, project 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  3 . 4
Google-y*
teams typically have daily “stand-up” meetings seven min-
utes after the hour. Why seven minutes after the hour? 
Because Google cofounder Sergey Brin once estimated 
that it took seven minutes to walk across the Google cam-
pus. Everybody stands to make sure no one gets too com-
fortable and no time is wasted during the rapid-fire 
update. As one manager noted, “The whole concept of 
the stand-up is to talk through what everyone’s doing, so if 
someone is working on what you’re working on, you can 
discover and collaborate not duplicate.”
 
Another custom is “dogfooding.” This is when a 
project team releases the functional prototype of a 
future product to Google employees for them to test 
drive. There is a strong norm within Google to test new 
products and provide feedback to the developers. The 
project team receives feedback from thousands of 
Google-ys. The internal focus group can log bugs or 
simply comment on design or functionality. Fellow 
Google-ys do not hold back on their feedback and are 
quick to point out things they don’t like. This often 
leads to significant product improvements.
© Caiaimage/Glow Images
simply rely on what people report about their culture. The physical environment in 
which people work, as well as how people act and respond to different events that 
occur, must be examined. Figure 3.6 contains a worksheet for diagnosing the culture of 
an organization. Although by no means exhaustive, the checklist often yields clues 
about the norms, customs, and values of an organization:
1. Study the physical characteristics of an organization. What does the external 
architecture look like? What image does it convey? Is it unique? Are the buildings 
* Walters, H., “How Google Got Its New Look,” BusinessWeek, 
May 10, 2010; Goo, S. K., “Building a ‘Googley’ Workforce,“ 
Washington Post, October 21, 2006; Mills, E., “Meet Google’s 
Culture Czar,” CNET News.com, April 27, 2007.

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  85
and offices the same quality for all employees? Or are modern buildings and fancier 
offices reserved for senior executives or managers from a specific department? 
What are the customs concerning dress? What symbols does the organization use to 
signal authority and status within the organization? These physical characteristics 
can shed light on who has real power within the organization, the extent to which 
the organization is internally differentiated, and how formal the organization is in 
its business dealings.
2. Read about the organization. Examine annual reports, mission statements, press 
releases, and internal newsletters. What do they describe? What principles are 
espoused in these documents? Do the reports emphasize the people who work for 
the organization and what they do or the financial performance of the firm? Each 
emphasis reflects a different culture. The first demonstrates concern for the people 
who make up the company. The second may suggest a concern for results and the 
bottom line.
3. Observe how people interact within the organization. What is their pace—is it 
slow and methodical or urgent and spontaneous? What rituals exist within the orga-
nization? What values do they express? Meetings can often yield insightful infor-
mation. Who are the people at the meetings? Who does the talking? To whom do 
they talk? How candid is the conversation? Do people speak for the organization or 
for the individual department? What is the focus of the meetings? How much time 
is spent on various issues? Issues that are discussed repeatedly and at length are 
clues about the values of the organization’s culture.
FIGURE 3.6
Organizational 
Culture Diagnosis 
Worksheet
Power Corp.
I. Physical Characteristics:
Architecture, office layout, décor, attire 
Corporate HQ is 20 story modern building—president on top floor. Offices are bigger in the top floors 
than lower floors. Formal business attire (white shirts, ties, power suits, . . . ). Power appears to increase 
the higher up you are.
II. Public Documents: 
Annual reports, internal newsletters, vision statements 
At the heart of the Power Corp. way is our vision . . . to be the global energy company most admired for 
its people, partnership, and performance.
Integrity. We are honest with others and ourselves. We meet the highest ethical standards in all busi-
ness dealings. We do what we say we will do.
III. Behavior: 
Pace, language, meetings, issues discussed, decision-making style, communication patterns, rituals 
Hierarchical decision making, pace brisk but orderly, meetings start on time and end on time, subordi-
nates choose their words very carefully when talking to superiors, people rarely work past 6:00 p.m., 
president takes top performing unit on a boat cruise each year . . .
IV. Folklore: 
Stories, anecdotes, heroines, heroes, villains 
Young project manager was fired after going over his boss’s head to ask for additional funds.
Stephanie C. considered a hero for taking complete responsibility for a technical error. 
Jack S. was labeled a traitor for joining chief competitor after working for Power Corp. for 15 years.
www.ebook3000.com

86  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
4. Interpret stories and folklore surrounding the organization. Look for similari-
ties among stories told by different people. The subjects highlighted in recurring 
stories often reflect what is important to an organization’s culture. For example, 
many of the stories that are repeated at Versatec, a Xerox subsidiary that makes 
graphic plotters for computers, involve their flamboyant cofounder, Renn Zaphi-
ropoulos. According to company folklore, one of the very first things Renn did 
when the company was formed was to assemble the top management team at his 
home. They then devoted the weekend to handmaking a beautiful teak conference 
table around which all future decisions would be made. This table came to symbol-
ize the importance of teamwork and maintaining high standards of performance, 
two essential qualities of the culture at Versatec. Try to identify who the heroes and 
villains are in company folklore. What do they suggest about the culture’s ideals? 
Returning to the Versatec story, when the company was eventually purchased 
by Xerox many employees expressed concern that Versatec’s informal, play hard/
work hard culture would be overwhelmed by the bureaucracy at Xerox. Renn rallied 
the employees to superior levels of performance by arguing that if they exceeded 
Xerox’s expectations they would be left alone. Autonomy has remained a fixture of 
Versatec’s culture long after Renn’s retirement.
 
It is also important to pay close attention to the basis for promotions and rewards. 
What do people see as the keys to getting ahead within the organization? What con-
tributes to downfalls? These last two questions can yield important insights into the 
qualities and behaviors which the organization honors as well as the cultural taboos 
and behavioral land mines that can derail a career. For example, one project man-
ager confided that a former colleague was sent to project management purgatory 
soon after publicly questioning the validity of a marketing report. From that point 
on, the project manager was extra careful to privately consult the marketing depart-
ment whenever she had questions about their data.
With practice an observer can assess how strong the dominant culture of an organiza-
tion is and the significance of subcultures and countercultures. Furthermore, learners 
can discern and identify where the culture of an organization stands on the 10 cultural 
dimensions presented earlier and, in essence, begin to build a cultural profile for a 
firm. Based on this profile, conclusions can be drawn about specific customs and 
norms that need to be adhered to as well as those behaviors and actions that violate the 
norms of a firm.
3.4 Implications of Organizational Culture for Organizing Projects
Project managers have to be able to operate in several, potentially diverse, organiza-
tional cultures. First, they have to interact with the culture of their parent organization 
as well as the subcultures of various departments (e.g., marketing, accounting). Sec-
ond, they have to interact with the project’s client or customer organizations. Finally, 
they have to interact in varying degrees with a host of other organizations connected to 
the project. These organizations include suppliers and vendors, subcontractors, con-
sulting firms, government and regulatory agencies, and, in many cases, community 
groups. Many of these organizations are likely to have very different cultures. Project 
managers have to be able to read and speak the culture they are working in to develop 
strategies, plans, and responses that are likely to be understood and accepted. Still, the 
emphasis of this chapter is on the relationship between organizational culture and proj-
ect management structure, and it is necessary to defer further discussion of these 
Understand the interac-
tion between project 
management structure 
and the culture of an 
organization.
3-6
LO

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  87
implications until Chapters 10–12, which focus on leadership, team building, and 
outsourcing.
 
Earlier we stated that we believe there are strong relationships among project man-
agement structure, organizational culture, and successful project management. To 
explore these relationships further, let us return to the dimensions that can be used to 
characterize the culture of an organization. When examining these dimensions we 
could hypothesize that certain aspects of the culture of an organization would support 
successful project management while other aspects would deter or interfere with effec-
tive management. Figure 3.7 attempts to identify which cultural characteristics create 
an environment conducive to completing most complex projects involving people from 
different disciplines.
 
Note that, in many cases, the ideal culture is not at either extreme. For example, a 
fertile project culture would likely be one in which management balances its focus 
on the needs of both the task and the people. An optimal culture would balance con-
cern with output (ends) and processes to achieve those outcomes (means). In other 
cases, the ideal culture would be on one end of a dimension or the other. For exam-
ple, because most projects require collaboration across disciplines, it would be desir-
able that the culture of the organization emphasize working in teams and identifying 
with the organization, not just the professional domain. Likewise, it is important that 
the culture support a certain degree of risk taking and a tolerance for constructive 
conflict.
 
One organization that appears to fit this ideal profile is 3M. 3M has received 
acclaim for creating an entrepreneurial culture within a large corporate framework. 
The essence of its culture is captured in phrases that have been chanted often by 3Mers 
throughout its history: “Encourage experimental doodling.” “Hire good people and 
leave them alone.” “If you put fences around people, you get sheep. Give people the 
room they need.” Freedom and autonomy to experiment are reflected in the “15 per-
cent rule,” which encourages technical people to spend up to 15 percent of their time 
on projects of their own choosing and initiative. This fertile culture has contributed to 
Job
Individual
Task
Independent
Loose
Low
Performance
Low
Means
Internal
  1. Member identity
  2. Team emphasis
  3. People focus
  4. Unit integration
  5. Control
  6. Risk tolerance
  7. Reward criteria
  8. Conﬂict tolerance
  9. Means-ends orientation
10. Open-system focus
Organization
Group
People
Interdependent
Tight
High
Other
High
Ends
External
FIGURE 3.7
Cultural Dimensions 
of an Organization 
Supportive of Project 
Management 
www.ebook3000.com

88  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
3M’s branching out into more than 60,000 products and 35 separate business units 
(Collins & Porras, 1994).
 
The metaphor we choose to describe the relationship between organizational culture 
and project management is that of a riverboat trip. Culture is the river and the project 
is the boat. Organizing and completing projects within an organization in which the 
culture is conducive to project management is like paddling downstream: much less 
effort is required. In many cases, the current can be so strong that steering is all that is 
required. Such is the case for projects that operate in a project-friendly environment 
where teamwork and cross-functional cooperation are the norms, where there is a deep 
commitment to excellence, and where healthy conflict is voiced and dealt with quickly 
and effectively.
 
Conversely, trying to complete a project in a toxic culture is like paddling upstream: 
much more time, effort, and attention are needed to reach the destination. This would 
be the situation in cultures that discourage teamwork and cooperation, that have a low 
tolerance for conflict, and where getting ahead is based less on performance and more 
on cultivating favorable relationships with superiors. In such cases, the project man-
ager and her people not only have to overcome the natural obstacles of the project but 
also have to overcome the prevailing negative forces inherent in the culture of the 
organization.
 
The implications of this metaphor are important. Greater project authority and time 
are necessary to complete projects that encounter a strong, negative cultural current. 
Conversely, less formal authority and fewer dedicated resources are needed to com-
plete projects in which the cultural currents generate behavior and cooperation essen-
tial to project success.
 
The key issue is the degree of interdependency between the parent organization and 
the project team. In cases where the prevalent organizational culture supports the 
behaviors essential to project completion, a weaker, more flexible project management 
structure can be effective. For example, one of the major reasons Chaparral Steel is 
able to use a functional matrix to successfully complete incremental projects is that its 
culture contains strong norms for cooperation (Bowen et al., 1994). See Research 
Highlight 3.1: The Secret of Success for another example of how culture supports suc-
cessful project management.
 
When the dominant organizational culture inhibits collaboration and innovation, 
it is advisable to insulate the project team from the dominant culture. Here it 
becomes necessary to create a self-sufficient project team. If a dedicated project 
team is impossible because of resource constraints, then at least a project matrix 
should be used where the project manager has dominant control over the project. In 
both cases, the managerial strategy is to create a distinct team subculture in which 
a new set of norms, customs, and values evolves that will be conducive to project 
completion.
 
Under extreme circumstances this project culture could even represent a countercul-
ture in that many of the norms and values are the antithesis of the dominant, parent 
culture. Such was the case when IBM decided to develop their personal computer 
quickly in 1980 (Smith & Reinertsen, 1995). They knew that the project could get 
bogged down by the overabundance of computer knowledge and bureaucracy in the 
company. They also realized that they would have to work closely with suppliers and 
make use of many non-IBM parts if they were to get to the market quickly. This was 
not the IBM way at the time, so IBM established the PC project team in a warehouse 
in Boca Raton, Florida, far from corporate headquarters and other corporate develop-
ment facilities that existed within the organization.

In The Secret of Success: The Dou-
ble Helix of Formal and Informal 
Structures in an R&D Laboratory 
Polly Rizova revealed the results of 
a year-long investigation into the in-
ner workings of a Fortune 500 R&D 
Lab. Through interviews with key participants and 
analysis of social networking data, Rizova assessed 
the efficacy of six high-tech development projects.
 
Four critical success factors emerged from her 
research. One element that is crucial to success is 
a heavy reliance on open and unrestricted patterns 
of communication, coupled with a low degree of 
formal reporting. In other words, team members 
freely interacted with each other regardless of title, 
experience, or discipline. A second key is having 
individuals on the project who are highly respected 
across the laboratory for their exceptional technical 
skills and experience. Similarly, it is also vital to 
have individuals involved in the project who are 
highly respected for their organizational expertise 
and experience. Having both “technical stars” and 
“organizational stars” on the project team was es-
sential to success. The final factor is a strong and 
sustained support for the project from the compa-
ny’s corporate management. What’s more, her 
analysis revealed the interactive nature of the four 
conditions, namely, that no one condition was 
likely to produce successful outcomes on its own, 
but only when put together in a way in which they 
reinforce each other. Here the culture of the labo-
ratory was seen as the key catalyst.
 
Rizova describes a matrix system in which peo-
ple work on multiple projects simultaneously but 
with a different wrinkle. Individuals occupy differ-
ent positions and play different roles depending 
upon the project. For example, it is common for a 
senior engineer to be the manager of one project 
and a researcher on another that is led by his or 
her subordinate. In essence one must “boss” his or 
her own boss. At first glance this formal structure 
should create destructive tensions. However, 
Rizova argues that the organizational culture of the 
lab is the glue that keeps things running smoothly.
 
She describes a culture in which the social 
norms of cooperation, respect, and civility are up-
held and reproduced. It is a culture characterized 
by trust and a strong drive toward superior individ-
ual and organizational learning and achievement. 
The culture is captured in the comments of 
researchers:
That is one of the nicest things around here. 
Your opinions are listened to. Superiors 
consider our advice. You will find that most 
of the projects here are a team effort. 
What I like most is the positive thinking 
and the “whatever it takes” attitude. Per-
sonality conflicts can be devastating. Here 
everyone helps you and supports you. There 
is no “I” in the word team.
Very friendly environment. . . . I met new 
people and learned a lot from them. They 
do not mind sharing their expertise.
Research Highlight 3.1
The Secret of Success*
* Polly S. Rizova, The Secret of Success: The Double Helix of 
Formal and Informal Structures in an R&D Laboratory (Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2007).
Summary
This chapter examined two major characteristics of the parent organization that affect 
the implementation and completion of projects. The first is the formal structure of the 
organization and how it chooses to organize and manage projects. Although the indi-
vidual project manager may have very little say as to how the firm chooses to manage 
projects, he or she must be able to recognize the options available as well as the inher-
ent strengths and weaknesses of different approaches.
 
Three basic project management structures were described and assessed as to their 
weaknesses and strengths. Only under unique circumstances can a case be made for 
managing a project within the normal functional hierarchy. When thinking only in 
terms of what is best for the project, the creation of an independent project team is 
clearly favored. However, the most effective project management system appropriately 
balances the needs of the project with those of the parent organization. Matrix 
89
www.ebook3000.com

90  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
structures emerged out of the parent organization’s need to share personnel and re-
sources across multiple projects and operations while creating legitimate project focus. 
The matrix approach is a hybrid organizational form that combines elements of both the 
functional and project team forms in an attempt to realize the advantages of both.
 
The second major characteristic of the parent organization that was discussed in this 
chapter is the concept of organizational culture. Organizational culture is the pattern of 
beliefs and expectations shared by an organization’s members. Culture includes the be-
havioral norms, customs, shared values, and the “rules of the game” for getting along and 
getting ahead within the organization. It is important for project managers to be “culture 
sensitive” so that they can develop appropriate strategies and responses and avoid violat-
ing key norms that would jeopardize their effectiveness within the organization.
 
The interaction between project management structure and organizational culture is 
a complicated one. We have suggested that in certain organizations, culture encourages 
the implementation of projects. In this environment the project management structure 
used plays a less decisive role in the success of the project. Conversely, for other orga-
nizations in which the culture stresses internal competition and differentiation, just the 
opposite may be true. The prevailing norms, customs, and attitudes inhibit effective 
project management, and the project management structure plays a more decisive role 
in the successful implementation of projects. At a minimum, under adverse cultural 
conditions, the project manager needs to have significant authority over the project 
team; under more extreme conditions firms should physically relocate dedicated proj-
ect teams to complete critical projects. In both cases, the managerial strategy should be 
insulate project work from the dominant culture so that a more positive “subculture” 
can emerge among project participants.
 
The project management structure of the organization and the culture of the organi-
zation are major elements of the environment in which a project is initiated. Subse-
quent chapters will examine how project managers and professionals work within this 
environment to successfully complete projects.
Key Terms
Balanced matrix, 76
Dedicated project  
 team, 71
Matrix, 75
Organizational culture, 81
Projectitis, 74
Projectized  
 organization, 72
Project office, 80
Strong matrix, 77
Weak matrix, 76
1. What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of the functional, matrix, and 
dedicated team approaches to managing projects?
2. What distinguishes a weak matrix from a strong matrix?
3. Under what conditions would it be advisable to use a strong matrix instead of a 
dedicated project team?
4. How can project management offices (POs) support effective project 
management?
5. Why is it important to assess the culture of an organization before deciding what 
project management structure should be used to complete a project?
6. Other than culture, what other organizational factors should be used to determine 
which project management structure should be used?
7. What do you believe is more important for successfully completing a project—the 
formal project management structure or the culture of the parent organization?
Review 
Questions

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  91
1. Going to college is analogous to working in a matrix environment in that most stu-
dents take more than one class and must distribute their time across multiple 
classes. What problems does this situation create for you? How does it affect your 
performance? How could the system be better managed to make your life less dif-
ficult and more productive?
2. You work for LL Company, which manufactures high-end optical scopes for hunt-
ing rifles. LL Company has been the market leader for the past 20 years and has 
decided to diversify by applying its technology to develop a top-quality binocular. 
What kind of project management structure would you recommend they use for this 
project? What information would you like to have to make this recommendation, 
and why?
3. You work for Barbata Electronics. Your R&D people believe they have come up 
with an affordable technology that will double the capacity of existing MP3 players 
and use audio format that is superior to MP3. The project is code named KYSO 
(Knock Your Socks Off). What kind of project management structure would you 
recommend they use for the KYSO project? What information would you like to 
have to make this recommendation and why?
4. This chapter discussed the role of values and beliefs in forming an organization’s 
culture. The topic of organizational culture is big business on the Internet. Many 
companies use their Web pages to describe their mission, vision, and corporate 
values and beliefs. There also are many consulting firms that advertise how they 
help organizations to change their culture. The purpose of this exercise is for you to 
obtain information pertaining to the organizational culture for two different compa-
nies. You can go about this task by very simply searching on the key words “orga-
nizational culture” or “corporate vision and values.” This search will identify 
numerous companies for you to use to answer the following questions. You may 
want to select companies that you would like to work for in the future.
 
a. What are the espoused values and beliefs of the companies?
 
b.  Use the worksheet in Figure 3.6 to assess the Web page. What does the Web 
page reveal about the culture of this organization? Would this culture be condu-
cive to effective project management?
5. Use the cultural dimensions listed in Figure 3.5 to assess the culture of your school. 
Instead of employees, consider students, and instead of management, use faculty. 
For example, member identity refers to the degree to which students identify with 
the school as a whole rather than their major or option. Either as individuals or in 
small groups rate the culture of your school on the 10 dimensions.
 
a. What dimensions were easy to evaluate and which ones were not?
 
b. How strong is the culture of your school?
 
c. What functions does the culture serve for your school?
 
d.  Do you think the culture of your school is best suited to maximizing your learn-
ing? Why or why not?
 
e.  What kind of projects would be easy to implement in your school and what kind 
of projects would be difficult given the structure and culture of your school? 
Explain your answer.
6. You work as an analyst in the marketing department for Springfield International (SI). 
SI uses a weak matrix to develop new services. Management has created an extremely 
competitive organizational culture that places an emphasis upon achieving results 
above everything else. One of the project managers that you have been assigned to 
Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

92  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
help has been pressuring you to make his project your number one priority. He also 
wants you to expand the scope of your work on his project beyond what your market-
ing manager believes is necessary or appropriate. The project manager is widely per-
ceived as a rising star within SI. Up to now you have been resisting the project 
manager’s pressure and complying with your marketing manager’s directives. How-
ever, your most recent interchange with the project manager ended by his saying, “I’m 
not happy with the level of help I am getting from you and I will remember this when 
I become VP of Marketing.” How would you respond and why?
Block, T. R., and J. D. Frame, The Project Office—A Key to Managing Projects 
Effectively (Menlo Park, CA: Crisp Publications, 1998).
Block, T. R., and J. D. Frame, “Today’s Project Office: Gauging Attitudes,” PM Net-
work, August 2001.
Bowen, H. K., K. B. Clark, C. A. Holloway, and S. C. Wheelwright, The Perpetual 
Enterprise Machine (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994).
Brown, S., and K. R. Eisenhardt, “Product Development: Past Research, Present 
Findings, and Future Directions,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 20, no. 2 
(1995), pp. 343–78.
Cameron, K. S., and R. E. Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational Culture: 
Based on the Competing Values Framework (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
2011).
Carlton, J., Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania, and Business Blunders 
(New York: Random House, 1997), pp. 13–14.
Casey, W., and W. Peck, “Choosing the Right PMO Setup,” PM Network, vol. 15,  
no. 2 (2001), pp. 40–47.
Collins, J. C., and J. I. Porras, Built to Last: The Successful Habits of Visionary Com-
panies (New York: HarperCollins, 1994), pp. 150–58.
Deal, T. E., and A. A. Kennedy, Corporate Cultures: The Rites and Rituals of Corpo-
rate Life (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1982).
De Laat, P. B., “Matrix Management of Projects and Power Struggles: A Case Study 
of an R&D Laboratory,” IEEE Engineering Management Review, Winter 1995.
Filipczak, B., “Beyond the Gates of Microsoft,” Training, September 1992, 
pp. 37–44.
Gallagher, R. S., The Soul of an Organization: Understanding the Values That Drive 
Successful Corporate Cultures (Chicago: Dearborn Trade Publishing, 2002).
Graham, R. J., and R. L. Englund, Creating an Environment for Successful Projects: 
The Quest to Manage Project Management (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1997).
Gray, C., S. Dworatschek, D. H. Gobeli, H. Knoepfel, and E. W. Larson, “International 
Comparison of Project Organization Structures: Use and Effectiveness,” International 
Journal of Project Management, vol. 8, no. 1 (February 1990), pp. 26–32.
Harrison, M. T., and J. M. Beyer, The Culture of Organizations (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1993).
References

Hobbs, B., and P. Ménard, “Organizational Choices for Project Management,”  
in Paul Dinsmore (ed.), The AMA Handbook of Project Management (New York: 
AMACOM, 1993).
Hobday, M., “The Project-Based Organization: An Ideal Form for Managing Com-
plex Products and Systems?” Research Policy, vol. 29, no. 17 (2000).
Jassawalla, A. R., and H. C. Sashittal, “Cultures that Support Product-Innovation Pro-
cesses,” Academy of Management Executive, vol. 15, no. 3 (2002), pp. 42–54.
Johnson, C. L., M. Smith, and L. K. Geary, More Than My Share in All (Washington, 
D.C.: Smithsonian Institute Publications, 1990).
Kerzner, H., In Search of Excellence in Project Management (New York: Von 
 Nostrand Reinhold, 1997).
Kerzner, H., “Strategic Planning for the Project Office,” Project Management Jour-
nal, vol. 34, no. 2 (2003), pp. 13–25.
Larson, E. W., “Project Management Structures” in The Wiley Handbook for Manag-
ing Projects, P. Morris & J. Pinto (eds.) (New York: Wiley, 2004), pp. 48–66.
Larson, E. W., and D. H. Gobeli, “Matrix Management: Contradictions and Insights,” 
California Management Review, vol. 29, no. 4 (Summer 1987), p. 137.
Larson, E. W., and D. H. Gobeli, “Organizing for Product Development Projects,” 
Journal of Product Innovation Management, vol. 5 (1988), pp. 180–90.
Larsson, U. (ed.), Cultures of Creativity: The Centennial Exhibition of the Nobel 
Prize (Canton, MA: Science History Publications, 2001).
Laslo, Z., and A. I. Goldberg, “Matrix Structures and Performance: The Search for 
Optimal Adjustments to Organizational Objectives?” IEEE Transactions in Engineer-
ing Management, vol. 48, no. 12 (2001).
Lawrence, P. R., and J. W. Lorsch, Organization and Environment (Homewood, IL: 
Irwin, 1969).
Majchrzak, A., and Q. Wang, “Breaking the Functional Mind-Set in Process Organi-
zations,” Harvard Business Review, September–October 1996, pp. 93–99.
Miller, J., Lockheed Martin’s Skunk Works (New York: Speciality Publications, 1996).
Olson, E. M., O. C. Walker, Jr., and R. W. Ruekert, “Organizing for Effective New 
Product Development: The Moderating Role of Product Innovativeness,” Journal of 
Marketing, vol. 59 (January 1995), pp. 48–62.
O’Reilly, C. A., J. Chatman, and D. F. Caldwell, “People and Organizational Culture: 
A Profile Comparison Approach to Assessing Person-Organization Fit,” Academy of 
Management Journal, vol. 34, no. 3 (September 1991), pp. 487–516.
Pettegrew, A. M., “On Studying Organizational Culture,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, vol. 24, no. 4 (1979), pp. 570–81.
Powell, M., and J. Young, “The Project Management Support Office” in The Wiley 
Handbook for Managing Projects, P. Morris and J. Pinto (eds.) (New York: Wiley, 
2004), pp. 937–69.
Rebello, K., “Inside Microsoft,” Business Weekly, July 15, 1996, pp. 56–67.
Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  93
www.ebook3000.com

Rizova, P., The Secret of Success: The Double Helix of Formal and Informal Struc-
tures in an R&D Laboratory (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2007).
Schein, E., Organizational Culture and Leadership: A Dynamic View (San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass, 2010).
Sculley, J., Odyssey: Pepsi to Apple . . . A Journey of Adventure, Ideas, and the 
Future (New York: Harper & Row, 1987), pp. 270–79.
Shenhar, A. J., “From Theory to Practice: Toward a Typology of Project Management 
Styles,” IEEE Transactions in Engineering Management, vol. 41, no. 1 (1998),  
pp. 33–48.
Shenhar, A. J., D. Dvir, T. Lechler, and M. Poli, “One Size Does Not Fit All—True 
for Projects, True for Frameworks,” Frontiers of Project Management Research and 
Application, Proceedings of PMI Research Conference, Seattle, 2002, pp. 99–106.
Smith, P. G., and D. G. Reinertsen, Developing Products in Half the Time (New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1995).
Stuckenbruck, L. C., Implementation of Project Management (Upper Darby, PA: 
Project Management Institute, 1981).
Yazici, H., “The Role of Project Management Maturity and Organizational Culture in 
Perceived Performance,” Project Management Journal, vol. 40, no. 3 (2009),  
pp. 14–33.
Youker, R., “Organizational Alternatives for Project Management,” Project Manage-
ment Quarterly, vol. 8 (March 1977), pp. 24–33.
Case 3.1
Moss and McAdams Accounting Firm
Bruce Palmer had worked for Moss and McAdams (M&M) for six years and was just 
promoted to account manager. His first assignment was to lead an audit of Johnson-
ville Trucks. He was quite pleased with the five accountants who had been assigned to 
his team, especially Zeke Olds. Olds was an Army vet who returned to school to get a 
double major in accounting and computer sciences. He was on top of the latest devel-
opments in financial information systems and had a reputation for coming up with 
innovative solutions to problems.
 
M&M was a well-established regional accounting firm with 160 employees located 
across six offices in Minnesota and Wisconsin. The main office, where Palmer worked, 
was in Green Bay, Wisconsin. In fact, one of the founding members, Seth Moss, played 
briefly for the hometown NFL Packers during the late 1950s. M&M’s primary ser-
vices were corporate audits and tax preparation. Over the last two years the partners 
decided to move more aggressively into the consulting business. M&M projected that 
consulting would represent 40 percent of their growth over the next five years.
 
M&M operated within a matrix structure. As new clients were recruited, a manager 
was assigned to the account. A manager might be assigned to several accounts, depend-
ing on the size and scope of the work. This was especially true in the case of tax 
94  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  95
preparation projects, where it was not uncommon for a manager to be assigned to 8 to 
12 clients. Likewise, senior and staff accountants were assigned to multiple account 
teams. Ruby Sands was the office manager responsible for assigning personnel to dif-
ferent accounts at the Green Bay office. She did her best to assign staff to multiple 
projects under the same manager. This wasn’t always possible, and sometimes accoun-
tants had to work on projects led by different managers.
 
M&M, like most accounting firms, had a tiered promotion system. New CPAs 
entered as junior or staff accountants. Within two years, their performance was reviewed 
and they were either asked to leave or promoted to senior accountant. Sometime during 
their fifth or sixth year, a decision was made to promote them to account manager. 
Finally, after 10 to 12 years with the firm, the manager was considered for promotion to 
partner. This was a very competitive position. During the last five years, only 20 per-
cent of account managers at M&M had been promoted to partner. However, once a 
partner, they were virtually guaranteed the position for life and enjoyed significant 
increases in salary, benefits, and prestige. M&M had a reputation for being a results-
driven organization; partner promotions were based on meeting deadlines, retaining 
clients, and generating revenue. The promotion team based its decision on the relative 
performance of the account manager in comparison to his or her cohorts.
 
One week into the Johnsonville audit, Palmer received a call from Sands to visit her 
office. There he was introduced to Ken Crosby, who recently joined M&M after work-
ing nine years for a Big 5 accounting firm. Crosby was recruited to manage special 
consulting projects. Sands reported that Crosby had just secured a major consulting 
project with Springfield Metals. This was a major coup for the firm: M&M had com-
peted against two Big 5 accounting firms for the project. Sands went on to explain that 
she was working with Crosby to put together his team. Crosby insisted that Zeke Olds 
be assigned to his team. Sands told him that this would be impossible because Olds 
was already assigned to work on the Johnsonville audit. Crosby persisted, arguing that 
Olds’s expertise was essential to the Springfield project. Sands decided to work out a 
compromise and have Olds split time across both projects.
 
At this time Crosby turned to Palmer and said, “I believe in keeping things simple. Why 
don’t we agree that Olds works for me in the mornings and you in the afternoons. I’m sure 
we can work out any problems that come up. After all, we both work for the same firm.”
SIX WEEKS LATER
Palmer could scream whenever he remembered Crosby’s words, “After all, we both 
work for the same firm.” The first sign of trouble came during the first week of the 
new arrangement when Crosby called, begging to have Olds work all of Thursday on 
his project. They were conducting an extensive client visit, and Olds was critical to the 
assessment. After Palmer reluctantly agreed, Crosby said he owed him one. The next 
week when Palmer called Crosby to request that he return the favor, Crosby flatly 
refused and said any other time but not this week. Palmer tried again a week later and 
got the same response.
 
At first Olds showed up promptly at 1:00 p.m. at Palmer’s office to work on the audit. 
Soon it became a habit to show up 30 to 60 minutes late. There was always a good rea-
son. He was in a meeting in Springfield and couldn’t just leave, or an urgent task took 
longer than planned. One time it was because Crosby took his entire team out to lunch at 
the new Thai restaurant—Olds was over an hour late because of slow service. In the 
beginning Olds would usually make up the time by working after hours, but Palmer 
could tell from conversations he overheard that this was creating tension at home.
www.ebook3000.com

96  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
 
What probably bothered Palmer the most were the e-mails and telephone calls Olds 
received from Crosby and his team members during the afternoons when he was sup-
posed to be working for Palmer. A couple of times Palmer could have sworn that Olds 
was working on Crosby’s project in his (Palmer’s) office.
 
Palmer met with Crosby to talk about the problem and voice his complaints. Crosby 
acted surprised and even a little bit hurt. He promised things would change, but the 
pattern continued.
 
Palmer was becoming paranoid about Crosby. He knew that Crosby played golf with 
Olds on the weekends and could just imagine him badmouthing the Johnsonville project 
and pointing out how boring auditing work was. The sad fact was that there probably was 
some truth to what he was saying. The Johnsonville project was getting bogged down, 
and the team was slipping behind schedule. One of the contributing factors was Olds’s 
performance. His work was not up to its usual standards. Palmer approached Olds about 
this, and Olds became defensive. Olds later apologized and confided that he found it dif-
ficult switching his thinking from consulting to auditing and then back to consulting. He 
promised to do better, and there was a slight improvement in his performance.
 
The last straw came when Olds asked to leave work early on Friday so that he could 
take his wife and kids to a Milwaukee Brewers baseball game. It turned out Springfield 
Metals had given Crosby their corporate tickets, and he decided to treat his team with 
box seats right behind the Brewers dugout. Palmer hated to do it, but he had to refuse 
the request. He felt guilty when he overheard Olds explaining to his son on the tele-
phone why they couldn’t go to the game.
 
Palmer finally decided to pick up the phone and request an urgent meeting with 
Sands to resolve the problem. He got up enough nerve and put in the call only to be 
told that Sands wouldn’t be back in the office until next week. As he put the receiver 
down, he thought maybe things would get better.
TWO WEEKS LATER
Sands showed up unexpectedly at Palmer’s office and said they needed to talk about Olds. 
Palmer was delighted, thinking that now he could tell her what had been going on. But 
before he had a chance to speak, Sands told him that Olds had come to see her yesterday. 
She told him that Olds confessed that he was having a hard time working on both Crosby’s 
and Palmer’s projects. He was having difficulty concentrating on the auditing work in the 
afternoon because he was thinking about some of the consulting issues that had emerged 
during the morning. He was putting in extra hours to try to meet both of the projects’ dead-
lines, and this was creating problems at home. The bottom line was that he was stressed out 
and couldn’t deal with the situation. He asked that he be assigned full-time to Crosby’s 
project. Sands went on to say that Olds didn’t blame Palmer, in fact he had a lot of nice 
things to say about him. He just enjoyed the consulting work more and found it more chal-
lenging. Sands concluded by saying, “I told him I understood, and I would talk to you 
about the situation and see what could be done. Frankly, I think we should pull him from 
your project and have him work full-time on Crosby’s project. What do you think?”
1. If you were Palmer at the end of the case, how would you respond?
2. What, if anything, could Palmer have done to avoid losing Olds?
3. What advantages and disadvantages of a matrix type organization are apparent from 
this case?
4. What could the management at M&M do to more effectively manage situations 
like this?

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  97
Case 3.2
Horizon Consulting
Patti Smith looked up at the bright blue Carolina sky before she entered the offices of 
Horizon Consulting. Today was Friday, which meant she needed to prepare for the 
weekly status report meeting. Horizon Consulting is a custom software development 
company that offers fully integrated mobile application services for iPhoneTM, 
AndroidTM, Windows Mobile® and BlackBerry® platforms. Horizon was founded by 
James Thrasher, a former marketing executive, who quickly saw the potential for digi-
tal marketing via smartphones. Horizon enjoyed initial success in sports marketing, 
but quickly expanded to other industries. A key to their success was the decline in cost 
for developing smartphone applications, which expanded the client base. The decline 
in cost was primarily due to learning curve and ability to build customized solutions 
on established platforms.
 
Patti Smith was a late bloomer who went back to college after working in the res-
taurant business for nine years. She and her former husband had tried unsuccessfully 
to operate a vegetarian restaurant in Golden, Colorado. After her divorce, she returned 
to University of Colorado where she majored in Management Information Systems 
with a minor in Marketing. While she enjoyed her marketing classes much more than 
her MIS classes, she felt the IT know-how acquired would give her an advantage in the 
job market. This turned out to be true as Horizon hired her to be an Account Manager 
soon after graduation.
 
Patti Smith was hired to replace Stephen Stills who had started the restaurant side 
of the business at Horizon. Stephen was “let go” according to one Account Manager 
for being a prima donna and hoarding resources. Patti’s clients ranged from high-end 
restaurants to hole-in-wall mom and pop shops. She helped develop smartphone apps 
that let users make reservations, browse menus, receive alerts on daily specials, pro-
vide customer feedback, order take-out, and in some cases order delivery. As an 
Account Manager she worked with clients to assess their needs, develop a plan, and 
create customized smartphone apps.
 
Horizon appeared to be a good fit for Patti. She had enough technical training to be 
able to work with software engineers and help guide them to produce client-ready 
products. At the same time she could relate to the restaurateurs and enjoyed working 
with them on web design and digital marketing.
 
Horizon was organized into three departments: Sales, Software Development, and 
Graphics, with Account Managers acting as project managers. Account Managers gen-
erally came from Sales, and would divide their time between projects and making sales 
pitches to potential new clients. Horizon employed a core group of software engineers 
and designers, supplemented by contracted programmers when needed.
 
The first step in developing a smartphone application involved the Account Manager 
meeting with the client to define the requirements and vision for the application. The 
Account Manager would then work with a Graphic User Interface (GUI) designer to 
come up with a preliminary story board of how the application would function and look. 
Once the initial concept and requirements were approved the Account Manager was 
assigned two pairs of software engineers. The first pair (app engineers) would work on 
the smartphone side of the application while the second pair would work on the client 
side of the application. Horizon preferred to have software engineers work in tandem so 
they could check each other’s work. The two app engineers would typically work full 
www.ebook3000.com

98  Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture
time on the application until it was completed while the other engineers would work on 
multiple projects as needed. Likewise, GUI designers would work on the project at cer-
tain key stages in the product development cycle when their expertise was needed.
 
The head of Graphics managed the GUI designers’ schedule while the head of Soft-
ware managed the software engineer assignments. At the end of each project Account 
Managers submitted performance reviews of their team. The Director of Sales was 
responsible for the Account Managers’ performance reviews based on customer satis-
faction, generation of sales, and project performance.
 
Horizon believed in iterative development, and every two to three weeks Account 
Managers were expected to demonstrate the latest version of applications to clients. 
This led to useful feedback and in many cases redefining the scope of the project. 
Often clients wanted to add more functionality to their application once they realized 
what the software could do. Depending upon the complexity of the application and 
changes introduced once the project was under way, it typically took Horizon two to 
four months to deliver a finished product to a client.
 
Patti was currently working on three projects. One was for Shanghai Wok, a busy Chi-
nese mom and pop restaurant located in downtown Charlotte, North Carolina. The owners 
of Shanghai Wok wanted Horizon to create a smartphone app that would allow customers 
to order and pay in advance for meals they would simply pick up at a walk-up window. 
The second project was for Taste of India that operated in Kannapolis, North Carolina. 
They wanted Horizon to create a phone app that would allow staff at the nearby bio-tech 
firms to order food that would be delivered on-site during lunch and dinner hours. The last 
project was for Nearly Normal, a vegetarian restaurant which wanted to send out e-mail 
alerts to subscribers that would describe in detail their daily fresh specials.
 
James Thrasher was an admirer of Google and encouraged a playful but focused 
environment at work. Employees were allowed to decorate their work spaces, bring 
pets to work, and play ping-pong or pool when they needed a break. Horizon paid its 
employees well but the big payoff was the annual Christmas bonus. This bonus was 
based on overall company profits, which were distributed proportionately based on pay 
grade and performance reviews. It was not uncommon for employees to receive a 
10–15 percent boost in pay at the end of the year.
STATUS REPORT MEETING
As was her habit Patti entered the status report meeting room early. David Briggs was 
in the midst of describing the game-winning catch John Lorsch had made in last night’s 
softball game. Horizon sponsored a co-ed city league softball team which most of the 
Account Managers played on. Patti had been coaxed to play to ensure that the requisite 
number of “females” were on the field. She balked at the idea at first; softball wasn’t 
really her sport, but she was glad she did. Not only was it fun, but it gave her a chance 
to get to know the other managers.
 
James Thrasher entered the room and everyone settled down to business. He started 
off as he always did by asking if anybody had important news to bring to everyone’s 
attention. Jackson Browne slowly raised his hand and said, “I am afraid I do. I just 
received notification from Apple IOS that they have rejected our TAT app.” TAT was 
a phone app that Jackson was the project lead on that allowed subscribers to reserve 
and see in real time what swimming lanes were available at a prestigious athletic club. 
This announcement was followed by a collective groan. Before an Apple app could go 
operational it had to be submitted and approved by Apple. Usually this was not a prob-
lem, but lately Apple had been rejecting apps for a variety of reasons. Jackson went on 

Chapter 3  Organization: Structure and Culture  99
to circulate the list of changes that had to be made before Apple would approve the 
app. The group studied the list, and in some cases ridiculed the new requirements.
 
Ultimately, James Thrasher asked Jackson how long it would take to make the nec-
essary changes and resubmit the app for approval. Jackson felt it would probably take 
two to three weeks at most. Thrasher asked who the engineers that worked on this 
project were. Patti’s heart fell. One of the app engineers who had developed the TAT 
app was working on her Shanghai Wok project. She knew what was going to happen 
next. Thrasher announced, “OK everyone, it only makes sense that these engineers are 
the best ones to finish what they had started so they are all going to have to be reas-
signed back to the TAT project. Those affected are going to have to get together after 
this meeting and figure how you are going to replace them.” The meeting then pro-
ceeded as planned with all the account managers reporting the status of their projects, 
and sharing relevant issues with the group.
POST-MEETING
As everyone filed out, Patti looked around to see who else was in her same boat. There 
were three other Account Managers as well as Jackson Browne. Resource assignments 
were a reoccurring issue at Horizon given the nature of their work. Horizon had devel-
oped a policy where decisions were made based on project priority. Each project was 
assigned a Green, Blue or Purple designation based on the company priority. Priority 
status was based on the extent the project contributed to the mission of the firm. The 
Shanghai Wok project given its limited size and scope was a Purple project, which was 
the lowest ranking. The list of available software engineers was displayed on the big 
screen. Patti was only familiar with a few of the names.
 
Leigh Taylor who had the only Green project immediately selected Jason Wheeler 
from the list. She had used him before and was confident in his work. Tom Watson and 
Samantha Stewart both had Blue Projects and both needed to replace a mobile app engi-
neer. They both immediately jumped on the name of Prem Mathew, claiming he was the 
best person for their project. After some friendly jousting, Tom said, “OK, Sam, you 
can have him; I remember when you helped me out on the Argos project; besides my 
project is just beginning. I’ll take Shin Chen.” Everyone looked at Patti; she started by 
saying, “You know, I am only familiar with a few of these names; I guess I’ll go with 
Mike Thu.” Jackson interjected, “Hey everyone, I am really sorry this happened, and I 
am sure Mike is a good programmer, but I recommend you work with Axel Gerthoff. I 
have used him before, and he is a very quick study and a joy to work with.” This was a 
relief to Patti and she quickly took his advice. They left to submit a report to Thrasher 
detailing the decisions they each had made and the impact on their projects.
1. How successful was the post-meeting?
2. What factors contributed to the success or failure of this meeting?
3. What kind of project management structure does Horizon use? Is it the right struc-
ture? Explain.
www.ebook3000.com

100
Deﬁning the Project
4
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
4-1 Identify key elements of a project scope state-
ment and understand why a complete scope 
statement is critical to project success.
4-2 Understand why it is important to establish project 
priorities in terms of cost, time, and performance.
4-3 Demonstrate the importance of a work break-
down structure (WBS) to the management of proj-
ects and how it serves as a data base for planning 
and control.
4-4 Demonstrate how the organization breakdown 
structure (OBS) establishes accountability to 
 organizational units.
4-5 Describe a process breakdown structure (PBS) 
and when to use it.
4-6 Create responsibility matrices for small projects.
4-7 Create a communication plan for a project.
OUTLINE
4.1 
Step 1: Deﬁning the Project Scope
4.2 Step 2: Establishing Project Priorities
4.3 Step 3: Creating the Work Breakdown Structure
4.4 Step 4: Integrating the WBS with the 
Organization
4.5 Step 5: Coding the WBS for the Information 
System
4.6 Process Breakdown Structure
4.7 Responsibility Matrices
4.8 Project Communication Plan
Summary
C H A P T E R  F O U R

101
Select a dream
Use your dream to set a goal
Create a plan
Consider resources
Enhance skills and abilities
Spend time wisely
Start! Get organized and go
. . . it is one of those acro-whatevers, said Pooh.*
Project managers in charge of a single small project can plan and schedule the project 
tasks without much formal planning and information. However, when the project man-
ager must manage several small projects or a large complex project, a threshold is 
quickly reached in which the project manager can no longer cope with the detail.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
* Roger E. Allen and Stephen D. Allen, Winnie-the-Pooh on Success (New York: Penguin, 1997), p. 10.
www.ebook3000.com

102  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
 
This chapter describes a disciplined, structured method for selectively collect-
ing information to use through all phases of the project life cycle, to meet the needs 
of all stakeholders (e.g., customer, project manager), and to measure performance 
against the strategic plan of the organization. The method suggested is a selective 
outline of the project called the work breakdown structure. The early stages of 
developing the outline serve to ensure that all tasks are identified and that partici-
pants of the project have an understanding of what is to be done. Once the outline 
and its detail are defined, an integrated information system can be developed to 
schedule work and allocate budgets. This baseline information is later used 
for control.
 
In addition, the chapter presents a variant of the work breakdown structure called 
the process breakdown structure as well as responsibility matrices that are used for 
smaller, less complex projects. With the work of the project defined through the work 
breakdown structure, the chapter concludes with the process of creating a communica-
tion plan used to help coordinate project activities and follow progress.
 
The five generic steps described herein provide a structured approach for collect-
ing the project information necessary for developing a work breakdown structure. 
These steps and the development of project networks found in the next chapters all 
take place concurrently, and several iterations are typically required to develop 
dates and budgets that can be used to manage the project. The old saying “We can 
control only what we have planned” is true; therefore, defining the project is the 
first step.
4.1 Step 1: Deﬁning the Project Scope
Defining the project scope sets the stage for developing a project plan. Project scope is 
a definition of the end result or mission of your project—a product or service for your 
client/customer. The primary purpose is to define as clearly as possible the deliverable(s) 
for the end user and to focus project plans.
 
Research clearly shows that a poorly defined scope or mission is the most frequently 
mentioned barrier to project success. In a study involving more than 1,400 project 
managers in the United States and Canada, Gobeli and Larson (1990) found that 
approximately 50 percent of the planning problems relate to unclear definition of 
scope and goals. This and other studies suggest a strong correlation between project 
success and clear scope definition (Ashley et al., 1987; Pinto and Slevin, 1988; Standish 
Group, 2009). The scope document directs focus on the project purpose throughout the 
life of the project for the customer and project participants.
 
The scope should be developed under the direction of the project manager, cus-
tomer, and other significant stakeholders. The project manager is responsible for see-
ing that there is agreement with the owner on project objectives, deliverables at each 
stage of the project, technical requirements, and so forth. For example, a deliverable in 
the early stage might be specifications; for the second stage, three prototypes for pro-
duction; for the third, a sufficient quantity to introduce to market; and finally, market-
ing promotion and training.
 
Your project scope definition is a document that will be published and used by the 
project owner and project participants for planning and measuring project success. 
Scope describes what you expect to deliver to your customer when the project is com-
plete. Your project scope should define the results to be achieved in specific, tangible, 
and measurable terms.
Identify key elements 
of a project scope state-
ment and understand 
why a complete scope 
statement is critical to 
project success.
4-1
LO

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  103
Employing a Project Scope Checklist
Clearly, project scope is the keystone interlocking all elements of a project plan. To 
ensure that scope definition is complete, you may wish to use the following checklist:
Project Scope Checklist
1. Project objective 
2. Deliverables 
3. Milestones 
4. Technical requirements 
5. Limits and exclusions 
6. Reviews with customer
1. Project objective. The first step of project scope definition is to define the overall 
objective to meet your customer’s need(s). For example, as a result of extensive 
market research a computer software company decides to develop a program that 
automatically translates verbal sentences in English to Russian. The project should 
be completed within three years at a cost not to exceed $1.5 million. Another exam-
ple is to design and construct a portable, hazardous-waste thermal treatment system 
in 13 months at a cost not to exceed $13 million. The project objective answers the 
questions of what, when, how much, and at times, where.
2. Deliverables. The next step is to define major deliverables—the expected, measur-
able outputs over the life of the project. For example, deliverables in the early design 
phase of a project might be a list of specifications. In the second phase deliverables 
could be software coding and a technical manual. The next phase could be the pro-
totype. The final phase could be final tests and approved software. Note: Deliver-
ables and requirements are often used interchangeably.
3. Milestones. A milestone is a significant event in a project that occurs at a point in 
time. The milestone schedule shows only major segments of work; it represents 
first, rough-cut estimates of time, cost, and resources for the project. The milestone 
schedule is built using the deliverables as a platform to identify major segments of 
work and an end date—for example, testing complete and finished by July 1 of the 
same year. Milestones should be natural, important control points in the project. 
Milestones should be easy for all project participants to recognize.
4. Technical requirements. More frequently than not, a product or service will have 
technical requirements to ensure proper performance. Technical requirements typi-
cally clarify either the deliverables or define the performance specifications. For 
example, a technical requirement for a personal computer might be the ability to 
accept 120-volt alternating current or 240-volt direct current without any adapters 
or user switches. Another well-known example is the ability of 911 emergency sys-
tems to identify the caller’s phone number and location of the phone. Examples 
from information systems projects include speed and capacity of database systems 
and connectivity with alternative systems. For understanding the importance of key 
requirements, see Snapshot from Practice 4.1: Big Bertha.
5. Limits and exclusions. The limits of scope should be defined. Failure to do so 
can lead to false expectations and to expending resources and time on the wrong 
problem. Examples of limits are: work on site is allowed only between the hours of 
8:00 pm - 5:00 am; system maintenance and repair will be done only up to one 
month after final inspection; client will be billed for additional training beyond that 
www.ebook3000.com

104  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
In 1991 Callaway Golf Equipment introduced their Big 
Bertha driver and revolutionized the golf equipment 
business. Big Bertha—named after the World War I Ger-
man long-distance cannon—was much larger than con-
ventional woods and lacked a hosel (the socket in the 
head of the club into which the shaft is inserted) so that 
the weight could be better distributed throughout the 
head. This innovative design gave the clubhead a 
larger sweet spot, which allowed a player to strike the 
golf ball off-center and not suffer much loss in distance 
or accuracy. Callaway has maintained its preeminent 
position in the golf industry by utilizing space-age tech-
nology to extend the accuracy and distance of golf 
equipment.
 
In 2000 Callaway introduced the Big Bertha ERC II 
forged titanium driver. The driver was technologically 
superior to any driver on the market. However, there 
was one big problem. The new version of Bertha did 
not conform to the coefficient of restitution (COR) 
requirement established by the United States Golf 
Association (USGA). As a result it was barred from use 
by golfers in North America who intended to play by the 
USGA’s Rules of Golf.
 
The USGA believed that the rapid technological 
advances in golf equipment made by Callaway Golf and 
other golf manufacturers were threatening the integrity 
of the game. Players were hitting balls so much farther 
and straighter that golf courses around the world were 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  4 .1
Big Bertha II versus the  
USGA’s COR Requirement*
being redesigned to make them longer and more 
difficult.
 
So in 1998 the USGA established performance 
thresholds for all new golf equipment. In order to pre-
vent manufacturers from developing more powerful 
clubs, the USGA limited the COR of new golf equip-
ment to 0.83. The COR was calculated by ﬁring a golf 
ball at a driver out of a cannon-like machine at 109 
miles per hour. The speed that the ball returned to the 
cannon could not exceed 83 percent of its initial 
speed (90.47 mph). The USGA called the ratio of 
incoming to outgoing velocity the coefficient of resti-
tution (COR). The intent of the USGA COR threshold 
was to limit the distance that golf balls could be hit 
since studies indicated that 0.01 increase in COR 
resulted in two extra yards of carry. The Big Bertha 
ERC II’s COR was 0.86.
 
After numerous efforts to get USGA to change its 
technical requirements, Callaway’s engineers went 
back to the drawing board and in 2002 introduced 
Great Big Bertha II, which conformed to USGA’s 0.83 
COR restriction.
* John E. Gamble, “Callaway Golf Company: Sustaining 
Advantage in a Changing Industry,” in A. A. Thompson,  
J. E. Gamble, and A. J. Strickland, Strategy: Winning in the 
Marketplace (Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2004),  
pp. C204–C228.
© Les Jorgensen/Getty

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  105
prescribed in the contract. Exclusions further define the boundary of the project by 
stating what is not included. Examples include: data will be collected by the client, 
not the contractor; a house will be built, but no landscaping or security devices 
added; software will be installed, but no training given.
6. Reviews with customer. Completion of the scope checklist ends with a review with 
your customer—internal or external. The main concern here is the understanding of 
and agreement to expectations. Is the customer getting what he or she desires in 
deliverables? Does the project definition identify key accomplishments, budgets, 
timing, and performance requirements? Are questions of limits and exclusions cov-
ered? Clear communication in all these issues is imperative to avoid claims or 
misunderstanding.
 
Scope definition should be as brief as possible but complete; one or two pages are 
typical for small projects. See Snapshot from Practice 4.2: Scope Statement.
 
The project scope checklist in Step 1 is generic. Different industries and companies 
will develop unique checklists and templates to fit their needs and specific kinds of 
projects. A few companies engaged in contracted work refer to scope statements as 
“statements of work” (SOW). Other organizations use the term project charter. How-
ever, the term project charter has emerged to have a special meaning in the world of 
PROJECT OBJECTIVE
To construct a high-quality, custom 
home within ﬁve months at cost not to 
exceed $700,000 on lot 42A in Green-
dale, Oregon.
DELIVERABLES
΄ 2	͜	͹b`dMaR͹S^^c͜	Ќ͹OMcV͜
͹ORQa^^\͜Ŭ]-
ished home.
΄ 2Ŭ]WbVRQUMaMUR͜W]bdZMcRQM]QbVRRca^PYRQ͙
΄ =WcPVR] M__ZWM]PRb c^ W]PZdQR aM]UR͜ ^eR]͜
microwave, and dishwasher.
΄ :WUV͹RűPWR]PhUMbSda]MPRfWcV_a^UaM\\MOZR
thermostat.
MILESTONES
1. Permits approved—March 5
2. Foundation poured—March 14
3. Drywall in. Framing, sheathing, plumbing, electri-
cal, and mechanical inspections passed—May 25
4. Final inspection—June 7
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Home must meet local building codes.
2. All windows and doors must pass NFRC class 40 
energy ratings.
3. Exterior wall insulation must meet an “R” factor 
of 21.
4. Ceiling insulation must meet an “R” factor of 38.
5. Floor insulation must meet an “R” factor of 25.
6. Garage will accommodate two large-size cars and 
one 20-foot Winnebago.
7. Structure must pass seismic stability codes.
LIMITS AND EXCLUSIONS
1. The home will be built to the speciﬁcations and 
design of the original blueprints provided by the 
customer.
2. Owner is responsible for landscaping.
3. Refrigerator is not included among kitchen 
appliances.
4. Air conditioning is not included but prewiring is 
included.
5. Contractor reserves the right to contract out 
services.
6. Contractor is responsible for subcontracted work.
7. Site work limited to Monday through Friday,  
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
CUSTOMER REVIEW
John and Joan Smith
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  4 . 2
Scope Statement
www.ebook3000.com

106  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
project management. A project charter refers to a document that authorizes the project 
manager to initiate and lead the project. This document is issued by upper management 
and provides the project manager with written authority to use organizational resources 
for project activities. Often the charter will include a brief scope description as well as 
such items as risk limits, business case, spending limits, and even team composition.
 
Many projects suffer from scope creep, which is the tendency for the project scope 
to expand over time—usually by changing requirements, specifications, and priorities. 
Scope creep can be reduced by carefully writing your scope statement. A scope state-
ment that is too broad is an invitation for scope creep. Scope creep can have a positive 
or negative effect on the project, but in most cases scope creep means added costs and 
possible project delays. Changes in requirements, specifications, and priorities fre-
quently result in cost overruns and delays. Examples are abundant—Denver airport 
baggage handling system; Boston’s new freeway system (“The Big Dig”); Sochi Winter 
Olympics; and the list goes on. On software development projects, scope creep is mani-
fested in bloated products in which added functionality undermines ease of use.
 
If the project scope needs to change, it is critical to have a sound change control 
process in place that records the change and keeps a log of all project changes. The log 
identifies the change, impact, and those responsible for accepting or rejecting a pro-
posed change.
 
Change control is one of the topics of Chapter 7. Project managers in the field con-
stantly suggest that dealing with changing requirements is one of their most challeng-
ing problems.
4.2 Step 2: Establishing Project Priorities
Quality and the ultimate success of a project are traditionally defined as meeting and/
or exceeding the expectations of the customer and/or upper management in terms of 
cost (budget), time (schedule), and performance (scope) of the project (see Figure 4.1). 
The interrelationship among these criteria varies. For example, sometimes it is neces-
sary to compromise the performance and scope of the project to get the project done 
quickly or less expensively. Often the longer a project takes, the more expensive it 
becomes. However, a positive correlation between cost and schedule may not always 
be true. Other times project costs can be reduced by using cheaper, less efficient labor 
or equipment that extends the duration of the project. Likewise, as will be seen in 
Chapter 9, project managers are often forced to expedite or “crash” certain key activi-
ties by adding additional labor, thereby raising the original cost of the project.
 
One of the primary jobs of a project manager is to manage the trade-offs among 
time, cost, and performance. To do so, project managers must define and understand 
the nature of the priorities of the project. They need to have a candid discussion with 
the project customer and upper management to establish the relative importance of 
Understand why it is 
important to establish 
project priorities in terms 
of cost, time, and 
performance.
4-2
LO
Quality
Cost
Time
Scope
FIGURE 4.1
Project Management 
Trade-offs

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  107
each criterion. For example, what happens when the customer keeps adding require-
ments? Or if, midway through the project, a trade-off must be made between cost and 
expediting, which criterion has priority?
 
One technique found in practice that is useful for this purpose is completing a prior-
ity matrix for the project to identify which criterion is constrained, which should be 
enhanced, and which can be accepted:
Constrain. The original parameter is fixed. The project must meet the completion 
date, specifications and scope of the project, or budget.
Enhance. Given the scope of the project, which criterion should be optimized? In 
the case of time and cost, this usually means taking advantage of opportunities to 
either reduce costs or shorten the schedule. Conversely, with regard to perfor-
mance, enhancing means adding value to the project.
Accept. For which criterion is it tolerable not to meet the original parameters? 
When trade-offs have to be made, is it permissible for the schedule to slip, to 
reduce the scope and performance of the project, or to go over budget?
Figure 4.2 displays the priority matrix for the development of a new wireless router. 
Because time to market is important to sales, the project manager is instructed to take 
advantage of every opportunity to reduce completion time. In doing so, going over 
budget is acceptable though not desirable. At the same time, the original performance 
specifications for the modem as well as reliability standards cannot be compromised.
 
Priorities vary from project to project. For example, for many software projects time 
to market is critical, and companies like Microsoft may defer original scope require-
ments to later versions in order to get to the market first. Alternatively, for special event 
projects (conferences, parades, tournaments) time is constrained once the date has 
been announced, and if the budget is tight, the project manager will compromise the 
scope of the project in order to complete the project on time.
 
Some would argue that all three criteria are always constrained and that good proj-
ect managers should seek to optimize each criterion. If everything goes well on a 
project and no major problems or setbacks are encountered, their argument may be 
valid. However, this situation is rare, and project managers are often forced to make 
tough decisions that benefit one criterion while compromising the other two. The pur-
pose of this exercise is to define and agree on what the priorities and constraints of the 
project are so that when “push comes to shove,” the right decisions can be made.
Constrain
Enhance
Accept
Time
Performance
Cost
FIGURE 4.2
Project Priority 
Matrix 
www.ebook3000.com

108  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
 
There are likely to be natural limits to the extent managers can constrain, optimize, 
or accept any one criterion. It may be acceptable for the project to slip one month 
behind schedule but no further or to exceed the planned budget by as much as $20,000. 
Likewise, it may be desirable to finish a project a month early, but after that cost con-
servation should be the primary goal. Some project managers document these limits as 
part of creating the priority matrix.
 
In summary, developing a priority matrix for a project before the project begins is a 
useful exercise. It provides a forum for clearly establishing priorities with customers 
and top management so as to create shared expectations and avoid misunderstandings. 
The priority information is essential to the planning process, where adjustments can be 
made in the scope, schedule, and budget allocation. Finally, the matrix is useful mid-
way in the project for approaching a problem that must be solved.
 
One caveat must be mentioned; during the course of a project, priorities may change. 
The customer may suddenly need the project completed one month sooner, or new 
directives from top management may emphasize cost saving initiatives. The project 
manager needs to be vigilant in order to anticipate and confirm changes in priorities 
and make appropriate adjustments.
4.3 Step 3: Creating the Work Breakdown Structure
Major Groupings Found in a WBS
Once the scope and deliverables have been identified, the work of the project can be 
successively subdivided into smaller and smaller work elements. The outcome of this 
hierarchical process is called the work breakdown structure (WBS). Use of a WBS 
helps to assure project managers that all products and work elements are identified, to 
integrate the project with the current organization, and to establish a basis for control. 
Basically, the WBS is an outline of the project with different levels of detail.
 
Figure 4.3 shows the major groupings commonly used in the field to develop a hier-
archical WBS. The WBS begins with the project as the final deliverable. Major project 
work deliverables/systems are identified first; then the subdeliverables necessary to 
accomplish the larger deliverables are defined. The process is repeated until the subde-
liverable detail is small enough to be manageable and where one person can be respon-
sible. This subdeliverable is further divided into work packages. Because the lowest 
subdeliverable usually includes several work packages, the work packages are grouped 
by type of work—for example, design and testing. These groupings within a subdeliv-
erable are called cost accounts. This grouping facilitates a system for monitoring proj-
ect progress by work, cost, and responsibility.
How WBS Helps the Project Manager
The WBS defines all the elements of the project in a hierarchical framework and 
establishes their relationships to the project end item(s). Think of the project as a 
large work package that is successively broken down into smaller work packages; the 
total project is the summation of all the smaller work packages. This hierarchical 
structure facilitates evaluation of cost, time, and technical performance at all levels in 
the organization over the life of the project. The WBS also provides management with 
information appropriate to each level. For example, top management deals primarily 
with major deliverables, while first-line supervisors deal with smaller subdeliverables 
and work packages.
Demonstrate the impor-
tance of a work break-
down structure (WBS) to 
the management of proj-
ects and how it serves as 
a data base for planning 
and control.
4-3
LO

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  109
 
Each item in the WBS needs a time and cost estimate. With this information it is 
possible to plan, schedule, and budget your project. The WBS also serves as a frame-
work for tracking cost and work performance.
 
As the WBS is developed, organizational units and individuals are assigned respon-
sibility for executing work packages. This integrates the work and the organization. In 
practice, this process is sometimes called the organization breakdown structure (OBS), 
which will be further discussed later in the chapter.
 
Use of the WBS provides the opportunity to “roll up” (sum) the budget and actual 
costs of the smaller work packages into larger work elements so that performance can 
be measured by organizational units and work accomplishment.
 
The WBS can also be used to define communication channels and assist in under-
standing and coordinating many parts of the project. The structure shows the work and 
organizational units responsible and suggests where written communication should be 
directed. Problems can be quickly addressed and coordinated because the structure 
integrates work and responsibility.
A Simple WBS Development
Figure 4.4 shows a simplified WBS to develop a new prototype tablet computer. At the 
top of the chart (level 1) is the project end item—the E-Slim Tablet x-13 Prototype. 
The subdeliverables levels (2–5) below level 1 represent further decomposition of 
work. The levels of the structure can also represent information for different levels of 
FIGURE 4.3
Hierarchical 
Breakdown of the 
WBS
Cost account*
Work package
Subdeliverable
Deliverable
Lowest subdeliverable
Level
Hierarchical breakdown
Description
Complete project
Major deliverables
Supporting deliverables
Lowest management
responsibility level
Grouping of work
packages for
monitoring progress
and responsibility
Identiﬁable work
activities
1
2
3
4
5
Project
* This breakdown groups work packages by type of work within a deliverable and allows 
assignment of responsibility to an organizational unit. This extra step facilitates a system for 
monitoring project progress (discussed in Chapter 13).
www.ebook3000.com

FIGURE 4.4 Work Breakdown Structure 
WP-F1
WP-S1
WP-A1
WP-A2
WP-A3
WP-K1
WP-C1
WP-C2
WP-C3
WP-C4
WP-TS1
WP-TS2
WP-TS3
WP-L1
WP-L2
WP-L3
WP-R1
WP-R2
WP-R3
Lowest Manageable
Subdeliverables
Level
1
2
3
4
5
E-Slim Tablet x-13
Prototype
More items
Frame
Cameras
Speakers
Antenna
Keyboard
USB Slots
Internet
Touch
Screen
CPU
Hardware
Power
Supply
Battery
Touch
Sensors
Back
Light
Resolution
Charger
Flash
ROM
I/O
Controller
Work
Packages
110

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  111
management. For example, level 1 information represents the total project objective 
and is useful to top management; levels 2, 3, and 4 are suitable for middle manage-
ment; and level 5 is for first-line managers.
 
In Figure 4.4 level 2 indicates there are two major deliverables—Hardware and 
CPU, or central processing unit. (There are likely to be other major deliverables such 
as software, but for illustrative purposes we are limiting our focus to just two major 
deliverables.) At level 3, the CPU is connected to three deliverables—Power Supply, 
Flash ROM, and I/O Controller. The I/O Controller has three subdeliverables at level 
4—USB Slots, Internet, and Touch Screen. The many subdeliverables for USB Slots 
and Internet have not been decomposed. The Touch Screen (shaded) has been decom-
posed down to level 5 and to the work package level.
 
Note that level 2, Hardware, skips levels 3 and 4 because the final subdeliverables 
can be pushed down to the lowest manageable level 5; skipping levels 3 and 4 suggests 
little coordination is needed and skilled team members are already familiar with the 
work needed to complete the level 5 subdeliverables. For example, Hardware requires 
four subdeliverables at level 5—Frame, Cameras, Speakers, and Antenna. Each subde-
liverable includes work packages that will be completed by an assigned organizational 
unit. Observe that the Cameras subdeliverable includes four work packages—WP-C1, 
2, 3, and 4. The Back Light, a subdeliverable of Touch Screen, includes three work 
packages—WP-L 1, 2, and 3.
 
The lowest level of the WBS is called a work package. Work packages are short-
duration tasks that have a definite start and stop point, consume resources, and represent 
cost. Each work package is a control point. A work package manager is responsible for 
seeing that the package is completed on time, within budget, and according to technical 
specifications. Practice suggests a work package should not exceed 10 workdays or one 
reporting period. If a work package has a duration exceeding 10 days, check or monitor-
ing points should be established within the duration, say, every three to five days, so 
progress and problems can be identified before too much time has passed. Each work 
package of the WBS should be as independent of other packages of the project as pos-
sible. No work package is described in more than one subdeliverable of the WBS.
 
There is an important difference from start to finish between the last work break-
down subdeliverable and a work package. Typically, a work breakdown subdeliverable 
includes the outcomes of more than one work package from perhaps two or three depart-
ments. Therefore, the subdeliverable does not have a duration of its own and does not 
consume resources or cost money directly. (In a sense, of course, a duration for a par-
ticular work breakdown element can be derived from identifying which work package 
must start first [earliest] and which package will be the latest to finish; the difference 
from start to finish becomes the duration for the subdeliverable.) The higher elements 
are used to identify deliverables at different phases in the project and to develop status 
reports during the execution stage of the project life cycle. Thus, the work package is the 
basic unit used for planning, scheduling, and controlling the project.
 
To review, each work package in the WBS
1. Defines work (what).
2. Identifies time to complete a work package (how long).
3. Identifies a time-phased budget to complete a work package (cost).
4. Identifies resources needed to complete a work package (how much).
5. Identifies a single person responsible for units of work (who).
6. Identifies monitoring points for measuring progress (how well).
www.ebook3000.com

112  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
Creating a WBS from scratch can be a daunting task. Project managers should take 
advantage of relevant examples from previous projects to begin the process.
 
WBSs are products of group efforts. If the project is small, the entire project team may 
be involved breaking down the project into its components. For large, complex projects, 
the people responsible for the major deliverables are likely to meet to establish the first 
two levels of deliverables. In turn, further detail would be delegated to the people respon-
sible for the specific work. Collectively this information would be gathered and inte-
grated into a formal WBS by a project support person. The final version would be 
reviewed by the inner echelon of the project team. Relevant stakeholders (most notably 
customers) would be consulted to confirm agreement and revise when appropriate.
 
Project teams developing their first WBS frequently forget that the structure should 
be end-item, output oriented. First attempts often result in a WBS that follows the 
organization structure—design, marketing, production, finance. If a WBS follows the 
organization structure, the focus will be on the organization function and processes 
rather than the project output or deliverables. In addition, a WBS with a process focus 
will become an accounting tool that records costs by function rather than a tool for 
“output” management. Every effort should be made to develop a WBS that is output 
oriented in order to concentrate on concrete deliverables. See Snapshot from Prac-
tice 4.3: Creating a WBS.
Figure 4.4 represents the classic WBS 
in which the project is broken down to 
the lowest manageable deliverable 
and subsequent work packages. Many 
situations do not require this level of 
detail. This begs the question of how far you should 
break down the work.
 
There is no set answer to this question. However, 
here are some tips given by project managers:
 
Break down the work until you can do an estimate 
that is accurate enough for your purposes. If you are 
doing a ball-park estimate to see if the project is worthy of 
serious consideration, you probably do not need to break 
it down beyond major deliverables. On the other hand, if 
you are pricing a project to submit a competitive bid, then 
you are likely to go down to the work package level.
 
The WBS should conform to how you are going to 
schedule work. For example, if assignments are made 
in terms of days, then tasks should be limited as best as 
possible to one day or more to complete. Conversely, if 
hours are the smallest unit for scheduling, then work 
can be broken down to one-hour increments.
 
Final activities should have clearly deﬁned start/
end events. Avoid open-ended tasks like “research” or 
“market analysis.” Take it down to the next level in 
which deliverables/outcomes are more clearly deﬁned. 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  4 . 3
Creating a WBS
Instead of ending with market analysis include items 
such as identify market share, list user requirements, or 
write a problem statement.
 
If accountability and control are important, then 
break the work down so that one individual is clearly 
responsible for the work. For example, instead of stop-
ping at product design, take it to the next level and 
identify speciﬁc components of the design (i.e., electri-
cal schematics, power source, etc.) that different indi-
viduals will be responsible for creating.
 
The bottom line is that the WBS should provide the 
level of detail needed to manage the speciﬁc project 
successfully.
© astephan/Shutterstock

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  113
4.4 Step 4: Integrating the WBS with the Organization
The WBS is used to link the organizational units responsible for performing the work. 
In practice, the outcome of this process is the organization breakdown structure 
(OBS). The OBS depicts how the firm has organized to discharge work responsibility. 
The purposes of the OBS are to provide a framework to summarize organization unit 
work performance, identify organization units responsible for work packages, and tie 
the organizational unit to cost control accounts. Recall, cost accounts group similar 
work packages (usually under the purview of a department). The OBS defines the 
organization subdeliverables in a hierarchical pattern in successively smaller and 
smaller units. Frequently, the traditional organization structure can be used. Even if the 
project is completely performed by a team, it is necessary to break down the team 
structure for assigning responsibility for budgets, time, and technical performance.
 
As in the WBS, the OBS assigns the lowest organizational unit the responsibility for 
work packages within a cost account. Herein lies one major strength of using WBS and 
OBS; they can be integrated as shown in Figure 4.5. The intersection of work packages 
and the organizational unit creates a project control point (cost account) that integrates 
work and responsibility. For example, at level 5 Touch Sensors has three work pack-
ages that have been assigned to the Design, Quality Control Test, and Production 
departments. The intersection of the WBS and OBS represents the set of work pack-
ages necessary to complete the subdeliverable located immediately above and the 
organizational unit on the left responsible for accomplishing the packages at the inter-
section. Note that the design department is responsible for five different work packages 
across the Hardware and Touch Screen deliverables. 
 
Later we will use the intersection as a cost account for management control of proj-
ects. For example, the Cameras element requires completion of work packages whose 
primary responsibility will include the design, QC test, production, and outsourcing 
departments. Control can be checked from two directions—outcomes and responsibil-
ity. In the execution phase of the project, progress can be tracked vertically on deliver-
ables (client’s interest) and tracked horizontally by organization responsibility (own-
er’s interest).
4.5 Step 5: Coding the WBS for the Information System
Gaining the maximum usefulness of a breakdown structure depends on a coding sys-
tem. The codes are used to define levels and elements in the WBS, organization ele-
ments, work packages, and budget and cost information. The codes allow reports to be 
consolidated at any level in the structure. The most commonly used scheme in practice 
is numeric indention. A portion of the E-Slim Tablet x-13 Prototype project is pre-
sented in Exhibit 4.1.
 
Note the project identification is 1.0. Each successive indention represents a lower 
element or work package. Ultimately the numeric scheme reaches down to the work 
package level, and all tasks and elements in the structure have an identification code. 
The “cost account” is the focal point because all budgets, work assignments, time, cost, 
and technical performance come together at this point.
 
This coding system can be extended to cover large projects. Additional schemes can 
be added for special reports. For example, adding a “23” after the code could indicate 
a site location, an elevation, or a special account such as labor. Some letters can be used 
as special identifiers such as “M” for materials or “E” for engineers. You are not 
 Demonstrate how the 
organization breakdown 
structure (OBS) estab-
lishes accountability to 
organizational units.
4-4
LO
www.ebook3000.com

FIGURE 4.5 Integration of WBS and OBS
E-Slim Tablet
x-13
More items
Frame
Cameras
Speakers
Antenna
Keyboard
USB Slots
Internet
Touch
Screen
Lowest Manageable
Subdeliverables
Cost Account
Number
CPU
Hardware
Level
1
2
3
4
5
Power
Supply
Battery
Touch
Sensors
Back
Light
Resolution
Charger
Flash
ROM
I/O
Controller
Design
QC Test
Production
Outsourcing
Organization
Cost
Account
1.2.3.3.2.3
1.2.3.3.1
1.2.3.3.2
1.2.3.3.3
1.2.3.3.4
1.1.4.1
1.0
1.2
1.1
1.2.1
1.2.2
1.2.3
1.2.1.1
1.1.1
1.1.2
1.1.3
1.1.4
1.2.1.2
1.2.3.1
1.2.3.2
1.2.3.3
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
Cost
Account
114

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  115
limited to only 10 subdivisions (0–9); you can extend each subdivision to large 
 numbers—for example, .1−.99 or .1−.9999. If the project is small, you can use whole 
numbers. The following example is from a large, complex project:
3R−237A−P2−33.6
where 3R identifies the facility, 237A represents elevation and the area, P2 represents 
pipe two inches wide, and 33.6 represents the work package number. In practice most 
organizations are creative in combining letters and numbers to minimize the length of 
WBS codes.
 
On larger projects, the WBS is further supported with a WBS dictionary that pro-
vides detailed information about each element in the WBS. The dictionary typically 
includes the work package level (code), name, and functional description. In some 
cases the description is supported with specifications. The availability of detailed 
descriptions has an added benefit of dampening scope creep.
EXHIBIT 4.1
Coding the WBS
www.ebook3000.com

116  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
4.6 Process Breakdown Structure
The WBS is best suited for design and build projects that have tangible outcomes such 
as an offshore mining facility or a new car prototype. The project can be decomposed 
or broken down into major deliverables, subdeliverables, further subdeliverables, and 
ultimately to work packages. It is more difficult to apply WBS to less tangible, pro-
cess-oriented projects in which the final outcome is a product of a series of steps or 
phases. Here, the big difference is that the project evolves over time with each phase 
affecting the next phase. Information systems projects typically fall in this category—
for example, creating an extranet website or an internal software database system. 
Process projects are driven by performance requirements, not by plans/blueprints. 
Some practitioners choose to utilize what we refer to as a process breakdown struc-
ture (PBS) instead of the classic WBS.
 
Figure 4.6 provides an example of a PBS for a software development project. Instead 
of being organized around deliverables, the project is organized around phases. Each 
of the five major phases can be broken down into more specific activities until a suf-
ficient level of detail is achieved to communicate what needs to be done to complete 
that phase. People can be assigned to specific activities, and a complementary OBS 
can be created just as is done for the WBS. Deliverables are not ignored but are defined 
as outputs required to move to the next phase. The software industry often refers to 
PBS as the “waterfall method” since progress flows downward through each phase.1
Describe a process 
breakdown structure 
(PBS) and when to use it.
4-5
LO
FIGURE 4.6 PBS for Software Development Project 
Software development
project 
Construct
Develop technical
design
Deﬁne processing
ﬂow
Design logical
database structure
Design system
interfaces
Deﬁne application
architecture
Develop detailed
design
Establish quality
requirements
Deﬁne user
interface
Design
Analysis
Test
Rollout
Design phase deliverables:
Design document
1 Level
Major phases:
2 Level
Activities:
3 Level
Activities:
Outputs:
User documentation outline
Application architecture
Application ﬂow
Database design
End user interface design
Workﬂow diagram
1 The limitations of the waterfall method for software development have led to the emergence of Agile project manage-
ment methods that are the subject of Chapter 17.

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  117
 
Checklists that contain the phase exit requirements are developed to manage project 
progress. These checklists provide the means to support phase walk-throughs and 
reviews. Checklists vary depending upon the project and activities involved but typi-
cally include the following details:
∙ Deliverables needed to exit a phase and begin a new one.
∙ Quality checkpoints to ensure that deliverables are complete and accurate.
∙ Sign-offs by all responsible stakeholders to indicate that the phase has been success-
fully completed and that the project should move on to the next phase.
As long as exit requirements are firmly established and deliverables for each phase are 
well defined, the PBS provides a suitable alternative to the standard WBS for projects 
that involve extensive development work.
4.7 Responsibility Matrices
In many cases, the size and scope of the project do not warrant an elaborate WBS or 
OBS. One tool that is widely used by project managers and task force leaders of small 
projects is the responsibility matrix (RM). The RM (sometimes called a linear respon-
sibility chart) summarizes the tasks to be accomplished and who is responsible for what 
on a project. In its simplest form an RM consists of a chart listing all the project activities 
and the participants responsible for each activity. For example, Figure 4.7 illustrates an 
RM for a market research study. In this matrix the R is used to identify the committee 
member who is responsible for coordinating the efforts of other team members assigned 
to the task and making sure that the task is completed. The S is used to identify members 
of the five-person team who will support and/or assist the individual responsible. Simple 
RMs like this one are useful not only for organizing and assigning responsibilities for 
small projects but also for subprojects of large, more complex projects.
 
More complex RMs not only identify individual responsibilities but also clarify 
critical interfaces between units and individuals that require coordination. For 
Create responsibility 
matrices for small 
projects.
4-6
LO
FIGURE 4.7 Responsibility Matrix for a Market Research Project 
Identify target customers
Develop draft questionnaire
Pilot-test questionnaire
Finalize questionnaire
Print questionnaire
Prepare mailing labels
Mail questionnaires
Receive and monitor returned questionnaires
Input response data
Analyze results
Prepare draft of report
Prepare ﬁnal report
Task
Richard
R
R
R
S
R
Dan
Project Team
R = Responsible
S = Supports/assists
S
S
R
S
R
R
Dave
S
S
R
S
S
S
Linda
S
S
S
R
S
S
Elizabeth
R
R
R
S
www.ebook3000.com

FIGURE 4.8 Responsibility Matrix for the Conveyor Belt Project 
Architectural designs
Hardware speciﬁcations
Kernel speciﬁcations
Utilities speciﬁcations
Hardware design
Disk drivers
Memory management
Operating system documentation
Prototypes
Integrated acceptance test
Deliverables
Design
1
2
1
2
1
3
1
2
5
5
Development
Organization
1
2
3
4
5
Responsible
Support
Consult
Notiﬁcation
Approval
2
1
3
1
1
3
2
2
Documentation
2
1
4
2
Assembly
3
1
Testing
2
3
3
3
1
Purchasing
2
3
3
Quality Assur.
3
3
3
5
Manufacturing
3
3
3
3
4
5
118

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  119
example, Figure 4.8 is an RM for a larger, more complex project to develop a new piece 
of automated equipment. Notice that within each cell a numeric coding scheme is used 
to define the nature of involvement on that specific task. Such an RM extends the 
WBS/OBS and provides a clear and concise method for depicting responsibility, 
authority, and communication channels.
 
Responsibility matrices provide a means for all participants in a project to view their 
responsibilities and agree on their assignments. They also help clarify the extent or type 
of authority exercised by each participant in performing an activity in which two or 
more parties have overlapping involvement. By using an RM and by defining authority, 
responsibility, and communications within its framework, the relationship between dif-
ferent organizational units and the work content of the project is made clear.
4.8 Project Communication Plan
Once the project deliverables and work are clearly identified, following up with an 
internal communication plan is vital. Stories abound of poor communication as a 
major contributor to project failure. Having a robust communications plan can go a 
long way toward mitigating project problems and can ensure that customers, team 
members, and other stakeholders have the information to do their jobs.
 
The communication plan is usually created by the project manager and/or the proj-
ect team in the early stage of project planning.
 
Communication is a key component in coordinating and tracking project schedules, 
issues, and action items. The plan maps out the flow of information to different stake-
holders and becomes an integral part of the overall project plan. The purpose of a project 
communication plan is to express what, who, how, and when information will be trans-
mitted to project stakeholders so schedules, issues, and action items can be tracked.
 
Project communication plans address the following core questions:
∙ What information needs to be collected and when?
∙ Who will receive the information?
∙ What methods will be used to gather and store information?
∙ What are the limits, if any, on who has access to certain kinds of information?
∙ When will the information be communicated?
∙ How will it be communicated?
Developing a communication plan that answers these questions usually entails the fol-
lowing basic steps:
1. Stakeholder analysis. Identify the target groups. Typical groups could be the cus-
tomer, sponsor, project team, project office, or anyone who needs project information 
to make decisions and/or contribute to project progress. A common tool found in 
practice to initially identify and analyze major project stakeholders’ communication 
needs is presented in Figure 4.9.2 How and what is communicated is influenced by the 
stakeholder interest and power. Some of these stakeholders may have the power either 
to block or enhance your project. By identifying stakeholders and prioritizing them on 
the “Power/Interest” map, you can plan the type and frequency of communications 
needed. (More on stakeholders will be discussed in Chapter 10.)
Create a communication 
plan for a project.
4-7
LO
2 For a more elaborate scheme for assessing stakeholders, see: Lynda Bourne, Stakeholder Relationship Management 
͈7Ma]VM\͜G͙=͙͛8^fRaBdOZWbVW]U>cQ͙͜	͉͙
www.ebook3000.com

120  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
 
For example, on a typical project you want to manage closely the professionals 
doing the work, while you want to satisfy senior management and project sponsor 
with periodic updates. Unions and operation managers interested in capacity would 
be someone you would want to keep informed, while you would only need to pro-
vide general information to the legal, public relations, and other departments.
2. Information needs. What information is pertinent to stakeholders who contribute 
to the project’s progress? The simplest answer to this question can be obtained by 
asking the different people what information they need and when they need it. For 
example, top management needs to know how the project is progressing, whether it 
is encountering critical problems, and the extent to which project goals are being 
realized. This information is required so that they can make strategic decisions and 
manage the portfolio of projects. Project team members need to see schedules, task 
lists, specifications, and the like, so they know what needs to be done next. External 
groups need to know any changes in the schedule and performance requirements of 
the components they are providing. Frequent information needs found in communi-
cation plans are:
Project status reports  
Deliverable issues
Changes in scope  
Team status meetings
Gating decisions  
Accepted request changes
Action items 
Milestone reports
3. Sources of information. When the information needs are identified, the next step 
is to determine the sources of information. That is, where does the information 
reside? How will it be collected? For example, information relating to the milestone 
report, team meetings, and project status meetings would be found in the minutes 
and reports of various groups.
4. Dissemination modes. In today’s world, traditional status report meetings are being 
supplemented by e-mail, teleconferencing, SharePoint, and a variety of database shar-
ing programs to circulate information. In particular, many companies are using the 
Web to create a “virtual project office” to store project information. Project manage-
ment software feeds information directly to the website so that different people have 
immediate access to relevant project information. In some cases, appropriate informa-
tion is routed automatically to key stakeholders. Backup paper hardcopy to specific 
stakeholders is still critical for many project changes and action items.
FIGURE 4.9
Stakeholder 
Communications 
Interest
D
A
F
H
C
D
E
G
B
High
High
Low
Power
Provide General
Information
Manage Closely
Keep Informed
Low
Keep Satisﬁed

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  121
5. Responsibility and timing. Determine who will send out the information. For 
example, a common practice is to have secretaries of meetings forward the minutes 
or specific information to the appropriate stakeholders. In some cases the responsi-
bility lies with the project manager or project office. Timing and frequency of dis-
tribution appropriate to the information need to be established.
The advantage of establishing a communication plan is that instead of responding to 
information requests, you are controlling the flow of information. This reduces confu-
sion and unnecessary interruptions, and it can provide project managers greater auton-
omy. Why? By reporting on a regular basis how things are going and what is happening, 
you allow senior management to feel more comfortable about letting the team complete 
the project without interference. See Figure 4.10 for a sample Shale Oil Research  Project 
Communication Plan.
 
The importance of establishing up-front a plan for communicating important proj-
ect information cannot be overstated. Many of the problems that plague a project can 
be traced back to insufficient time devoted to establishing a well-grounded internal 
communication plan.
What
Information
Milestone report
Project status
reports &
agendas
Team status
reports
Issues report
Escalation
reports
Outsourcing
performance
Accepted
change requests
Oversight gate
decisions
Senior management and
project manager
Senior management and
project manager
Bimonthly
Weekly
E-mail and
hardcopy
Project office
Project manager
Team recorder
Team recorder
Project manager
Project manager
Design
department
Oversight group
or
project office
E-mail and
hardcopy
E-mail and
hardcopy
E-mail meeting
report
E-mail
E-mail
Meeting and
hardcopy
Meeting
Weekly
Weekly
When
needed
Bimonthly
Anytime
As required
Project office, senior
mgmt., customer, staff,
and project mgr.
Staff and customer
Staff and customer
Staff and customer
Project manager and
project office
Staff and customer
Target
Audience
When?
Method of
Communication
Provider
FIGURE 4.10 Shale Oil Research Project Communication Plan 
Summary
The project scope definition, priorities, and breakdown structure are the keys to nearly 
every aspect of managing the project. The scope definition provides focus and emphasis 
on the end item(s) of the project. Establishing project priorities allows managers to make 
appropriate trade-off decisions. The WBS structure helps ensure all tasks of the project 
are identified and provides two views of the project—one on deliverables and one on 
www.ebook3000.com

122  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
Key Terms
Cost account, 113
Milestone, 103
Organization breakdown 
structure (OBS), 113
Priority matrix, 107
Process breakdown 
structure (PBS), 116
Project charter, 105
Responsibility matrix, 117
Scope creep, 106
Scope statement, 105
WBS dictionary, 115
Work breakdown 
structure (WBS), 108
Work package, 111
organization responsibility. The WBS avoids having the project driven by organization 
function or by a finance system. The structure forces attention to realistic requirements 
of personnel, hardware, and budgets. Use of the structure provides a powerful framework 
for project control that identifies deviations from plan, identifies responsibility, and spots 
areas for improved performance. No well-developed project plan or control system is 
possible without a disciplined, structured approach. The WBS, OBS, and cost account 
codes provide this discipline. The WBS will serve as the database for developing the 
project network which establishes the timing of work, people, equipment, and costs.
 
PBS is often used for process-based projects with ill-defined deliverables. In small 
projects responsibility matrices may be used to clarify individual responsibility.
 
Clearly defining your project is the first and most important step in planning. The 
absence of a clearly defined project plan consistently shows up as the major reason for 
project failures. Whether you use a WBS, PBS, or responsibility matrix will depend pri-
marily on the size and nature of your project. Whatever method you use, definition of your 
project should be adequate to allow for good control as the project is being implemented. 
Follow-up with a clear communication plan for coordinating and tracking project prog-
ress will help keep important stakeholders informed and avoid some potential problems.
1. What are the six elements of a typical scope statement?
2. What questions does a project objective answer? What would be an example of a 
good project objective?
3. What does it mean if the priorities of a project include: Time-constrain, Scope-
accept, and Cost-enhance?
4. What kinds of information are included in a work package?
5. When would it be appropriate to create a responsibility matrix rather than a full-
blown WBS?
6. How does a communication plan benefit management of projects?
Review 
Questions
Exercises
1. You are in charge of organizing a dinner-dance concert for a local charity. You have 
reserved a hall that will seat 30 couples and have hired a jazz combo.
a.  Develop a scope statement for this project that contains examples of all the ele-
ments. Assume that the event will occur in four weeks and provide your best 
guess estimate of the dates for milestones.
b.  What would the priorities likely be for this project?
2. In small groups, identify real life examples of a project that would fit each of the 
following priority scenarios:
a.  Time-constrain, Scope-enhance, Cost-accept
b.  Time-accept, Scope-constrain, Cost-accept
c.  Time-constrain, Scope-accept, Cost-enhance

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  123
3. Develop a WBS for a project in which you are going to build a bicycle. Try to iden-
tify all of the major components and provide three levels of detail.
4. You are the father or mother of a family of four (kids ages 13 and 15) planning a 
weekend camping trip. Develop a responsibility matrix for the work that needs to be 
done prior to starting your trip.
5. Develop a WBS for a local stage play. Be sure to identify the deliverables and orga-
nizational units (people) responsible. How would you code your system? Give an 
example of the work packages in one of your cost accounts. Develop a correspond-
ing OBS which identifies who is responsible for what.
6. Use an example of a project you are familiar with or are interested in. Identify the 
deliverables and organizational units (people) responsible. How would you code 
your system? Give an example of the work packages in one of your cost accounts.
7. Develop a communication plan for an airport security project. The project entails 
installing the hardware and software system that (1) scans a passenger’s eyes, 
(2) fingerprints the passenger, and (3) transmits the information to a central location 
for evaluation.
8. Go to an Internet search engine (e.g., Google) and type in “project communication 
plan.” Check three or four that have “.gov” as their source. How are they similar or 
dissimilar? What would be your conclusion concerning the importance of an inter-
nal communication plan?
9. Your roommate is about to submit a scope statement for a spring concert sponsored 
by the entertainment council at Western Evergreen State University (WESU). WESU 
is a residential university with over 22,000 students. This will be the first time in six 
years since WESU sponsored a spring concert. The entertainment council has bud-
geted $40,000 for the project. The event is to occur on June 5th. Since your room-
mate knows you are taking a class on project management she has asked you to 
review her scope statement and make suggestions for improvement. She considers 
the concert a resume-building experience and wants to be as professional as possible. 
Below is a draft of her scope statement. What suggestions would you make and why?
WESU Spring Music Concert
Project Objective 
To organize and deliver a 6-hour music concert 
Deliverables 
΄ 4^]PRacbRPdaWch
΄ 4^]cMPcZ^PMZ]Rfb_M_RabM]QaMQW^bcMcW^]b
΄ ER_MaMcRORRaUMaQR]
΄ EWgV^dab^S\dbWPMZR]cRacMW]\R]c
΄ 5RbWU]MP^\\R\^aMcWeRP^]PRacF͹bVWac
΄ >^PMZb_^]b^ab
΄ 7^^QeR]dRb
΄ 6eR]cW]bdaM]PR
΄ EMSRR]eWa^]\R]c
Milestones 
1. Secure all permissions and approvals 
2. Sign big-name artist 
3. Contact secondary artists 
4. Secure vendor contracts 
www.ebook3000.com

5. Advertising campaign 
6. Plan set-up 
7. Concert 
8. Clean-up 
Technical Requirements 
1. Professional sound stage and system 
2. At least ﬁve performing acts 
3. Restroom facilities 
4. Parking 
5. Compliance with WESU and city requirements/ordinances 
Limits and Exclusions 
΄ ERMcW]UPM_MPWchS^a͜bcdQR]cb
΄ BRaS^a\RabMaRaRb_^]bWOZRS^acaMeRZMaaM]UR\R]cc^M]QSa^\I6EG
΄ BRaS^a\Rab\dbc_a^eWQR^f]ZWMOWZWchW]bdaM]PR
΄ BRaS^a\RabM]QbRPdaWch_Rab^]]RZfWZZOR_a^eWQRQZd]PVM]QQW]]Ra^]cVRQMh^ScVRP^]PRac
΄ HR]Q^abP^]caWOdcR	_RaPR]c^SbMZRbc^P^]PRacSd]Q
΄ 4^]PRac\dbcOR^eRaMc	͛M͙\͙
Customer Review: WESU
Ashley, D. B., et al., “Determinants of Construction Project Success,” Project Man-
agement Journal, vol. 18, no. 2 (June 1987), p. 72.
Chilmeran, A. H., “Keeping Costs on Track,” PM Network, vol. 19, no. 2 (2004), 
pp. 45–51.
Gary, L. “Will Project Scope Cost You—Or Create Value?” Harvard Management 
Update, January 2005.
Gobeli, D. H., and E. W. Larson, “Project Management Problems,” Engineering 
Management Journal, vol. 2 (1990), pp. 31–36.
Ingebretsen, M., “Taming the Beast,” PM Network, July 2003, pp. 30–35.
Katz, D. M., “Case Study: Beware ‘Scope Creep’ on ERP Projects,” CFO.com, 
March 27, 2001.
Kerzner, H., Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, 8th ed. (New 
York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 2003).
Lewis, J. P., Project Planning, Scheduling and Controlling, 3rd ed. (Burr Ridge, IL: 
McGraw-Hill, 2000).
Luby, R. E., D. Peel, and W. Swahl, “Component-Based Work Breakdown Structure,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 26, no. 2 (December 1995), pp. 38–44.
Murch, R., Project Management: Best Practices for IT Professionals (Upper Darby, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001).
Pinto, J. K., and D. P. Slevin, “Critical Success Factors Across the Project Life Cycle,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 19, no. 3 (June 1988), p. 72.
Pitagorsky, G., “Realistic Project Planning Promotes Success,” Engineer’s Digest, 
vol. 29, no. 1 (2001).
PMI Standards Committee, Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(Newton Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2000).
References
124  Chapter 4  Defining the Project

Posner, B. Z., “What It Takes to Be a Good Project Manager,” Project Management 
Journal, vol. 18, no. 1 (March 1987), p. 52.
Raz, T., and S. Globerson, “Effective Sizing and Content Definition of Work Packages,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 29, no. 4 (1998), pp. 17–23.
The Standish Group, CHAOS Summary 2009, pp. 1–4.
Tate, K., and K. Hendrix, “Chartering IT Projects,” Proceedings, 30th Annual, Project 
Management Institute (Philadelphia, PA. 1999), CD.
Case 4.1
Manchester United Soccer Club
Nicolette Larson was loading the dishwasher with her husband, Kevin, and telling him 
about the first meeting of the Manchester United Tournament Organizing Committee. 
Nicolette, a self-confessed “soccer mom,” had been elected tournament director and 
was responsible for organizing the club’s first summer tournament.
 
Manchester United Soccer Club (MUSC), located in Manchester, New Hampshire, 
was formed in 1992 as a way of bringing recreational players to a higher level of com-
petition and preparing them for the State Olympic Development Program and/or high 
school teams. The club currently has 24 boys and girls (ranging in age from under 9 to 
16) on teams affiliated with the New Hampshire Soccer Association and the Granite 
State Girls Soccer League. The club’s board of directors decided in the fall to sponsor 
a summer invitational soccer tournament to generate revenue. Given the boom in youth 
soccer, hosting summer tournaments has become a popular method for raising funds. 
MUSC teams regularly compete in three to four tournaments each summer at different 
locales in New England. These tournaments have been reported to generate between 
$50,000 and $70,000 for the host club.
 
MUSC needs additional revenue to refurbish and expand the number of soccer 
fields at the Rock Rimmon soccer complex. Funds would also be used to augment the 
club’s scholarship program, which provides financial aid to players who cannot afford 
the $450 annual club dues.
 
Nicolette gave her husband a blow-by-blow account of what transpired during the first 
tournament committee meeting that night. She started the meeting by having everyone 
introduce themselves and by proclaiming how excited she was that the club was going to 
sponsor its own tournament. She then suggested that the committee brainstorm what 
needed to be done to pull off the event; she would record their ideas on a flipchart.
 
What emerged was a free-for-all of ideas and suggestions. One member immedi-
ately stressed the importance of having qualified referees and spent several minutes 
describing in detail how his son’s team was robbed in a poorly officiated championship 
game. This was followed by other stories of injustice on the soccer field. Another 
member suggested that they needed to quickly contact the local colleges to see if they 
could use their fields. The committee spent more than 30 minutes talking about how 
they should screen teams and how much they should charge as an entry fee. An argu-
ment broke out over whether they should reward the winning teams in each age bracket 
with medals or trophies. Many members felt that medals were too cheap, while others 
thought the trophies would be too expensive. Someone suggested that they seek local 
Chapter 4  Defining the Project  125
www.ebook3000.com

126  Chapter 4  Defining the Project
corporate sponsors to help fund the tournament. The proposed sale of tournament 
T-shirts and sweatshirts was followed by a general critique of the different shirts par-
ents had acquired at different tournaments. One member advocated that they recruit an 
artist he knew to develop a unique silk-screen design for the tournament. The meeting 
adjourned 30 minutes late with only half of the members remaining until the end. 
Nicolette drove home with seven sheets of ideas and a headache.
 
As Kevin poured a glass of water for the two aspirin Nicolette was about to take, he 
tried to comfort her by saying that organizing this tournament would be a big project 
not unlike the projects he worked on at his engineering and design firm. He offered to 
sit down with her the next night and help her plan the project. He suggested that the 
first thing they needed to do was to develop a WBS for the project.
1. Make a list of the major deliverables for the project and use them to develop a draft 
of the work breakdown structure for the tournament that contains at least three lev-
els of detail. What are the major deliverables associated with hosting an event such 
as a soccer tournament?
2. How would developing a WBS alleviate some of the problems that occurred during 
the first meeting and help Nicolette organize and plan the project?
3. Where can Nicolette find additional information to help her develop a WBS for the 
tournament?
4. How could Nicolette and her task force use the WBS to generate cost estimates for 
the tournament? Why would this be useful information?
Case 4.2
The Home Improvement Project
Lukas Nelson and his wife, Anne, and their three daughters had been living in their house 
for over five years when they decided it was time to make some modest improvements. 
One area they both agreed needed an upgrade was the bathtub. Their current house had 
one standard shower bathtub combination. Lukas was 6 feet four, and could barely 
squeeze into it. In fact, he had taken only one bath since they moved in. He and Anne 
both missed soaking in the older, deep bathtubs they enjoyed when they lived back East.
 
Fortunately, the previous owners that built the house had plumbed the corner of a 
large exercise room in the basement for a hot tub. They contacted a trusted remodeling 
contractor who assured them it would be relatively easy to install a new bathtub and it 
shouldn’t cost more than $1,500. They decided to go ahead with the project.
 
First the Nelsons went to the local plumbing retailer to pick out a tub. They soon 
realized that for a few hundred dollars more they could buy a big tub with water jets (a 
Jacuzzi). With old age on the horizon a Jacuzzi seemed like a luxury that was worth the 
extra money.
 
Originally the plan was to install the tub using the simple plastic frame the bath 
came with and install a splash guard around the tub. Once Anne saw the tub, frame, 
and splashguard in the room she balked. She did not like how it looked with the cedar 
paneling in the exercise room. After significant debate, Ann won out, and the Nelsons 
agreed to pay extra to have a cedar frame built for the tub and use attractive tile instead 
of the plastic splashguard. Lukas rationalized the changes would pay for themselves 
when they tried to sell the house.

Chapter 4  Defining the Project  127
 
The next hiccup occurred when it came time to address the flooring issue. The exer-
cise room was carpeted, which wasn’t ideal when getting out of a bathtub. The original 
idea was to install relatively cheap laminated flooring in the drying and undressing 
area adjacent to the tub. However, the Nelsons couldn’t agree on the pattern to use. One 
of Anne’s friends said it would be a shame to put such cheap flooring in such a nice 
room. She felt they should consider using tile. The contractor agreed and said he knew 
a tile installer who needed work and would give them a good deal. 
 
Lukas reluctantly agreed that the laminated options just didn’t fit the style or quality 
of the exercise room. Unlike the laminated floor debate both Anne and Lukas immedi-
ately liked a tile pattern that matched the tile used around the tub. Anxious not to delay 
the project, they agreed to pay for the tile flooring.
 
Once the tub was installed and the framing was almost completed, Anne realized 
that something had to be done about the lighting. One of her favorite things to do was 
to read while soaking in the tub. The existing lights didn’t provide sufficient illumina-
tion for doing so. Lukas knew this was “non-negotiable” and they hired an electrician 
to install additional lighting over the bathtub.
 
While the lighting was being installed and the tile was being laid, another issue 
came up. The original plan was to tile only the exercise room and use remnant rugs to 
cover the area away from the tub where the Nelsons did their exercises. The Nelsons 
were very happy with how the tile looked and fit with the overall room. However, it 
clashed with the laminated flooring in the adjacent bathroom. Lukas agreed with Ann, 
that it really made the adjacent bathroom look cheap and ugly. He also felt the bath-
room was so small it wouldn’t cost much more.
 
After a week the work was completed. Both Lukas and Anne were quite pleased 
with how everything turned out. It cost much more than they had planned, but they 
planned to live in the house until the girls graduated from college so they felt it was a 
good long-term investment.
 
Anne had the first turn using the bathtub followed by their three girls. Everyone 
enjoyed the Jacuzzi. It was 10:00 p.m. when Lukas began running water for his first bath. 
At first the water was steaming hot, but by the time he was about to get in, it was lukewarm 
at best. Lukas groaned, “After paying all of that money I still can’t enjoy a bath.”
 
The Nelsons rationed bathing for a couple weeks, until they decided to find out what 
if anything could be done about the hot water problem. They asked a reputable heating 
contractor to assess the situation. The contractor reported that the hot water tank was 
insufficient to service a family of five. This had not been discovered before because 
baths were rarely taken in the past. The contractor said it would cost $2,200 to replace 
the existing water heater with a larger one that would meet their needs. The heating 
contractor also said if they wanted to do it right they should replace the existing furnace 
with a more energy efficient one. A new furnace would not only heat the house but also 
indirectly heat the water tank. Such a furnace would cost $7,500, but with the improved 
efficiency and savings in the gas bill, the furnace would pay for itself in 10 years. 
Besides, the Nelsons would likely receive tax credits for the more fuel-efficient 
furnace.
 
Three weeks later, after the new furnace was installed, Lukas settled into the new 
bathtub. He looked around the room at all the changes that had been made and mut-
tered to himself, “And to think that all I wanted was to soak in a nice, hot bath.”
1. What factors and forces contributed to scope creep in this case?
2. Is this an example of good or bad scope creep? Explain.
3. How could scope creep have been better managed by the Nelsons?
www.ebook3000.com

128
Estimating Project Times 
and Costs
5
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
5-1 Understand estimating project times and costs are 
the foundation for project planning and control.
5-2 Describe guidelines for estimating time, costs, 
and resources.
5-3 Describe the methods, uses, and advantages and 
disadvantages of top-down and bottom-up esti-
mating methods.
5-4 Distinguish different kinds of costs associated 
with a project.
5-5 Suggest a scheme for developing an estimating 
database for future projects.
5-6 Understand the challenge of estimating mega 
projects and describe steps that lead to better 
informed decisions.
5-7 Deﬁne a “white elephant” in project management 
and provide examples.
OUTLINE
5.1 
Factors Inﬂuencing the Quality of Estimates
5.2 Estimating Guidelines for Times, Costs, and 
Resources
5.3 Top-Down versus Bottom-Up Estimating
5.4 Methods for Estimating Project Times and 
Costs
5.5 Level of Detail
5.6 Types of Costs
5.7 Reﬁning Estimates
5.8 Creating a Database for Estimating
5.9 Mega Projects: A Special Case
Summary
Appendix 5.1: Learning Curves for Estimating
C H A P T E R  F I V E

129
Project estimation is indeed a yardstick for project cost control. And if the 
yardstick is faulty, you start on the “wrong foot.” . . . We exhort you not to 
underestimate the estimate.*
Given the urgency to start work on the project, managers sometimes minimize or avoid 
the effort to follow through on estimating project time and cost. This attitude is a huge 
mistake and costly. There are important reasons to make the effort and incur the cost 
of estimating for your project. Exhibit 5.1 summarizes some key reasons.
 
Estimating is the process of forecasting or approximating the time and cost of com-
pleting project deliverables. Estimating processes are frequently classified as top-down 
and bottom-up. Top-down estimates are usually done by senior management. Manage-
ment will often derive estimates from analogy, group consensus, or mathematical 
relationships. Bottom-up estimates are typically performed by the people who are 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
* O. P. Kharbanda and J. K. Pinto, What Made Gertie Gallop: Learning from Project Failures (New York: Von Nostrand Rein-
hold, 1996), p. 73.
Understand estimating 
project times and costs 
are the foundation for 
project planning and 
control.
5-1
LO
www.ebook3000.com

130  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
doing the work. Their estimates are based on estimates of elements found in the work 
breakdown structure.
 
All project stakeholders prefer accurate cost and time estimates, but they also under-
stand the inherent uncertainty in all projects. Inaccurate estimates lead to false expec-
tations and consumer dissatisfaction. Accuracy is improved with greater effort, but is 
it worth the time and cost?—estimating costs money! Project estimating becomes a 
trade-off, balancing the benefits of better accuracy against the costs for securing 
increased accuracy.
 
Cost, time, and budget estimates are the lifeline for control; they serve as the stan-
dard for comparison of actual and plan throughout the life of the project. Project status 
reports depend on reliable estimates as the major input for measuring variances and 
taking corrective action. Ideally, the project manager, and in most cases the customer, 
would prefer to have a database of detailed schedule and cost estimates for every work 
package in the project. Regrettably, such detailed data gathering is not always possible 
or practical and other methods are used to develop project estimates.
5.1 Factors Inﬂuencing the Quality of Estimates
A typical statement in the field is the desire to “have a 95 percent probability of meet-
ing time and cost estimates.” Past experience is a good starting point for developing 
time and cost estimates. But past experience estimates must almost always be refined 
by other considerations to reach the 95 percent probability level. Factors related to the 
uniqueness of the project will have a strong influence on the accuracy of estimates. 
Project, people, and external factors all need to be considered to improve quality of 
estimates for project times and costs.
Planning Horizon 
The quality of the estimate depends on the planning horizon; estimates of current 
events are close to 100 percent accurate but are reduced for more distant events. For 
example, cost estimates for a party you are organizing this weekend should be much 
more accurate than the estimates for a party that will take place in six months. The 
accuracy of time and cost estimates should improve as you move from the conceptual 
phase to the point where individual work packages are defined. Long-duration projects 
increase the uncertainty in estimates.
Project Complexity 
Time to implement new technology has a habit of expanding in an increasing, nonlin-
ear fashion. Sometimes poorly written scope specifications for new technology result 
in errors in estimating times and costs.
Source: O. P. Kharbanda and J. K. Pinto, What Made Gertie Gallop: Learning from Project Failures (New York: Von Nostrand Reinhold, 
1996), p. 73.
EXHIBIT 5.1 
Why Estimating 
Time and Cost Is 
Important
΄ 6bcW\McRbMaR]RRQRQc^bd__^acU^^QQRPWbW^]b͙
΄ 6bcW\McRbMaR]RRQRQc^bPVRQdZRf^aY͙
΄ 6bcW\McRbMaR]RRQRQc^QRcRa\W]RV^fZ^]UcVR_a^XRPcbV^dZQcMYRM]QWcbP^bc͙
΄ 6bcW\McRbMaR]RRQRQc^QRcRa\W]RfVRcVRacVR_a^XRPcWbf^acVQ^W]U͙
΄ 6bcW\McRbMaR]RRQRQc^QReRZ^_PMbVů^f]RRQb͙
΄ 6bcW\McRbMaR]RRQRQc^QRcRa\W]RV^ffRZZcVR_a^XRPcWb_a^UaRbbW]U͙

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  131
People 
The people factor can influence the quality of time and cost estimates. For example, 
accuracy of estimates depends on the skills of the people making the estimates. How 
familiar are they with the task they are estimating?
Project Structure and Organization 
Which project structure is chosen to manage the project will influence time and cost 
estimates. One of the major advantages of a dedicated project team discussed earlier is 
the speed gained from concentrated focus and localized project decisions. This speed 
comes at an additional cost of tying up personnel full time. Conversely, projects operat-
ing in a matrix environment may reduce costs by more efficiently sharing personnel 
across projects but may take longer to complete since attention is divided and coordi-
nation demands are higher.
Padding Estimates 
In some cases people are inclined to pad estimates. For example, if you are asked 
how long it takes you to drive to the airport, you might give an average time of 
30 minutes, assuming a 50/50 chance of getting there in 30 minutes. If you are 
asked the fastest you could possibly get there, you might reduce the driving time to 
20 minutes. Finally, if you are asked how long the drive would take if you abso-
lutely had to be there to meet with the president, it is likely you would increase the 
estimate to say 50 minutes to ensure not being late. In work situations where you are 
asked for time and cost estimates, most of us are inclined to add a little padding to 
increase the probability and reduce the risk of being late. If everyone at all levels of 
the project adds a little padding to reduce risk, the project duration and cost are seri-
ously overstated. This phenomenon causes some managers or owners to call for a 
10–15 percent cut in time and/or cost for the project. Of course the next time the 
game is played, the person estimating cost and/or time will pad the estimate to 
20 percent or more. Clearly such games defeat chances for realistic estimates, which 
is what is needed to be competitive.
Organization Culture 
Organization culture can significantly influence project estimates. In some organiza-
tions padding estimates is tolerated and even privately encouraged. Other organiza-
tions place a premium on accuracy and strongly discourage estimating gamesmanship. 
Organizations vary in the importance they attach to estimates. The prevailing belief in 
some organizations is that detailed estimating takes too much time and is not worth the 
effort or that it’s impossible to predict the future. Other organizations subscribe to the 
belief that accurate estimates are the bedrock of effective project management. Orga-
nization culture shapes every dimension of project management; estimating is not 
immune to this influence.
Other Factors 
Finally, nonproject factors can impact time and cost estimates. For example, equip-
ment down-time can alter time estimates. National holidays, vacations, and legal limits 
can influence project estimates. Project priority can influence resource assignment and 
impact time and cost.
www.ebook3000.com

132  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
 
Project estimating is a complex process. The quality of time and cost estimates can 
be improved when these variables are considered in making the estimates. Estimates of 
time and cost together allow the manager to develop a time-phased budget, which is 
imperative for project control. Before discussing macro and micro estimating methods 
for times and costs, a review of estimating guidelines will remind us of some of the 
important “rules of the game” that can improve estimating.
5.2 Estimating Guidelines for Times, Costs, and Resources
Managers recognize time, cost, and resource estimates must be accurate if project 
planning, scheduling, and controlling are to be effective. However, there is substan-
tial evidence suggesting poor estimates are a major contributor to projects that have 
failed. Therefore, every effort should be made to see that initial estimates are as 
accurate as possible since the choice of no estimates leaves a great deal to luck and 
is not palatable to serious project managers. Even though a project has never been 
done before, a manager can follow seven guidelines to develop useful work package 
estimates.
1. Responsibility. At the work package level, estimates should be made by the 
person(s) most familiar with the task. Draw on their expertise! Except for supertech-
nical tasks, those responsible for getting the job done on schedule and within budget 
are usually first-line supervisors or technicians who are experienced and familiar 
with the type of work involved. These people will not have some preconceived, 
imposed duration for a deliverable in mind. They will give an estimate based on 
experience and best judgment. A secondary benefit of using those responsible is the 
hope they will “buy in” to seeing that the estimate materializes when they imple-
ment the work package. If those involved are not consulted, it will be difficult to 
hold them responsible for failure to achieve the estimated time. Finally, drawing on 
the expertise of team members who will be responsible helps to build communica-
tion channels early.
2. Use several people to estimate. It is well known that a cost or time estimate usually 
has a better chance of being reasonable and realistic when several people with rel-
evant experience and/or knowledge of the task are used (sometimes called “crowd-
sourcing”). True, people bring different biases based on their experience. But dis-
cussion of the individual differences in their estimate leads to consensus and tends 
to eliminate extreme estimate errors.
3. Normal conditions. When task time, cost, and resource estimates are determined, 
they are based on certain assumptions. Estimates should be based on normal condi-
tions, efficient methods, and a normal level of resources. Normal conditions are 
sometimes difficult to discern, but it is necessary to have a consensus in the organi-
zation as to what normal conditions mean in this project. If the normal workday is 
eight hours, the time estimate should be based on an eight-hour day. Similarly, if the 
normal workday is two shifts, the time estimate should be based on a two-shift 
workday. Any time estimate should reflect efficient methods for the resources nor-
mally available. The time estimate should represent the normal level of resources—
people or equipment. For example, if three programmers are available for coding or 
two road graders are available for road construction, time and cost estimates should 
be based on these normal levels of resources unless it is anticipated the project will 
Describe guidelines for 
estimating time, costs, 
and resources.
5-2
LO

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  133
change what is currently viewed as “normal.” In addition, possible conflicts in 
demand for resources on parallel or concurrent activities should not be considered 
at this stage. The need for adding resources will be examined when resource sched-
uling is discussed in a later chapter.
4. Time units. Specific time units to use should be selected early in the development 
phase of the project network. All task time estimates need consistent time units. 
Estimates of time must consider whether normal time is represented by calendar 
days, workdays, workweeks, person days, single shift, hours, minutes, etc. In prac-
tice the use of workdays is the dominant choice for expressing task duration. How-
ever, in projects such as a heart transplant operation, minutes probably would be 
more appropriate as a time unit. One such project that used minutes as the time unit 
was the movement of patients from an old hospital to an elegant new one across 
town. Since there were several life-endangering moves, minutes were used to ensure 
patient safety so proper emergency life-support systems would be available if 
needed. The point is, network analysis requires a standard unit of time. When com-
puter programs allow more than one option, some notation should be made of any 
variance from the standard unit of time. If the standard unit of time is a five-day 
workweek and the estimated activity duration is in calendar days, it must be con-
verted to the normal workweek.
5. Independence. Estimators should treat each task as independent of other tasks 
that might be integrated by the WBS. Use of first-line managers usually results 
in considering tasks independently; this is good. Top managers are prone to 
aggregate many tasks into one time estimate and then deductively make the indi-
vidual task time estimates add to the total. If tasks are in a chain and performed 
by the same group or department, it is best not to ask for all the time estimates in 
the sequence at once to avoid the tendency for a planner or a supervisor to look 
at the whole path and try to adjust individual task times in the sequence to meet 
an arbitrary imposed schedule or some rough “guesstimate” of the total time for 
the whole path or segment of the project. This tendency does not reflect the 
uncertainties of individual activities and generally results in optimistic task 
time estimates. In summary, each task time estimate should be considered inde-
pendently of other activities.
6. Contingencies. Work package estimates should not include allowances for contin-
gencies. The estimate should assume normal or average conditions even though 
every work package will not materialize as planned. For this reason top manage-
ment needs to create an extra fund for contingencies that can be used to cover 
unforeseen events.
7. Adding risk assessment to the estimate helps to avoid surprises to stakeholders. 
It is obvious some tasks carry more time and cost risks than others. For example, a 
new technology usually carries more time and cost risks than a proven process. 
Simply identifying the degree of risk lets stakeholders consider alternative methods 
and alter process decisions. A simple breakdown by optimistic, most likely, and pes-
simistic for task time could provide valuable information regarding time and cost. 
See Chapter 7 for further discussion of project risk.
Where applicable, these guidelines will greatly help to avoid many of the pitfalls found 
so often in practice. See Snapshot from Practice 5.1: Reducing Estimating Errors for a 
similar set of guidelines.
www.ebook3000.com

134  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
5.3 Top-Down versus Bottom-Up Estimating
Since estimating efforts cost money, the time and detail devoted to estimating are 
important decisions. Yet, when estimating is considered, you as a project manager may 
hear statements such as these:
Rough order of magnitude is good enough. Spending time on detailed estimating 
wastes money.
Time is everything; our survival depends on getting there first! Time and cost 
accuracy is not an issue.
The project is internal. We don’t need to worry about cost.
The project is so small, we don’t need to bother with estimates. Just do it.
However, there are sound reasons for using top-down or bottom-up estimates. Table 5.1 
depicts conditions that suggest when one approach is preferred over another.
 
Top-down estimates usually are derived from someone who uses experience and/
or information to determine the project duration and total cost. However, these esti-
mates are sometimes made by top managers who have very little knowledge of the 
component activities used to complete the project. For example, a mayor of a major 
Describe the methods, 
uses, and advantages 
and disadvantages of 
top-down and bottom-up 
estimating methods.
5-3
LO
Complexity is the major source of esti-
mating error, says Kerry Willis, Project 
Management Sr. Director at the health-
care services organization Cigna, in 
Hartford, Connecticut. “Project manag-
ers cannot possibly be experts in all areas and therefore 
need to rely on the stakeholders for their expertise 
when estimating,” Willis notes. To minimize errors he 
recommends treating estimating as a living process and 
not a one-time event. 
 
He follows the same approach on all of his projects:
1. Identify all of the stakeholders based on the 
scope of the project and organizational history.
2. Involve the stakeholders when creating the 
 estimates. “You can’t hold people accountable for 
estimates they didn’t help create,” Willis says.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  5 .1
Reducing Estimating Errors*
3. Aggregate the estimates by comparing several 
models (resource based, parametric, etc.).
4. Manage the project against the estimates. This 
includes making adjustments based on changes in 
project scope.
5. Track projects closely using tools such as earned 
value to gauge progress toward estimates.
6. Track actual costs and time at a granular level to 
recalibrate the model for future projects.
“The initial estimate could be perfect, but if it is not 
managed, then the end result will be bad and people 
will point to the estimating process,” Wills argues.
* S. Swanson, “Estimating Errors,” PMNetwork, October 2011, 
pp. 62–66.
TABLE 5.1 
Conditions for 
Preferring Top-Down 
or Bottom-Up Time 
and Cost Estimates
Condition 
Top-Down Estimates 
Bottom-Up Estimates
Strategic decision making 
X 
Cost and time important 
 
X
High uncertainty 
X 
Internal, small project 
X 
Fixed-price contract 
 
X
Customer wants details 
 
X
Unstable scope 
X 

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  135
city making a speech noted that a new law building would be constructed at a cost of 
$23 million and would be ready for occupancy in two and one-half years. Although the 
mayor probably asked for an estimate from someone, the estimate could have come 
from a luncheon meeting with a local contractor who wrote an estimate (guesstimate) 
on a napkin. This is an extreme example, but in a relative sense this scenario is fre-
quently played out in practice. See Snapshot from Practice 5.2: Council Fumes, for 
another example of this. The question actually is, do these estimates represent low-
cost, efficient methods? Seldom. The fact that the estimate came from the top can 
influence people responsible to “do what it takes to make the estimate.”
 
If possible and practical, you want to push the estimating process down to the work 
package level for bottom-up estimates that establish low-cost, efficient methods. This 
process can take place after the project has been defined in detail. Good sense suggests 
project estimates should come from the people most knowledgeable about the estimate 
needed. The use of several people with relevant experience with the task can improve the 
time and cost estimate. The bottom-up approach at the work package level can serve as a 
check on cost elements in the WBS by rolling up the work packages and associated cost 
accounts to major deliverables. Similarly, resource requirements can be checked. Later, 
the time, resource, and cost estimates from the work packages can be consolidated into 
time-phased networks, resource schedules, and budgets that are used for control.
 
The bottom-up approach also provides the customer with an opportunity to compare 
the low-cost, efficient method approach with any imposed restrictions. For example, if 
the project completion duration is imposed at two years and your bottom-up analysis 
tells you the project will take two and one-half years, the client can now consider the 
trade-off of the low-cost method versus compressing the project to two years—or in 
Portland, Oregon’s, Willamette riverfront 
development has exploded with seven 
condominium towers and a new health 
sciences center under construction. 
The health science complex is to be 
linked with Oregon Health Sciences University (OHSU), 
which is high on a nearby hill, with an aerial cable tram.
 
The aerial tram linking the waterfront district to OHSU 
is to support the university expansion, to increase biotech-
nology research, and to become Portland’s icon equiva-
lent to Seattle’s Space Needle. All of the hype turned 
south when news from a hearing suggested that the real 
budget for the tram construction, originally estimated at 
$15 million, is going to be about $55–$60 million, more 
than triple the original estimate. The estimate could even 
go higher. 
 
Commissioners want to ﬁnd out why city staff 
knowingly relied on ﬂawed estimates. Mike Lindberg, 
president of the nonproﬁt Aerial Transportation Inc., 
acknowledged “the $15 million number was not a good 
number. It was simply a guesstimate.” Commissioner 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  5 . 2
Council Fumes as Tram  
Tale Unfolds*
© Spaces Images/Blend Images LLC
* The Oregonian, January 13, 2006, by Frank Ryan, pages A1 
and A14, and April 2, 2006, page A1.
Erik Sten said, “Those numbers were presented as 
much more ﬁrm than they appear to have been. . . . It 
appears the actual design wasn’t costed out. That’s 
pretty shoddy.”
www.ebook3000.com

136  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
rare cases canceling the project. Similar trade-offs can be compared for different levels 
of resources or increases in technical performance. The assumption is any movement 
away from the low-cost, efficient method will increase costs—e.g., overtime. The pre-
ferred approach in defining the project is to make rough top-down estimates, develop 
the WBS/OBS, make bottom-up estimates, develop schedules and budgets, and recon-
cile differences between top-down and bottom-up estimates. Hopefully, these steps 
will be done before final negotiation with either an internal or external customer. In 
conclusion, the ideal approach is for the project manager to allow enough time for both 
the top-down and bottom-up estimates to be worked out so a complete plan based on 
reliable estimates can be offered to the customer. In this way false expectations are 
minimized for all stakeholders and negotiation is reduced.
5.4 Methods for Estimating Project Times and Costs
Top-Down Approaches for Estimating Project Times and Costs
At the strategic level top-down estimating methods are used to evaluate the project 
proposal. Sometimes much of the information needed to derive accurate time and cost 
estimates is not available in the initial phase of the project—for example, design is not 
finalized. In these situations top-down estimates are used until the tasks in the WBS 
are clearly defined.
Consensus Methods 
This method simply uses the pooled experience of senior and/or middle managers to 
estimate the total project duration and cost. This typically involves a meeting where 
experts discuss, argue, and ultimately reach a decision as to their best guess estimate. 
Firms seeking greater rigor will use the Delphi Method to make these macro estimates. 
See Snapshot from Practice 5.3: The Delphi Method.
Originally developed by the RAND 
Corporation in 1969 for technological 
forecasting, the Delphi Method is a 
group decision process about the like-
lihood that certain events will occur. 
The Delphi Method makes use of a panel of experts 
familiar with the kind of project in question. The notion 
is that well-informed individuals, calling on their 
insights and experience, are better equipped to esti-
mate project costs/times than theoretical approaches 
or statistical methods. Their responses to estimate 
questionnaires are anonymous, and they are provided 
with a summary of opinions.
 
Experts are then encouraged to reconsider, and if 
appropriate, to change their previous estimate in light 
of the replies of other experts. After two or three rounds 
it is believed that the group will converge toward the 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  5 . 3
The Delphi Method
“best” response through this consensus process. The 
midpoint of responses is statistically categorized by the 
median score. In each succeeding round of question-
naires, the range of responses by the panelists will pre-
sumably decrease and the median will move toward 
what is deemed to be the “correct” estimate.
 
One distinct advantage of the Delphi Method is that 
the experts never need to be brought together physi-
cally. The process also does not require complete 
agreement by all panelists, since the majority opinion is 
represented by the median. Since the responses are 
anonymous, the pitfalls of ego, domineering personali-
ties, and the “bandwagon or halo effect” in responses 
are all avoided. On the other hand, future develop-
ments are not always predicted correctly by iterative 
consensus nor by experts, but at times by creative, “off 
the wall” thinking.

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  137
 
It is important to recognize that these first top-down estimates are only a rough cut 
and typically occur in the “conceptual” stage of the project. The top-down estimates 
are helpful in initial development of a complete plan. However, such estimates are 
sometimes significantly off the mark because little detailed information is gathered. At 
this level individual work items are not identified. Or, in a few cases, the top-down 
estimates are not realistic because top management “wants the project.” Nevertheless, 
the initial top-down estimates are helpful in determining whether the project warrants 
more formal planning, which would include more detailed estimates. Be careful that 
macro estimates made by senior managers are not dictated to lower level managers 
who might feel compelled to accept the estimates even if they believe resources are 
inadequate.
 
Although your authors prefer to avoid the top-down approach if possible, we have 
witnessed surprising accuracy in estimating project duration and cost in isolated cases. 
Some examples are building a manufacturing plant, building a distribution warehouse, 
developing air control for skyscraper buildings, and road construction. However, we 
have also witnessed some horrendous miscalculations, usually in areas where the tech-
nology is new and unproven. Top-down methods can be useful if experience and judg-
ment have been accurate in the past.
Ratio Methods 
Top-down methods (sometimes called parametric) usually use ratios, or surrogates, to 
estimate project times or costs. Top-down approaches are often used in the concept or 
“need” phase of a project to get an initial duration and cost estimate for the project. For 
example, contractors frequently use number of square feet to estimate the cost and time 
to build a house; that is, a house of 2,700 square feet might cost $160 per square foot 
(2,700 feet × $160 per foot equals $432,000). Likewise, knowing the square feet and 
dollars per square foot, experience suggests it should take approximately 100 days to 
complete. Two other common examples of top-down cost estimates are the cost for a 
new plant estimated by capacity size, or a software product estimated by features and 
complexity.
Apportion Methods 
This method is an extension to the ratio method. Apportionment is used when proj-
ects closely follow past projects in features and costs. Given good historical data, 
estimates can be made quickly with little effort and reasonable accuracy. This method 
is very common in projects that are relatively standard but have some small variation 
or customization.
 
Anyone who has borrowed money from a bank to build a house has been exposed to 
this process. Given an estimated total cost for the house, banks and the FHA (Federal 
Housing Authority) authorize pay to the contractor by completion of specific segments 
of the house. For example, foundation might represent 3 percent of the total loan, fram-
ing 25 percent, plumbing and heating 15 percent, etc. Payments are made as these 
items are completed. An analogous process is used by some companies that apportion 
costs to deliverables in the WBS—given average cost percentages from past projects. 
Figure 5.1 presents an example similar to one found in practice. Assuming the total 
project cost is estimated, using a top-down estimate, to be $500,000, the costs are 
apportioned as a percentage of the total cost. For example, the costs apportioned to the 
“Document” deliverable are 5 percent of the total, or $25,000. The subdeliverables 
“Doc-1 and Doc-2” are allocated 2 and 3 percent of the total—$10,000 and $15,000, 
respectively.
www.ebook3000.com

138  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
Function Point Methods for Software and System Projects 
In the software industry, software development projects are frequently estimated using 
weighted macro variables called “function points” or major parameters such as num-
ber of inputs, number of outputs, number of inquiries, number of data files, and num-
ber of interfaces. These weighted variables are adjusted for a complexity factor and 
added. The total adjusted count provides the basis for estimating the labor effort and 
cost for a project (usually using a regression formula derived from data of past proj-
ects). This latter method assumes adequate historical data by type of software project 
for the industry—for example, MIS systems. In the U.S. software industry, one person-
month represents on average five function points. A person working one month can 
generate on average (across all types of software projects) about five function points. 
Of course each organization needs to develop its own average for its specific type of 
work. Such historical data provide a basis for estimating the project duration. Varia-
tions of this top-down approach are used by companies such as IBM, Bank of America, 
Sears Roebuck, HP, AT&T, Ford Motors, GE, DuPont, and many others. See Table 5.2 
and Table 5.3 for a simplified example of function point count methodology.
 
From historical data the organization developed the weighting scheme for complex-
ity found in Table 5.2. Function points are derived from multiplying the number of 
kinds of elements by weighted complexity.
Total project cost
$500,000
Design
20%
100,000
D-1
10%
50,000
D-2
10%
50,000
Program
30%
150,000
Test
40%
200,000
Document
5%
25,000
Produce CD
5%
25,000
Doc-1
2%
10,000
Doc-2
3%
15,000
CD-1
5%
25,000
P-1
20%
100,000
P-2
5%
25,000
P-3
5%
25,000
T-1
10%
50,000
T-2
10%
50,000
T-3
20%
100,000
FIGURE 5.1 Apportion Method of Allocating Project Costs Using the Work Breakdown Structure
TABLE 5.2
Simplified Basic 
Function Point Count 
Process for a 
Prospective Project 
or Deliverable
 
Complexity Weighting
Element 
Low 
Average 
High 
Total
Number of inputs 
_____ × 2 + 
_____ ×  3 + 
_____ ×  4 
= _____
Number of outputs 
_____ × 3 + 
_____ ×  6 + 
_____ ×  9 
= _____
Number of inquiries 
_____ × 2 + 
_____ ×  4 + 
_____ ×  6 
= _____
Number of ﬁles 
_____ × 5 + 
_____ ×  8 + 
_____ × 12 
= _____
Number of interfaces 
_____ × 5 + 
_____ × 10 + 
_____ × 15 
= _____

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  139
 
Table 5.3 shows the data collected for a specific task or deliverable: Patient Admit-
ting and Billing—the number of inputs, outputs, inquiries, files, and interfaces along 
with the expected complexity rating. Finally, the application of the element count is 
applied and the function point count total is 660. Given this count and the fact that one 
person-month has historically been equal to 5 function points, the job will require 132 
person-months (660/5 = 132). Assuming you have 10 programmers who can work on 
this task, the duration would be approximately 13 months. The cost is easily derived by 
multiplying the labor rate per month times 132 person-months. For example, if the 
monthly programmer rate is $4,000, then the estimated cost would be $528,000 (132 × 
4,000). Although function point metrics are useful, their accuracy depends on adequate 
historical data, currency of data, and relevancy of the project/deliverable to past 
averages.
Learning Curves 
Some projects require that the same task, group of tasks, or product be repeated several 
times. Managers know intuitively that the time to perform a task improves with repeti-
tion. This phenomenon is especially true of tasks that are labor intensive. In these cir-
cumstances the pattern of improvement phenomenon can be used to predict the reduc-
tion in time to perform the task. From empirical evidence across all industries, the 
pattern of this improvement has been quantified in the learning curve (also known as 
improvement curve, experience curve, and industrial progress curve), which is 
described by the following relationship:
Each time the output quantity doubles, the unit labor hours are reduced at a constant rate.
In practice the improvement ratio may vary from 60 percent, representing very large 
improvement, to 100 percent, representing no improvement at all. Generally, as the 
difficulty of the work decreases the expected improvement also decreases and the 
improvement ratio that is used becomes greater. One significant factor to consider is 
the proportion of labor in the task in relation to machine-paced work. Obviously, a 
lower percentage of improvement can occur only in operations with high labor content. 
Appendix 5.1 at the end of the chapter provides a detailed example of how the improve-
ment phenomenon can be used to estimate time and cost for repetitive tasks.
TABLE 5.3
Example: Function 
Point Count Method
 
Software Project 13: Patient Admitting and Billing
15 
Inputs 
Rated complexity as low 
(2)
 5 
Outputs 
Rated complexity as average 
(6)
10 
Inquiries 
Rated complexity as average 
(4)
30 
Files 
Rated complexity as high 
##(12)
20 
Interfaces 
Rated complexity as average 
#(10)
 
Application of Complexity Factor
Element 
Count 
Low 
Average 
High 
Total
Inputs 
####15 
× 2 
 
 
=  30
Outputs 
 5 
 
×  6 
 
=  30
Inquiries 
###10 
 
×  4 
 
=  40
Files 
30 
 
 
× 12 
= 360
Interfaces 
20 
 
× 10 
 
= 200
 
 
 
 
Total 
660
www.ebook3000.com

140  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
 
The main disadvantage of top-down approaches to estimating is simply that the time 
and cost for a specific task are not considered. Grouping many tasks into a common 
basket encourages errors of omission and the use of imposed times and costs.
 
Micro estimating methods are usually more accurate than macro methods.
Bottom-Up Approaches for Estimating Project Times and Costs
Template Methods 
If the project is similar to past projects, the costs from past projects can be used as a 
starting point for the new project. Differences in the new project can be noted and past 
times and costs adjusted to reflect these differences. For example, a ship repair dry-
dock firm has a set of standard repair projects (i.e., templates for overhaul, electrical, 
mechanical) that are used as starting points for estimating the cost and duration of any 
new project. Differences from the appropriate standardized project are noted (for times, 
costs, and resources) and changes are made. This approach enables the firm to develop 
a potential schedule, estimate costs, and develop a budget in a very short time span. 
Development of such templates in a database can quickly reduce estimate errors.
Parametric Procedures Applied to Specific Tasks 
Just as parametric techniques such as cost per square foot can be the source of top-
down estimates, the same technique can be applied to specific tasks. For example, as 
part of an MS Office conversion project, 36 different computer workstations needed to 
be converted. Based on past conversion projects, the project manager determined that 
on average one person could convert three workstations per day. Therefore the task of 
converting the 36 workstations would take three technicians four days [(36/3)/3]. Simi-
larly, to estimate the wallpapering allowance on a house remodel, the contractor fig-
ured a cost of $5 per square yard of wallpaper and $2 per yard to install it, for a total 
cost of $7. By measuring the length and height of all the walls she was able to calculate 
the total area in square yards and multiply it by $7.
Range Estimating 
When do you use range estimating? Range estimating works best when work packages 
have significant uncertainty associated with the time or cost to complete. If the work pack-
age is routine and carries little uncertainty, using a person most familiar with the work 
package is usually the best approach. She is likely to know best how to estimate work 
packages durations and costs. However, when work packages have significant uncertainty 
associated with the time or cost to complete, it is a prudent policy to require three time 
estimates—low, average, and high (borrowed from PERT methodology that uses proba-
bility distributions). The low to high give a range within which the average estimate will 
fall. Determining the low and high estimates for the activity is influenced by factors such 
as complexity, technology, newness, familiarity.
 
How do you get the estimates? Since range estimating works best for work packages 
that have significant uncertainty, having a group determine the low, average, and high cost 
or duration gives best results. Group estimating tends to refine extremes by bringing more 
evaluative judgments to the estimate and potential risks. The judgment of others in a 
group helps to moderate extreme perceived risks associated with a time or cost  estimate. 
Involving others in making activity estimates gains buy-in and credibility to the estimate.
 
Figure 5.2 presents an abridged estimating template using three time estimates for 
work packages developed by a cross functional group(s) of project stakeholders. The 
group estimates show the low, average, and high for each work package. The Risk 

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  141
Level column is the group’s independent assessment of the degree of confidence that 
the actual time will be very close to the estimate. In a sense this number represents the 
group’s evaluation of many factors (e.g., complexity, technology) that might impact 
the average time estimate. In our example, the group feels work packages 104, 108, 
110, 111, and 114 have a high chance that the average time may vary from expected. 
Likewise, the group’s confidence feels the risk of work packages 102, 105, and 112 not 
materializing as expected is low.
 
How do you use the estimate? Group range estimating gives the project manager and 
owner an opportunity to assess the confidence associated with project times (and/or 
costs). For example, a contractor responsible for building a high rise apartment building 
can tell the owner that the project will cost between 3.5 and 4.1 million dollars and take 
between six and nine months to complete. The approach helps to reduce surprises as the 
project progresses. The range estimating method also provides a basis for assessing risk, 
managing resources, and determining the project contingency fund. (See Chapter 7 for 
a discussion of contingency funds.) Range estimating is popular in software and new 
product projects where up-front requirements are fuzzy and not well known. Group 
range estimating is often used with phase estimating, which is discussed next.
A Hybrid: Phase Estimating
This approach begins with a top-down estimate for the project and then refines esti-
mates for phases of the project as it is implemented. Some projects by their nature 
cannot be rigorously defined because of the uncertainty of design or the final product. 
Although rare, such projects do exist. These projects are often found in aerospace proj-
ects, IT projects, new technology projects, and construction projects where design is 
incomplete. In these projects, phase or life-cycle estimating is frequently used.
 
Phase estimating is used when an unusual amount of uncertainty surrounds a proj-
ect and it is impractical to estimate times and costs for the entire project. Phase estimat-
ing uses a two-estimate system over the life of the project. A detailed estimate is 
developed for the immediate phase and a macro estimate is made for the remaining 
phases of the project. Figure 5.3 depicts the phases of a project and the progression of 
estimates over its life.
FIGURE 5.2
Range Estimating 
Template 
www.ebook3000.com

142  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
 
For example, when the project need is determined, a macro estimate of the project 
cost and duration is made so analysis and decisions can be made. Simultaneously a 
detailed estimate is made for deriving project specifications and a macro estimate for 
the remainder of the project. As the project progresses and specifications are solidi-
fied, a detailed estimate for design is made and a macro estimate for the remainder of 
the project is computed. Clearly, as the project progresses through its life cycle and 
more information is available, the reliability of the estimates should be improving. See 
Snapshot from Practice 5.4: Estimate Accuracy.
 
Phase estimating is preferred by those working on projects where the final product is 
not known and the uncertainty is very large—for example, the integration of wireless 
phones and computers. The commitment to cost and schedule is only necessary over the 
next phase of the project and commitment to unrealistic future schedules and costs based 
on poor information is avoided. This progressive macro/micro method provides a stron-
ger basis for using schedule and cost estimates to manage progress during the next phase.
FIGURE 5.3
Phase Estimating 
over Project Life 
Cycle 
Phase
1
Need
1
Speciﬁcations
2
Detailed
estimate
Design
3
Produce
4
Deliver
5
Detailed
estimate
Detailed
estimate
Detailed
estimate
2
3
4
5
Macro estimate
Macro estimate
Macro estimate
Macro estimate
The smaller the element of a work 
package, the more accurate the over-
all estimate is likely to be. The extent 
of this improvement varies by type of 
project. The table below is developed 
to reﬂect this observation. For example, information 
technology projects that determine their time and cost 
estimates in the conceptual stage can expect their 
“actuals” to err up to 200 percent over cost and 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  5 . 4
Estimate Accuracy
duration and, perhaps, as much as 30 percent under 
estimates. Conversely, estimates for buildings, roads, 
etc., made after the work packages are clearly deﬁned, 
have a smaller error in actual costs and times of 15 per-
cent over estimate and 5 percent less than estimate. 
Although these estimates vary by project, they can 
serve as ballpark numbers for project stakeholders 
selecting how project time and cost estimates will be 
derived.
Time and Cost Estimate Accuracy by Type of Project
 
Bricks and Mortar 
Information Technology
Conceptual stage 
+60% to −30% 
+200% to −30%
Deliverables deﬁned 
+30% to − 15% 
+ 100% to − 15%
Work packages deﬁned 
+ 15% to − 5% 
+ 50% to − 5%

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  143
 
Unfortunately your customer—internal or external—will want an accurate estimate 
of schedule and cost the moment the decision is made to implement the project. Addi-
tionally, the customer who is paying for the project often perceives phase estimating as 
a blank check because costs and schedules are not firm over most of the project life 
cycle. Even though the reasons for phase estimating are sound and legitimate, most 
customers have to be sold on its legitimacy. A major advantage for the customer is the 
opportunity to change features, re-evaluate, or even cancel the project in each new 
phase. In conclusion, phase estimating is very useful in projects that possess huge 
uncertainties concerning the final nature (shape, size, features) of the project.
 
See Figure 5.4 for a summary of the differences between top-down and bottom-up 
estimates.
 
Obtaining accurate estimates is a challenge. Committed organizations accept the 
challenge of coming up with meaningful estimates and invest heavily in developing 
their capacity to do so. Accurate estimates reduce uncertainty and support a discipline 
for effectively managing projects.
5.5 Level of Detail
Level of detail is different for different levels of management. At any level the detail 
should be no more than is necessary and sufficient. Top management interests 
 usually center on the total project and major milestone events that mark major 
accomplishments—e.g., “Build Oil Platform in the North Sea” or “Complete Proto-
type.” Middle management might center on one segment of the project or one mile-
stone. First-line managers’ interests may be limited to one task or work package. One 
of the beauties of WBS is the ability to aggregate network information so each level 
of management can have the kind of information necessary to make decisions.
 
Getting the level of detail in the WBS to match management needs for effective 
implementation is crucial, but the delicate balance is difficult to find. See Snapshot 
from Practice 5.5: Level of Detail. The level of detail in the WBS varies with the 
Top-Down
Estimates
Bottom-Up
Estimates
Intended Use
Feasibility/conceptual phase
Rough time/cost estimate
Fund requirements
Resource capacity planning
Intended Use
Budgeting
Scheduling
Resource requirements
Fund timing
Preparation Cost
1/10 to 3/10
of a percent
of total project cost
Preparation Cost
3/10 of a percent
to 1.0 percent
of total project cost
Accuracy
Minus 20%,
to plus 60%
Accuracy
Minus 10%,
to plus 30%
Method
Consensus
Ratio
Apportion
Function point
Learning curves
Method
Template
Parametric
WBS packages
Range estimates
FIGURE 5.4 
Top-Down and 
Bottom-Up Estimates 
www.ebook3000.com

144  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
complexity of the project; the need for control; the project size, cost, duration; and 
other factors. If the structure reflects excessive detail, there is a tendency to break the 
work effort into department assignments. This tendency can become a barrier to suc-
cess, since the emphasis will be on departmental outcomes rather than on deliverable 
outcomes. Excessive detail also means more unproductive paperwork. Note that if the 
level of the WBS is increased by one, the number of cost accounts may increase geo-
metrically. On the other hand, if the level of detail is not adequate, an organization unit 
may find the structure falls short of meeting its needs. Fortunately, the WBS has built-
in flexibility. Participating organization units may expand their portion of the structure 
to meet their special needs. For example, the engineering department may wish to 
further break their work on a deliverable into smaller packages by electrical, civil, and 
mechanical. Similarly, the marketing department may wish to break their new product 
promotion into TV, radio, periodicals, and newspapers.
5.6 Types of Costs
Assuming work packages are defined, detailed cost estimates can be made. Here are 
typical kinds of costs found in a project:
1. Direct costs
a. Labor 
c. Equipment
b. Materials 
d. Other
2. Direct project overhead costs
3. General and administrative (G&A) overhead costs
Distinguish different 
kinds of costs associated 
with a project.
5-4
LO
Practicing project managers advocate 
keeping the level of detail to a mini-
mum. But there are limits to this sug-
gestion. One of the most frequent 
errors of new project managers is to 
forget that the task time estimate will be used to control 
schedule and cost performance. A frequent rule of 
thumb used by practicing project managers says that a 
task duration should not exceed 5 workdays or at the 
most 10 workdays, if workdays are the time units used 
for the project. Such a rule probably will result in a more 
detailed network, but the additional detail pays off in 
controlling schedule and cost as the project progresses.
 
Suppose the task is “build prototype computer-
controlled conveyor belt,” the time estimate is 40 work-
days, and the budget $300,000. It may be better to 
divide the task into seven or eight smaller tasks for 
control purposes. If one of the smaller tasks gets 
behind because of problems or a poor time estimate, it 
will be possible to take corrective action quickly and 
avoid delaying successive tasks and the project. If the 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  5 . 5
Level of Detail—Rule of Thumb
single task of 40 workdays is used, it is possible that no 
corrective action would be taken until day 40, since 
many people have a tendency to “wait and see” or 
avoid admitting they are behind or passing on bad 
news; the result may mean far more than 5 days behind 
schedule.
 
The 5- to 10-day rule of thumb applies to cost and 
performance goals. If using the rule of thumb sug-
gested above results in too many network tasks, an 
alternative is available, but it has conditions. The activ-
ity time can be extended beyond the 5- to 10-day rule 
only IF control monitoring checkpoints for segments of 
the task can be established so clear measures of prog-
ress can be identiﬁed by a speciﬁc percent complete.
 
This information is invaluable to the control process 
of measuring schedule and cost performance—for 
example, payments for contract work are paid on “per-
cent complete” basis. Deﬁning a task with clear deﬁn-
able start and end points and intermediate points 
enhances the chances of early detection of problems, 
corrective action, and on-time project completion.

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  145
The total project cost estimate is broken down in this fashion to sharpen the control 
process and improve decision making.
Direct Costs 
These costs are clearly chargeable to a specific work package. Direct costs can be 
influenced by the project manager, project team, and individuals implementing the 
work package. These costs represent real cash outflows and must be paid as the project 
progresses; therefore, direct costs are usually separated from overhead costs. Lower-
level project rollups frequently include only direct costs.
Direct Project Overhead Costs 
Direct overhead rates more closely pinpoint which resources of the organization are 
being used in the project. Direct project overhead costs can be tied to project deliver-
ables or work packages. Examples include the salary of the project manager and tem-
porary rental space for the project team. Although overhead is not an immediate out-
of-pocket expense, it is real and must be covered in the long run if the firm is to remain 
viable. These rates are usually a ratio of the dollar value of the resources used—e.g., 
direct labor, materials, equipment. For example, a direct labor burden rate of 20 per-
cent would add a direct overhead charge of 20 percent to the direct labor cost estimate. 
A direct charge rate of 50 percent for materials would carry an additional 50 percent 
charge to the material cost estimate. Selective direct overhead charges provide a more 
accurate project (job or work package) cost, rather than using a blanket overhead rate 
for the whole project.
General and Administrative (G&A) Overhead Costs 
These represent organization costs that are not directly linked to a specific project. 
These costs are carried for the duration of the project. Examples include organization 
costs across all products and projects such as advertising, accounting, and senior man-
agement above the project level. Allocation of G&A costs varies from organization to 
organization. However, G&A costs are usually allocated as a percent of total direct 
cost, or a percent of the total of a specific direct cost such as labor, materials, or 
equipment.
 
Given the totals of direct and overhead costs for individual work packages, it is pos-
sible to cumulate the costs for any deliverable or for the entire project. A percentage 
can be added for profit if you are a contractor. A breakdown of costs for a proposed 
contract bid is presented in Figure 5.5.
 
Perceptions of costs and budgets vary depending on their users. The project manager 
must be very aware of these differences when setting up the project budget and when 
communicating these differences to others. Figure 5.6 depicts these different 
FIGURE 5.5
Contract Bid 
Summary Costs
Direct costs 
$80,000
Direct overhead 
 ###$20,000
Total direct costs 
$100,000
G&A overhead (20%) 
 ###$20,000
Total costs 
$120,000
Proﬁt (20%) 
 ###$24,000
 Total bid 
$144,000
www.ebook3000.com

146  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
perceptions. The project manager can commit costs months before the resource is used. 
This information is useful to the financial officer of the organization in forecasting future 
cash outflows. The project manager is interested in when the budgeted cost is expected 
to occur, and when the budgeted cost actually is charged (earned); the respective timings 
of these two cost figures are used to measure project schedule and cost variances.
5.7 Reﬁning Estimates
As described earlier in Chapter 4, detailed work package estimates are aggregated and 
“rolled up” by deliverable to estimate the total direct cost of the project. Similarly, esti-
mated durations are entered into the project network to establish the project schedule and 
determine the overall duration of the project. Experience tells us that for many projects 
the total estimates do not materialize and the actual costs and schedule of some projects 
significantly exceed original work package–based estimates. In order to compensate for 
the problem of actual cost and schedule exceeding estimates, some project managers 
adjust total costs by some multiplier (i.e., total estimated costs × 1.20).
 
The practice of adjusting original estimates by 20 percent or even 100 percent begs 
the question of why, after investing so much time and energy on detailed estimates, the 
numbers could be so far off. There are a number of reasons for this, most of which can 
be traced to the estimating process and the inherent uncertainty of predicting the 
future. Some of these reasons are discussed below.
∙ Interaction costs are hidden in estimates. According to the guidelines, each task 
estimate is supposed to be done independently. However, tasks are rarely completed 
in a vacuum. Work on one task is dependent upon prior tasks, and the hand-offs 
between tasks require time and attention. For example, people working on prototype 
development need to interact with design engineers after the design is completed, 
whether to simply ask clarifying questions or to make adjustments in the original 
design. Similarly, the time necessary to coordinate activities is typically not reflected 
in independent estimates. Coordination is reflected in meetings and briefings as 
Committed
Actual cost
Scheduled budget
$6,000
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
Project duration
Costs
FIGURE 5.6 
Three Views of Cost 

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  147
well as time necessary to resolve disconnects between tasks. Time, and therefore 
cost, devoted to managing interactions rises exponentially as the number of people 
and different disciplines involved increases on a project.
∙ Normal conditions do not apply. Estimates are supposed to be based on normal 
conditions. While this is a good starting point, it rarely holds true in real life. This is 
especially true when it comes to the availability of resources. Resource shortages, 
whether in the form of people, equipment, or materials, can extend original estimates. 
For example, under normal conditions four bulldozers are typically used to clear a 
certain site size in five days, but the availability of only three bulldozers would extend 
the task duration to eight days. Similarly, the decision to outsource certain tasks can 
increase costs as well as extend task durations since time is added to acclimating out-
siders to the particulars of the project and the culture of the organization.
∙ Things go wrong on projects. Design flaws are revealed after the fact, extreme 
weather conditions occur, accidents happen, and so forth. Although you shouldn’t 
plan for these risks to happen when estimating a particular task, the likelihood and 
impact of such events need to be considered.
∙ Changes in project scope and plans. As one gets further and further into the proj-
ect, a manager obtains a better understanding of what needs to be done to accom-
plish the project. This may lead to major changes in project plans and costs. Like-
wise, if the project is a commercial project, changes often have to be made midstream 
to respond to new demands by the customer and/or competition. Unstable project 
scopes are a major source of cost overruns. While every effort should be made up 
front to nail down the project scope, it is becoming increasingly difficult to do so in 
our rapidly changing world.
∙ Overly optimistic. There is solid research indicating that there is a tendency in 
people to overestimate how quickly they can get things done and underestimate how 
long it will take them to complete tasks (Lovallo, D., and D. Kahneman, 2003; 
Buehler, R., D. Griffin, and M. Ross, 1994).
∙ Strategic misrepresentation. There is growing evidence that some project promot-
ers underestimate the costs of projects and overestimate project benefits in order to 
win approval. This appears to be particularly true for large-scale public works proj-
ects which have a notorious habit of coming in way over budget (remember the 
earlier Snapshot from Practice 5.2: Council Fumes).
 
The reality is that for many projects not all of the information needed to make accu-
rate estimates is available, and it is impossible to predict the future. The challenge is 
further compounded by human nature and the political dynamics associated with gain-
ing project approval. The dilemma is that without solid estimates, the credibility of the 
project plan is eroded. Deadlines become meaningless, budgets become rubbery, and 
accountability becomes problematic.
 
Challenges similar to those described above will influence the final time and cost 
estimates. Even with the best estimating efforts, it may be necessary to revise estimates 
based on relevant information prior to establishing a baseline schedule and budget.
 
Effective organizations adjust estimates of specific tasks once risks, resources, and 
particulars of the situation have been more clearly defined. They recognize that the rolled-
up estimates generated from a detailed estimate based on the WBS are just the starting 
point. As they delve further into the project-planning process, they make appropriate revi-
sions both in the time and cost of specific activities. They factor the final assignment of 
resources into the project budget and schedule. For example, when they realize that only 
www.ebook3000.com

148  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
three instead of four bulldozers are available to clear a site, they adjust both the time and 
cost of that activity. They adjust estimates to account for specific actions to mitigate poten-
tial risks on the project. For example, to reduce the chances of design code errors, they 
would add the cost of independent testers to the schedule and budget. Finally, organizations 
adjust estimates to take into account abnormal conditions. For example, if soil samples 
reveal excessive ground water, then they adjust foundation costs and times.
 
There will always be some mistakes, omissions, and adjustments that will require addi-
tional changes in estimates. Fortunately every project should have a change management 
system in place to accommodate these situations and any impact on the project baseline. 
Change management and contingency funds will be discussed later in Chapter 7.
5.8 Creating a Database for Estimating
The best way to improve estimates is to collect and archive data on past project esti-
mates and actuals. Saving historical data—estimates and actuals—provides a knowl-
edge base for improving project time and cost estimating. Creating an estimating data-
base is a “best practice” among leading project management organizations.
 
Some organizations have large estimating departments of professional estimators—
e.g., Boeing, IBM—that have developed large time and cost databases. Others collect 
these data through the project office. This database approach allows the project estima-
tor to select a specific work package item from the database for inclusion. The estima-
tor then makes any necessary adjustments concerning the materials, labor, and equip-
ment. Of course any items not found in the database can be added to the project—and 
ultimately to the database if desired. Again, the quality of the database estimates 
depends on the experience of the estimators, but over time the data quality should 
improve. Such structured databases serve as feedback for estimators and as bench-
marks for cost and time for each project. In addition, comparison of estimate and actual 
for different projects can suggest the degree of risk inherent in estimates. See Figure 5.7 
for the structure of a database similar to those found in practice.
Suggest a scheme for 
developing an estimating 
database for future 
projects.
5-5
LO
FIGURE 5.7 
Estimating Database 
Templates 
Estimating
database
Operation
processes
Risk
analysis
Documentation
Hardware
MIS
EXAMPLE
1. Estimated & actuals on
       A. Labor
       B. Materials
       C. Equipment
2. Benchmarking ratios
3. Code of accounts
Product
production
Programming

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  149
5.9 Mega Projects: A Special Case
Mega projects are large-scale, complex ventures that typically cost $1 billion or more, 
take many years to complete, and involve multiple private and public stakeholders. 
They are often transformational, and impact millions of people (Flyvbjerg, 2014). 
Examples include high-speed rail lines, airports, healthcare reform, the Olympics, 
development of new aircraft, and so forth. What do these projects have in common 
beyond scope and complexity? They all tend to go way over budget and fall behind 
schedule. For example, the new Denver airport that opened in 1995 had cost overrun 
of 200 percent and was completed two years later than planned. The “Chunnel,” the 
31-mile-plus tunnel that connects France with England, was 80 percent over budget. 
These are but two examples of many public works and other large-scale projects in 
which costs came in way over than planned. In a study of government infrastructure 
projects, Flyvbjerg found costs for bridges and tunnels, road, and rail to be underesti-
mated 34 percent, 20 percent, and 45 percent, respectively, from baseline estimates 
(Flyvbjerg, Bruzelius, and Rothengatter, 2003)!
 
Mega projects often involve a double whammy. Not only did they cost much more 
than expected, but they underdelivered on benefits they were to provide. The Denver 
Airport realized only 55 percent of forecasted traffic during its first year of operation. 
The Chunnel traffic revenues have been one-half of what was predicted with internal 
rate of return of −14.5 percent! Again Flyvbjerg’s study revealed a consistent pattern 
of underusage on most infrastructure projects (Flyvbjerg et al., 2003), including only a 
5 percent forecasted usage for the Kolkata metro!
 
So why does there appear to be a consistent pattern of overestimating benefits and 
underestimating costs? Many argue the sheer complexity and long time horizon make 
it impossible to accurately estimate costs and benefits. While this is certainly true, 
Flyvbjerg and his colleagues’ research suggests that other factors come in to play. They 
concluded that in most cases project promoters use deception to promote projects not 
for public good but for personal gain, political or economic. Deception may be delib-
erate, or may be the product of overzealousness, optimism, and ignorance (Flyvbjerg 
et al., 2003). In some cases, promoters rationalize that nothing great would ever get 
built if people knew in advance what the real costs and challenges involved were 
(Hirschman, 1967).
 
On some mega projects, there is a triple whammy. Not only are they over budget and 
under value, but the cost of maintaining them exceeds the benefits received. These 
kinds of projects are called white elephants.
 
A “white elephant” suggests a valuable, but burdensome, possession which the 
owner cannot easily dispose of and whose cost (particularly upkeep) is out of propor-
tion with its usefulness. The term derives from the story that the Kings of Siam (now 
Thailand) would often make a present of a white elephant to courtiers who had fallen 
out of favor with the king. At first glance, it was a great honor to receive such a revered 
beast from the king. However, the true intent was to ruin the recipient by forcing him 
to absorb the costs of taking care of the animal.
 
Examples of white elephants abound. While traveling across southern China one of the 
authors was struck by the palatial stature of the Trade Expo buildings each city had. It was 
as if each city tried to outdo its neighbor in terms of grandeur. When asked how often they 
were used, city officials would say once or twice a year. The 2015 FIFA scandal brought 
attention to the hidden costs of hosting the World Cup. South Africa built six new world 
class stadiums for the 2010 competition. None of the post-World Cup revenue generated 
from these stadiums exceeds their maintenance cost (Molloy and Chetty, 2015).
Understand the chal-
lenge of estimating 
mega projects and 
describe steps that lead 
to better informed 
decisions.
5-6
LO
Deﬁne a “white ele-
phant” in project man-
agement and provide 
examples.
5-7
LO
www.ebook3000.com

150  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
 
White elephants are not limited to buildings and stadiums. Air France had to moth-
ball the Concorde, the world’s fastest commercial airline, because maintenance costs 
and noise restrictions did not justify a three-flights-a-week schedule. It is not uncom-
mon in our personal lives to acquire white elephants, such as underutilized vacation 
homes or yachts.
 
Flyvbjerg and others argue that cost overrun is not the price of doing big things and 
that we are capable of making better informed decisions on mega projects. The first step 
is to assume there is optimism bias and even deception on the part of promoters. Propos-
als should require a thorough review by impartial observers who do not have vested inter-
est in the project. Some if not all financial risk should be absorbed by promoters and 
those who benefit financially from the project. Sustainable business practices should be 
used and maintenance costs be integrated into the forecasted cost/benefit analyses of 
projects. See Snapshot from Practice 5.6: London 2012 Olympics to see how British 
organizers tried to avoid the curse of the white elephant in the 2012 Olympic games.
Once hosting the Olympics was consid-
ered the crown prize and a tremendous 
source of national and local pride. 
Seven cities competed to host the 1992 
Winter Olympics. For the 2022 Winter 
Olympics only Beijing and Almaty (Kazakhstan) submit-
ted bids. Oslo (Norway), the favorite, withdrew applica-
tion due to a lack of public support. Likewise, Boston 
withdrew application for the 2024 Summer Olympics in 
the face of public outcry. Why the outcry? Because of the 
legacy of exorbitant cost overruns and draining mainte-
nance costs. The Olympics has a long history of expen-
sive white elephants. For example, the Beijing National 
Stadium, nicknamed the Bird’s Nest, built at cost of 
$480 million for the 2008 Olympic games, requires over 
$10 million each year to maintain, and has no regular 
tenant. Some have attributed the Greek economic melt-
down to exorbitant debt accrued from hosting the 2004 
summer games (Flyvbjerg, 2014). Perhaps the most infa-
mous example is the “Big Owe,” Montreal’s Olympic 
Stadium, which took Canadian taxpayers over thirty 
years to pay off and was not even ﬁnished in time for the 
1976 Olympics!
 
The London 2012 organizers were committed to 
turning this around. In particular, they were well aware of 
hidden post-Olympic maintenance costs of buildings that 
were no longer in demand. One advantage they had 
over less developed countries is that the infrastructure 
and many of the arenas were already in place and the 
Olympics provided a necessary upgrade. They built tem-
porary arenas for less popular sports. For example, after 
the games the water polo arena was deconstructed and 
© Sophie Vigneault /123RF
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  5 . 6
London 2012 Olympics: Avoiding  
White Elephant Curse*
materials recycled. The 12,000-seat basketball arena 
was designed to be portable so it could be used in future 
Olympics. Scalability was another key consideration. For 
example, during the Olympics over 17,000 people 
watched swimming events in the newly constructed 
aquatic center. The aquatic center was downsized to a 
2,500-person capacity after the Olympics and is now 
open to the public.
 
In recognition of its achievements, London 2012 
Olympics won Gold in the Environmental and Sustain-
ability category of the 6th International Sports Events 
awards. “We set out with a huge promise to the world, 
to deliver the most sustainable Olympic Games of mod-
ern times,” says David Stubbs, London 2012’s Head of 
Sustainability. “Seven years, nine million visitors, and 
2,484 medals later, that’s exactly what we achieved.”
* “London 2012’s Sustainability Legacy Lives On,” Olympic 
.org, accessed October 10, 2015.

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  151
 
In particular, Flyvbjerg advocates an external view based on the outcome of similar 
projects completed in the past. It is called reference class forecasting (RCF) and 
involves three major steps:
1. Select a reference class of projects similar to your potential project, for example, 
cargo ships or bridges.
2. Collect and arrange outcome data as a distribution. Create a distribution of cost 
overruns as a percentage of the original project estimate (low to high).
3. Use the distribution data to arrive at a realistic forecast. Compare the original cost 
estimate for the project with the reference class projects. (For example, ask an advo-
cate of rail tunnel what strong evidence do you have that your project will not follow 
the tunnel projects in the reference class?)
The benefits of RCF are compelling:
∙ Outside empirical data mitigates human bias.
∙ Political, strategic, and promoter forces have difficulty ignoring outside RCF 
information.
∙ Serves as reality check for funding large projects.
∙ Helps executives avoid unsound optimism.
∙ Leads to improved accountability.
∙ Provides basis for project contingency funds.
The use of RCF is increasing as governments and organizations require this method be 
used to temper project promoters’ estimates and reduce cost/benefit inaccuracies.
Summary
Quality time and cost estimates are the bedrock of project control. Past experience is 
the best starting point for these estimates. The quality of estimates is influenced by 
other factors such as people, technology, and downtimes. The key for getting estimates 
that represent realistic average times and costs is to have an organization culture that 
allows errors in estimates without incriminations. If times represent average time, we 
should expect that 50 percent will be less than the estimate and 50 percent will exceed 
the estimate. The use of teams that are highly motivated can help in keeping task times 
and costs near the average. For this reason, it is crucial to get the team to buy into time 
and cost estimates.
 
Using top-down estimates is good for initial and strategic decision making or in 
situations where the costs associated with developing better estimates have little ben-
efit. However, in most cases the bottom-up approach to estimating is preferred and 
more reliable because it assesses each work package, rather than the whole project, 
section, or deliverable of a project. Estimating time and costs for each work package 
facilitates development of the project schedule and a time-phased budget, which are 
needed to control the project as it is implemented. Using the estimating guidelines will 
help eliminate many common mistakes made by those unacquainted with estimating 
times and costs for project control. Establishing a time and cost estimating database 
fits well with the learning organization philosophy.
 
The level of time and cost detail should follow the old saying of “no more than is 
necessary and sufficient.” Managers must remember to differentiate between commit-
ted outlays, actual costs, and scheduled costs. It is well known that up-front efforts in 
www.ebook3000.com

152  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
clearly defining project objectives, scope, and specifications vastly improve time and 
cost estimate accuracy.
 
How estimates are gathered and how they are used can affect their usefulness for 
planning and control. The team climate, organization culture, and organization struc-
ture can strongly influence the importance attached to time and cost estimates and how 
they are used in managing projects.
 
Finally, large-scale mega projects like subway systems or football stadiums often 
suffer from underestimated costs and overestimated benefits. They also can evolve into 
“white elephants” in which the cost of maintenance exceeds benefits. Steps must be 
taken to remove bias and compare mega project estimates with similar projects that 
have been done in the past.
Key Terms
Apportionment, 137
Bottom-up estimates, 135
Delphi Method, 136
Direct costs, 145
Function points, 138
Learning curve, 139
Overhead costs, 145
Phase estimating, 141
Range estimating, 140
Ratio methods, 137
Reference class  
 forecasting (RCF), 151
Template method, 140
Time and cost  
 databases, 148
Top-down estimates, 134
White elephant, 149
1. Why are accurate estimates critical to effective project management?
2. How does the culture of an organization influence the quality of estimates?
3. What are the differences between bottom-up and top-down estimating approaches? 
Under what conditions would you prefer one over the other?
4. What are the major types of costs? Which costs are controllable by the project 
manager?
5. Why is it difficult to estimate mega project (e.g., airports, stadiums, etc.) costs and 
benefits?
6. Define what a “white elephant” is in project management. Provide a real-life 
example.
Review 
Questions
1. Calculate the direct cost of labor for a project team member using the following 
data:
Hourly rate: $40/hr
Hours needed: 80
Overhead rate: 40%
2. Mrs. Tolstoy and her husband, Serge, are planning their dream house. The lot for 
the house sits high on a hill with a beautiful view of the Appalachian Mountains. 
The plans show the size of the house to be 2,900 square feet. The average price for 
a lot and house similar to this one has been $120 per square foot. Fortunately, Serge 
is a retired plumber and feels he can save money by installing the plumbing him-
self. Mrs. Tolstoy feels she can take care of the interior decorating.
Exercises

 
The following average cost information is available from a local bank that makes 
loans to local contractors and dispenses progress payments to contractors when spe-
cific tasks are verified as complete.
24% 
Excavation and framing complete
  8% 
Roof and fireplace complete
  3% 
Wiring roughed in
  6% 
Plumbing roughed in
  5% 
Siding on
17% 
Windows, insulation, walks, plaster, and garage complete
  9% 
Furnace installed
  4% 
Plumbing fixtures installed
10% 
Exterior paint, light fixtures installed, finish hardware installed
  6% 
Carpet and trim installed
  4% 
Interior decorating
  4% 
Floors laid and finished
a. What is the estimated cost for the Tolstoys’ house if they use contractors to com-
plete all of the house?
b. Estimate what the cost of the house would be if the Tolstoys use their talents to 
do some of the work themselves.
3. Exercise Figure 5.1 is a project WBS with cost apportioned by percentages. If the 
total project cost is estimated to be $600,000, what are the estimated costs for the 
following deliverables?
a. Design
b. Programming
c. In-house testing
 
What weaknesses are inherent in this estimating approach?
Router systems project
Cost: $600,000
Deﬁnition
10%
Design
40%
Implementation
50%
Objectives
4%
Requirements
6%
Inputs
3%
Outputs
3%
Files
4%
Interfaces
10%
Programming
20%
In-house
testing
40%
Customer testing
& review
10%
EXERCISE FIGURE 5.1 
WBS Figure 
Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  153
www.ebook3000.com

4. Firewall Project XT. Using the “complexity weighting” scheme shown in Table 5.3 
and the function point complexity weight table shown below, estimate the total 
function point count. Assume historical data suggest five function points equal one 
person a month and six people can work on the project.
Complexity Weight Table
Number of inputs 
####10 
Rated complexity low
Number of outputs 
20 
Rated complexity average
Number of inquiries 
####10 
Rated complexity average
Number of ﬁles 
30 
Rated complexity high
Number of interfaces 
50 
Rated complexity high
a. What is the estimated project duration?
b. If 20 people are available for the project, what is the estimated project duration?
c. If the project must be completed in six months, how many people will be needed 
for the project?
References
Buehler, R., D. Griffin, and M. Ross, “Exploring the ‘Planning Fallacy’: Why People 
Underestimate Their Task Completion Times,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, vol. 67, no. 3 (1994), pp. 366–81.
Dalkey, N. C., D. L. Rourke, R. Lewis, and D. Snyder, Studies in the Quality of Life: 
Delphi and Decision Making (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1972).
Flyvbjerg, Bent, “From Nobel Prize to Project Management: Getting Risks Right,” 
Project Management Journal, August 2006, pp. 5–15.
Flyvbjerg, Bent, “Curbing Optimism Bias and Strategic Misrepresentation in Plan-
ning: Reference Class Forecasting in Practice,” European Planning Studies, vol. 16, 
no. 1 (January 2008), pp. 3–21.
Flyvbjerg, Bent, N. Bruzelius, and W. Rothengatter, Mega Projects and Risk: An 
Anatomy of Ambition (Cambridge Press, 2003).
Flyvbjerg, B., “What You Should Know about Megaprojects and Why: An Over-
view,” Project Management Journal, vol. 45, no. 2 (April/May 2014), pp. 6–19.
Gray, N. S., “Secrets to Creating the Elusive ‘Accurate Estimate,’” PM Network, 
vol. 15, no. 8 (August 2001), p. 56.
Hirschman. A. O., “The Principle of the Hiding Hand,” The Public Interest, Winter 
1967, pp. 10–23.
Jeffery, R., G. C. Low, and M. Barnes, “A Comparison of Function Point Counting 
Techniques,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 19, no. 5 (1993),  
pp. 529–32.
Jones, C., Applied Software Measurement (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1991).
Jones, C., Estimating Software Costs (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998).
Kharbanda, O. P., and J. K. Pinto, What Made Gertie Gallop: Learning from Project 
Failures (New York: Von Nostrand Reinhold, 1996).
154  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs

Lovallo, D., and D. Kahneman, “Delusions of Success: How Optimism Undermines 
Executives’ Decisions,” Harvard Business Review, July 2003, pp. 56–63.
Magne, E., K. Emhjellenm, and P. Osmundsen, “Cost Estimation Overruns in the 
North Sea,” Project Management Journal, vol. 34, no. 1 (2003), pp. 23–29.
McLeod, G., and D. Smith, Managing Information Technology Projects (Cambridge, 
MA: Course Technology, 1996).
Molloy, E., and T. Chetty, “The Rocky Road to Legacy: Lessons from the 2010 FIFA 
World Cup South Africa Stadium Program,” Project Management Journal, vol. 46, 
no. 3 (June/July 2015), pp. 88–107.
Milosevic, D. Z., Project Management ToolBox (Upper Saddle River, NJ: John Wiley, 
2003), p. 229.
Pressman, R. S., Software Engineering: A Practitioner’s Approach, 4th ed. (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1997).
Symons, C. R., “Function Point Analysis: Difficulties and Improvements,” IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 14, no. 1 (1988), pp. 2–11.
Case 5.1
Sharp Printing, AG
Three years ago the Sharp Printing (SP) strategic management group set a goal of hav-
ing a color laser printer available for the consumer and small business market for less 
than $200. A few months later the senior management met off-site to discuss the new 
product. The results of this meeting were a set of general technical specifications along 
with major deliverables, a product launch date, and a cost estimate based on prior 
experience.
 
Shortly afterward, a meeting was arranged for middle management explaining the 
project goals, major responsibilities, the project start date, and importance of meeting 
the product launch date within the cost estimate. Members of all departments involved 
attended the meeting. Excitement was high. Although everyone saw the risks as high, 
the promised rewards for the company and the personnel were emblazoned in their 
minds. A few participants questioned the legitimacy of the project duration and cost 
estimates. A couple of R&D people were worried about the technology required to 
produce the high-quality product for less than $200. But given the excitement of the 
moment, everyone agreed the project was worth doing and doable. The color laser 
printer project was to have the highest project priority in the company.
 
Lauren was selected to be the project manager. She had 15 years of experience in 
printer design and manufacture, which included successful management of several 
projects related to printers for commercial markets. Since she was one of those uncom-
fortable with the project cost and time estimates, she felt getting good bottom-up time 
and cost estimates for the deliverables was her first concern. She quickly had a meeting 
with the significant stakeholders to create a WBS identifying the work packages and 
organizational unit responsible for implementing the work packages. Lauren stressed 
Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  155
www.ebook3000.com

156  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
she wanted time and cost estimates from those who would do the work or were the 
most knowledgeable, if possible. Getting estimates from more than one source was 
encouraged. Estimates were due in two weeks.
 
The compiled estimates were placed in the WBS/OBS. The corresponding cost esti-
mate seemed to be in error. The cost estimate was $1,250,000 over the top-down senior 
management estimate; this represented about a 20 percent overrun! Furthermore the 
bottom-up time estimate based on the project network was four months longer than 
the top management time estimate. Another meeting was scheduled with the significant 
stakeholders to check the estimates and to brainstorm for alternative solutions. At this 
meeting everyone agreed the bottom-up cost and time estimates appeared to be accu-
rate. Some of the suggestions for the brainstorming session are listed below.
∙ Change scope.
∙ Outsource technology design.
∙ Use the priority matrix (found in Chapter 4) to get top management to clarify their 
priorities.
∙ Partner with another organization or build a research consortium to share costs and 
to share the newly developed technology and production methods.
∙ Cancel the project.
∙ Commission a break-even study for the laser printer.
 
Very little in the way of concrete savings was identified, although there was consen-
sus that time could be compressed to the market launch date, but at additional costs.
 
Lauren met with the marketing (Connor), production (Kim), and design (Gage) man-
agers who yielded some ideas for cutting costs, but nothing significant enough to have a 
large impact. Gage remarked, “I wouldn’t want to be the one to deliver the message to top 
management that their cost estimate is $1,250,000 off! Good luck, Lauren.”
1. At this point, what would you do if you were the project manager?
2. Was top management acting correctly in developing an estimate?
3. What estimating techniques should be used for a mission critical project such as this?
Case 5.2
Post Graduation Adventure
Josh and Mike met each other as roommates during freshman year at MacAlister Col-
lege in St. Paul, Minnesota. Despite a rocky start they became best friends. They are 
planning on going on a two-week adventure together to celebrate their graduation in 
June. Josh has never been to Europe and wants to visit France or Spain. Mike spent a 
semester abroad in Aarhus, Denmark, and traveled extensively in northern Europe. 
Even though he never went to France or Spain, Mike wants to go to someplace more 
exotic like South Africa or Vietnam. For the past week they have been arguing back 
and forth over where they should go. Josh argues that it will cost too much to fly to 
South Africa or Vietnam, while Mike counters that it will be much cheaper to travel in 
Vietnam or South Africa once they are there. Each of them agreed that they can spend 
no more than $3,500 each on the trip and could be gone for only two weeks.
 
One evening when they were arguing with each other over beers with friends, 
Sara said, “Why don’t you use what you learned in your project management class 

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  157
to decide what to do?” Josh and Mike looked at each other and agreed that made 
perfect sense.
1. Assume you are either Mike or Josh; how would you go about making a decision 
using project management methodology?
2. Looking first at only cost, what decision would you make?
3. After cost, what other factors should be considered before making a decision?
Appendix 5.1
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this appendix you should be able to:
A5-1 Use learning curves to improve task estimates.
Learning Curves for Estimating
A forecast estimate of the time required to perform a work package or task is a basic 
necessity for scheduling the project. In some cases, the manager simply uses judgment 
and past experience to estimate work package time, or may use historical records of 
similar tasks.
 
Most managers and workers intuitively know that improvement in the amount of 
time required to perform a task or group of tasks occurs with repetition. A worker can 
perform a task better/quicker the second time and each succeeding time she/he per-
forms it (without any technological change). It is this pattern of improvement that is 
important to the project manager and project scheduler.
 
This improvement from repetition generally results in a reduction of labor hours for 
the accomplishment of tasks and results in lower project costs. From empirical evi-
dence across all industries, the pattern of this improvement has been quantified in the 
learning curve (also known as improvement curve, experience curve, and industrial 
progress curve), which is described by the following relationship:
Each time the output quantity doubles, the unit labor hours are reduced at a constant rate.
 
For example, assume that a manufacturer has a new contract for 16 prototype units 
and a total of 800 labor hours were required for the first unit. Past experience has indi-
cated that on similar types of units the improvement rate was 80 percent. This relation-
ship of improvement in labor hours is shown below:
Unit 
 
Labor Hours
  1 
 
800
  2 
800 × .80 = 
640
  4 
640 × .80 = 
512
  8 
512 × .80 = 
410
16 
410 × .80 = 
328
By using Table A5.1 unit values, similar labor hours per unit can be determined. 
Looking across the 16 unit level and down the 80 percent column, we find a ratio 
Use learning curves to 
improve task estimates.
A5-1
LO
www.ebook3000.com

158  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
TABLE A5.1
Learning Curves 
Unit Values
Units 
60% 
65% 
70% 
75% 
80% 
85% 
90% 
95%
 
1 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000 
1.0000
 
2 
.6000 
.6500 
.7000 
.7500 
.8000 
.8500 
.9000 
.9500
 
3 
.4450 
.5052 
.5682 
.6338 
.7021 
.7729 
.8462 
.9219
 
 4 
.3600 
.4225 
.4900 
.5625 
.6400 
.7225 
.8100 
.9025
 
 5 
.3054 
.3678 
.4368 
.5127 
.5956 
.6857 
.7830 
.8877
 
 6 
.2670 
.3284 
.3977 
.4754 
.5617 
.6570 
.7616 
.8758
 
 7 
.2383 
.2984 
.3674 
.4459 
.5345 
.6337 
.7439 
.8659
 
 8 
.2160 
.2746 
.3430 
.4219 
.5120 
.6141 
.7290 
.8574
 
 9 
.1980 
.2552 
.3228 
.4017 
.4930 
.5974 
.7161 
.8499
 
 10 
.1832 
.2391 
.3058 
.3846 
.4765 
.5828 
.7047 
.8433
 
 12 
.1602 
.2135 
.2784 
.3565 
.4493 
.5584 
.6854 
.8320
 
 14 
.1430 
.1940 
.2572 
.3344 
.4276 
.5386 
.6696 
.8226
 
 16 
.1296 
.1785 
.2401 
.3164 
.4096 
.5220 
.6561 
.8145
 
 18 
.1188 
.1659 
.2260 
.3013 
.3944 
.5078 
.6445 
.8074
 
 20 
.1099 
.1554 
.2141 
.2884 
.3812 
.4954 
.6342 
.8012
 
 22 
.1025 
.1465 
.2038 
.2772 
.3697 
.4844 
.6251 
.7955
 
 24 
.0961 
.1387 
.1949 
.2674 
.3595 
.4747 
.6169 
.7904
 
 25 
.0933 
.1353 
.1908 
.2629 
.3548 
.4701 
.6131 
.7880
 
30 
.0815 
.1208 
.1737 
.2437 
.3346 
.4505 
.5963 
.7775
 
35 
.0728 
.1097 
.1605 
.2286 
.3184 
.4345 
.5825 
.7687
 
40 
.0660 
.1010 
.1498 
.2163 
.3050 
.4211 
.5708 
.7611
 
 45 
.0605 
.0939 
.1410 
.2060 
.2936 
.4096 
.5607 
.7545
 
 50 
.0560 
.0879 
.1336 
.1972 
.2838 
.3996 
.5518 
.7486
 
 60 
.0489 
.0785 
.1216 
.1828 
.2676 
.3829 
.5367 
.7386
 
 70 
.0437 
.0713 
.1123 
.1715 
.2547 
.3693 
.5243 
.7302
 
 80 
.0396 
.0657 
.1049 
.1622 
.2440 
.3579 
.5137 
.7231
 
 90 
.0363 
.0610 
.0987 
.1545 
.2349 
.3482 
.5046 
.7168
  100 
.0336 
.0572 
.0935 
.1479 
.2271 
.3397 
.4966 
.7112
  120 
.0294 
.0510 
.0851 
.1371 
.2141 
.3255 
.4830 
.7017
  140 
.0262 
.0464 
.0786 
.1287 
.2038 
.3139 
.4718 
.6937
  160 
.0237 
.0427 
.0734 
.1217 
.1952 
.3042 
.4623 
.6869
  180 
.0218 
.0397 
.0691 
.1159 
.1879 
.2959 
.4541 
.6809
  200 
.0201 
.0371 
.0655 
.1109 
.1816 
.2887 
.4469 
.6757
  250 
.0171 
.0323 
.0584 
.1011 
.1691 
.2740 
.4320 
.6646
  300 
.0149 
.0289 
.0531 
.0937 
.1594 
.2625 
.4202 
.5557
  350 
.0133 
.0262 
.0491 
.0879 
.1517 
.2532 
.4105 
.6482
  400 
.0121 
.0241 
.0458 
.0832 
.1453 
.2454 
.4022 
.6419
  450 
.0111 
.0224 
.0431 
.0792 
.1399 
.2387 
.3951 
.6363
  500 
.0103 
.0210 
.0408 
.0758 
.1352 
.2329 
.3888 
.6314
  600 
.0090 
.0188 
.0372 
.0703 
.1275 
.2232 
.3782 
.6229
 700 
.0080 
.0171 
.0344 
.0659 
.1214 
.2152 
.3694 
.6158
  800 
.0073 
.0157 
.0321 
.0624 
.1163 
.2086 
.3620 
.6098
  900 
.0067 
.0146 
.0302 
.0594 
.1119 
.2029 
.3556 
.6045
 1,000 
.0062 
.0137 
.0286 
.0569 
.1082 
.1980 
.3499 
.5998
 1,200 
.0054 
.0122 
.0260 
.0527 
.1020 
.1897 
.3404 
.5918
 1,400 
.0048 
.0111 
.0240 
.0495 
.0971 
.1830 
.3325 
.5850
 1,600 
.0044 
.0102 
.0225 
.0468 
.0930 
.1773 
.3258 
.5793
 1,800 
.0040 
.0095 
.0211 
.0446 
.0895 
.1725 
.3200 
.5743
 2,000 
.0037 
.0089 
.0200 
.0427 
.0866 
.1683 
.3149 
.5698
 2,500 
.0031 
.0077 
.0178 
.0389 
.0606 
.1597 
.3044 
.5605
 3,000 
.0027 
.0069 
.0162 
.0360 
.0760 
.1530 
.2961 
.5530

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  159
of .4096. By multiplying this ratio times the labor hours for the first unit, we obtain 
the per unit value:
.4096 × 800 = 328 hours or 327.68
 
That is, the 16th unit should require close to 328 labor hours, assuming an 80 percent 
improvement ratio.
 
Obviously, a project manager may need more than a single unit value for estimating 
the time for some work packages. The cumulative values in Table A5.2 provide factors 
for computing the cumulative total labor hours of all units. In the previous example, for 
the first 16 units, the total labor hours required would be
800 × 8.920 = 7,136 hours
 
By dividing the total cumulative hours (7,136) by the units, the average unit labor 
hours can be obtained:
7,136 labor hours/16 units = 446 average labor hours per unit
 
Note how the labor hours for the 16th unit (328) differs from the average for all 16 
units (446). The project manager, knowing the average labor costs and processing 
costs, could estimate the total prototype costs. (The mathematical derivation of factors 
found in Tables A5.1 and A5.2 can be found in Jelen, F. C., and J. H. Black, Cost and 
Optimization Engineering, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983.)
FOLLOW-ON CONTRACT EXAMPLE
Assume the project manager gets a follow-on order of 74 units; how should she esti-
mate labor hours and cost? Going to the cumulative Table A5.2 we find at the 80 per-
cent ratio and 90 total units intersection—a 30.35 ratio.
800 × 30.35 = 
24,280 labor hours for 90 units
Less previous 16 units = 
  7,136
Total follow-on order = 
 17,144 labor hours
17,144/74 equals 232 average labor hours per unit
Labor hours for the 90th unit can be obtained from Table A5.1: .2349 × 800 = 187.9 
labor hours. (For ratios between given values, simply estimate.)
Exercise A5.1
 
Norwegian Satellite Development Company
 
Cost Estimates 
 
for 
 
World Satellite Telephone Exchange Project
NSDC has a contract to produce eight satellites to support a worldwide telephone sys-
tem (for Alaska Telecom, Inc.) that allows individuals to use a single, portable tele-
phone in any location on earth to call in and out. NSDC will develop and produce the 
eight units. NSDC has estimated that the R&D costs will be NOK (Norwegian Krone) 
12,000,000. Material costs are expected to be NOK 6,000,000. They have estimated 
the design and production of the first satellite will require 100,000 labor hours and an 
www.ebook3000.com

160  Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs
TABLE A5.2
Learning Curves 
Cumulative Values
Units 
60% 
65% 
70% 
75% 
80% 
85% 
90% 
95%
 
1 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000
 
 2 
1.600 
1.650 
1.700 
1.750 
1.800 
1.850 
1.900 
1.950
 
 3 
2.045 
2.155 
2.268 
2.384 
2.502 
2.623 
2.746 
2.872
 
 4 
2.405 
2.578 
2.758 
2.946 
3.142 
3.345 
3.556 
3.774
 
 5 
2.710 
2.946 
3.195 
3.459 
3.738 
4.031 
4.339 
4.662
 
 6 
2.977 
3.274 
3.593 
3.934 
4.299 
4.688 
5.101 
5.538
 
 7 
3.216 
3.572 
3.960 
4.380 
4.834 
5.322 
5.845 
6.404
 
 8 
3.432 
3.847 
4.303 
4.802 
5.346 
5.936 
6.574 
7.261
 
 9 
3.630 
4.102 
4.626 
5.204 
5.839 
6.533 
7.290 
8.111
 
10 
3.813 
4.341 
4.931 
5.589 
6.315 
7.116 
7.994 
8.955
 
12 
4.144 
4.780 
5.501 
6.315 
7.227 
8.244 
9.374 
10.62
 
14 
4.438 
5.177 
6.026 
6.994 
8.092 
9.331 
10.72 
12.27
 
16 
4.704 
5.541 
6.514 
7.635 
8.920 
10.38 
12.04 
13.91
 
18 
4.946 
5.879 
6.972 
8.245 
9.716 
11.41 
13.33 
15.52
 20 
5.171 
6.195 
7.407 
8.828 
10.48 
12.40 
14.64 
17.13
 
22 
5.379 
6.492 
7.819 
9.388 
11.23 
13.38 
15.86 
18.72
 
24 
5.574 
6.773 
8.213 
9.928 
11.95 
14.33 
17.10 
20.31
 
25 
5.668 
6.909 
8.404 
10.19 
12.31 
14.80 
17.71 
21.10
 30 
6.097 
7.540 
9.305 
11.45 
14.02 
17.09 
20.73 
25.00
 
35 
6.478 
8.109 
10.13  
12.72 
15.64 
19.29 
23.67 
28.86
 
40 
6.821 
8.631 
10.90 
13.72 
17.19 
21.43 
26.54 
32.68
 
45 
7.134 
9.114 
11.62 
14.77 
18.68 
23.50 
29.37 
36.47
 50 
7.422 
9.565 
12.31 
15.78 
20.12 
25.51 
32.14 
40.22
 60 
7.941 
10.39 
13.57 
17.67 
22.87 
29.41 
37.57 
47.65
 
70 
8.401 
11.13 
14.74 
19.43 
25.47 
33.17 
42.87 
54.99
 80 
8.814 
11.82 
15.82 
21.09 
27.96 
36.80 
48.05 
62.25
 90 
9.191 
12.45 
16.83 
22.67 
30.35 
40.32 
53.14 
69.45
  100 
9.539 
13.03 
17.79 
24.18 
32.65 
43.75 
58.14 
76.59
  120 
10.16 
14.16 
19.57 
27.02 
37.05 
50.39 
67.93  
90.71
  140 
10.72 
15.08 
21.20 
29.67 
41.22 
56.78 
77.46 
104.7
 160 
11.21 
15.97 
22.72 
32.17 
45.20 
62.95 
86.80 
118.5
  180 
11.67 
16.79 
24.14 
34.54 
49.03 
68.95 
95.96 
132.1
  200 
12.09 
17.55 
25.48 
36.80 
52.72 
74.79 
105.0  
145.7
  250 
13.01 
19.28 
28.56 
42.08 
61.47 
88.83 
126.9  
179.2
   300 
13.81 
20.81 
31.34 
46.94 
69.66 
102.2  
148.2  
212.2
  350 
14.51 
22.18 
33.89 
51.48 
77.43 
115.1  
169.0  
244.8
  400 
15.14 
23.44 
36.26 
55.75 
84.85 
127.6  
189.3 
277.0
  450 
15.72 
24.60 
38.48 
59.80 
91.97 
139.7  
209.2  
309.0
  500 
16.26 
25.68 
40.58 
63.68 
98.85 
151.5  
228.8 
340.6
  600 
17.21 
27.67 
44.47 
70.97 
112.0 
174.2  
267.1  
403.3
 700 
18.06 
29.45 
48.04 
77.77 
124.4 
196.1  
304.5  
465.3
  800 
18.82 
31.09 
51.36 
84.18 
136.3 
217.3  
341.0  
526.5
  900 
19.51 
32.60 
54.46 
90.26 
147.7 
237.9  
376.9  
587.2
 1,000 
20.15 
34.01 
57.40 
96.07 
158.7 
257.9  
412.2  
647.4
 1,200 
21.30 
36.59 
62.85 
107.0  
179.7 
296.6  
481.2 
766.6
 1,400 
22.32 
38.92 
67.85 
117.2  
199.6 
333.9  
548.4  
884.2
 1,600 
23.23 
41.04 
72.49 
126.8  
218.6 
369.9  
614.2  
1001.
 1,800 
24.06 
43.00 
76.85 
135.9  
236.8 
404.9  
678.8  
1116.
 2,000 
24.83 
44.84 
80.96 
144.7  
254.4 
438.9  
742.3  
1230.
 2,500 
26.53 
48.97 
90.39 
165.0  
296.1 
520.8  
897.0  
1513.
 3,000 
27.99 
52.62 
98.90 
183.7  
335.2 
598.9 
1047. 
1791.

Chapter 5  Estimating Project Times and Costs  161
80 percent improvement curve is expected. Skilled labor cost is NOK 300 per hour. 
Desired profit for all projects is 25 percent of total costs.
A. How many labor hours should the eighth satellite require?
B. How many labor hours for the whole project of eight satellites?
C. What price would you ask for the project? Why?
D. Midway through the project your design and production people realize that a 
75 percent improvement curve is more appropriate. What impact does this have on 
the project?
E. Near the end of the project, Deutsch Telefon AG has requested a cost estimate for 
four satellites identical to those you have already produced. What price will you 
quote them? Justify your price.
www.ebook3000.com

162
Developing a Project Plan
6
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
6-1 Understand the linkage between WBS and the 
project network.
6-2 Diagram a project network using AON methods.
6-3 Calculate early, late, and slack activity times.
6-4 Identify and understand the importance of  
managing the critical path.
6-5 Distinguish free slack from total slack.
6-6 Demonstrate understanding and application of 
lags in compressing projects or constraining the 
start or ﬁnish of an activity.
OUTLINE
6.1 
Developing the Project Network
6.2 From Work Package to Network
6.3 Constructing a Project Network
6.4 Activity-on-Node (AON) Fundamentals
6.5 Network Computation Process
6.6 Using the Forward and Backward Pass 
Information
6.7 Level of Detail for Activities
6.8 Practical Considerations
6.9 Extended Network Techniques to Come Closer 
to Reality
Summary
C H A P T E R  S I X

163
I keep six honest serving-men (they taught me all I knew); their names are 
What and Why and When and How and Where and Who.
—Rudyard Kipling
6.1 Developing the Project Network
The project network is the tool used for planning, scheduling, and monitoring project 
progress. The network is developed from the information collected for the WBS and is 
a graphic flow chart of the project job plan. The network depicts the project activities 
that must be completed, the logical sequences, the interdependencies of the activities 
to be completed, and in most cases the times for the activities to start and finish along 
with the longest path(s) through the network—the critical path. The network is the 
framework for the project information system that will be used by the project managers 
to make decisions concerning project time, cost, and performance.
 
Developing the project networks takes time for someone or some group to develop; 
therefore, they cost money! Are networks really worth the struggle? The answer is 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

164  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
definitely yes, except in cases where the project is considered trivial or very short in 
duration.1 The network is easily understood by others because the network presents a 
graphic display of the flow and sequence of work through the project. Once the net-
work is developed, it is very easy to modify or change when unexpected events occur 
as the project progresses. For example, if materials for an activity are delayed, the 
impact can be quickly assessed and the whole project revised in only a few minutes 
with the computer. These revisions can be communicated to all project participants 
quickly (for example, via e-mail or project website).
 
The project network provides other invaluable information and insights. It provides 
the basis for scheduling labor and equipment. It enhances communication that melds 
all managers and groups together in meeting the time, cost, and performance objectives 
of the project. It provides an estimate of project duration rather than picking a project 
completion date from a hat or someone’s preferred date. The network gives the times 
when activities can start and finish and when they can be delayed. It provides the basis 
for budgeting the cash flow of the project. It identifies which activities are “critical” 
and, therefore, should not be delayed if the project is to be completed as planned. It 
highlights which activities to consider if the project needs to be compressed to meet a 
deadline.
 
There are other reasons project networks are worth their weight in gold. Basically, 
project networks minimize surprises by getting the plan out early and allowing correc-
tive feedback. A commonly heard statement from practitioners is that the project net-
work represents three-quarters of the planning process. Perhaps this is an exaggeration, 
but it signals the perceived importance of the network to project managers in the field.
6.2 From Work Package to Network
Project networks are developed from the WBS. The project network is a visual flow 
diagram of the sequence, interrelationships, and dependencies of all the activities that 
must be accomplished to complete the project. An activity is an element in the project 
that consumes time—for example, work or waiting. Work packages from the WBS are 
used to build the activities found in the project network. An activity can include one or 
more work packages. The activities are placed in a sequence that provides for orderly 
completion of the project. Networks are built using nodes (boxes) and arrows (lines).
 
Integrating the work packages and the network represents a point where the man-
agement process often fails in practice. The primary explanations for this failure are 
that (1) different groups (people) are used to define work packages and activities and 
(2) the WBS is poorly constructed and not deliverable/output oriented. Integration of 
the WBS and project network is crucial to effective project management. The project 
manager must be careful to guarantee continuity by having some of the same people 
who defined the WBS and work packages develop the network activities.
 
Networks provide the project schedule by identifying dependencies, sequencing, and 
timing of activities, which the WBS is not designed to do. The primary inputs for devel-
oping a project network plan are work packages. Remember, a work package is defined 
independently of other work packages, has definite start and finish points, requires spe-
cific resources, includes technical specifications, and has cost estimates for the package. 
However, dependency, sequencing, and timing of each of these factors are not included 
in the work package. A network activity can include one or more work packages.
Understand the linkage 
between WBS and the 
project network.
6-1
LO
1 This process could be clariﬁed and improved by using a simple responsibility matrix (see Chapter 4).

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  165
FIGURE 6.1
WBS/Work Packages 
to Network 
Circuit
board
Lowest
element
Design
cost
account
O
r
g
a
n
i
z
a
t
i
o
n
U
n
i
t
s
Production
cost
account
Test
cost
account
Software
cost
account
A
D -1-1
D -1-2
Design
WP  D-1-1 Speciﬁcations
WP  D-1-2 Documentation
Production
WP  P-10-1 Proto 1
WP  P-10-2 Final Proto 2
Test systems
WP T-13-1 Test
Software
WP  S-22-1 Software preliminary
WP  S-22-2 Software ﬁnal version
B
P -10-1
C
S -22-1
D
P -10-2
Activity network for circuit board work packages
F
S -22-2
K
T -13-1
A
Speciﬁcations
and documentation
2
B
Proto 1
5
C
Software
preliminary
3
D
Final
proto 2
4
F
Final
software
2
K
Test
3
 
Figure 6.1 shows a segment of the WBS example and how the information is used to 
develop a project network. The lowest level deliverable in Figure 6.1 is “circuit board.” 
The cost accounts (design, production, test, software) denote project work, organiza-
tion unit responsible, and time-phased budgets for the work packages. Each cost account 
represents one or more work packages. For example, the design cost account has two 
work packages (D-1-1 and D-1-2)—specifications and documentation. The software 
and production accounts also have two work packages. Developing a network requires 
sequencing tasks from all work packages that have measurable work.
 
Figure 6.1 traces how work packages are used to develop a project network. You can 
trace the use of work packages by the coding scheme. For example, activity A uses 
work packages D-1-1 and D-1-2 (specifications and documentation), while activity C 
www.ebook3000.com

166  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
uses work package S-22-1. This methodology of selecting work packages to describe 
activities is used to develop the project network, which sequences and times project 
activities. Care must be taken to include all work packages. The manager derives activ-
ity time estimates from the task times in the work package. For example, activity B 
(proto 1) requires five weeks to complete; activity K (test) requires three weeks to 
complete. After computing the activity early times and late times, the manager can 
schedule resources and time-phase budgets (with dates).
6.3 Constructing a Project Network
Terminology
Every field has its jargon that allows colleagues to communicate comfortably with 
each other about the techniques they use. Project managers are no exception. Here are 
some terms used in building project networks.
Activity. For project managers, an activity is an element of the project that 
requires time. It may or may not require resources. Typically an activity consumes 
time—either while people work or while people wait. Examples of the latter are 
time waiting for contracts to be signed, materials to arrive, drug approval by the 
government, budget clearance, etc. Activities usually represent one or more tasks 
from a work package. Descriptions of activities should use a verb/noun format: for 
example, develop product specifications.
Merge Activity. This is an activity that has more than one activity immediately 
preceding it (more than one dependency arrow flowing to it).
Parallel Activities. These are activities that can take place at the same time, if the 
manager wishes. However, the manager may choose to have parallel activities not 
occur simultaneously.
Path. A sequence of connected, dependent activities.
Critical Path. When this term is used, it means the path(s) with the longest dura-
tion through the network; if an activity on the path is delayed, the project is 
delayed the same amount of time.
Burst Activity. This activity has more than one activity immediately following it 
(more than one dependency arrow flowing from it).
Basic Rules to Follow in Developing Project Networks
The following eight rules apply in general when developing a project network:
1. Networks flow typically from left to right.
2. An activity cannot begin until all preceding connected activities have been completed.
3. Arrows on networks indicate precedence and flow. Arrows can cross over each other.
4. Each activity should have a unique identification number.
5. An activity identification number must be larger than that of any activities that precede it.
6. Looping is not allowed (in other words, recycling through a set of activities cannot 
take place).
7. Conditional statements are not allowed (that is, this type of statement should not 
appear: If successful, do something; if not, do nothing).
8. Experience suggests that when there are multiple starts, a common start node can be 
used to indicate a clear project beginning on the network. Similarly, a single project 
end node can be used to indicate a clear ending.
Diagram a project  
network using AON 
methods.
6-2
LO

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  167
Read the Snapshot from Practice 6.1: The Yellow Sticky Approach to see how these 
rules are used to create project networks.
6.4 Activity-on-Node (AON) Fundamentals
Historically, two methods have been used to develop project networks: Activity-
on-node (AON) and Activity-on-arrow (AOA). Over time the availability of 
advanced computer graphics improved the clarity and visual appeal of the AON 
method. Today, the activity-on-node method has come to dominate nearly all project 
network plans. For this reason, we have limited our discussion to AON methods. 
Figure 6.2 shows a few typical uses of building blocks for the AON network 
In practice small project networks (25 
to 100 activities) are frequently devel-
oped using yellow Post-it® stickers. The 
meeting requirements and process for 
the project team are described herein.
 
The following are the requirements for such a 
project:
1. Project team members and a facilitator.
2. One yellow sticker (3 × 4 inches or larger) for each 
activity with the description of the activity printed 
on the sticker.
3. Erasable whiteboard with marker pen (a long, 
4-foot-wide piece of butcher paper can be used in 
place of the whiteboard).
All of the yellow stickers are placed in easy view of all 
team members. The team begins by identifying those 
activity stickers that have no predecessors. Each of 
these activity stickers is then attached to the white-
board. A start node is drawn, and a dependency arrow 
is connected to each activity.
 
Given the initial network start activities, each activ-
ity is examined for immediate successor activities. 
These activities are attached to the whiteboard and 
dependency arrows drawn. This process is continued 
until all of the yellow stickers are attached to the white-
board with dependency arrows. (Note: The process can 
be reversed, beginning with those activities that have 
no successor activities and connecting them to a proj-
ect end node. The predecessor activities are selected 
for each activity and attached to the whiteboard with 
dependency arrows marked.)
 
When the process is complete, the dependencies 
are recorded in the project software, which develops a 
computer-designed network along with the critical 
path(s) and early, late, and slack times. This methodol-
ogy sensitizes team members early to the interdepen-
dencies among activities of the project. But more 
importantly, the methodology empowers team mem-
bers by giving them input to the important decisions 
that they must implement later.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  6 .1
The Yellow Sticky Approach (for 
Constructing a Project Network)
© Image Source/Alamy
www.ebook3000.com

168  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
FIGURE 6.2
Activity-on-Node 
Network 
Fundamentals
A
B
C
A is preceded by nothing 
B is preceded by A 
C is preceded by B
X
Z
Y
Y and Z are preceded by X
Y and Z can begin at the same time, if you wish
(A)
(B)
X is a burst activity
M is a merge activity
(C)
(D)
K
M
L
J
J, K, & L can all begin at the same time, if you
wish (they need not occur simultaneously)
but
All (J, K, L) must be completed before M can
begin
X
Z
Y
AA
Z is preceded by X and Y
AA is preceded by X and Y
construction. An activity is represented by a node (box). The node can take many 
forms, but in recent years the node represented as a rectangle (box) has dominated. 
The dependencies among activities are depicted by arrows between the rectangles 
(boxes) on the AON network. The arrows indicate how the activities are related and 
the sequence in which things must be accomplished. The length and slope of the 
arrow are arbitrary and set for convenience of drawing the network. The letters in 
the boxes serve here to identify the activities while you learn the fundamentals of 
network construction and analysis. In practice, activities have identification num-
bers and descriptions.
 
There are three basic relationships that must be established for activities included in 
a project network. The relationships can be found by answering the following three 
questions for each activity:
1. Which activities must be completed immediately before this activity? These activi-
ties are called predecessor activities.
2. Which activities must immediately follow this activity? These activities are called 
successor activities.
3. Which activities can occur while this activity is taking place? This is known as a 
concurrent or parallel relationship.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  169
 
Sometimes a manager can use only questions 1 and 3 to establish relationships. This 
information allows the network analyst to construct a graphic flow chart of the sequence 
and logical interdependencies of project activities.
 
Figure 6.2A is analogous to a list of things to do where you complete the task at the 
top of the list first and then move to the second task, etc. This figure tells the project 
manager that activity A must be completed before activity B can begin, and activity B 
must be completed before activity C can begin.
 
Figure 6.2B tells us that activities Y and Z cannot begin until activity X is com-
pleted. This figure also indicates that activities Y and Z can occur concurrently or 
simultaneously if the project manager wishes; however, it is not a necessary condition. 
For example, pouring a concrete driveway (activity Y) can take place while landscape 
planting (activity Z) is being accomplished, but land clearing (activity X) must be 
completed before activities Y and Z can start. Activities Y and Z are considered paral-
lel activities. Parallel paths allow concurrent effort, which may shorten time to do a 
series of activities. Activity X is sometimes referred to as a burst activity because more 
than one arrow bursts from the node. The number of arrows indicates how many activi-
ties immediately follow activity X.
 
Figure 6.2C shows us activities J, K, and L can occur simultaneously if desired, and 
activity M cannot begin until activities J, K, and L are all completed. Activities J, K, 
and L are parallel activities. Activity M is called a merge activity because more than 
one activity must be completed before M can begin. Activity M could also be called a 
milestone—a significant accomplishment.
 
In Figure 6.2D, activities X and Y are parallel activities that can take place at the 
same time; activities Z and AA are also parallel activities. But activities Z and AA 
cannot begin until activities X and Y are both completed. Given these fundamentals of 
AON, we can practice developing a simple network. Remember, the arrows can cross 
over each other (e.g., Figure 6.2D), be bent, or be any length or slope. Neatness is not 
a criterion for a valid, useful network—only accurate inclusion of all project activities, 
their dependencies, and time estimates.
 
Information for a simplified project network is given in Table 6.1. This project rep-
resents a new automated warehouse system for picking frozen food package orders and 
moving them to a staging area for delivery to stores.
 
Figure 6.3 shows the first steps in constructing the AON project network from 
the information in Table 6.1. We see that activity A (define requirements) has 
nothing preceding it; therefore, it is the first node to be drawn. Next, we note that 
activities B and C (assign team and design hardware) are both preceded by activity 
A. We draw two arrows and connect them to activities B and C. This segment shows 
TABLE 6.1
Network Information
AUTOMATED WAREHOUSE  
Order Picking System
Activity 
Description 
Preceding Activity
A 
Deﬁne Requirements 
None
B 
Assign Team 
A
C 
Design Hardware 
A
D 
Code Software 
B
E 
Build and Test Hardware 
C
F 
Develop Patent Request 
C
G 
Test Software 
D
H 
Integrate Systems 
E, F, G
www.ebook3000.com

170  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
the project manager that activity A must be completed before activities B and C 
can begin. After A is completed, B and C can take place concurrently, if desired. 
Figure 6.4 shows the completed network with all of the activities sequences and 
dependencies.
 
The information in Figure 6.4 is tremendously valuable to those managing the proj-
ect. However, estimating the duration for each activity will further increase the value 
of the network. A realistic project plan and schedule require reliable time estimates for 
project activities. The addition of time to the network allows us to estimate how long 
the project will take. When activities can or must start, when resources must be avail-
able, which activities can be delayed, and when the project is estimated to be complete 
are all determined from the times assigned. Deriving an activity time estimate neces-
sitates early assessment of resource needs in terms of material, equipment, and people. 
In essence the project network with activity time estimates links planning, scheduling, 
and controlling of projects.
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System
Deﬁne
Requirements
Design
Hardware
Assign
Team
B
A
C
FIGURE 6.3
Automated  
Warehouse—Partial  
Network
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System
A
F
Develop Patent
Request
C
E
H
Deﬁne
Requirements
Design
Hardware
Build & Test
Hardware
Integrate
Systems
Assign
Team
Code
Software
D
G
Test
Software
B
FIGURE 6.4 Automated Warehouse—Completed Network

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  171
Calculate early, late, and 
slack activity times.
6-3
LO
6.5 Network Computation Process
Drawing the project network places the activities in the right sequence for computing 
start and finish times of activities. Activity time estimates are taken from the task times 
in the work package and added to the network (review Figure 6.1). Performing a few 
simple computations allows the project manager to complete a process known as the 
forward and backward pass. Completion of the forward and backward pass will answer 
the following questions:
Forward Pass—Earliest Times
1. How soon can the activity start? (early start—ES)
2. How soon can the activity finish? (early finish—EF)
3. How soon can the project be finished? (expected time—TE)
Backward Pass—Latest Times
1. How late can the activity start? (late start—LS)
2. How late can the activity finish? (late finish—LF)
3. Which activities represent the critical path (CP)? This is the longest path in the 
network which, when delayed, will delay the project.
4. How long can the activity be delayed? (slack or float—SL)
The terms in parentheses represent the acronyms used in most texts and computer pro-
grams and by project managers. The forward and backward pass process is presented next.
Forward Pass—Earliest Times
The forward pass starts with the first project activity(ies) and traces each path (chain 
of sequential activities) through the network to the last project activity(ies). As you 
trace along the path, you add the activity times. The longest path denotes the project 
completion time for the plan and is called the critical path (CP). Table 6.2 lists the 
activity times in workdays for the Automated Warehouse project example we used for 
drawing a network.
 
Figure 6.5 shows the network with the activity time estimate found in the node (see 
“DUR” for duration in the legend). For example, activity A (define requirements) has an 
activity duration of 10 workdays, and activity E (build and test hardware) has a duration 
of 50 days. The forward pass begins with the project start time, which is usually time 
zero. (Note: Calendar times can be computed for the project later in the planning phase.)
AUTOMATED WAREHOUSE  
Order Picking System
Activity 
Description 
Preceding Activity 
Activity Time
A 
Deﬁne Requirements 
None    
10 workdays
B 
Assign Team 
A          
  5
C 
Design Hardware 
A          
25
D 
Code Software 
B          
20
E 
Build & Test Hardware 
C          
50
F 
Develop Patent Request 
C          
15
G 
Test Software 
D          
35
H 
Integrate Systems 
E, F, G 
15
TABLE 6.2
Network Information
www.ebook3000.com

172  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
 
In our Automated Warehouse example, the early start time for the first activity 
(activity A) is zero. This time is found in the upper left corner of the activity A node in 
Figure 6.6. The early finish for activity A is 10 days (EF = ES + DUR or 0 + 10 = 10). 
Next, we see that activity A is the predecessor for activities B (assign team) and C 
(design hardware). Therefore, the earliest activities B and C can begin is the instant in 
time when activity A is completed; this time is 10 days. You can now see in Figure 6.6 
that activities B and C have an early start (ES) of 10 days. Using the formula EF = 
ES + DUR, the early finish (EF) times for activities B and C are 15 and 35 days. Fol-
lowing the same process of moving along each network path, the early start and finish 
times for selected activities are shown here:
Activity D: ES = 15
EF = 15 + 20 = 35
Activity F: ES = 35
EF = 35 + 15 = 50
Activity E: ES = 35
EF = 35 + 50 = 85
Activity G: ES = 35
EF = 35 + 35 = 70
 
Activity H (integrate system) is a merge activity because it is preceded by more 
than one activity. The early start (ES) of a merge activity depends on the early finish 
(EF) of all activities that merge to it. In this project activity H is preceded by activities 
E, F, and G. Which activity controls the ES of activity H? The answer is activity E. In 
Figure 6.6 the EF times are 85, 50, and 70. Since 85 days is the largest EF time, activ-
ity E controls the ES for activity H, which is 85. If activity E is delayed, activity H 
will be delayed. The early finish for activity H or the project is 100 days (EF = ES + 
DUR or 85 + 15 = 100).
FIGURE 6.5 Activity-on-Node Network 
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System
A
10
ID
Legend
DUR 
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
F
15
E
50
H
15
B
5
D
20
G
35
Deﬁne
Requirements
Build & Test
Hardware
Integrate
Systems
Assign
Team
Code
Software
Test
Software
Develop Patent
Request
Design
Hardware
C
25
Description

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  173
 
The forward pass requires that you remember just three things when computing 
early activity times:
1. You add activity times along each path in the network (ES + DUR = EF).
2. You carry the early finish (EF) to the next activity where it becomes its early start 
(ES), or
3. If the next succeeding activity is a merge activity, you select the largest early finish 
number (EF) of all its immediate predecessor activities.
The three questions derived from the forward pass have been answered; that is, early 
start (ES), early finish (EF), and the project expected duration (TE) times have been 
computed. The backward pass is the next process to learn.
Backward Pass—Latest Times
The backward pass starts with the last project activity(ies) on the network. You trace 
backward on each path subtracting activity times to find the late start (LS) and late 
finish (LF) times for each activity. Before the backward pass can be computed, the late 
finish for the last project activity(ies) must be selected. In early planning stages, this 
time is usually set equal to the early finish (EF) of the last project activity (or in the 
case of multiple finish activities, the activity with the largest EF). In some cases an 
imposed project duration deadline exists, and this date will be used. Let us assume for 
planning purposes we can accept the EF project duration (TE) equal to 100 workdays. 
The LF for activity H becomes 100 days (EF = LF) (see Figure 6.7).
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System
A
10
10
0
F
35
50
15
E
50
35
85
H
85
85
50
70
100
15
B
10
15
5
D
15
35
20
G
35
70
35
Build & Test
Hardware
Integrate
System
Assign
Team
Code
Software
Test
Software
Develop Patent
Request
Design
Hardware
C
25
10
35
ID
Legend
DUR
Description
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
Deﬁne
Requirements
FIGURE 6.6 Activity-on-Node Network Forward Pass
www.ebook3000.com

174  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
 
The backward pass is similar to the forward pass; you need to remember three things:
1. You subtract activity times along each path starting with the project end activity 
(LF − DUR = LS).
2. You carry the LS to the preceding activity to establish its LF, or
3. If the next preceding activity is a burst activity; in this case you select the smallest 
LS of all its immediate successor activities to establish its LF.
Let’s apply these rules to our Automated Warehouse example. Beginning with activ-
ity H (integrate systems) and a LF of 100 workdays, the LS for activity H is 85 days 
(LF − DUR = LS or 100 − 15 = 85). The LS for activity H becomes the LF for activi-
ties E, F, and G. Moving backward on the network the late starts for E, F, and G are 
shown here (LS = LF − DUR):
Activity E: LS = 85 − 50 = 35
Activity G: 85 − 35 = 50
Activity F: LS = 85 − 15 = 70
At this point we see that activity C is a burst activity that ties to (precedes) activities E 
and F. The late finish for activity C is controlled by the LS of activities E and F. The 
smallest LS of activities E and F (LS’s = 35 and 70) is activity E. This establishes the 
LF for activity C. The LS for activity C becomes 10. Moving backward to the first 
project activity, we note it is also a burst activity that links to activities B and C. The 
FIGURE 6.7 Activity-on-Node Network Backward Pass 
B
5
25
30
Assign
Team
C
25
10
35
A
10
0
10
10
25
35
70
Deﬁne
Requirements
D
20
30
50
Code
Software
E
50
35
85
Build & Test
Hardware
F
15
70
85
Develop
Patent Request
H
15
85
100
Integrate
Systems
G
35
50
85
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System
ID
Legend
DUR
Description
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
Design
Hardware
Test
Software

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  175
LF of activity A is controlled by activity C that has the smallest LS of 10 days. Given 
a LF of 10 days, the LS for activity is time period zero (LS = 10 − 10 = 0). The back-
ward pass is complete, and the latest activity times are known. Figure 6.8 shows the 
completed network with all the early, late, and slack times included. Slack can be 
important to managing your project.
Determining Slack (or Float)
Total Slack
When the forward and backward passes have been computed, it is possible to deter-
mine which activities can be delayed by computing “slack” or “float.” Total slack tells 
us the amount of time an activity can be delayed and not delay the project. Stated dif-
ferently, total slack is the amount of time an activity can exceed its early finish date 
without affecting the project end date or an imposed completion date.
 
Total slack or float for an activity is simply the difference between the LS and 
ES (LS − ES = SL) or between LF and EF (LF − EF = SL). For example, in Figure 
6.8 the total slack for activity D is 15 workdays, for activity F is 35 days, and for 
activity E is zero. If total slack of one activity in a path is used, the ES for all 
activities that follow in the chain will be delayed and their slack reduced. Use of 
total slack must be coordinated with all participants in the activities that follow in 
the chain.
 
After slack for each activity is computed, the critical path(s) is (are) easily identi-
fied. When the LF = EF for the end project activity, the critical path can be identified 
Identify and understand 
the importance of 
 managing the critical path.
6-4
LO
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System
5
25
TS = 15
FS = 0
TS = 0
FS = 0
TS = 0
FS = 0
TS = 15
FS = 0
TS = 0
FS = 0
TS = 0
FS = 0
TS = 35
FS = 35
TS = 15
FS = 15
30
15
10
15
20
30
50
15
15
35
35
50
85
15
35
70
1
17
18
15
2
3
50
35
85
0
35
85
15
70
85
35
35
50
15
85
100
0
85
70
85
50
100
25
10
35
0
10
35
10
10
0
0
10
B
Assign
Team
C
A
0
10
25
35
70
Deﬁne
Requirements
D
Code
Software
E
Build & Test
Hardware
F
Develop
Patent Request
H
Integrate
Systems
G
ID
Legend
DUR
Description
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
Design
Hardware
Test
Software
FIGURE 6.8 Forward and Backward Passes Completed with Slack Times 
www.ebook3000.com

176  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
as those activities that also have LF = EF or a slack of zero (LF − EF = 0 or LS − 
ES = 0). The critical path is the network path(s) that has (have) the least slack in com-
mon. This awkward arrangement of words is necessary because a problem arises when 
the project finish activity has a LF that differs from the EF found in the forward pass—
for example, an imposed duration date. If this is the case, the slack on the critical path 
will not be zero; it will be the difference between the project EF and the imposed LF 
of the last project activity. For example, if the EF for the project is 100 days, but the 
imposed LF or target date is set at 95 days, all activities on the critical path would have 
a slack of minus 5 days. Of course, this would result in a late start 5 days for the first 
project activity—a good trick if the project is to start now. Negative slack occurs in 
practice when the critical path is delayed.
 
In Figure 6.8 the critical path is marked with dashed arrows—activities A, C, E, 
and H. Delay of any of these activities will delay the total project by the same num-
ber of days. Since actual projects may have many critical activities with numerous 
preceding dependencies, coordination among those responsible for critical activi-
ties is crucial. Critical activities typically represent about 10 percent of the activi-
ties of the project. Therefore, project managers pay close attention to the critical 
path activities to be sure they are not delayed. See Snapshot from Practice 6.2: The 
Critical Path.
 
We use the term sensitivity to reflect the likelihood the original critical path(s) 
will change once the project is initiated. Sensitivity is a function of the number of 
critical or near-critical paths. A network schedule that has only one critical path and 
noncritical activities that enjoy significant slack would be labeled insensitive. 
The critical path method (CPM) has 
long been considered the “Holy Grail” 
of project management. Here are 
comments made by veteran project 
managers when asked about the sig-
niﬁcance of the critical path in managing projects:
΄
;cahc^\MYRWcM_^W]cfVR]ReRa_^bbWOZRc^_dc\h
best people on critical activities or on those activities 
that stand the greatest chance of becoming critical.
΄
;_MhRgcaMMccR]cW^]fVR]Q^W]UaWbYMbbRbb\R]cc^
identifying those risks that can impact the critical 
path, either directly or indirectly, by making a non-
critical activity so late that it becomes critical. When 
I’ve got money to spend to reduce risks, it usually 
gets spent on critical tasks.
΄
;Q^]ͭcVMeRcW\Rc^\^]Wc^aMZZcVRMPcWeWcWRb^]M
big project, but I make it a point to keep in touch 
with the people who are working on critical activi-
ties. When I have the time, they are the ones I visit 
to ﬁnd out ﬁrsthand how things are going. It’s 
amazing how much more I can ﬁnd out from 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  6 . 2
The Critical Path
talking to the rank and ﬁle who are doing the work 
and by reading the facial expressions of people—
much more than I can gain from a number-driven 
status report.
΄
IVR] ; URc PMZZb Sa^\ ^cVRa \M]MURab MbYW]U c^
“borrow” people or equipment, I’m much more 
generous when it involves resources from working 
on noncritical activities. For example, if another 
project manager needs an electrical engineer who 
is assigned to a task with ﬁve days of slack, I’m will-
ing to share that engineer with another project 
manager for two to three days.
΄
FVR\^bc^OeW^dbaRMb^]cVRPaWcWPMZ_McVWbW\_^a-
tant is because these are the activities that impact 
completion time. If I suddenly get a call from above 
saying they need my project done two weeks ear-
lier than planned, the critical path is where I sched-
ule the overtime and add extra resources to get the 
project done more quickly. In the same way, if the 
project schedule begins to slip, it’s the critical activ-
ities I focus on to get back on schedule.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  177
Conversely, a sensitive network would be one with more than one critical path and/
or noncritical activities with very little slack. Under these circumstances the original 
critical path is much more likely to change once work gets under way on the project. 
How sensitive is the Automated Warehouse schedule? Not very, since there is only 
one critical path and the two other noncritical paths have 15 and 35 days of slack, 
which suggests considerable flexibility. Project managers assess the sensitivity of 
their network schedules to determine how much attention they should devote to man-
aging the critical path.
Free Slack (Float)
Free slack (FS) is unique. It is the amount of time an activity can be delayed without 
delaying any immediately following (successor) activity. Or, free slack is the amount 
of time an activity can exceed its early finish date without affecting the early start date 
of any successor(s). Free slack can never be negative. Only activities that occur at the 
end of a chain of activities, where you have a merge activity, can have free slack. See 
Figure 6.8, the Automated Warehouse project.
 
In Figure 6.8 activity G has free slack of 15 days, while activities B and D do not. 
In this case, activity G is the last activity in the upper path, and it merges to activity 
H. Hence, to delay activity G up to 15 days does not delay any following activities and 
requires no coordination with managers of other activities. Conversely, if either activ-
ity B or D is delayed, the managers of following activities need to be notified that the 
slack has been used so they can adjust their start schedules. For example, if activity B 
is delayed 5 days, the manager of activity B should notify those in charge of the fol-
lowing activities (D and G) that their slack has been reduced to 10 time units and their 
early start will be delayed 5 days. In this example, activity D cannot then start until 
day 20, which reduces activity D slack to 10 days (LS − ES = SL or 30 − 20 = 10). 
Free slack for activity G is also reduced to 10 days.
 
Free slack occurs at the last activity in a chain of activities. In some situations the 
“chain” has only one link. Activity F in Figure 6.8 is an example. It has free slack of 
35 days. Note that it needs no coordination with other activities—unless a delay 
exceeds the free slack of 35 days. (Note: The moment you exceed all free slack avail-
able, you delay the project and must coordinate with others who are impacted.)
 
The distinction between free and total slack at first glance seems trivial, but in real-
ity it is very important. When you are responsible for a late activity that has zero free 
slack you impact the schedules of subsequent activities. You should notify the manag-
ers of the remaining activities in the chain that you will be late. Again, note that total 
slack is shared across the whole path. Alternatively, if you are responsible for an activ-
ity that has free slack when you start, you do not need to notify anyone as long as your 
work does not absorb all of the slack!
6.6 Using the Forward and Backward Pass Information
Returning to the Automated Warehouse project network in Figure 6.8, what does a 
slack of 35 days for activity F (develop patent request) mean for the project manager? 
In this specific case it means activity F can be delayed 35 days. In a larger sense the 
project manager soon learns that free slack is important because it allows flexibility in 
scheduling scarce project resources—personnel and equipment—that are used on more 
than one parallel activity or another project.
6-5
LO
Distinguish free slack 
from total slack.
www.ebook3000.com

178  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
 
Knowing the four activity times of ES, LS, EF, and LF is invaluable for the plan-
ning, scheduling, and controlling phases of the project. The ES and LF tell the project 
manager the time interval in which the activity should be completed. For example, 
activity G (test software) must be completed within the time interval 35 and 85 days; 
the activity can start as early as day 35 or finish as late as day 85. Conversely, activity 
C (design hardware) must start on day 10, or the project will be delayed.
 
When the critical path is known, it is possible to tightly manage the resources of the 
activities on the critical path so no mistakes are made that will result in delays. In addi-
tion, if for some reason the project must be expedited to meet an earlier date, it is pos-
sible to select those activities, or combination of activities, that will cost the least to 
shorten the project. Similarly, if the critical path is delayed and the time must be made 
up by shortening some activity or activities on the critical path to make up any negative 
slack, it is possible to identify the activities on the critical path that cost the least to 
shorten. If there are other paths with very little slack, it may be necessary to shorten 
activities on those paths also.
6.7 Level of Detail for Activities
Time-phasing work and budgets of the project mandate careful definition of the activi-
ties that make up the project network. Typically an activity represents one or more 
tasks from a work package. How many tasks you include in each activity sets the level 
of detail. In some cases it is possible to end up with too much information to manage, 
and this can result in increased overhead costs. Managers of small projects have been 
able to minimize the level of detail by eliminating some of the preliminary steps to 
drawing networks. Larger firms also recognize the cost of information overload and are 
working to cut down the level of detail in networks and in most other dimensions of the 
project.
6.8 Practical Considerations
Network Logic Errors
Project network techniques have certain logic rules that must be followed. One rule is 
that conditional statements such as “if test successful build proto, if failure redesign” 
are not permitted. The network is not a decision tree; it is a project plan that we 
assume will materialize. If conditional statements were allowed, the forward and 
backward pass would make little sense. Although in reality a plan seldom materializes 
as we expect in every detail, it is a reasonable initial assumption. You shall see that 
once a network plan is developed, it is an easy step to make revisions to accommodate 
changes.
 
Another rule that defeats the project network and computation process is looping. 
Looping is an attempt by the planner to return to an earlier activity. Recall that the 
activity identification numbers should always be higher for the activities following an 
activity in question; this rule helps to avoid the illogical precedence relationships 
among the activities. An activity should only occur once; if it is to occur again, the 
activity should have a new name and identification number and should be placed in the 
right sequence on the network. Figure 6.9 shows an illogical loop. If this loop were 
allowed to exist, this path would perpetually repeat itself. Many computer programs 
catch this type of logic error.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  179
Activity Numbering
Each activity needs a unique identification code—a letter or a number. In practice very 
elegant schemes exist. Most schemes number activities in ascending order, that is, each 
succeeding activity has a larger number so that the flow of the project activities 
is toward project completion. It is customary to leave gaps between numbers (1, 5, 10, 
15 . . .). Gaps are desirable so you can add missing or new activities later. Because it is 
nearly impossible to draw a project network perfectly, numbering networks is fre-
quently not done until after the network is complete.
 
In practice you will find computer programs that accept numeric, alphabetic, or a com-
bination of activity designations. Combination designations are often used to identify 
cost, work skill, departments, and locations. As a general rule, activity numbering systems 
should be ascending and as simple as possible. The intent is to make it as easy as you can 
for project participants to follow work through the network and locate specific activities.
Use of Computers to Develop Networks
All of the tools and techniques discussed in this chapter can be used with computer 
software currently available. Two examples are shown in Figures 6.10 and 6.11. Figure 6.10 
presents a generic AON computer output for the Automated Warehouse Picking Sys-
tem project. Observe that these computer outputs use numbers to identify activities. 
The critical path is identified by the nodes (activities) 2, 4, 6, and 9. The activity 
description is shown on the top line of the activity node. The activity start time and 
identification are on the second line. The finish time and duration are on the third line 
of the node. The project starts on January 1 and is planned to finish May 20. Note this 
sample computer network has included non-workdays of holidays and weekends.
 
Figure 6.11 presents an early start Gantt chart.2 Bar charts are popular because they 
present an easy-to-understand, clear picture on a time-scaled horizon. They are used dur-
ing planning, resource scheduling, and status reporting. The format is a two-dimensional 
representation of the project schedule, with activities down the rows and time across the 
horizontal axis. In this computer output the shaded bars represent the activity durations. 
The extended lines from the bars represent slack. For example, “test software” (ID # 8) 
has a duration of 35 days (shaded area of the bar) and 15 days slack (represented by the 
extended line). The bar also indicates test software has an early start of February 19 and 
would finish April 8, but can finish as late as April 29 because it has 15 days of slack. 
When calendar dates are used on the time axis, Gantt charts provide a clear overview of 
the project schedule and can often be found posted on the walls of project offices. Unfor-
tunately, when projects have many dependency relationships, the dependency lines soon 
become overwhelming and defeat the simplicity of the Gantt chart.
 
Project management software can be a tremendous help in the hands of those who 
understand and are familiar with the tools and techniques discussed in this text. How-
ever, there is nothing more dangerous than someone using the software with little or no 
FIGURE 6.9 
Illogical Loop 
A
C
B
2 Gantt charts were introduced over 100 years ago by Henry Gantt.
www.ebook3000.com

180
FIGURE 6.10 Automated Warehouse Order Picking System Network 
Deﬁne Req.s
Start:   Tue 1/1
Finish: Mon 1/14 
Res:
ID:   2
Dur: 10 days
Assign Team
Start: Tue 1/15
Finish: Mon 1/21
Res:
ID:   3
Dur: 5 days
Design Hardware
Start: Tue 1/15
Finish: Mon 2/18
Res:
ID:   4
Dur: 25 days
Dev. Patent Request
Start: Tue 2/19
Finish: Mon 3/11
Res:
ID:   7
Dur: 15 days
Test Software
Start: Tue 2/19
Finish: Mon 4/8
Res:
ID:   8
Dur: 35 days
Integrate Systems
Start: Tue 4/30
Finish: Mon 5/20
Res:
ID:   9
Dur: 15 days
Code Software
Start: Tue 1/22
Finish: Mon 2/18
Res:
ID:   5
Dur: 20 days
Build & Test HW
Start: Tue 2/19
Finish: Mon 4/29
Res:
ID:   6
Dur: 50 days
Automated Warehouse
Order Picking System Network Diagram

181
ID
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
5
25
20
50
15
35
15
Duration
Start
Tue 1/1
Tue 1/15
Tue 1/15
Tue 1/22
Tue 2/19
Tue 2/19
Tue 2/19
Tue 4/30
Finish
Automated Warehouse Order Picking System Schedule Table
Mon 1/14
Mon 1/21
Mon 2/18
Mon 2/18
Mon 4/29
Mon 3/11
Mon 4/8
Mon 5/20
Late Start
Tue 1/1
Tue 2/5
Tue 1/15
Tue 2/12
Tue 2/19
Tue 4/9
Tue 3/12
Tue 4/30
Tue 1/15
Mon 2/11
Mon 2/18
Mon 3/11
Mon 4/29
Mon 4/29
Mon 4/29
Mon 5/20
Late Finish
Free Slack
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
0 days
35 days
15 days
0 days
Total Slack
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
0 days
15 days
0 days
15 days
0 days
35 days
15 days
0 days
Task Name
Deﬁne Req.s
Assign Team
Design Hardware
Code Software
Build and Test HW
Dev. Patent Request
Test Software
Integrate Systems
May
FIGURE 6.11 Automated Order Warehouse Picking System Bar Chart 
www.ebook3000.com

182  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
knowledge of how the software derives its output. Mistakes in input are very common 
and require someone skilled in the concepts, tools, and information system to recog-
nize that errors exist so false actions are avoided.
Calendar Dates
Ultimately you will want to assign calendar dates to your project activities. If a com-
puter program is not used, dates are assigned manually. Lay out a calendar of workdays 
(exclude non-workdays), and number them. Then relate the calendar workdays to the 
workdays on your project network. Most computer programs will assign calendar dates 
automatically after you identify start dates, time units, non-workdays, and other 
information.
Multiple Starts and Multiple Projects
Some computer programs require a common start and finish event in the form of a 
node—usually a circle or rectangle—for a project network. Even if this is not a require-
ment, it is a good idea because it avoids “dangler” paths. Dangler paths give the 
impression that the project does not have a clear beginning or ending. If a project has 
more than one activity that can begin when the project is to start, each path is a dangler 
path. The same is true if a project network ends with more than one activity; these 
unconnected paths are also called danglers. Danglers can be avoided by tying dangler 
activities to a common project start or finish node.
 
When several projects are tied together in an organization, using a common start 
and end node helps to identify the total planning period of all projects. Use of pseudo 
or dummy wait activities from the common start node allows different start dates for 
each project.
6.9 Extended Network Techniques to Come Closer to Reality
The method for showing relationships among activities in the last section is called the 
finish-to-start relationship because it assumes all immediate preceding connected 
activities must be completed before the next activity can begin. In an effort to come 
closer to the realities of projects, some useful extensions have been added. The use of 
laddering was the first obvious extension practitioners found very useful.
Laddering
The assumption that all immediate preceding activities must be 100 percent complete 
is too restrictive for some situations found in practice. This restriction occurs most 
frequently when one activity overlaps the start of another and has a long duration. 
Under the standard finish-to-start relationship, when an activity has a long duration 
and will delay the start of an activity immediately following it, the activity can be bro-
ken into segments and the network drawn using a laddering approach so the following 
activity can begin sooner and not delay the work. This segmenting of the larger activity 
gives the appearance of steps on a ladder on the network, thus the name. The classic 
example used in many texts and articles is laying pipe, because it is easy to visualize. 
The trench must be dug, pipe laid, and the trench refilled. If the pipeline is one mile 
long, it is not necessary to dig one mile of trench before the laying of pipe can begin or 
to lay one mile of pipe before refill can begin. Figure 6.12 shows how these overlap-
ping activities might appear in an AON network using the standard finish-to-start 
approach.
6-6
LO
Demonstrate under-
standing and application 
of lags in compressing 
projects or constraining 
the start or ﬁnish of an 
activity.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  183
Use of Lags to Reduce Schedule Detail and Project Duration
The use of lags has been developed to offer greater flexibility in network construction. 
A lag is the minimum amount of time a dependent activity must be delayed to begin or 
end. The use of lags in project networks occurs for two primary reasons:
1. When activities of long duration delay the start or finish of successor activities, the 
network designer normally breaks the activity into smaller activities to avoid the 
long delay of the successor activity. Use of lags can avoid such delays and reduce 
network detail.
2. Lags can be used to constrain the start and finish of an activity.
The most commonly used relationship extensions are start-to-start, finish-to-finish, and 
combinations of these two. These relationship patterns are discussed in this section.
Finish-to-Start Relationship
The finish-to-start relationship represents the typical, generic network style used in the 
early part of the chapter. However, there are situations in which the next activity in a 
sequence must be delayed even when the preceding activity is complete. For example, 
removing concrete forms cannot begin until the poured cement has cured for two time 
units. Figure 6.13 shows this lag relationship for AON networks. Finish-to-start lags are 
frequently used when ordering materials. For example, it may take 1 day to place orders 
but take 19 days to receive the goods. The use of finish-to-start allows the activity dura-
tion to be only 1 day and the lag 19 days. This approach ensures the activity cost is tied 
to placing the order only rather than charging the activity for 20 days of work. This same 
finish-to-start lag relationship is useful to depict transportation, legal, and mail lags.
 
The use of finish-to-start lags should be carefully checked to ensure their validity. Con-
servative project managers or those responsible for completion of activities have been 
known to use lags as a means of building in a “slush” factor to reduce the risk of being 
late. A simple rule to follow is that the use of finish-to-start lags must be justified and 
approved by someone responsible for a large section of the project. The legitimacy of lags 
is not usually difficult to discern. The legitimate use of the additional relationship shown 
can greatly enhance the network by more closely representing the realities of the project.
Start-to-Start Relationship
An alternative to segmenting the activities as we did earlier is to use a start-to-start 
relationship. Typical start-to-start relationships are shown in Figure 6.14. Figure 6.14A 
FIGURE 6.12 
Example of 
Laddering Using 
Finish-to-Start 
Relationship 
Trench
1/3
Trench
1/3
Lay pipe
1/3
Trench
1/3
AON network
Lay pipe
1/3
Reﬁll
1/3
Lay pipe
1/3
Reﬁll
1/3
Reﬁll
1/3
FIGURE 6.13
Finish-to-Start 
Relationship 
X
Lag 19
Y
www.ebook3000.com

184  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
shows the start-to-start relationship with zero lag, while Figure 6.14B shows the same 
relationship with a lag of five time units. It is important to note that the relationship 
may be used with or without a lag. If time is assigned, it is usually shown on the depen-
dency arrow of an AON network.
 
In Figure 6.14B, activity Q cannot begin until five time units after activity P begins. 
This type of relationship typically depicts a situation in which you can perform a por-
tion of one activity and begin a following activity before completing the first. This 
relationship can be used on the pipe-laying project. Figure 6.15 shows the project using 
an AON network. The start-to-start relationship reduces network detail and project 
delays by using lag relationships.
 
It is possible to find compression opportunities by changing finish-to-start relations 
to start-to-start relationships. A review of finish-to-start critical activities may point out 
opportunities that can be revised to be parallel by using start-to-start relationships. For 
example, in place of a finish-to-start activity “design house, then build foundation,” a 
start-to-start relationship could be used in which the foundation can be started, say, five 
days (lag) after design has started—assuming the design of the foundation is the first 
part of the total design activity. This start-to-start relationship with a small lag allows a 
sequential activity to be worked on in parallel and to compress the duration of the criti-
cal path. This same concept is frequently found in projects in which concurrent engi-
neering is used to speed completion of a project. Concurrent engineering, which is 
highlighted in the Snapshot from Practice 6.3: Concurrent Engineering, basically breaks 
activities into smaller segments so that work can be done in parallel and the project 
FIGURE 6.14
Start-to-Start 
Relationship 
Activity
M
Activity
N
Activity
P
A
Activity
Q
B
Lag 5
FIGURE 6.15
Use of Lags to 
Reduce Project 
Duration 
Trench
1 mile
Lay pipe
1 mile
Lag 3
Reﬁll
1 mile
Lag 3

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  185
In the old days, when a new product 
development project was initiated by 
a ﬁrm, it would start its sequential 
journey in the research and develop-
ment department. Concepts and 
ideas would be worked out and the results passed to 
the engineering department, which sometimes 
reworked the whole product. This result would be 
passed to manufacturing, where it might be reworked 
once more in order to ensure the product could be 
manufactured using existing machinery and opera-
tions. Quality improvements were initiated after the 
fact once defects and improvement opportunities 
were discovered during production. This sequential 
approach to product development required a great 
deal of time, and it was not uncommon for the ﬁnal 
product to be totally unrecognizable when compared 
to original speciﬁcations.
 
Given the emphasis on speed to the market, com-
panies have abandoned the sequential approach to 
product development and have adopted a more 
holistic approach titled concurrent engineering. In a 
nutshell, concurrent engineering entails the active 
involvement of all the relevant specialty areas 
throughout the design and development process. 
The traditional chainlike sequence of ﬁnish-to-start 
relationships is replaced by a series of start-to-start 
lag relationships as soon as meaningful work can be 
initiated for the next phase. Figure 6.16 summarizes 
the dramatic gains in time to market achieved by this 
approach.
 
Within the world of project management this 
approach is also called Fast Tracking. General Motors 
used this approach to design the very ﬁrst American 
hybrid car, the Chevy Volt. From the very beginning 
specialists from marketing, engineering, design, 
manufacturing, quality assurance, and other relevant 
departments were involved in every stage of the proj-
ect. Not only did the project meet all of its objectives, 
it was completed ahead of schedule.
*“Chevrolet Volt Hits Road, Ahead of Schedule,” The New York 
Times, June 25, 2009; accessed online June 2, 2011.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  6 . 3
Concurrent Engineering*
Engineering
design &
development
Engineering
design &
development
Product
planning
Product
planning
Systems
engineering
Systems
engineering
Time
Procurement
Procurement
Manufacturing
& production
Manufacturing
& production
Quality
assurance
Quality
assurance
Release
Traditional Sequential Approach
Concurrent Engineering Approach
Release
FIGURE 6.16 
New Product Development Process 
www.ebook3000.com

186  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
expedited (Turtle, 1994). Start-to-start relationships can depict the concurrent engineer-
ing conditions and reduce network detail. Of course, the same result can be accom-
plished by breaking an activity into small packages that can be implemented in parallel, 
but this latter approach increases the network and tracking detail significantly.
Finish-to-Finish Relationship
This relationship is found in Figure 6.17. The finish of one activity depends on the fin-
ish of another activity. For example, testing cannot be completed any earlier than four 
days after the prototype is complete. Note that this is not a finish-to-start relationship 
because the testing of subcomponents can begin before the prototype is completed, but 
four days of “system” testing is required after the prototype is finished.
Start-to-Finish Relationship
This relationship represents situations in which the finish of an activity depends on the 
start of another activity. For example, system documentation cannot end until three 
days after testing has started (see Figure 6.18). Here all the relevant information to 
complete the system documentation is produced after the first three days of testing.
Combinations of Lag Relationships
More than one lag relationship can be attached to an activity. These relationships are 
usually start-to-start and finish-to-finish combinations tied to two activities. For exam-
ple, debug cannot begin until two time units after coding has started. Coding must be 
finished four days before debug can be finished (see Figure 6.19).
An Example Using Lag Relationships—The Forward and Backward Pass
The forward and backward pass procedures are the same as explained earlier in the chapter 
for finish-to-start relationships (without lags). The modifying technique lies in the need to 
check each new relationship to see if it alters the start or finish time of another activity.
FIGURE 6.17
Finish-to-Finish 
Relationship 
Prototype
Testing
Lag 4
FIGURE 6.18
Start-to-Finish 
Relationship 
Testing
System
documentation
Lag 3
FIGURE 6.19
Combination 
Relationships 
Debug
Lag 2
Lag 4
Code

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  187
 
An example of the outcome of the forward and backward pass is shown in Fig-
ure 6.20. Order hardware depends upon the design of the system (start-to-start). Three 
days into the design of the system (activity A), it is possible to order the required hard-
ware (activity B). It takes four days after the order is placed (activity B) for the hard-
ware to arrive so it can begin to be installed (activity C). After two days of installing 
the software system (activity D), the testing of the system can begin (activity E). System 
testing (activity E) can be completed two days after the software is installed (activity 
D). Preparing system documentation (activity F) can begin once the design is com-
pleted (activity A), but it cannot be completed until two days after testing the system 
(activity E). This final relationship is an example of a finish-to-finish lag.
 
Note how an activity can have a critical finish and/or start. Activities E and F have 
critical finishes (zero slack), but their activity starts have 4 and 12 days of slack. It is only 
the finishes of activities E and F that are critical. Conversely, activity A has zero slack to 
start but has five days of slack to finish. The critical path follows activity start and finish 
constraints that occur due to the use of the additional relationships available and the 
imposed lags. You can identify the critical path in Figure 6.20 by following the dashed 
line on the network.
 
If a lag relationship exists, each activity must be checked to see if the start or finish 
is constrained. For example, in the forward pass the EF of activity E (test system) (18) 
is controlled by the finish of activity D (install software) and the lag of two time units 
(16 + lag 2 = 18). Finally, in the backward pass, the LS of activity A (design system) is 
controlled by activity B (order hardware) and the lag relationship to activity A (3 − 3 = 0).
A
5
5
10
0
5
0
0
Design
system
ID
Legend
Duration 
Description
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
SL
F
3
20
20
5
0
12
17
System
documentation
B
1
4
4
3
0
0
3
Order
hardware
C
2
10
10
8
0
0
Lag 4
Lag 3
Lag 2
Lag 2
Lag 2
8
Install
hardware
D
6
16
16
10
0
0
10
Install
software
E
2
18
18
12
0
4
16
Test
system
FIGURE 6.20 Network Using Lags 
www.ebook3000.com

188  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
Hammock Activities
Another of the extended techniques uses a hammock activity. This type of activity 
derives its name because it spans over a segment of a project. The hammock activity 
duration is determined after the network plan is drawn. Hammock activities are fre-
quently used to identify the use of fixed resources or costs over a segment of the project. 
Typical examples of hammock activities are inspection services, consultants, or con-
struction management services. A hammock activity derives its duration from the time 
span between other activities. For example, a special color copy machine is needed for 
a segment of a tradeshow publication project. A hammock activity can be used to indi-
cate the need for this resource and to apply costs over this segment of the project. This 
hammock is linked from the start of the first activity in the segment that uses the color 
copy machine to the end of the last activity that uses it. The hammock duration is simply 
the difference between the EF for the last activity and the ES of the first activity. The 
duration is computed after the forward pass and hence has no influence on other activity 
times. Figure 6.21 provides an example of a hammock activity used in a network. The 
duration for the hammock activity is derived from the early start of activity B and 
the early finish of activity F; that is, the difference between 13 and 5, or 8 time units. 
The hammock duration will change if any ES or EF in the chain-sequence changes. 
Hammock activities are very useful in assigning and controlling indirect project costs.3
 
Another major use of hammock activities is to aggregate sections of a project. This 
is similar to developing a subnetwork, but the precedence is still preserved. This 
approach is sometimes used to present a “macro network” for upper management lev-
els. Using a hammock activity to group activities can facilitate getting the right level 
of detail for specific sections of a project.
FIGURE 6.21  
Hammock Activity Example 
H
4
21
21
25
25
0
A
5
ID
Legend
Dur.
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
Description
B
1
C
5
D
4
F
3
0
0
5
5
6
6
6
14
10
18
5
5
6
6
11
11
10
18
13
21
0
0
0
8
8
E
10
11
11
21
21
0
Hammock
G
8
5
13
3 In order to designate G as a Hammock activity in MS Project 2012 you would copy and paste for activity G the start date 
of activity B and the ﬁnish date for activity F (http://support.microsoft.com/kb/141733).

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  189
Key Terms
Activity, 164, 166, 168
Activity-on-arrow  
(AOA), 167
Activity-on-node  
(AON), 167
Burst activity, 166
Concurrent  
engineering, 184
Critical path, 166
Early time, 166
Free slack (FS), 177
Gantt chart, 179
Hammock  
activity, 188
Lag relationship, 183
Late time, 166
Merge activity, 166
Parallel activity, 166
Path, 166
Sensitivity, 176
Total slack, 175
1. How does the WBS differ from the project network?
2. How are WBS and project networks linked?
3. Why bother creating a WBS? Why not go straight to a project network and forget 
the WBS?
4. Why is slack important to the project manager?
5. What is the difference between free slack and total slack?
6. Why are lags used in developing project networks?
7. What is a hammock activity, and when is it used?
Review 
Questions
Many project managers feel the project network is their most valuable exercise and 
planning document. Project networks sequence and time-phase the project work, 
resources, and budgets. Work package tasks are used to develop activities for 
 networks. Every project manager should feel comfortable working in an AON envi-
ronment. The AON method uses nodes (boxes) for activities and arrows for 
 dependencies. The forward and backward passes establish early and late times for 
activities. Although most project managers use computers to generate networks and 
activity times, they find a keen understanding of network development and the abil-
ity to compute activity times is invaluable in the field. Computers break down; input 
errors give false information; some decisions must be made without computer “what 
if” analysis. Project managers who are well acquainted with network development 
and AON methods and who are able to compute activity times will encounter fewer 
problems than project managers less well acquainted. Project networks help to ensure 
there are no surprises.
 
Several extensions and modifications have been appended to the original AON 
method. Lags allow the project planner to more closely replicate the actual conditions 
found in practice. The use of lags can result in the start or finish of an activity becom-
ing critical. Some computer software simply calls the whole activity critical rather than 
identifying the start or finish as being critical. Caution should be taken to ensure that 
lags are not used as a buffer for possible errors in estimating time. Finally, hammock 
activities are useful in tracking costs of resources used for a particular segment of a 
project. Hammock activities can also be used to reduce the size of a project network by 
grouping activities for simplification and clarity. All of the discussed refinements to 
the original AON methodology contribute toward better planning and control of 
projects.
Summary
www.ebook3000.com

190  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
Creating a Project Network
1. Here is a partial work breakdown structure for a wedding. Use the method described 
in the Snapshot from Practice 6.1: The Yellow Sticky Approach to create a network 
for this project.
Note: Do not include summary tasks in the network (i.e., 1.3, Ceremony, is a summary 
task; 1.2, Marriage license, is not a summary task). Do not consider who would be 
doing the task in building the network. For example, do not arrange “hiring a band” to 
occur after “florist” because the same person is responsible for doing both tasks. Focus 
only on technical dependencies between tasks.
Hint: Start with the last activity (wedding reception), and work your way back to the 
start of the project. Build the logical sequence of tasks by asking the following ques-
tion: In order to have or do this, what must be accomplished immediately before this? 
Once completed, check forward in time by asking this question: Is this task(s) the only 
thing that is needed immediately before the start of the next task?
Work Breakdown Structure
1. Wedding project
 1.1 Decide on date
 1.2 Marriage license
 1.3 Ceremony
 
1.3.1 Rent church
 
1.3.2 Florist
 
1.3.3 Create/print programs
 
1.3.4 Hire photographer
 
1.3.5 Wedding ceremony
 1.4 Guests
 
1.4.1 Develop guest list
 
1.4.2 Order invitations
 
1.4.3 Address and mail invitations
 
1.4.4 Track RSVPs
 1.5 Reception
 
1.5.1 Reserve reception hall
 
1.5.2 Food and beverage
 
1.5.2.1 Choose caterer
 
1.5.2.2 Decide on menu
 
1.5.2.3 Make final order
 
1.5.3 Hire DJ
 
1.5.4 Decorate reception hall
 
1.5.5 Wedding reception
Exercises

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  191
Drawing AON Networks
 2. Draw a project network from the following information. What activity(ies) is a burst 
activity? What activity(ies) is a merge activity?
ID 
Description 
Predecessor
A 
Survey site 
None
B 
Excavate site 
A
C 
Install power lines 
B
D 
Install drainage 
B
E 
Pour foundation 
C, D 
 3.* Draw a project network from the following information. What activity(ies) is a burst 
activity? What activity(ies) is a merge activity?
ID 
Description 
Predecessor
A 
Identify topic 
None
B 
Research topic 
A
C 
Draft paper 
B
D 
Edit paper 
C
E 
Create graphics 
C
F 
References 
C
G 
Proof paper 
D, E, F
H 
Submit paper 
G
 4. Draw a project network from the following information. What activity(ies) is a burst 
activity? What activity(ies) is a merge activity?
ID 
Description 
Predecessor
A 
Contract signed 
None
B 
Survey designed 
A
C 
Target market identiﬁed 
B
D 
Data collection 
B, C
E 
Develop presentation 
B
F 
Analyze results 
D
G 
Demographics 
C
H 
Presentation 
E, F, G
 5. Draw a project network from the following information. What activity(ies) is a burst 
activity? What activity(ies) is a merge activity?
ID 
Description 
Predecessor
A 
Order review 
None
B 
Order standard parts 
A
C 
Produce standard parts 
A
D 
Design custom parts 
A
E 
Software development 
A
F 
Manufacture custom parts 
C, D
G 
Assemble 
B, F
H 
Test 
E, G
* The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix One.
www.ebook3000.com

192  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
AON Network Times
6. From the following information, develop an AON project network. Complete the 
forward and backward pass, compute activity slack, and identify the critical path. 
How many days will the project take?
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Time
A 
Survey site 
None 
2
B 
Excavate site 
A       
4
C 
Install power lines 
B       
3
D 
Install drainage 
B     
5
E 
Pour foundation 
C, D   
3
7. The project information for the custom order project of the Air Control Company is 
presented here. Draw a project network for this project. Compute the early and late 
activity times and the slack times. Identify the critical path.
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Time
A 
Order review 
None 
2
B 
Order standard parts 
A       
3
C 
Produce standard parts 
A       
10
D 
Design custom parts 
A       
13
E 
Software development 
A       
18
F 
Manufacture custom hardware 
C, D  
15
G 
Assemble 
B, F  
10
H 
Test 
E, G  
 5
8. You have signed a contract to build a garage for the Simpsons. You will receive a 
$500 bonus for completing the project within 17 working days. The contract also 
contains a penalty clause in which you will lose $100 for each day the project takes 
longer than 17 working days.
 
Draw a project network given the information below. Complete the forward and 
backward pass, compute the activity slack, and identify the critical path. Do you 
expect to receive a bonus or a penalty on this project?
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Time (days)
A 
Prepare site 
None 
2
B 
Pour foundation 
B    
3
C 
Erect frame 
C    
4
D 
Roof 
C    
4
E 
Windows 
C    
1
 
Doors 
C    
1
G 
Electrical 
D, E, F, G 
3
H 
Rough-in frame 
F, G  
2
I 
Door opener 
H, I  
1
J 
Paint 
J    
2
K 
Cleanup 
 
1
9. You are creating a customer database for the Hillsboro Hops minor league baseball 
team. Draw a project network given the information in the table that follows. Complete 
the forward and backward pass, compute activity slack, and identify the critical path.
 
How long will this project take? How sensitive is the network schedule? Calcu-
late the free slack and total slack for all noncritical activities.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  193
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Time (days)
A 
Systems design 
None 
2
B 
Subsystem A design 
A    
1
C 
Subsystem B design 
A    
1
D 
Subsystem C design 
A    
1
E 
Program A 
B    
2
F 
Program B 
C    
2
G 
Program C 
D    
2
H 
Subsystem A test 
E    
1
I 
Subsystem B test 
F    
1
J 
Subsystem C test 
G    
1
K 
Integration 
H, I, J 
3
L 
Integration test 
K    
1
10.  K. Nelson, project manager of Print Software, Inc., wants you to prepare a project 
network; compute the early, late, and slack activity times; determine the planned 
project duration; and identify the critical path. His assistant has collected the fol-
lowing information for the Color Printer Drivers Software Project:
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Time
A 
External speciﬁcations 
None 
8
B 
Review design features 
A      
  2
C 
Document new features 
A      
  3
D 
Write software 
A      
60
E 
Program and test 
B      
40
F 
Edit and publish notes 
C      
  2
G 
Review manual 
D      
  2
H 
Alpha site 
E, F  
20
I 
Print manual 
G      
10
J 
Beta site 
H, I   
10
K 
Manufacture 
J       
12
L 
Release and ship 
K      
  3
11. * A large Southeast city is requesting federal funding for a park-and-ride project. 
One of the requirements in the request application is a network plan for the design 
phase of the project. Sophie Kim, the chief engineer, wants you to develop a proj-
ect network plan to meet this requirement. She has gathered the activity time esti-
mates and their dependencies shown here. Show your project network with the 
activity early, late, and slack times. Mark the critical path.
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Time
A 
Survey 
None  
5
B 
Soils report 
A  
20
C 
Traffic design 
A  
30
D 
Lot layout 
A  
 5
E 
Approve design 
B, C, D  
80
F 
Illumination 
E  
15
G 
Drainage 
E  
30
H 
Landscape 
E  
25
I 
Signage 
E  
15
J 
Bid proposal 
F, G, H, I 
10
* The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix One.
www.ebook3000.com

194  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
12.  You are creating a customer database for the Lehigh Valley IronPigs minor 
league baseball team. Draw a project network given the information below. 
Complete the forward and backward pass, compute activity slack, and identify 
the critical path.
    
How long will this project take? How sensitive is the network schedule? Calcu-
late the free slack and total slack for all noncritical activities.
 
 
 
Time
ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
 (days)
A 
Systems design 
None 
2
B 
Subsystem A design 
A  
1
C 
Subsystem B design 
A  
2
D 
Subsystem C design 
A  
1
E 
Program A 
B  
2
F 
Program B 
C  
10
G 
Program C 
D  
 3
H 
Subsystem A test 
E  
 1
I 
Subsystem B test 
F  
 1
J 
Subsystem C test 
G  
 1
K 
Integration 
H, I, J 
 3
L 
Integration test 
K  
 1
13. * You are completing a group term paper. Given the project network that follows, 
complete the forward and backward pass, compute activity slack, and identify the 
critical path. Use this information to create a Gantt chart for the project. Be sure to 
show slack for noncritical activities.
* The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix One.
ID
Legend
DUR
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
A
1
Identify topic
Research topic
Draft paper
Edit paper
Create graphics
References
Final Draft
Proof
Identify
topic
Group Term Paper
B
5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Research
topic
C
3
Draft
paper
D
2
Edit
paper
G
1
Proof
F
1
References
Description
E
1
Create
graphics
Submit
Paper
H
1

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  195
ID
Legend
DUR
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
A
1
Form
Project Team
B
5
Interview
Users
C
3
Survey
Users
D
2
Identify New 
Features
G
3
Produce
Prototype
J
3
Perform
Sales Calls
H
3
Design
Graphics
I
5
Conduct
Marketing
Description
E
4
Acquire
Materials
F
2
Develop Mrkt
Campaign
Product
Upgrade
Project
Project Team
Interview Users
Survey Users
ID New Features
Acquire Materials
Dev Mrkt Campaign
Produce Prototypes
Design Graphics
Conduct Marketing
Perform Sales Calls
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
13
12
14
15
16
17
18
Product Upgrade Project Gantt Chart
14.  You are managing a product upgrade project for Bangkokagogo. Given the project 
network that follows, complete the forward and backward pass, compute activity 
slack, and identify the critical path. Use this information to create a Gantt chart for 
the project. Be sure to show slack for noncritical activities.
15.  You are creating a database for the Oklahoma City Thunder NBA Basketball team. 
Given the project network that follows, complete the forward and backward pass, 
compute activity slack, and identify the critical path. Use this information to create 
a Gantt chart for the project.
www.ebook3000.com

196  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
Computer Exercises
16.  The planning department of an electronics firm has set up the activities for devel-
oping and production of a new MP3 Player. Given the information below, develop 
a project network using Microsoft Project. Assume a five-day workweek and the 
project starts on January 4, 2017.
Activity 
Description 
Activity 
     Activity Time
ID  
 
Predecessor 
(weeks)
1 
Staff 
None 
2
2 
Develop market program 
1        
  3
3 
Select channels of distribution 
1        
  8
4 
Patent 
1       
12
5 
Pilot production 
1       
  4
6 
Test market 
5       
  4
7 
Ad promotion 
2       
  4
8 
Set up for production 
4, 6   
16
   The project team has requested that you create a network for the project, and deter-
mine if the project can be completed in 45 weeks.
ID
Legend
DUR
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
A
2
Problem
Deﬁnition
B
3
System
Analysis
E
6
Develop
Input Screens
H
2
Test
System
F
4
Develop
Output Reports
G
5
Create
Database
Description
C
4
Design I/Q
D
10
Design
Database
I
3
Implement
System
Problem Deﬁnition
System Analysis
Design I/Q
Design Database
Develop Input Screens
Develop Input Reports
Create Database
Test System
Implement System
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
13
12
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22 23 24 25

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  197
17.  Using Microsoft Project, set up the network and determine the critical path for 
Phase 1 of the Whistler Ski Resort project. The project workweek will be 5 days 
(M–F).
Whistler Ski Resort Project
Given the fact that the number of skiing visitors to Whistler, B.C., Canada, has been 
increasing at an exciting rate, thanks to the 2010 Winter Olympics, the Whistler Ski 
Association has been considering construction of another ski lodge and ski complex. The 
results of an economic feasibility study just completed by members of the staff show that 
a winter resort complex near the base of Whistler Mountain could be a very profitable 
venture. The area is accessible by car, bus, train, and air. The board of directors has voted 
to build the 10-million-dollar complex recommended in the study. Unfortunately, due to 
the short summer season, the complex will have to be built in stages. The first stage (year 1) 
will contain a day lodge, chair lift, rope tow, generator house (for electricity), and a park-
ing lot designed to accommodate 400 cars and 30 buses. The second and third stages will 
include a hotel, ice rink, pool, shops, two additional chair lifts, and other attractions. The 
board has decided that stage one should begin no later than April 1 and be completed by 
October 1, in time for the next skiing season. You have been assigned the task of project 
manager, and it is your job to coordinate the ordering of materials and construction 
activities to ensure the project’s completion by the required date.
 
After looking into the possible sources of materials, you are confronted with the 
following time estimates. Materials for the chair lift and rope tow will take 30 days and 
12 days, respectively, to arrive once the order is submitted. Lumber for the day lodge, 
generator hut, and foundations will take 9 days to arrive. The electrical and plumbing 
materials for the day lodge will take 12 days to arrive. The generator will take 12 days 
to arrive. Before actual construction can begin on the various facilities, a road to the 
site must be built; this will take 6 days. As soon as the road is in, clearing can begin 
concurrently on the sites of the day lodge, generator house, chair lift, and rope tow. It 
is estimated that the clearing task at each site will take 6 days, 3 days, 36 days, and  
6 days, respectively. The clearing of the main ski slopes can begin after the area for the 
chair lift has been cleared; this will take 84 days.
 
The foundation for the day lodge will take 12 days to complete. Construction of the 
main framework will take an additional 18 days. After the framework is completed, 
electrical wiring and plumbing can be installed concurrently. These should take 24 and 
30 days, respectively. Finally, the finishing construction on the day lodge can begin; 
this will take 36 days.
 
Installation of the chair lift towers (67 days) can begin once the site is cleared, lum-
ber delivered, and the foundation completed (6 days). Also, when the chair lift site has 
been cleared, construction of a permanent road to the upper towers can be started; this 
will take 24 days. While the towers are being installed, the electric motor to drive the 
chair lift can be installed; the motor can be installed in 24 days. Once the towers are 
completed and the motor installed, it will take 3 days to install the cable and an addi-
tional 12 days to install the chairs.
 
Installation of the towers for the rope tow can begin once the site is cleared and the 
foundation is built and poured; it takes 4 days to build the foundation, pour the con-
crete and let it cure, and 20 days to install the towers for the rope tow. While the towers 
are being erected, installation of the electric motor to drive the rope tow can begin; 
this activity will take 24 days. After the towers and motor are installed, the rope tow 
can be strung in 1 day. The parking lot can be cleared once the rope tow is finished; 
this task will take 18 days.
www.ebook3000.com

198  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
 
The foundation for the generator house can begin at the same time as the foun-
dation for the lodge; this will take 6 days. The main framework for the generator 
house can begin once the foundation is completed; framing will take 12 days. 
After the house is framed, the diesel generator can be installed in 18 days. Finish-
ing construction on the generator house can now begin and will take 12 more 
days.
Assignment:
1. Identify the critical path on your network.
2. Can the project be completed by October 1?
Optical Disk Preinstallation Project
18.  The optical disk project team has started gathering the information necessary to 
develop the project network—predecessor activities and activity times in weeks. 
The results of their meeting are found in the following table.
Activity 
Description 
Duration 
Predecessor
   1 
Define scope 
  6 
None                  
  2 
Deﬁne customer problems 
  3 
1                         
  3 
Deﬁne data records and relationships 
  5 
1                         
  4 
Mass storage requirements 
  5 
2, 3                     
  5 
Consultant needs analysis 
10 
2, 3                     
  6 
Prepare installation network 
  3 
4, 5                     
  7 
Estimate costs and budget 
  2 
4, 5                     
  8 
Design section “point” system 
   1 
4, 5                     
  9 
Write request proposal 
  5 
4, 5                     
 10 
Compile vendor list 
  3 
4, 5                     
  11 
Prepare mgmt. control system 
  5 
6, 7                     
 12 
Prepare comparison report 
  5 
 9, 10                    
 13 
Compare system “philosophies” 
  3 
8, 12                   
 14 
Compare total installation 
  2 
8, 12                   
 15 
Compare cost of support 
  3 
8, 12                   
 16 
Compare customer satisfaction level 
10 
8, 12                   
 17 
Assign philosophies points 
   1 
13                       
 18 
Assign installation cost 
   1 
14                       
 19 
Assign support cost 
   1 
15                       
20 
Assign customer satisfaction points 
   1 
16                       
 21 
Select best system 
   1 
11, 17, 18, 19, 20
22 
Order system 
   1 
21                      
   The project team has requested that you create a network for the project, and deter-
mine if the project can be completed in 45 weeks.
Lag Exercises
19.  From the following information, compute the early, late, and slack times for each 
activity. Identify the critical path.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  199
20.  Given the following information, compute the early, late, and slack times for the 
project network. Which activities on the critical path have only the start or finish 
of the activity on the critical path?
Lag 4
Lag 2
Lag 2
Legend
ES
LS
SL
EF
LF
SL
Lag 3
A
5
ID
Duration
Design
Description
C
6
Code
Software
E
3
Debug
D
3
Assemble
B
1
Order
Parts
F
1
Install
Legend
ES
LS
SL
EF
LF
SL
ID
Duration
A
Post
Signs
Description
Lag 3
Lag 10
1
B
Prepare
Site
Open
Lot
3
D
Dig
Trenches
5
E
Lay
Pipe
5
F
Black
Fill
3
G
Pave
2
C
Lights
1
H
Paint
Parkin
Lines
1
I
Signage
1
J
1
Lag 1
Lag 3
www.ebook3000.com

200  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
Legend
Lag 10
Lag 3
Lag 4
Lag 5
Lag 3
A
15
Interview
B
5
Def. New
Features
C
2
Order
Comps
D
8
Prototype
E
5
Test
F
10
Field Test
ES
LS
SL
EF
LF
SL
ID
Duration
Description
Legend
Lag 2
Lag 5
Lag 1
Lag 5
A
3
Design
B
3
Tear
Down
C
1
Order
Appliances
D
7
Build
Cabinets
E
2
Install
Cabinets
G
1
Inspect
F
2
Install
Appliances
ES
LS
SL
EF
LF
SL
ID
Duration
Description
21. * Given the information in the following lag exercises, compute the early, late, and 
slack times for the project network. Which activities on the critical path have only 
the start or finish of the activity on the critical path?
* The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix One.
22.  Given the network below, compute the early, late, and slack time for each activity. 
Clearly identify the critical path.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  201
CyClon Project
23.  The CyClon project team has started gathering information necessary to develop a 
project network—predecessor activities and activity time in days. The results of 
their meeting are found in the following table:
Activity 
Description 
Duration 
Predecessor
  1 
CyClon Project 
 
  2 
Design 
     10 
  3 
Procure prototype parts 
     10 
           2
  4 
Fabricate parts 
       8 
           2
  5 
Assemble prototype 
       4 
           3, 4
  6 
Laboratory test 
       7 
           5
  7 
Field test 
     10 
           6
  8 
Adjust design 
       6 
           7
  9 
Order stock components 
     10 
           8
10 
Order custom components 
     15 
           8
 11 
Assemble test production unit 
     10 
           9, 10
12 
Test unit 
       5 
           11
13 
Document results 
       3 
           12
Part A. Create a network based on the above information. How long will the project 
take? What is the critical path?
Part B. Upon further review the team recognizes that they missed three finish-to-start 
lags. Procure prototype parts will involve only 2 days of work but it will take 8 days for the 
parts to be delivered. Likewise, Order stock components will take 2 days of work and 8 
days for delivery and Order custom components 2 days of work and 13 days for delivery.
 
Reconfigure the CyClon schedule by entering the three finish-to-start lags. What 
impact did these lags have on the original schedule? On the amount of work required 
to complete the project?
Part C. Management is still not happy with the schedule and wants the project com-
pleted as soon as possible. Unfortunately, they are not willing to approve additional 
resources. One team member pointed out that the network contained only finish-to-
start relationships and that it might be possible to reduce project duration by creating 
start-to-start lags. After much deliberation the team concluded that the following rela-
tionships could be converted into start-to-start lags:
∙ Procure prototype parts could start 6 days after the start of Design.
∙ Fabricate parts could start 9 days after the start of Design.
∙ Laboratory test could begin 1 day after the start of Assemble prototype.
∙ Field test could start 5 days after the start of Laboratory test.
∙ Adjust design could begin 7 days after the start of Field test.
∙ Order stock and Order custom components could begin 5 days after Adjust design.
∙ Test unit could begin 9 days after the start of Assemble test production unit.
∙ Document results could start 3 days after the start of Test unit.
Reconfigure the CyClon schedule by entering all nine start-to-start lags. What impact 
did these lags have on the original schedule (Part A)? How long will the project take? 
Is there a change in the critical path? Is there a change in the sensitivity of the network? 
Why would management like this solution?
www.ebook3000.com

Case 6.1
Advantage Energy Technology Data Center  
Migration*—Part A
Brian Smith, network administrator at Advanced Energy Technology (AET), has been 
given the responsibility of implementing the migration of a large data center to a new 
office location. Careful planning is needed because AET operates in the highly com-
petitive petroleum industry. AET is one of five national software companies that 
provide an accounting and business management package for oil jobbers and gasoline 
distributors. A few years ago, AET jumped into the “application service provider” 
world. Their large data center provides clients with remote access to AET’s complete 
suite of application software systems. Traditionally, one of AET’s primary competi-
tive advantages has been the company’s trademark IT reliability. Due to the complex-
ity of this project, Brian will have to use a parallel method of implementation. 
Although this will increase project costs, a parallel approach is essential if reliability 
is not to be compromised.
 
Currently, AET’s data center is located on the second floor of a renovated old bank 
building in downtown Corvallis, Oregon. The company is moving to a new, one-level 
building located in the recently developed industrial complex at the Corvallis Interna-
tional Airport. On February 1, Brian is formally assigned the task by the Vice Presi-
dent of Operations, Dan Whitmore, with the following guidelines:
∙ From start to finish, it is anticipated the entire project will take three to four months 
to complete.
∙ It is essential that AET’s 235 clients suffer no downtime.
Whitmore advises Brian to come back to the Executive Committee on February 15, 
with a presentation on the scope of the project that includes costs, “first-cut” timeline, 
and proposed project team members.
 
Brian had some preliminary discussions with some of AET’s managers and direc-
tors from each of the functional departments and then arranged for a full-day scope 
202  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
References
Gantt, H. L., Work, Wages and Profit, published by The Engineering Magazine, New 
York, 1910; republished as Work, Wages and Profits (Easton, PA: Hive Publishing 
Company, 1974).
Kelly, J. E., “Critical Path Planning and Scheduling: Mathematical Basis,” Operations 
Research, vol. 9, no. 3 (May–June 1961), pp. 296–321.
Levy, F. K., G. L. Thompson, and J. D. West, “The ABCs of the Critical Path 
Method,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 41, no. 5 (1963), pp. 98–108.
Rosenblatt, A., and G. Watson, “Concurrent Engineering,” IEEE Spectrum, July 1991, 
pp. 22–37.
Turtle, Q. C., Implementing Concurrent Project Management (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1994).
* Prepared by James Moran, a project management instructor at the College of Business, Oregon State University

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  203
meeting on February 4 with a few of the managers and technical representatives from 
operations, systems, facilities, and applications. The scope team determined the 
following:
∙ Three to four months is a feasible project timeline and first-cut cost estimate is 
$80,000–$90,000 (this includes the infrastructure upgrade of the new site).
∙ Critical to the “no-downtime” requirement is the need to completely rely on AET’s 
remote disaster recovery “hot” site for full functionality.
∙ Brian will serve as project manager of a team consisting of one team member each 
from facilities, operations/systems, operations/telecommunications, systems & 
applications, and customer service.
Brian’s Executive Committee report was positively received and, after a few modifica-
tions and recommendations, he was formally charged with responsibility for the proj-
ect. Brian recruited his team and scheduled their first team meeting (March 1) as the 
initial task of his project planning process.
 
Once the initial meeting is conducted Brian can hire the contractors to renovate 
the new data center. During this time Brian will figure out how to design the net-
work. Brian estimates that screening and hiring a contractor will take about one 
week and that the network design will take about two weeks. The new center requires 
a new ventilation system. The manufacturer’s requirements include an ambient tem-
perature of 67 degrees to keep all of the data servers running at optimal speeds. The 
ventilation system has a lead time of three weeks. Brian will also need to order new 
racks to hold the servers, switches, and other network devices. The racks have a two-
week delivery time.
 
The data center supervisor requested that Brian replace all of the old power sup-
plies and data cables. Brian will need to order these as well. Because Brian has a great 
relationship with the vendor, they guarantee that it will take only one week lead time 
for the power supplies and the data cables. Once the new ventilation system and racks 
arrive, Brian can begin installing them. It will take one week to install the ventilation 
system and three weeks to install the racks. The renovation of the new data center can 
begin as soon as the contractors have been hired. The contractors tell Brian that con-
struction will take 20 days. Once the construction begins and after Brian installs the 
ventilation system and racks, the city inspector must approve the construction of the 
raised floor.
 
The city inspector will take two days to approve the infrastructure. After the city 
inspection and after the new power supplies and cables have arrived, Brian can install 
the power supplies and run the cables. Brian estimates that it will take five days to 
install the power supplies and one week to run all of the data cables. Before Brian can 
assign an actual date for taking the network off line and switching to the hot remote 
site, he must get approval from each of the functional units (“Switchover Approval”). 
Meetings with each of the functional units will require one week. During this time he 
can initiate a power check to ensure that each of the racks has sufficient voltage. This 
will require only one day.
 
Upon completion of the power check, he can take one week to install his test servers. 
The test servers will test all of the primary network functions and act as a safeguard 
before the network is taken off line. The batteries must be charged, ventilation installed, 
and test servers up and running before management can be assured that the new infra-
structure is safe, which will take two days. Then they will sign off the Primary Systems 
check, taking one day of intense meetings. They will also set an official date for the 
network move.
www.ebook3000.com

204  Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan
 
Brian is happy that everything has gone well thus far and is convinced that the 
move will go just as smoothly. Now that an official date is set, the network will be 
shut down for a day. Brian must move all of the network components to the new data 
center. Brian will do the move over the weekend—two days—when user traffic is at 
low point.
ASSIGNMENT
1. Generate a priority matrix for AET’s system move.
2. Develop a WBS for Brian’s project. Include duration (days) and predecessors.
3. Using a project planning tool, generate a network diagram for this project. 
 
Note: Base your plan on the following guidelines: eight-hour days, five-day weeks 
except for when Brian moves the network components over a weekend, no holiday 
breaks, March 1, 2010, is the project start date. Ordering Ventilation System, New 
Racks, and Power Supplies/Cables takes only one actual day of work. The remain-
ing days are the time necessary for the vendors to fill and ship the order to Brian. 
So use Finish to Start lags here. Assume that five days after the start of the Renova-
tion of the Data Center that the raised floor will be ready for inspection (a Start-to-
Start lag).
Case 6.2
Shoreline Stadium Case
The G&E Company is preparing a bid to build the new 47,000-seat Shoreline baseball 
stadium. The construction must start on July 3, 2017, and be completed in time for the 
start of the 2020 season. A penalty clause of $250,000 per day of delay beyond April 3 
is written into the contract.
 
Percival Young, the president of the company, expressed optimism at obtaining the 
contract and revealed that the company could net as much as $3 million on the project. 
He also said if they were successful, the prospects of future projects are bright since 
there is a projected renaissance in building classic ball parks with modern luxury boxes.
ASSIGNMENT
Given the information provided in Table 6.3, construct a network schedule for the sta-
dium project and answer the following questions:
1. Will the project be able to be completed by the April 3 deadline? How long will it take?
2. What is the critical path for the project?
3. Based on the schedule would you recommend that G&E pursue this contact? Why? 
Include a one-page Gantt chart for the stadium schedule.

Chapter 6  Developing a Project Plan  205
TABLE 6.3 
Shoreline Stadium Case
ID 
Activity 
Duration 
Predecessor(s)
   1 
Baseball Stadium 
 
   2 
Clear stadium site 
  70 days 
          —
   3 
Demolish building  
  30 days 
          2
   4 
Set up construction site 
  70 days 
          3
   5 
Drive support piling 
120 days 
          4
   6 
Pour lower concrete bowl 
120 days 
          5
   7 
Pour main concourse 
120 days 
          6
   8 
Install playing ﬁeld 
  90 days 
          6
   9 
Construct upper steel bowl 
120 days 
          6
 10 
Install seats 
140 days 
          9
  11 
Build luxury boxes 
  90 days 
          9
 12 
Install jumbotron 
  30 days 
          9
 13 
Stadium infrastructure 
120 days 
          9
 14 
Construct steel canopy 
  75 days 
         10
 15 
Light installation 
  30 days 
         10
 16 
Build roof supports 
  90 days 
          4
 17 
Construct roof 
180 days 
         16
 18 
Install roof tracks 
  90 days 
         14
 19 
Install roof 
  90 days 
     17, 18
20 
Inspection 
  20 days 
8, 11, 13, 15, 19
Case Appendix
Technical Details For The Shoreline Baseball Stadium
For purposes of this case assume the following:
1. The following holidays are observed: January 1, Martin Luther King Day (third 
Monday in January), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), July 4th, Labor Day (first 
Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (4th Thursday in November), December 25 
and 26.
2. If a holiday falls on a Saturday then Friday will be given as an extra day off, and if 
it falls on a Sunday then Monday will be given as a day off.
3. The construction crew work Monday through Friday.
www.ebook3000.com

206
Managing Risk
7
OUTLINE
7.!1 
Risk Management Process
7.2 Step 1: Risk Identification
7.3 Step 2: Risk Assessment
7.4 Step 3: Risk Response Development
7.5 Contingency Planning
7.6 Opportunity Management
7.7 
Contingency Funding and Time Buffers
7.8 Step 4: Risk Response Control
7.9 Change Control Management
Summary
Appendix 7.1: PERT and PERT Simulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
7-1  Describe the risk management process.
7-2  Understand how to identify project risks.
7-3  Assess the significance of different  
project risks.
7-4  Describe the four different responses to man-
aging risks.
7-5  Understand the role contingency plans play in 
risk management process.
7-6  Understand opportunity management and 
describe the four different approaches to 
responding to opportunities in a project.
7-7  Understand how contingency funds and time 
buffers are used to manage risks on a project.
7-8  Recognize the need for risk management 
being an ongoing activity.
7-9  Describe the change control process.
C H A P T E R  S E V E N

207
You’ve got to go out on a limb sometimes because that’s where the fruit is.
 —Will Rogers
Every project manager understands risks are inherent in projects, deliveries are 
delayed, accidents happen, people get sick, etc. No amount of planning can overcome 
risk, or the inability to control chance events. In the context of projects, risk is an 
uncertain event or condition that, if it occurs, has a positive or negative effect on proj-
ect objectives. A risk has a cause and, if it occurs, a consequence. For example, a cause 
may be a flu virus or change in scope requirements. The event is that team members 
get stricken with the flu or the product has to be redesigned. If either of these uncertain 
events occurs, it will impact the cost, schedule, and quality of the project.
 
Some potential risk events can be identified before the project starts—such as 
equipment malfunction or change in technical requirements. Risks can be anticipated 
consequences, like schedule slippages or cost overruns. Risks can be beyond imagina-
tion like the 2008 financial meltdown.
 
While risks can have positive consequences such as unexpected price reduction in 
materials, the primary focus of this chapter is on what can go wrong and the risk man-
agement process.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

208  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
 
Risk management attempts to recognize and manage potential and unforeseen trou-
ble spots that may occur when the project is implemented. Risk management identifies 
as many risk events as possible (what can go wrong), minimizes their impact (what 
can be done about the event before the project begins), manages responses to those 
events that do materialize (contingency plans), and provides contingency funds to 
cover risk events that actually materialize.
 
For a humorous, but ultimately embarrassing example of poor risk management see 
Snapshot from Practice 7.1: Giant Popsicle Gone Wrong.
7.1 Risk Management Process
Figure 7.1 presents a graphic model of the risk management challenge. The chances of 
a risk event occurring (e.g., an error in time estimates, cost estimates, or design tech-
nology) are greatest during the early stages of a project. This is when uncertainty is 
highest and many questions remain unanswered. As the project progresses toward 
completion, risk declines as the answers to critical issues (Will the technology work? 
Is the timeline feasible?) are resolved. The cost impact of a risk event, however, 
increases over the life of the project. For example, the risk event of a design flaw 
occurring after a prototype has been made has a greater cost or time impact than if the 
flaw were discovered during the planning phase of the project.
 
The cost of mismanaged risk control early on in the project is exemplified by the 
ill-fated 1999 NASA Mars Climate Orbiter. Investigations revealed that Lockheed 
Martin botched the design of critical navigation software. While flight computers on 
the ground did calculations based on pounds of thrust per second, the spacecraft’s 
7-1
LO
Describe the risk  
management process.
An attempt to erect the World’s Larg-
est Popsicle in New York City ended 
with a scene straight out of a disaster 
film, but much stickier.
The 25-foot-tall, 17½-ton treat of 
frozen juice melted faster than expected, flooding 
Union Square in downtown Manhattan with kiwi-
strawberry–flavored fluid.
 
Bicyclists wiped out in the stream of goo. Pedestri-
ans slipped. Traffic was, well, frozen. Firefighters 
closed off several streets and used hoses to wash away 
the thick, sweet slime.
 
The Snapple Company, a leading maker of soft 
beverages, had been trying to promote a new line of 
frozen treats by setting a record for the World’s Larg-
est Popsicle, but called off the stunt before the fro-
zen giant was pulled fully upright by a construction 
crane.
 
Authorities said they were worried the 2½-story 
popsicle would collapse.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  7.1
Giant Popsicle Gone Wrong*
© Brian Smith/Zuma Press, Inc.
 
Organizers were not sure why it melted so quickly. 
“We planned for it. We just didn’t expect for it to hap-
pen so fast,” said Snapple spokeswoman Lauren Rad-
cliffe. She said the company would offer to pay the city 
for the clean-up costs.
* Associated Press, June 23, 2005.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  209
computer software used metric units called newtons. A check to see if the values were 
compatible was never done.
 
“Our check and balances processes did not catch an error like this that should have 
been caught,” said Ed Weiler, NASA’s associate administrator for space science. “That is 
the bottom line” (Orlando Sentinel, 1999). If the error had been discovered early the cor-
rection would have been relatively simple and inexpensive. Instead the error was never 
discovered, and after the nine-month journey to the Red Planet, the $125-million probe 
approached Mars at too low an altitude and burned up in the planet’s atmosphere.
 
Following the 1999 debacle, NASA instituted a more robust risk management sys-
tem which has produced a string of successful missions to Mars, including the dra-
matic landing of the Curiosity rover in August 2012.1
 
Risk management is a proactive approach rather than reactive. It is a preventive 
process designed to ensure that surprises are reduced and that negative consequences 
associated with undesirable events are minimized. It also prepares the project manager 
to take action when a time, cost, and/or technical advantage is possible. Successful 
management of project risk gives the project manager better control over the future 
and can significantly improve chances of reaching project objectives on time, within 
budget, and meeting required technical (functional) performance.
 
The sources of project risks are unlimited. There are external sources, such as infla-
tion, market acceptance, exchange rates, and government regulations. In practice, these 
risk events are often referred to as “threats” to differentiate them from those that are 
not within the project manager’s or team’s responsibility area. (Later we will see bud-
gets for such risk events are placed in a “management reserve” contingency budget.) 
Since such external risks are usually considered before the decision to go ahead with 
the project, they will be excluded from the discussion of project risks. However, exter-
nal risks are extremely important and must be addressed.
 
The major components of the risk management process are depicted in Figure 7.2. 
Each step will be examined in more detail in the remainder of the chapter.
FIGURE 7.1
Risk Event Graph 
Risk
High
Low
High
Low
Cost
Chances of risks
occurring
Project Life Cycle
Executing
Delivering
Deﬁning Planning
Cost to ﬁx
risk event
1 E. Landau, “Mars Landing Went ‘Flawlessly,’ Scientists Say,” CNN.com, accessed August 14, 2012.
www.ebook3000.com

210  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
7.2 Step 1: Risk Identification
The risk management process begins by trying to generate a list of all the possible 
risks that could affect the project. Typically the project manager pulls together, during 
the planning phase, a risk management team consisting of core team members and 
other relevant stakeholders. Research has demonstrated that groups make more accu-
rate judgments about risks than individuals do (Snizek and Henry, 1989). The team 
uses brainstorming and other problem identifying techniques to identify potential 
problems. Participants are encouraged to keep an open mind and generate as many 
probable risks as possible. More than one project has been bushwhacked by an event 
that members thought was preposterous in the beginning. Later during the assessment 
phase, participants will have a chance to analyze and filter out unreasonable risks.
 
One common mistake that is made early in the risk identification process is to focus 
on objectives and not on the events that could produce consequences. For example, team 
members may identify failing to meet schedule as a major risk. What they need to focus 
on are the events that could cause this to happen (i.e., poor estimates, adverse weather, 
shipping delays, etc.). Only by focusing on actual events can potential solutions be found.
 
Organizations use risk breakdown structures (RBSs) in conjunction with work 
breakdown structures (WBSs) to help management teams identify and eventually ana-
lyze risks. Figure 7.3 provides a generic example of a RBS. The focus at the beginning 
should be on risks that can affect the whole project as opposed to a specific section of 
the project or network. For example, the discussion of funding may lead the team to 
identify the possibility of the project budget being cut after the project has started as a 
FIGURE 7.2
The Risk 
Management Process 
New risks
New risks
New risks
Assess risks in terms of:
* Severity of impact
* Likelihood of occurring
* Controllability
* Develop a strategy to reduce
   possible damage
* Develop contingency plans
* Implement risk strategy
* Monitor and adjust plan for
   new risks
* Change management
Analyze the project to identify
sources of risk
Step 1 Risk Identiﬁcation
Step 2 Risk Assessment
Known risks
Risk assessment
Risk management
plan
Step 3 Risk Response Development
Step 4 Risk Response Control
7-2
LO
Understand how to  
identify project risks.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  211
FIGURE 7.3 The Risk Breakdown Structure (RBS) 
Project
Organizational
Project
dependencies
Resources
Funding
Prioritization
External
Subcontractors
and suppliers
Regulatory
Market
Customer
Weather
Technical
Requirements
Technology
Complexity and
interfaces
Performances
and reliability
Quality
Project
Management
Estimating
Planning
Controlling
Communication
significant risk event. Likewise, when discussing the market the team may identify 
responding to new product releases by competitors as a risk event.
 
After the macro risks have been identified, specific areas can be checked. An effec-
tive tool for identifying specific risks is the work breakdown structure. Use of the RBS 
reduces the chance a risk event will be missed. On large projects multiple risk teams 
are organized around specific deliverables and submit their risk management reports 
to the project manager.
 
A risk profile is another useful tool. A risk profile is a list of questions that address tra-
ditional areas of uncertainty on a project. These questions have been developed and refined 
from previous, similar projects. Figure 7.4 provides a partial example of a risk profile.
 
Good risk profiles, like RBSs, are tailored to the type of project in question. For exam-
ple, building an information system is different from building a new car. They are organi-
zation specific. Risk profiles recognize the unique strengths and weaknesses of the firm. 
Finally, risk profiles address both technical and management risks. For example, the pro-
file shown in Figure 7.4 asks questions about design such as, Does the design depend 
upon unrealistic assumptions? The questions may lead the team to identify that the tech-
nology will not work under extreme conditions as a risk. Similarly, questions about work 
environment (Do people cooperate across functional boundaries?) may lead to the identi-
fication of potential communication breakdowns between marketing and R&D as a risk.
 
Risk profiles are generated and maintained usually by personnel from the project 
office. They are updated and refined during the postproject audit (see Chapter 14). 
These profiles, when kept up to date, can be a powerful resource in the risk management 
process. The collective experience of the firm’s past projects resides in their questions.
 
Historical records can complement or be used when formal risk profiles are not 
available. Project teams can investigate what happened on similar projects in the past to 
www.ebook3000.com

212  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
identify potential risks. For example, a project manager can check the on-time perfor-
mance of selected vendors to gauge the threat of shipping delays. IT project managers 
can access “best practices” papers detailing other companies’ experiences converting 
software systems. Inquiries should not be limited to recorded data. Savvy project man-
agers tap the wisdom of others by seeking the advice of veteran project managers.
 
The risk identification process should not be limited to just the core team. Input from 
customers, sponsors, subcontractors, vendors, and other stakeholders should be solicited. 
Relevant stakeholders can be formally interviewed or included on the risk management 
team. Not only do these players have a valuable perspective, but by involving them in the 
risk management process they also become more committed to project success.2
 
One of the keys to success in risk identification is attitude. While a “can do” atti-
tude is essential during implementation, project managers have to encourage critical 
thinking when it comes to risk identification. The goal is to find potential problems 
before they happen.
 
The RBS and risk profiles are useful tools for making sure no stones are left 
unturned. At the same time, when done well the number of risks identified can be 
overwhelming and a bit discouraging. Initial optimism can be replaced with griping 
and cries of “what have we gotten ourselves into?” It is important that project manag-
ers set the right tone and complete the risk management process so members regain 
confidence in themselves and the project.
7.3 Step 2: Risk Assessment
Step 1 produces a list of potential risks. Not all of these risks deserve attention. Some 
are trivial and can be ignored, while others pose serious threats to the welfare of the 
project. Managers have to develop methods for sifting through the list of risks, elimi-
nating inconsequential or redundant ones and stratifying worthy ones in terms of 
importance and need for attention.
7-3
LO
Assess the significance 
of different project risks.
FIGURE 7.4
Partial Risk Profile 
for Product 
Development Project
Technical Requirements
Are the requirements stable? 
Design 
Does the design depend on unrealistic or  
optimistic assumptions? 
Testing 
Will testing equipment be available when needed? 
Development 
Is the development process supported by a com-
patible set of procedures, methods, and tools? 
Schedule 
Is the schedule dependent upon the completion 
of other projects? 
Budget 
How reliable are the cost estimates?
Quality 
Are quality considerations built into the design? 
Management 
Do people know who has authority for what? 
Work Environment 
Do people work cooperatively across functional 
boundaries? 
Staffing 
Is staff inexperienced or understaffed? 
Customer 
Does the customer understand what it will take 
to complete the project? 
Contractors 
Are there any ambiguities in contractor task 
definitions?
2 The Delphi Method (see Snapshot from Practice 5.3) is a popular technique for involving stakeholders.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  213
 
 Scenario analysis is the easiest and most commonly used technique for analyzing 
risks. Team members assess the significance of each risk event in terms of:
∙ Probability of the event.
∙ Impact of the event.
 
Simply stated, risks need to be evaluated in terms of the likelihood the event is 
going to occur and the impact or consequences of its occurrence. The risk of a project 
manager being struck by lightning at a work site would have major negative impact on 
the project, but the likelihood is so low it is not worthy of consideration. Conversely, 
people do change jobs, so an event like the loss of key project personnel would have 
not only an adverse impact but also a high likelihood of occurring in some organiza-
tions. If so, then it would be wise for that organization to be proactive and mitigate this 
risk by developing incentive schemes for retaining specialists and/or engaging in 
cross-training to reduce the impact of turnover.
 
The quality and credibility of the risk analysis process require that different lev-
els of risk probabilities and impacts be defined. These definitions vary and should 
be tailored to the specific nature and needs of the project. For example, a relatively 
simple scale ranging from “very unlikely” to “almost certainly” may suffice for one 
project, whereas another project may use more precise numerical probabilities  
(e.g., 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, . . .).
 
Impact scales can be a bit more problematic since adverse risks affect project objec-
tives differently. For example, a component failure may cause only a slight delay in 
project schedule but a major increase in project cost. If controlling cost is a high prior-
ity, then the impact would be severe. If, on the other hand, time is more critical than 
cost, then the impact would be minor.
 
Because impact ultimately needs to be assessed in terms of project priorities, differ-
ent kinds of impact scales are used. Some scales may simply use rank-order descrip-
tors, such as “low,” “moderate,” “high,” and “very high,” whereas others use numeric 
weights (e.g., 1–10). Some may focus on the project in general while others focus on 
specific project objectives. The risk management team needs to establish up front what 
distinguishes a 1 from a 3 or “moderate” impact from “severe” impact. Figure 7.5 pro-
vides an example of how impact scales could be defined given the project objectives of 
cost, time, scope, and quality.
 
Documentation of scenario analyses can be seen in various risk assessment forms 
used by companies. Figure 7.6 is a partial example of a risk assessment form used on 
an IS project involving the upgrade from Windows 10 to Windows 11.
 
Notice that in addition to evaluating the severity and probability of risk events the 
team also assesses when the event might occur and its detection difficulty. Detection 
difficulty is a measure of how easy it would be to detect that the event was going to 
occur in time to take mitigating action, that is, how much warning would we have? So 
in the Windows 11 conversion example, the detection scale would range from 5 = no 
warning to 1 = lots of time to react.
 
Often organizations find it useful to categorize the severity of different risks into 
some form of risk assessment matrix. The matrix is typically structured around the 
impact and likelihood of the risk event. For example, the risk matrix presented in Fig-
ure 7.7 consists of a 5 × 5 array of elements with each element representing a different 
set of impact and likelihood values.
 
The matrix is divided into red, yellow, and green zones representing major, moder-
ate, and minor risks, respectively. The red zone is centered on the top right corner of 
the matrix (high impact/high likelihood), while the green zone is centered on the 
www.ebook3000.com

214  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
bottom left corner (low impact/low likelihood). The moderate risk, yellow zone 
extends down the middle of the matrix. Since impact is generally considered more 
important than likelihood (a 10 percent chance of losing $1,000,000 is usually consid-
ered a more severe risk than a 90 percent chance of losing $1,000), the red zone (major 
risk) extends farther down the high impact column.
 
Using the Windows 11 project again as an example, interface problems and system 
freezing would be placed in the red zone (major risk), while user backlash and hard-
ware malfunctioning would be placed in the yellow zone (moderate risk).
 
The risk severity matrix provides a basis for prioritizing which risks to address. 
Red zone risks receive first priority followed by yellow zone risks. Green zone risks 
are typically considered inconsequential and ignored unless their status changes.
FIGURE 7.6
Risk Assessment 
Form 
Interface problems
System freezing
User backlash
Hardware
malfunctioning
4
Likelihood
Risk Event
Impact
Detection Difficulty
When
2
4
1
4
5
3
5
4
5
3
5
Conversion
Start-up
Postinstallation
Installation
Project
Objective
Cost
Time
Scope
Quality
Relative or Numerical Scale
Insigniﬁcant cost
increase
Insigniﬁcant time
increase
Scope decrease
barely noticeable
Quality degradation
barely noticeable
1
Very Low
2
Low
< 10% cost
increase
< 5% time
increase
Minor areas of 
scope affected
Only very demanding 
applications are 
affected
10–20% cost
increase
5–10% time
increase
Major areas of
scope affected
Quality reduction
requires sponsor
approval
20–40% cost
increase
10–20% time
increase
Scope reduction
unacceptable to
sponsor
Quality reduction
unacceptable 
to sponsor
> 40% cost
increase
> 20% time
increase
Project end item
is effectively 
useless
Project end item
is effectively 
useless
3
Moderate
4
High
5
Very High
FIGURE 7.5   Defined Conditions for Impact Scales of a Risk on Major Project Objectives (examples for negative 
impacts only)

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  215
 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) extends the risk severity matrix by 
including ease of detection in the equation:
Impact × Probability × Detection = Risk Value
 
Each of the three dimensions is rated according to a five-point scale. For example, 
detection is defined as the ability of the project team to discern that the risk event is 
imminent. A score of 1 would be given if even a chimpanzee could spot the risk com-
ing. The highest detection score of 5 would be given to events that could only be dis-
covered after it is too late (i.e., system freezing). Similar anchored scales would be 
applied for severity of impact and the probability of the event occurring. The weight-
ing of the risks is then based on their overall score. For example, a risk with an impact 
in the “1” zone with a very low probability and an easy detection score might score a 
1 (1 × 1 × 1 = 1). Conversely, a high-impact risk with a high probability and impos-
sible to detect would score 125 (5 × 5 × 5 = 125). This broad range of numerical 
scores allows for easy stratification of risk according to overall significance.
 
No assessment scheme is absolutely foolproof. For example, the weakness of the 
FMEA approach is that a risk event rated Impact = 1, Probability = 5, and Detection = 5 
would receive the same weighted score as an event rated Impact = 5, Probability = 5, 
and Detection = 1! This underscores the importance of not treating risk assessment as 
simply an exercise in mathematics. There is no substitute for thoughtful discussion of 
key risk events.
Probability Analysis
There are many statistical techniques available to the project manager that can assist in 
assessing project risk. Decision trees have been used to assess alternative courses of 
action using expected values. Statistical variations of net present value (NPV) have 
been used to assess cash flow risks in projects. Correlations between past projects’ 
cash flow and S-curves (cumulative project cost curve—baseline—over the life of the 
project) have been used to assess cash flow risks.
FIGURE 7.7
Risk Severity Matrix 
User
backlash
Interface
problems
System
freezing
Hardware
malfunc-
tioning
5
5
4
4
3
3
Impact
2
2
1
1
Likelihood
Red zone (major risk)
Yellow zone (moderate risk)
Green zone (minor risk)
www.ebook3000.com

216  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
 
PERT (program evaluation and review technique) and PERT simulation can be used 
to review activity and project risk. PERT and related techniques take a more macro 
perspective by looking at overall cost and schedule risks. Here the focus is not on indi-
vidual events but on the likelihood the project will be completed on time and within 
budget. These methods are useful in assessing the overall risk of the project and the 
need for such things as contingency funds, resources, and time. The use of PERT 
simulation is increasing because it uses the same data required for PERT, and software 
to perform the simulation is readily available.
 
Basically PERT simulation assumes a statistical distribution (range between optimis-
tic and pessimistic) for each activity duration; it then simulates the network (perhaps 
over 1,000 simulations) using a random number generator. The outcome is the relative 
probability, called a criticality index, of an activity becoming critical under the many 
different, possible activity durations for each activity. PERT simulation also provides a 
list of potential critical paths and their respective probabilities of occurring. Having this 
information available can greatly facilitate identifying and assessing schedule risk. (See 
Appendix 7.1 at the end of this chapter for a more detailed description and discussion.)
7.4 Step 3: Risk Response Development
When a risk event is identified and assessed, a decision must be made concerning 
which response is appropriate for the specific event. Responses to risk can be classi-
fied as mitigating, avoiding, transferring, or retaining.
Mitigating Risk
Reducing risk is usually the first alternative considered. There are basically two strat-
egies for mitigating risk: (1) reduce the likelihood that the event will occur and/or 
(2) reduce the impact that the adverse event would have on the project. Most risk 
teams focus first on reducing the likelihood of risk events since, if successful, this may 
eliminate the need to consider the potentially costly second strategy.
 
Testing and prototyping are frequently used to prevent problems from surfacing 
later in a project. An example of testing can be found in an information systems proj-
ect. The project team was responsible for installing a new operating system in their 
parent company. Before implementing the project, the team tested the new system on a 
smaller isolated network. By doing so they discovered a variety of problems and were 
able to come up with solutions prior to implementation. The team still encountered 
problems with the installation but the number and severity were greatly reduced.
 
Often identifying the root causes of an event is useful. For example, the fear that a 
vendor will be unable to supply customized components on time may be attributable to 
(1) poor vendor relationships, (2) design miscommunication, and (3) lack of motiva-
tion. As a result of this analysis the project manager may decide to take his counterpart 
to lunch to clear the air, invite the vendor to attend design meetings, and restructure the 
contract to include incentives for on-time delivery.
 
Other examples of reducing the probability of risks occurring are scheduling out-
door work during the summer months, investing in up-front safety training, and choos-
ing high-quality materials and equipment.
 
When the concerns are that duration and costs have been underestimated, managers 
will augment estimates to compensate for the uncertainties. It is common to use a ratio 
between old and new project to adjust time or cost. The ratio typically serves as a con-
stant. For example, if past projects have taken 10 minutes per line of computer code, a 
7-4
Describe the four  
different responses to 
managing risks.
LO

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  217
constant of 1.10 (which represents a 10 percent increase) would be used for the proposed 
project time estimates because the new project is more difficult than prior projects.
 
An alternative mitigation strategy is to reduce the impact of the risk if it occurs. For 
example, a bridge-building project illustrates risk reduction. A new bridge project for 
a coastal port was to use an innovative, continuous cement-pouring process developed 
by an Australian firm to save large sums of money and time. The major risk was that 
the continuous pouring process for each major section of the bridge could not be inter-
rupted. Any interruption would require that the whole cement section (hundreds of 
cubic yards) be torn down and started over. An assessment of possible risks centered 
on delivery of the cement from the cement factory. Trucks could be delayed, or the fac-
tory could break down. Such risks would result in tremendous rework costs and delays. 
Risk was reduced by having two additional portable cement plants built nearby on dif-
ferent highways within 20 miles of the bridge project in case the main factory supply 
was interrupted. These two portable plants carried raw materials for a whole bridge 
section, and extra trucks were on immediate standby each time continuous pouring was 
required. Similar risk reduction scenarios are apparent in system and software develop-
ment projects where parallel innovation processes are used in case one fails.
 
Snapshot from Practice 7.2: From Dome to Dust details the steps Controlled Demo-
lition took to minimize damage when they imploded the Seattle Kingdome.
Avoiding Risk
Risk avoidance is changing the project plan to eliminate the risk or condition. Although 
it is impossible to eliminate all risk events, some specific risks may be avoided before 
you launch the project. For example, adopting proven technology instead of experimental 
technology can eliminate technical failure. Choosing an Australian supplier as opposed to 
an Indonesian supplier would virtually eliminate the chance that political unrest would 
disrupt the supply of critical materials. Likewise, one could eliminate the risk of choos-
ing the wrong software by developing web applications using both ASAP.NET and PHP. 
Choosing to move a concert indoors would eliminate the threat of inclement weather.
Transferring Risk
Passing risk to another party is common; this transfer does not change risk. Passing risk 
to another party almost always results in paying a premium for this exemption. Fixed-
price contracts are the classic example of transferring risk from an owner to a contractor. 
The contractor understands his or her firm will pay for any risk event that materializes; 
therefore, a monetary risk factor is added to the contract bid price. Before deciding to 
transfer risk, the owner should decide which party can best control activities that would 
lead to the risk occurring. Also, is the contractor capable of absorbing the risk? Clearly 
identifying and documenting responsibility for absorbing risk is imperative.
 
Another more obvious way to transfer risk is insurance. However, in most cases this 
is impractical because defining the project risk event and conditions to an insurance 
broker who is unfamiliar with the project is difficult and usually expensive. Of course, 
low-probability and high-consequence risk events such as acts of God are more easily 
defined and insured. Performance bonds, warranties, and guarantees are other finan-
cial instruments used to transfer risk.
 
On large, international construction projects like petrochemical plants and oil 
refineries, host countries are insisting on contracts that enforce Build-Own-Operate-
Transfer (BOOT) provisions. Here the prime project organization is expected not only 
to build the facility, but also to take over ownership until its operation capacity has 
been proven and all the debugging has occurred before final transfer of ownership to 
www.ebook3000.com

218  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
the client. In such cases, the host country has transferred financial risk of ownership 
until the project has been completed and capabilities proven.
Accept Risk
In some cases a conscious decision is made to accept the risk of an event occurring. 
Some risks are so large it is not feasible to consider transferring or reducing the event 
(e.g., an earthquake or flood). The project owner assumes the risk because the chance 
of such an event occurring is slim. In other cases risks identified in the budget reserve 
can simply be absorbed if they materialize. The risk is retained by developing a contin-
gency plan to implement if the risk materializes. In a few cases a risk event can be 
ignored and a cost overrun accepted should the risk event occur.
On March 26, 2000, the largest con-
crete domed structure in the world was 
reduced to a pile of rubble in a dramatic 
implosion lasting less than 20 seconds. 
According to Mark Loizeaux, whose 
Maryland-based Controlled Demolition 
Inc. was hired to bring the 24-year-old Seattle Kingdome 
down, “We don’t blow things up. We use explosives as an 
engine, but gravity is the catalyst that will bring it down.”
 
Destroying the Kingdome was the most complicated 
of the 7,000 demolitions Loizeaux’s company has under-
taken. Nearly three months of preparations were needed 
to implode the dome at a total cost of $9 million. The King-
dome was considered to be one of the strongest struc-
tures in the world containing over 25,000 tons of concrete 
with each of its 40 vaulted ribs incorporating seven 
lengths of two-and-one-quarter-inch reinforcing steel bar.
 
Strands of orange detonating cord—basically dyna-
mite in a string that explodes at the lightning pace of 
24,000 feet per second—connected six pielike divi-
sions of the Kingdome to a nearby control center.
 
Throughout each section, Controlled Demolition 
workers drilled nearly 1,000 holes and packed them 
with high-velocity gelatin explosives the size of hot 
dogs. Large charges were placed about one-third of 
the way up each dome rib; smaller charges were put 
farther up the ribs. When the detonation button was 
pushed, blasting caps set off a chain reaction of explo-
sions in each section reducing the stadium to rubble.
 
While the actual implosion was a technical tour-
de-force, risk management was a critical part of the 
project’s success. To minimize damage to surrounding 
buildings, the explosive charges were wrapped in a 
layer of chain-link fencing covered with thick sheets of 
geotextile polypropylene fabric to contain flying con-
crete. Nearby buildings were protected in various man-
ners depending on the structure and proximity to the 
Dome. Measures included sealing air-handling units, 
taping seams on doors and windows, covering floors 
and windows with plywood and draping reinforced 
polyethylene sheeting around the outside.
 
To help absorb the impact, air-conditioning units 
removed from the interior were stacked with other material 
to create a barrier around the perimeter of the work area.
 
Hundreds of police officers and security personnel 
were used to cordon off an area extending roughly 
1,000 feet from the Dome from overzealous spectators. 
Traffic was closed for a larger area. Accommodations 
were provided for people and pets who lived within the 
restricted zone.
 
Eight water trucks, eight sweeper units, and more 
than 100 workers were deployed immediately after the 
blast to control dust and begin the cleanup.
 
As a side note, one-third of the concrete will be 
crushed and used in the foundation of a new $430-million 
outdoor football stadium which is being built in its place. 
The rest of the concrete will be carted away and used in 
roadbeds and foundations throughout the Seattle area.
© Tim Matsui/Getty Images
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  7. 2
From Dome to Dust*
* New York Times—Sunday Magazine (March 19, 2000);  
Seattle Times (March 27, 2000) website.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  219
 
The more effort given to risk response before the project begins, the better the 
chances are for minimizing project surprises. Knowing that the response to a risk event 
will be retained, transferred, or mitigated greatly reduces stress and uncertainty. Again, 
control is possible with this structured approach.
7.5 Contingency Planning
A contingency plan is an alternative plan that will be used if a possible foreseen risk 
event becomes a reality. The contingency plan represents actions that will reduce or 
mitigate the negative impact of the risk event. A key distinction between a risk response 
and a contingency plan is that a response is part of the actual implementation plan and 
action is taken before the risk can materialize, while a contingency plan is not part of 
the initial implementation plan and only goes into effect after the risk is recognized.
 
Like all plans, the contingency plan answers the questions of what, where, when, 
and how much action will take place. The absence of a contingency plan, when a risk 
event occurs, can cause a manager to delay or postpone the decision to implement a 
remedy. This postponement can lead to panic, and acceptance of the first remedy sug-
gested. Such after-the-event decision making under pressure can be potentially danger-
ous and costly. Contingency planning evaluates alternative remedies for possible 
foreseen events before the risk event occurs and selects the best plan among alterna-
tives. This early contingency planning facilitates a smooth transition to the remedy or 
work-around plan. The availability of a contingency plan can significantly increase the 
chances for project success.
 
Conditions for activating the implementation of the contingency plan should be 
decided and clearly documented. The plan should include a cost estimate and identify 
the source of funding. All parties affected should agree to the contingency plan and 
have authority to make commitments. Because implementation of a contingency plan 
embodies disruption in the sequence of work, all contingency plans should be com-
municated to team members so that surprise and resistance are minimized.
 
Here is an example: A high-tech niche computer company intends to introduce a 
new “platform” product at a very specific target date. The project’s 47 teams all agree 
delays will not be acceptable. Their contingency plans for two large component suppli-
ers demonstrate how seriously risk management is viewed. One supplier’s plant sits on 
the San Andreas Fault, which is prone to earthquakes. The contingency plan has an 
alternative supplier, who is constantly updated, producing a replica of the component 
in another plant. Another key supplier in Toronto, Canada, presents a delivery risk on 
their due date because of potential bad weather. This contingency plan calls for a char-
tered plane (already contracted to be on standby) if overland transportation presents a 
delay problem. To outsiders these plans must seem a bit extreme, but in high-tech 
industries where time to market is king, risks of identified events are taken seriously.
 
Risk response matrices such as the one shown in Figure 7.8 are useful for summa-
rizing how the project team plans to manage risks that have been identified. Again, the 
Windows 11 project is used to illustrate this kind of matrix. The first step is to identify 
whether to reduce, share, transfer, or accept the risk. The team decided to reduce the 
chances of the system freezing by experimenting with a prototype of the system. Pro-
totype experimentation not only allows them to identify and fix conversion “bugs” 
before the actual installation, but it also yields information that could be useful in 
enhancing acceptance by end-users. The project team is then able to identify and docu-
ment changes between the old and new system that will be incorporated in the training 
the users receive. The risk of equipment malfunctioning is transferred by choosing a 
reliable supplier with a strong warranty program.
Understand the role  
contingency plans play  
in risk management 
process.
7-5
LO
www.ebook3000.com

220  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
FIGURE 7.8 
Risk Response Matrix
Interface problems
System freezing
User backlash
Equipment
malfunctions
Mitigate: Test prototype
Response
Risk Event
Contingency Plan
Trigger
Who Is Responsible
Mitigate: Test prototype
Mitigate:
Prototype demonstration
Mitigate: Select reliable vendor
Transfer: Warranty
Work around
until help comes
Reinstall OS
Increase staff
support
Order
replacement
Not solved
within 24 hours
Still frozen after
one hour
Call from top
management
Equipment
fails
Nils
Emmylou
Eddie
Jim
 
The next step is to identify contingency plans in case the risk still occurs. For exam-
ple, if interface problems prove insurmountable, then the team would attempt a work-
around until vendor experts arrived to help solve the problem. If the system freezes 
after installation, the team will first try to reinstall the software. If user dissatisfaction 
is high, then the IS department will provide more staff support. If the team is unable to 
get reliable equipment from the original supplier, then it will order a different brand 
from a second dealer. The team also needs to discuss and agree what would “trigger” 
implementation of the contingency plan. In the case of the system freezing, the trigger 
is not being able to unfreeze the system within one hour or, in the case of user back-
lash, an angry call from top management. Finally, the individual responsible for moni-
toring the potential risk and initiating the contingency plan needs to be assigned. Smart 
project managers establish protocols for contingency responses before they are needed. 
For an example of the importance of establishing protocols see Snapshot from Practice 
7.3: Risk Management at the Top of the World.
 
Some of the most common methods for handling risk are discussed here.
Technical Risks
Technical risks are problematic; they can often be the kind that cause the project to be 
shut down. What if the system or process does not work? Contingency or backup plans 
are made for those possibilities that are foreseen. For example, Carrier Transicold was 
involved in developing a new Phoenix refrigeration unit for truck-trailer applications. 
This new unit was to use rounded panels made of bonded metals, which at the time 
was new technology for Transicold. Furthermore, one of its competitors had tried 
unsuccessfully to incorporate similar bonded metals in their products. The project 
team was eager to make the new technology work, but it wasn’t until the very end of 
the project that they were able to get the new adhesives to bond adequately to complete 
the project. Throughout the project, the team maintained a welded-panel fabrication 
approach just in case they were unsuccessful. If this contingency approach had been 
needed, it would have increased production costs, but the project still would have been 
completed on time.
 
In addition to backup strategies, project managers need to develop methods to 
quickly assess whether technical uncertainties can be resolved. The use of sophisti-
cated CAD programs has greatly helped resolve design problems. At the same time, 
Smith and Reinertsen (1995), in their book Developing Products in Half the Time, 
argue that there is no substitute for making something and seeing how it works, feels, 
or looks. They suggest that one should first identify the high-risk technical areas, then 

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  221
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  7. 3
Risk Management at the  
Top of the World*
The gripping account in the 2015 film 
Everest of an ill-fated attempt to climb 
Mount Everest in which six climbers 
died provides testimony to the risks of 
extreme mountain climbing.
  Accounts of Mount Everest expedi-
tions provide insights into project risk management. 
First, most climbers spend more than three weeks accli-
mating their bodies to high-altitude conditions. Native 
Sherpas are used extensively to carry supplies and set 
up each of the four base camps that will be used during 
the final stages of the climb. To reduce the impact of 
hypoxia, lightheadness, and disorientation caused by 
shortage of oxygen, most climbers use oxygen masks 
and bottles during the final ascent. If lucky enough not 
to be one of the first expeditions of the season, the path 
to the summit should be staked out and roped by previ-
ous climbers. Climbing guides receive last-minute 
weather reports by radio to confirm whether the 
weather conditions warrant the risk. Finally, for added 
insurance, most climbers join their Sherpas in an elabo-
rate puja ritual intended to summon the divine support 
of the gods before beginning their ascent.
 
All of these efforts pale next to the sheer physical and 
mental rigors of making the final climb from base camp IV 
to the summit. This is what climbers refer to as the “death 
zone” because beyond 26,000 feet the mind and body 
begin to quickly deteriorate despite supplemental oxy-
gen. Under fair conditions it takes around 18 hours to 
make the round-trip to the top and back to the base camp. 
Climbers leave as early as 1:00 a.m. in order to make it 
back before night falls and total exhaustion sets in.
 
The greatest danger in climbing Mount Everest is not 
in reaching the summit but in making it back to the base 
camp. One out of every five climbers who make it to the 
summit dies during their descent. The key is establishing 
a contingency plan in case the climbers encounter hard 
© Bobby Model/National Geographic Stock/Getty Images
going or the weather changes. Guides establish a pre-
determined turnaround time (i.e., 2:00 p.m.) to ensure a 
safe return no matter how close the climbers are to the 
summit. Many lives have been lost by failing to adhere 
to the turnaround time and pushing forward to the 
summit. As one climber put it, “With enough determi-
nation, any bloody idiot can get to the top of the hill. 
The trick is to get back alive.”
 
One climber who faced the 2:00 p.m. deadline was 
Goran Krupp. After cycling 8,000 miles from Stockholm to 
Katmandu he turned back 1,000 feet from the summit.
* Jon Krakauer, Into Thin Air (New York: Doubleday, 1997),  
p. 190; Broughton Coburn, Everest: Mountain without Mercy 
(New York: National Geographic Society, 1997).
build models or design experiments to resolve the risk as quickly as possible. Technol-
ogy offers many methods for early testing and validation, ranging from 3-D printing 
and holographic imagery for model building to focus groups and early design usability 
testing for market testing (Thamhain, 2013). By isolating and testing the key technical 
questions early on in a project, project feasibility can be quickly determined and neces-
sary adjustments made such as reworking the process or in some cases closing down 
the project.3
3 This is a key principle of Agile project management, which is discussed in Chapter 17.
www.ebook3000.com

222  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
Schedule Risks
Often organizations will defer the threat of a project coming in late until it surfaces. 
Here contingency funds are set aside to expedite or “crash” the project to get it back on 
track. Crashing, or reducing project duration, is accomplished by shortening (com-
pressing) one or more activities on the critical path. This comes with additional costs 
and risk. Techniques for managing this situation are discussed in Chapter 9. Some 
contingency plans can avoid costly procedures. For example, schedules can be altered 
by working activities in parallel or using start-to-start lag relationships. Also, using the 
best people for high-risk tasks can relieve or lessen the chance of some risk events 
occurring.
Cost Risks
Projects of long duration need some contingency for price changes—which are usually 
upward. The important point to remember when reviewing price is to avoid the trap of 
using one lump sum to cover price risks. For example, if inflation has been running 
about 3 percent, some managers add 3 percent for all resources used in the project. 
This lump-sum approach does not address exactly where price protection is needed 
and fails to provide for tracking and control. On cost sensitive projects, price risks 
should be evaluated item by item. Some purchases and contracts will not change over 
the life of the project. Those that may change should be identified and estimates made 
of the magnitude of change. This approach ensures control of the contingency funds as 
the project is implemented.
Funding Risks
What if the funding for the project is cut by 25 percent or completion projections indi-
cate that costs will greatly exceed available funds? What are the chances of the project 
being canceled before completion? Seasoned project managers recognize that a com-
plete risk assessment must include an evaluation of funding supply. This is especially 
true for publicly funded projects. Case in point was the ill-fated ARH-70 Arapaho 
helicopter which was being developed for the U.S. Army by BellAircraft. Over 
300-million dollars had been invested to develop a new age combat and reconnais-
sance helicopter, when in October 2008, the Defense Department recommended that 
the project be canceled. The cancellation reflected a need to cut costs and a switch 
toward using unmanned aircraft for surveillance as well as attack missions.
 
Just as government projects are subject to changes in strategy and political agenda, 
business firms frequently undergo changes in priorities and top management. The pet 
projects of the new CEO replace the pet projects of the former CEO. Resources 
become tight and one way to fund new projects is to cancel other projects.
 
Severe budget cuts or lack of adequate funding can have a devastating effect on a 
project. Typically, when such a fate occurs, there is a need to scale back the scope of 
the project to what is possible. “All-or-nothing projects” are ripe targets to budget cut-
ters. This was the case of the Arapaho helicopter once the decision was made to move 
away from manned reconnaissance aircraft. Here the “chunkability” of the project can 
be an advantage. For example, freeway projects can fall short of the original intentions 
but still add value for each mile completed.
 
On a much smaller scale, similar funding risks may exist for more mundane projects. 
For example, a building contractor may find that due to a sudden downturn in the stock 
market the owners can no longer afford to build their dream house. Or an IS consulting 
firm may be left empty handed when a client files for bankruptcy. In the former case the 

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  223
contractor may have as a contingency selling the house on the open market, while 
unfortunately the consulting firm will have to join the long line of creditors.
7.6 Opportunity Management
For the sake of brevity, this chapter has focused on negative risks—what can go wrong 
on a project. There is a flip side—what could go right on a project? This is commonly 
referred to as a positive risk or opportunity. An opportunity is an event that can have a 
positive impact on project objectives. For example, unusually favorable weather can 
accelerate construction work, or a drop in fuel prices may create savings that could be 
used to add value to a project. Essentially the same process that is used to manage nega-
tive risks is applied to positive risks. Opportunities are identified, assessed in terms of 
likelihood and impact, responses are determined, and even contingency plans and funds 
can be established to take advantage of the opportunity if it occurs. The major exception 
between managing negative risks and opportunity is in the responses. The project man-
agement profession has identified four different types of response to an opportunity:4
 
Exploit. This tactic seeks to eliminate the uncertainty associated with an opportu-
nity to ensure that it definitely happens. Examples include assigning your best per-
sonnel to a critical burst activity to reduce the time to completion or revising a 
design to enable a component to be purchased rather than developed internally.
 
Share. This strategy involves allocating some or all of the ownership of an oppor-
tunity to another party who is best able to capture the opportunity for the benefit of 
the project. Examples include establishing continuous improvement incentives for 
external contractors or joint ventures.
 
Enhance. Enhance is the opposite of mitigation in that action is taken to increase 
the probability and/or the positive impact of an opportunity. Examples include 
choosing site location based on favorable weather patterns or choosing raw materi-
als that are likely to decline in price.
 
Accept. Accepting an opportunity is being willing to take advantage of it if it 
occurs, but not taking action to pursue it.
While it is only natural to focus on negative risks, it is sound practice to engage in 
active opportunity management as well.
7.7 Contingency Funding and Time Buffers
Contingency funds are established to cover project risks—identified and unknown. When, 
where, and how much money will be spent is not known until the risk event occurs. Proj-
ect “owners” are often reluctant to set up project contingency funds that seem to imply the 
project plan might be a poor one. Some perceive the contingency fund as an add-on slush 
fund. Others say they will face the risk when it materializes. Usually such reluctance to 
establish contingency reserves can be overcome with documented risk identification, 
assessment, contingency plans, and plans for when and how funds will be disbursed.
 
The size and amount of contingency reserves depend on uncertainty inherent in the 
project. Uncertainty is reflected in the “newness” of the project, inaccurate time and 
cost estimates, technical unknowns, unstable scope, and problems not anticipated. In 
practice, contingencies run from 1 to 10 percent in projects similar to past projects. 
7-6
LO
Understand opportunity 
management and 
describe the four 
different approaches  
to responding to 
opportunities in a 
project.
7-7
LO
Understand how 
contingency funds and 
time buffers are used to 
manage risks on a 
project.
4 PMBOK, 5th ed. (Newton Square, PA: PMI, 2013), pp. 345-46.
www.ebook3000.com

224  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
However, in unique and high-technology projects it is not uncommon to find contin-
gencies running in the 20 to 60 percent range. Use and rate of consumption of reserves 
must be closely monitored and controlled. Simply picking a percentage of the baseline, 
say, 5 percent, and calling it the contingency reserve is not a sound approach. Also, 
adding up all the identified contingency allotments and throwing them into one pot is 
not conducive to sound control of the reserve fund.
 
In practice, the contingency reserve fund is typically divided into budget and man-
agement reserve funds for control purposes. Budget reserves are set up to cover iden-
tified risks; these reserves are those allocated to specific segments or deliverables of 
the project. Management reserves are set up to cover unidentified risks and are allo-
cated to risks associated with the total project. The risks are separated because their 
use requires approval from different levels of project authority. Because all risks are 
probabilistic, the reserves are not included in the baseline for each work package or 
activity; they are only activated when a risk occurs. If an identified risk does not occur 
and its chance of occurring is past, the fund allocated to the risk should be deducted 
from the budget reserve. (This removes the temptation to use budget reserves for other 
issues or problems.) Of course if the risk does occur, funds are removed from the 
reserve and added to the cost baseline.
 
It is important that contingency allowances be independent of the original time and 
cost estimates. These allowances need to be clearly distinguished to avoid time and 
budget game playing.
Budget Reserves
These reserves are identified for specific work packages or segments of a project found 
in the baseline budget or work breakdown structure. For example, a reserve amount 
might be added to “computer coding” to cover the risk of “testing” showing a coding 
problem. The reserve amount is determined by costing out the accepted contingency or 
recovery plan. The budget reserve should be communicated to the project team. This 
openness suggests trust and encourages good cost performance. However, distributing 
budget reserves should be the responsibility of both the project manager and the team 
members responsible for implementing the specific segment of the project. If the risk 
does not materialize, the funds are removed from the budget reserve. Thus, budget 
reserves decrease as the project progresses.
Management Reserves
These reserve funds are needed to cover major unforeseen risks and, hence, are applied 
to the total project. For example, a major scope change may appear necessary midway 
in the project. Because this change was not anticipated, it is covered from the management 
reserve. Management reserves are established after budget reserves are identified and 
funds established. These reserves are independent of budget reserves and are controlled 
by the project manager and the “owner” of the project. The “owner” can be internal 
(top management) or external to the project organization. Most management reserves 
are set using historical data and judgments concerning the uniqueness and complexity 
of the project.
 
Placing technical contingencies in the management reserve is a special case. Identi-
fying possible technical (functional) risks is often associated with a new, untried, inno-
vative process or product. Because there is a chance the innovation may not work out, 
a fallback plan is necessary. This type of risk is beyond the control of the project man-
ager. Hence, technical reserves are held in the management reserve and controlled by 

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  225
the owner or top management. The owner and project manager decide when the con-
tingency plan will be implemented and the reserve funds used. It is assumed there is a 
high probability these funds will never be used.
 
Table 7.1 shows the development of a contingency fund estimate for a hypothetical 
project. Note how budget and management reserves are kept separate; control is easily 
tracked using this format.
Time Buffers
Just as contingency funds are established to absorb unplanned costs, managers use time 
buffers to cushion against potential delays in the project. And like contingency funds, 
the amount of time is dependent upon the inherent uncertainty of the project. The more 
uncertain the project the more time should be reserved for the schedule. The strategy is 
to assign extra time at critical moments in the project. For example, buffers are added to
A. Activities with severe risks.
B. Merge activities that are prone to delays due to one or more preceding activities 
being late.
C. Noncritical activities to reduce the likelihood that they will create another critical 
path.
D. Activities that require scarce resources to ensure that the resources are available 
when needed.
In the face of overall schedule uncertainty, buffers are sometimes added to the end of 
the project. For example, a 300-working-day project may have a 30-day project buffer. 
While the extra 30 days would not appear on the schedule, it is available if needed. 
Like management reserves, this buffer typically requires the authorization of top man-
agement. A more systematic approach to buffer management is discussed in the Chap-
ter 8 appendix on critical chain project management.
7.8 Step 4: Risk Response Control
Typically the results of the first three steps of the risk management process are sum-
marized in a formal document often called the risk register. A risk register details all 
identified risks, including descriptions, category, and probability of occurring, impact, 
responses, contingency plans, owners, and current status. The register is the backbone 
for the last step in the risk management process: risk control. Risk control involves 
executing the risk response strategy, monitoring triggering events, initiating contin-
gency plans, and watching for new risks. Establishing a change management system to 
deal with events that require formal changes in the scope, budget, and/or schedule of 
the project is an essential element of risk control.
 
Budget 
Budget 
Project  
Activity 
Baseline 
Reserve 
Budget
Design 
 $500,000 
$15,000 
 $515,000
Code 
 900,000 
 80,000 
 980,000
Test 
 20,000 
 2,000 
 22,000
Subtotal 
$1,420,000 
$97,000 
$1,517,000
Management reserve 
 — 
— 
 50,000
Total 
$1,420,000 
$97,000 
$1,567,000
TABLE 7.1
Contingency Fund 
Estimate
www.ebook3000.com

226  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
 
Project managers need to monitor risks just like they track project progress. Risk 
assessment and updating needs to be part of every status meeting and progress report 
system. The project team needs to be on constant alert for new, unforeseen risks. 
Thamhain studied 35 major product development efforts and found that over half of 
contingencies that occurred were not anticipated (Thamhain, 2013)! Readiness to 
respond to the unexpected is a critical element of risk management.
 
Management needs to be sensitive that others may not be forthright in acknowledg-
ing new risks and problems. Admitting that there might be a bug in the design code or 
that different components are not compatible reflects poorly on individual perfor-
mance. If the prevailing organizational culture is one where mistakes are punished 
severely, then it is only human nature to protect oneself. Similarly, if bad news is 
greeted harshly and there is a propensity to “kill the messenger,” then participants will 
be reluctant to speak freely. The tendency to suppress bad news is compounded when 
individual responsibility is vague and the project team is under extreme pressure from 
top management to get the project done quickly.
 
Project managers need to establish an environment in which participants feel com-
fortable raising concerns and admitting mistakes. The norm should be that mistakes 
are acceptable, hiding mistakes is intolerable. Problems should be embraced not 
denied. Participants should be encouraged to identify problems and new risks. Here a 
positive attitude by the project manager toward risks is a key.
 
On large, complex projects it may be prudent to repeat the risk identification/
assessment exercise with fresh information. Risk profiles should be reviewed to test to 
see if the original responses held true. Relevant stakeholders should be brought into 
the discussion and the risk register needs to be updated. While this may not be practi-
cal on an ongoing basis, project managers should touch base with them on a regular 
basis or hold special stakeholder meetings to review the status of risks on the project.
 
A second key for controlling the cost of risks is documenting responsibility. This can 
be problematic in projects involving multiple organizations and contractors. Responsi-
bility for risk is frequently passed on to others with the statement, “That is not my 
worry.” This mentality is dangerous. Each identified risk should be assigned (or shared) 
by mutual agreement of the owner, project manager, and the contractor or person hav-
ing line responsibility for the work package or segment of the project. It is best to have 
the line person responsible approve the use of budget reserve funds and monitor their 
rate of usage. If management reserve funds are required, the line person should play an 
active role in estimating additional costs and funds needed to complete the project. Hav-
ing line personnel participate in the process focuses attention on the management 
reserve, control of its rate of usage, and early warning of potential risk events. If risk 
management is not formalized, responsibility and responses to risk will be ignored—it 
is not my area.
 
The bottom line is that project managers and team members need to be vigilant in 
monitoring potential risks and identify new land mines that could derail a project. Risk 
assessment has to be part of the working agenda of status meetings, and when new risks 
emerge they need to be analyzed and incorporated into the risk management process.
7.9 Change Control Management
A major element of the risk control process is change management. Every detail 
of a project plan will not materialize as expected. Coping with and controlling 
project changes present a formidable challenge for most project managers. 
Changes come from many sources such as the project customer, owner, project 
7-8
LO
Recognize the need for 
risk management being 
an ongoing activity.
7-9
LO
Describe the change 
control process.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  227
manager, team members, and occurrence of risk events. Most changes easily fall 
into three categories:
1. Scope changes in the form of design or additions represent big changes; for exam-
ple, customer requests for a new feature or a redesign that will improve the 
product.
2. Implementation of contingency plans, when risk events occur, represent changes in 
baseline costs and schedules.
3. Improvement changes suggested by project team members represent another 
category.
Because change is inevitable, a well-defined change review and control process should 
be set up early in the project planning cycle.
 
Change management systems involve reporting, controlling, and recording changes 
to the project baseline. (Note: Some organizations consider change control systems 
part of configuration management.) In practice most change management systems are 
designed to accomplish the following:
1. Identify proposed changes.
2. List expected effects of proposed change(s) on schedule and budget.
3. Review, evaluate, and approve or disapprove changes formally.
4. Negotiate and resolve conflicts of change, conditions, and cost.
5. Communicate changes to parties affected.
6. Assign responsibility for implementing change.
7. Adjust master schedule and budget.
8. Track all changes that are to be implemented.
As part of the project communication plan, stakeholders define up front the com-
munication and decision-making process that will be used to evaluate and accept 
changes. The process can be captured in a flow diagram like the one presented in 
Figure 7.9. On small projects this process may simply entail approval of a small 
group of stakeholders. On larger projects more elaborate decision-making processes 
are established, with different processes being used for different kinds of change. 
For example, changes in performance requirements may require multiple sign-offs, 
including the project sponsor and client, while switching suppliers may be autho-
rized by the project manager. Regardless of the nature of the project, the goal is to 
establish the process for introducing necessary changes in the project in a timely and 
effective manner.
 
Of particular importance is assessing the impact of the change on the project. Often 
solutions to immediate problems have adverse consequences on other aspects of a 
project. For example, in overcoming a problem with the exhaust system for a hybrid 
automobile, the design engineers contributed to the prototype exceeding weight 
parameters. It is important that the implications of changes are assessed by people with 
appropriate expertise and perspective. On construction projects this is often the 
responsibility of the architecture firm, while “software architects” perform a similar 
function on software development efforts.
 
Organizations use change request forms and logs to track proposed changes. An 
example of a simplified change request form is depicted in Figure 7.10. Typically 
change request forms include a description of the change, the impact of not approving 
the change, the impact of the change on project scope/schedule/cost, and defined sig-
nature paths for review as well as a tracking log number.
Distribute
for
Action
No
Change
Originates
Review Change
Request
Yes
Change Request
Submitted
Approved
?
Update
Plan of Record
FIGURE 7.9
Change Control 
Process
www.ebook3000.com

228  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
 
An abridged version of a change request log for a construction project is presented 
in Figure 7.11. These logs are used to monitor change requests. They typically sum-
marize the status of all outstanding change requests and include such useful informa-
tion as source and date of the change, document codes for related information, cost 
estimates, and the current status of the request.
 
Every approved change must be identified and integrated into the plan of record 
through changes in the project WBS and baseline schedule. The plan of record is the 
current official plan for the project in terms of scope, budget, and schedule. The plan 
of record serves as a change management benchmark for future change requests as 
well as the baseline for evaluating project progress.
 
If the change control system is not integrated with the WBS and baseline, project 
plans and control will soon self-destruct. Thus, one of the keys to a successful change 
FIGURE 7.10
Sample Change 
Request
Priority
Emergency
Urgent
Low
Disposition
Approve
Approve as amended
Disapprove
Deferred
Funding Source
Mgmt. reserve
Budget reserve
Customer
Other
Request number
12
Description of requested change
1. Request river dancers to replace small Irish dance group.
2. Request one combination dance with river dancers and China ballet group.
Reason for change
River dancers will enhance stature of event. The group is well known and loved by
Chinese people.
Scope
Schedule
X
X
X
X
X
Cost
Risk
Other
Areas of impact of proposed change–describe each on separate sheet
Project name
Irish/Chinese culture exchange
Jennifer McDonald
Originator
Date June 6, 2xxx
Sign-off Approvals
Project manager
Project sponsor
Other
Project customer
William O'Mally
Kenneth Thompson
Hong Lee
Date
June 12, 2xxx
Date
June 13, 2xxx
Date
June 18, 2xxx
Date
Project sponsor
Irish embassy
Chinese culture office
Change
requested by

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  229
FIGURE 7.11 Change Request Log
Owner Requested Change Status Report—Open Items 
OSU—Weatherford
 
 
Reference 
    Dates
Rc# 
Description 
Document 
Date Rec’d 
Date Submit 
Amount 
Status 
Comments
51 
Sewer work 
 
 
 
–188,129 
OPEN 
FUNDING  
 
 offset 
 
 
 
 
 
 FROM OTHER  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SOURCE
52 
Stainless Plates 
ASI 56 
1/5/2013 
3/30/2013 
9,308 
APPROVED 
 
 
 at restroom  
 
 Shower Valves
53 
Waterproofing 
ASI 77 
1/13/2013 
 
169,386 
OPEN 
 
 Options
54 
Change Electrical 
RFI 113 
12/5/2013 
3/29/2013 
2,544 
SUBMIT 
 
 floor box 
 
 spec change
55 
VE Option 
Door 
1/14/2013 
 
−20,000 
ROM 
 
 for Style and 
 samples 
 
 rail doors
56 
Pressure Wash 
Owner 
3/15/2013 
3/30/2013 
14,861 
SUBMIT 
 
 C tower 
 request
57 
Fire Lite glass 
Owner 
 
 
8,000 
QUOTE 
ROM BASED  
 
 in stairs 
 request 
 
 
 
 
 ON FIRELITE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 NT
58 
Cyber Café 
ASI 65 
1/30/2013 
3/29/2013 
 4,628 
APPROVED 
 
 
 added tele 
 
 /OFOI equipment
59 
Additional Dampers 
ASI 68 
2/4/2013 
3/29/2013 
 1,085 
SUBMIT 
 
 
 in C wing
60 
Revise 
ASI 72 
2/13/2013 
3/31/2013 
 –3,755 
SUBMIT 
 
 
 Corridor ceilings
OPEN—Requires estimate 
SUBMIT—RC letter submitted 
ASI—Architect’s supplemental instructions 
ROM—Rough order magnitude 
APPROVED—RC letter approved 
RFI—Request for information 
QUOTE—Subcontractor quotes 
REVISE—RC letter to be reviewed
control process is document, document, document! The benefits derived from change 
control systems are the following:
1. Inconsequential changes are discouraged by the formal process.
2. Costs of changes are maintained in a log.
3. Integrity of the WBS and performance measures is maintained.
4. Allocation and use of budget and management reserve funds are tracked.
5. Responsibility for implementation is clarified.
6. Effect of changes is visible to all parties involved.
7. Implementation of change is monitored.
8. Scope changes will be quickly reflected in baseline and performance measures.
Clearly, change control is important and requires that someone or some group be 
responsible for approving changes, keeping the process updated, and communicating 
changes to the project team and relevant stakeholders. Project control depends heavily 
on keeping the change control process current. This historical record can be used for 
satisfying customer inquiries, identifying problems in post-project audits, and estimat-
ing future project costs.
www.ebook3000.com

230  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
To put the processes discussed in this chapter in proper perspective one should rec-
ognize that the essence of project management is risk management. Every technique 
in this book is really a risk management technique. Each in its own way tries to pre-
vent something bad from happening. Project selection systems try to reduce the like-
lihood that projects will not contribute to the mission of the firm. Project scope 
statements, among other things, are designed to avoid costly misunderstandings and 
reduce scope creep. Work breakdown structures reduce the likelihood that some  
vital part of the project will be omitted or that the budget estimates are unrealistic. 
Teambuilding reduces the likelihood of dysfunctional conflict and breakdowns in 
coordination. All of the techniques try to increase stakeholder satisfaction and  
increase the chances of project success.
 
From this perspective managers engage in risk management activities to compen-
sate for the uncertainty inherent in project management and that things never go ac-
cording to plan. Risk management is proactive not reactive. It reduces the number of 
surprises and prepares people for the unexpected.
 
Although many managers believe that in the final analysis, risk assessment and 
contingency depend on subjective judgment, some standard method for identifying, 
assessing, and responding to risks should be included in all projects. The very process 
of identifying project risks forces some discipline at all levels of project management 
and improves project performance.
 
Contingency plans increase the chance that the project can be completed on time 
and within budget. Contingency plans can be simple “work-arounds” or elaborate  
detailed plans. Responsibility for risks should be clearly identified and documented. It 
is desirable and prudent to keep a reserve as a hedge against project risks. Budget  
reserves are linked to the WBS and should be communicated to the project team. Con-
trol of management reserves should remain with the owner, project manager, and line 
person responsible. Use of contingency reserves should be closely monitored, con-
trolled, and reviewed throughout the project life cycle.
 
Experience clearly indicates that using a formal, structured process to handle pos-
sible foreseen and unforeseen project risk events minimizes surprises, costs, delays, 
stress, and misunderstandings. Risk management is an iterative process that occurs 
throughout the lifespan of the project. When risk events occur or changes are neces-
sary, using an effective change control process to quickly approve and record changes 
will facilitate measuring performance against schedule and cost. Ultimately success-
ful risk management requires a culture in which threats are embraced not denied and 
problems are identified not hidden.
Summary
Key Terms
Accept risk, 218
Avoiding risk, 217
Budget reserve, 224
Change management 
system, 227
Contingency plan, 219
Management reserve, 224
Mitigating risk, 216
Opportunity, 223
Risk, 207
Risk breakdown  
structure (RBS), 210
Risk profile, 211
Risk register, 225
Risk severity matrix, 214
Scenario analysis, 213
Time buffer, 225
Transferring risk, 217

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  231
Review  
Questions
1. Project risks can/cannot be eliminated if the project is carefully planned. Explain.
2. The chances of risk events occurring and their respective costs increasing change 
over the project life cycle. What is the significance of this phenomenon to a project 
manager?
3. What is the difference between avoiding a risk and accepting a risk?
4. What is the difference between mitigating a risk and contingency planning?
5. Explain the difference between budget reserves and management reserves.
6. How are the work breakdown structure and change control connected?
7. What are the likely outcomes if a change control process is not used? Why?
8. What are the major differences between managing negative risks versus positive 
risks (opportunities)?
Exercises
1. Gather a small team of students. Think of a project most students would understand; 
the kinds of tasks involved should also be familiar. Identify and assess major and 
minor risks inherent to the project. Decide on a response type. Develop a contin-
gency plan for two to four identified risks. Estimate costs. Assign contingency 
reserves. How much reserve would your team estimate for the whole project? Jus-
tify your choices and estimates.
2. You have been assigned to a project risk team of five members. Because this is the 
first time your organization has formally set up a risk team for a project, it is hoped 
that your team will develop a process that can be used on all future projects. Your 
first team meeting is next Monday morning. Each team member has been asked to 
prepare for the meeting by developing, in as much detail as possible, an outline 
that describes how you believe the team should proceed in handling project risks. 
Each of the team members will hand out their proposed outline at the beginning of 
the meeting. Your outline should include but not be limited to the following 
information:
 
a. Team objectives.
 
b. Process for handling risk events.
 
c. Team activities.
 
d. Team outputs.
3. The Manchester United Soccer Tournament project team (review the Manchester 
United case at the end of Chapter 4) has identified the following potential risks to 
their project:
 
a. Referees failing to show up at designated games.
 
b. Fighting between teams.
 
c. Pivotal error committed by a referee that determines the outcome of a game.
 
d. Abusive behavior along the sidelines by parents.
 
e. Inadequate parking.
 
f. Not enough teams sign up for different age brackets.
 
g. Serious injury.
 
How would you recommend that they respond (i.e., avoid, accept, . . .) to these risks 
and why?
4. Search the Web using the key words: “best practices, project management.” What 
did you find? How might this information be useful to a project manager?
www.ebook3000.com

232  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
References
Atkinson, W., “Beyond the Basics,” PM Network, May 2003, pp. 38–43.
Baker, B., and R. Menon, “Politics and Project Performance: The Fourth Dimension 
of Project Management,” PM Network, vol. 9, no. 11 (November 1995), pp. 16–21.
Carr, M. J., S. L. Konda, I. Monarch, F. C. Ulrich, and C. F. Walker, “Taxonomy- 
Based Risk Identification,” Technical Report CMU/SEI-93-TR 6, Software Engineer-
ing Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 1993.
Ford, E. C., J. Duncan, A. G. Bedeian, P. M. Ginter, M. D. Rousculp, and A. M. 
Adams, “Mitigating Risks, Visible Hands, Inevitable Disasters, and Soft Variables: 
Management Research That Matters to Managers,” Academy of Management Executive, 
vol. 19, no. 4 (November 2005), pp. 24–38.
Gray, C. F., and R. Reinman, “PERT Simulation: A Dynamic Approach to the PERT 
Technique,” Journal of Systems Management, March 1969, pp. 18–23.
Hamburger, D. H., “The Project Manager: Risk Taker and Contingency Planner,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 21, no. 4 (1990), pp. 11–16.
Hulett, D. T., “Project Schedule Risk Assessment,” Project Management Journal, 26 
(1) 1995, pp. 21–31.
Ingebretson, M., “In No Uncertain Terms,” PM Network, 2002, pp. 28–32.
Meyer, A. D., C. H. Loch, and M. T. Pich, “Managing Project Uncertainty: From 
Variation to Chaos,” MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter 2002, pp. 60–67.
Orlando Sentinel, “Math Mistake Proved Fatal to Mars Orbiter,” November 23, 1999.
Pavlik, A., “Project Troubleshooting: Tiger Teams for Reactive Risk Management,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 35, no. 4 (December 2004), pp. 5–14.
Pinto, J. K., Project Management: Achieving Competitive Advantage (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson, 2007).
Project Management Body of Knowledge (Newton Square, PA: Project Management 
Institute, 2013).
Schuler, J. R., “Decision Analysis in Projects: Monte Carlo Simulation,” PM Network, 
vol. 7, no. 1 (January 1994), pp. 30–36.
Skelton, T. and H. Thamhain, “Managing Risk in New Product Development Projects: 
Beyond Analytical Methods,” Project Perspectives, vol. 27, no. 1 (2006), pp. 12–20.
Skelton, T. and H. Thamhain, “Success Factors for Effective R&D Risk Management,” 
International Journal of Technology Intelligence and Planning, vol. 3, no. 4 (2007), 
pp. 376–386.
Smith, P. G., and G. M. Merritt, Proactive Risk Management: Controlling Uncertainty 
in Product Development (New York: Productivity Press, 2002).
Smith, P. G., and D. G. Reinertsen, Developing Products in Half the Time (New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1995).
Snizek, J. A., and R. A. Henry, “Accuracy and Confidence in Group Judgment,” Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, vol. 4, no. 3 (1989), pp. 1–28.
Thamhain, H., “Managing Risks in Complex Projects,” Project Management Journal, 
vol. 44, no. 20 (2013), pp. 20–35.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  233
Case 7.1
Alaska Fly-Fishing Expedition*
You are sitting around the fire at a lodge in Dillingham, Alaska, discussing a fishing 
expedition you are planning with your colleagues at Great Alaska Adventures (GAA). 
Earlier in the day you received a fax from the president of BlueNote, Inc. The presi-
dent wants to reward her top management team by taking them on an all-expense-paid 
fly-fishing adventure in Alaska. She would like GAA to organize and lead the 
expedition.
 
You have just finished a preliminary scope statement for the project (see below). 
You are now brainstorming potential risks associated with the project.
1. Brainstorm potential risks associated with this project. Try to come up with at least 
five different risks.
2. Use a risk assessment form similar to Figure 7.6 to analyze identified risks.
3. Develop a risk response matrix similar to Figure 7.8 to outline how you would deal 
with each of the risks.
PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
PROJECT OBJECTIVE
To organize and lead a five-day fly-fishing expedition down the Tikchik River system 
in Alaska from June 21 to 25 at a cost not to exceed $35,000.
DELIVERABLES
∙ Provide air transportation from Dillingham, Alaska, to Camp I and from Camp II 
back to Dillingham.
∙ Provide river transportation consisting of two eight-man drift boats with outboard 
motors.
∙ Provide three meals a day for the five days spent on the river.
∙ Provide four hours fly-fishing instruction.
∙ Provide overnight accommodations at the Dillingham lodge plus three four-man 
tents with cots, bedding, and lanterns.
∙ Provide four experienced river guides who are also fly fishermen.
∙ Provide fishing licenses for all guests.
MILESTONES
1. Contract signed January 22.
2. Guests arrive in Dillingham June 20.
3. Depart by plane to Base Camp I June 21.
4. Depart by plane from Base Camp II to Dillingham June 25.
* This case was prepared with the assistance of Stuart Morigeau.
www.ebook3000.com

234  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Fly in air transportation to and from base camps.
2. Boat transportation within the Tikchik River system.
3. Digital cellular communication devices.
4. Camps and fishing conform to state of Alaska requirements.
LIMITS AND EXCLUSIONS
1. Guests are responsible for travel arrangements to and from Dillingham, Alaska.
2. Guests are responsible for their own fly-fishing equipment and clothing.
3. Local air transportation to and from base camps will be outsourced.
4. Tour guides are not responsible for the number of King Salmon caught by guests.
CUSTOMER REVIEW
The president of BlueNote, Inc.
Case 7.2
Silver Fiddle Construction
You are the president of Silver Fiddle Construction (SFC), which specializes in build-
ing high-quality, customized homes in the Grand Junction, Colorado, area. You have 
just been hired by the Czopeks to build their dream home. You operate as a general 
contractor and employ only a part-time bookkeeper. You subcontract work to local 
trade professionals. Housing construction in Grand Junction is booming. You are ten-
tatively scheduled to complete 11 houses this year. You have promised the Czopeks 
that the final costs will range from $450,000 to $500,000 and that it will take five 
months to complete the house once groundbreaking has begun. The Czopeks are will-
ing to have the project delayed in order to save costs.
 
You have just finished a preliminary scope statement for the project (see below). 
You are now brainstorming potential risks associated with the project.
1. Identify potential risks associated with this project. Try to come up with at least 
five different risks.
2. Use a risk assessment form similar to Figure 7.6 to analyze identified risks.
3. Develop a risk response matrix similar to Figure 7.8 to outline how you would deal 
with each of the risks.
PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
PROJECT OBJECTIVE
To construct a high-quality, custom home within five months at a cost not to exceed 
$500,000.
DELIVERABLES
∙ A 2,500-square-foot, 2½-bath, 3-bedroom, finished home.
∙ A finished garage, insulated and sheetrocked.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  235
∙ Kitchen appliances to include range, oven, microwave, and dishwasher.
∙ High-efficiency gas furnace with programmable thermostat.
MILESTONES
1. Permits approved July 5.
2. Foundation poured July 12.
3. “Dry in”—framing, sheathing, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical inspections—
passed September 25.
4. Final inspection November 7.
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Home must meet local building codes.
2. All windows and doors must pass NFRC class 40 energy ratings.
3. Exterior wall insulation must meet an “R” factor of 21.
4. Ceiling insulation must meet an “R” factor of 38.
5. Floor insulation must meet an “R” factor of 25.
6. Garage will accommodate two cars and one 28-foot-long Winnebago.
7. Structure must pass seismic stability codes.
LIMITS AND EXCLUSIONS
1. The home will be built to the specifications and design of the original blueprints 
provided by the customer.
2. Owner is responsible for landscaping.
3. Refrigerator is not included among kitchen appliances.
4. Air conditioning is not included, but house is prewired for it.
5. SFC reserves the right to contract out services.
CUSTOMER REVIEW
“Bolo” and Izabella Czopek.
Case 7.3
Trans LAN Project
Trans Systems is a small information systems consulting firm located in Meridian, 
Louisiana. Trans has just been hired to design and install a local area network (LAN) 
for the city of Meridian’s social welfare agency. You are the manager for the project, 
which includes one Trans professional and two interns from a local university. You 
have just finished a preliminary scope statement for the project (see below). You are 
now brainstorming potential risks associated with the project.
1. Identify potential risks associated with this project. Try to come up with at least 
five different risks.
2. Use a risk assessment form similar to Figure 7.6 to analyze identified risks.
3. Develop a risk response matrix similar to Figure 7.8 to outline how you would deal 
with each of the risks.
www.ebook3000.com

236  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
PROJECT OBJECTIVE
To design and install a new local area network (LAN) within one month with a budget 
not to exceed $90,000 for the Meridian Social Service Agency with minimum disrup-
tion to ongoing operations.
DELIVERABLES
∙ Twenty workstations and twenty laptop computers.
∙ Server with dual-core processors.
∙ Two color laser printers.
∙ Windows R2 server and workstation operating system (Windows 10).
∙ Migration of existing databases and programs to new system.
∙ Four hours of introduction training for client’s personnel.
∙ Sixteen hours of training for client network administrator.
∙ Fully operational LAN system.
MILESTONES
1. Hardware January 22.
2. Setting users’ priority and authorization January 26.
3. In-house whole network test completed February 1.
4. Client site test completed February 2.
5. Training completed February 16.
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Workstations with 17-inch flat panel monitors, dual-core processors, 4 GB RAM, 
8X DVD+RW, wireless card, Ethernet card, 500 GB hard drive.
2. Laptops with 12-inch display monitor, dual-core processors, 2GB RAM,  
8X DVD+RW, wireless card, Ethernet card, 500 GB hard drive and weigh less than 
4½ lbs.
3. Wireless network interface cards and Ethernet connections.
4. System must support Windows 11 platforms.
5. System must provide secure external access for field workers.
LIMITS AND EXCLUSIONS
1. On-site work to be done after 8:00 p.m. and before 7:00 a.m. Monday through 
Saturday.
2. System maintenance and repair only up to one month after final inspection.
3. Warranties transferred to client.
4. Only responsible for installing software designated by the client two weeks before 
the start of the project.
5. Client will be billed for additional training beyond that prescribed in the contract.
CUSTOMER REVIEW
Director of the city of Meridian’s Social Service Agency.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  237
Case 7.4
XSU Spring Concert
You are a member of the X State University (XSU) student body entertainment com-
mittee. Your committee has agreed to sponsor a spring concert. The motive behind this 
concert is to offer a safe alternative to Hasta Weekend. Hasta Weekend is a spring 
event in which students from XSU rent houseboats and engage in heavy partying. Tra-
ditionally this occurs during the last weekend in May. Unfortunately, the partying has 
a long history of getting out of hand, sometimes leading to fatal accidents. After one 
such tragedy last spring, your committee wants to offer an alternative experience for 
those who are eager to celebrate the change in weather and the pending end of the 
school year.
 
You have just finished a preliminary scope statement for the project (see below). 
You are now brainstorming potential risks associated with the project.
1. Identify potential risks associated with this project. Try to come up with at least 
five different risks.
2. Use a risk assessment form similar to Figure 7.6 to analyze identified risks.
3. Develop a risk response matrix similar to Figure 7.8 to outline how you would deal 
with each of the risks.
PROJECT SCOPE STATEMENT
PROJECT OBJECTIVE
To organize and deliver an eight-hour concert at Wahoo Stadium at a cost not to exceed 
$50,000 on the last Saturday in May.
DELIVERABLES
∙ Local advertising.
∙ Concert security.
∙ Separate Beer Garden.
∙ Eight hours of music and entertainment.
∙ Food venues.
∙ Souvenir concert T-shirts.
∙ Secure all licenses and approvals.
∙ Secure sponsors.
MILESTONES
1. Secure all permissions and approvals by January 15.
2. Sign big-name artist by February 15.
3. Complete artist roster by April 1.
4. Secure vendor contracts by April 15.
5. Setup completed on May 27.
6. Concert on May 28.
7. Cleanup completed by May 31.
www.ebook3000.com

238  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
Case 7.5
Sustaining Project Risk Management during 
Implementation
BACKGROUND
Bill (Senior VP of product development): Carlos [project manager], we have to talk. 
I am concerned about the way we manage project risk here at Futuronics. I just came 
from an international “Future Mote Devices” meeting at UC Berkeley. [Note: A mote 
is a very small [e.g., 2–3mm square], wireless sensing pod that may be placed on land 
or in water to measure and communicate data.] The project management sessions 
receiving most attention addressed risk in product development projects. They 
described our management of project risk to the letter—failure to sustain risk manage-
ment after the project gets rolling. It seems someone has to get burned before risk 
management is taken seriously.
 
Much to my surprise, almost every project manager there admitted their firms have 
a problem sustaining team members’ interest in managing risk after the project is on 
its way. The old saying, “If you don’t manage risk, you pay the price later,” generated 
horror stories from a few who paid the price. We spent some time brainstorming ways 
to handle the problem at the project level, but there were very few concrete sugges-
tions. The meeting gave me a wakeup call. Carlos, we need to tackle this problem or 
some new or known risk event could put us both out of a job. The similarities between 
their horror stories and some of our past mistakes are scary.
 
Since here at Futuronics we only develop new products that are at least seven years 
beyond anything on the market, the level of both “known risk events and unknown risk” 
is far higher than in most other organizations. Managing project risk is important to 
every project, but here at Futuronics every new product project is loaded with risks. 
Carlos, I’m willing to work with you to improve our management of project risk at 
Futuronics.
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Professional sound stage and system.
2. At least one big-name artist.
3. At least seven performing acts.
4. Restroom facilities for 10,000 people.
5. Parking available for 1,000 cars.
6. Compliance with XSU and city requirements/ordinances.
LIMITS AND EXCLUSIONS
1. Performers responsible for travel arrangements to and from XSU.
2. Vendors contribute a set percentage of sales.
3. Concert must be over by 11:30 p.m.
CUSTOMER REVIEW
The president of XSU student body.

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  239
Carlos: Bill, I am aware of the problem. The PMI Roundtables I attend also talk to the 
difficulty of keeping teams and other stakeholders willing to revisit risk once the proj-
ect is on its way. [PMI Roundtables are monthly meetings of practicing PMs across 
industries designed to address project management problems.] I also heard war stories 
at a recent project management roundtable meeting. I have some notes from the meet-
ing right here.
 
It all started with the leader’s question: “How many project managers actually man-
age risk over the complete project life cycle?”
 
PM 1: We all work through the risk management process well before the project 
begins. We have the process template of risk identification, assessment, response, 
control, risk register, and contingency down pat. We just don’t follow through after 
the project begins. I think interest dies. Have you ever tried to get project stakehold-
ers to come to a risk meeting when the project is moving relatively well?
 
PM 2: A recent e-mail from one of our stakeholders said, “We’ll deal with it [risk] 
when it happens.”
 
PM 3: I agree. Interest seems to move from future oriented to reactionary. Also, 
risk management seems to degenerate into issue (concerns and problems) manage-
ment versus real risk management.
 
PM 4: I ask team members, “What is the risk of not managing risk over the life of 
the project?” Sometimes this question nudges a few to respond positively, espe-
cially if risks have changed or new ones are perceived. I use a failed project where 
a solid risk management process would have avoided the project failure. I explain 
all of the risk management processes that would have helped to improve the risk 
elements—risk identification, triggers, responsibility, transfer, accept, etc.
 
PM 5: Risk is not a line item in the budget or schedule. Maybe it is in the contin-
gency budget to cover “unknowns of unknowns.” I have to watch that management 
doesn’t try to squeeze out the contingency budget for something else.
Carlos continued to share with his boss that there were many more comments, but very 
few gave much guidance. Carlos then shared his idea:
Carlos: Colette is our best trainer, especially in transition management, and she would 
be a great choice for following through on this problem. Her training classes on upfront 
risk management are excellent. Should we ask her to present a session?
Bill: You are right, Carlos, Colette is ideal. She is smart and a great team motivator. 
Ask her, but give her some kind of direction for focus.
A few days later, Carlos sent out a memo:
Colette, this is to follow up on our lunch conversation yesterday discussing sustaining 
risk management after the project is on its way. Given the nature of our futuristic com-
pany, we should stress the point that our product development projects carry many 
more inherent risks than do traditional projects. I suggest the training classes should 
drill down on concrete actions and policies that will encourage interest of team mem-
bers and other project stakeholders in sustaining risk management practices during 
project execution.
 
Colette, we appreciate your taking on this project. When you have developed your 
training session, please give me a copy so I can schedule and support your efforts.
Regards, Carlos
www.ebook3000.com

240  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
CHALLENGE
Divide the class into teams of three or more participants.
 
Colette needs your help to develop her training program. You may wish to consider 
the questions listed below to initiate ideas.
∙ Why do project stakeholders lose interest in project risk after the project is under 
way?
∙ What are the dangers of not keeping on top of risk management during 
implementation?
∙ What kind of business is Futuronics in?
Brainstorm specific actions that will encourage project stakeholders to continue to 
scan and track the project environment for risk events. Suggest three concrete actions 
or scenarios that will encourage project stakeholders to change their behavior and truly 
support risk management while projects are being implemented. The following outline 
headings may be helpful in developing possible actions that would improve/enhance 
stakeholder support.
∙ Improving the risk management process
∙ Organization actions
∙ Motivating participation
Appendix 7.1
PERT and PERT Simulation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this appendix you should be able to:
A7-1 Calculate basic Pert Simulation projections.
PERT—PROGRAM EVALUATION AND REVIEW TECHNIQUE
In 1958 the Special Office of the Navy and the Booze, Allen, and Hamilton consulting 
firm developed PERT (program evaluation and review technique) to schedule the more 
than 3,300 contractors of the Polaris submarine project and to cover uncertainty of 
activity time estimates.
 
PERT is almost identical to the critical path method (CPM) technique except it 
assumes each activity duration has a range that follows a statistical distribution. PERT 
uses three time estimates for each activity. Basically, this means each activity duration 
can range from an optimistic time to a pessimistic time, and a weighted average can be 
computed for each activity. Because project activities usually represent work, and 
because work tends to stay behind once it gets behind, the PERT developers chose an 
approximation of the beta distribution to represent activity durations. This distribution 
is known to be flexible and can accommodate empirical data that do not follow a nor-
mal distribution. The activity durations can be skewed more toward the high or low 
end of the data range. Figure A7.1A depicts a beta distribution for activity durations 
that is skewed toward the right and is representative of work that tends to stay late once 
it is behind. The distribution for the project duration is represented by a normal 
Calculate basic Pert 
 Simulation projections.
A7-1
LO

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  241
(symmetrical) distribution shown in Figure A7.1B. The project distribution represents 
the sum of the weighted averages of the activities on the critical path(s).
 
Knowing the weighted average and variances for each activity allows the project 
planner to compute the probability of meeting different project durations. Follow the 
steps described in the hypothetical example given next. (The jargon is difficult for 
those not familiar with statistics, but the process is relatively simple after working 
through a couple of examples.)
 
The weighted average activity time is computed by the following formula:
 
te = a + 4m + b
6
 
(7.1)
where
 
 
te = weighted average activity time
 
 
 a =  optimistic activity time (1 chance in 100 of completing the activity  
earlier under normal conditions)
 
 
 b =  pessimistic activity time (1 chance in 100 of completing the activity  
later under normal conditions)
 
 
m = most likely activity time
When the three time estimates have been specified, this equation is used to compute 
the weighted average duration for each activity. The average (deterministic) value is 
placed on the project network as in the CPM method and the early, late, slack, and 
project completion times are computed as they are in the CPM method.
 
The variability in the activity time estimates is approximated by the following equa-
tions: Equation 7.2 represents the standard deviation for the activity. Equation 7.3 rep-
resents the standard deviation for the project. Note the standard deviation of the 
activity is squared in this equation; this is also called variance. This sum includes only 
activities on the critical path(s) or path being reviewed.
 
 σte = (
b −a
6
)  
(7.2)
 
 σTE = √Σσte
2  
(7.3)
Finally, the average project duration (TE) is the sum of all the average activity times 
along the critical path (sum of te), and it follows a normal distribution.
FIGURE A7.1 
Activity and Project Frequency Distributions 
a
m
ACTIVITY
b
(A)
TE
PROJECT
(B)
www.ebook3000.com

242  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
 
Knowing the average project duration and the variances of activities allows the 
probability of completing the project (or segment of the project) by a specific time to 
be computed using standard statistical tables. The equation below (Equation 7.4) is 
used to compute the “Z” value found in statistical tables (Z = number of standard 
deviations from the mean), which, in turn, tells the probability of completing the proj-
ect in the time specified.
 
Z =
TS −TE
√Σσte
2  
(7.4)
where
 
TE = critical path duration
 
TS = scheduled project duration
 
 Z =  probability (of meeting scheduled duration) found in statistical Table A7.2
A HYPOTHETICAL EXAMPLE USING THE PERT TECHNIQUE
The activity times and variances are given in Table A7.1. The project network is presented 
in Figure A7.2. This figure shows the project network as AOA and AON. The AON net-
work is presented as a reminder that PERT can use AON networks as well as AOA.
 
The expected project duration (TE) is 64 time units; the critical path is 1-2-3-5-6. 
With this information, the probability of completing the project by a specific date can 
easily be computed using standard statistical methods. For example, what is the prob-
ability the project will be completed before a scheduled time (TS) of 67? The normal 
curve for the project would appear as shown in Figure A7.3.
 
Using the formula for the Z value, the probability can be computed as follows:
 Z =
TS −TE
√Σσte
2
 =
67 −64
√25 + 9 + 1 + 1
 =
+3
√36
 = +0.50
 P = 0.69
Reading from Table A7.2, a Z value of +0.5 gives a probability of 0.69, which is inter-
preted to mean there is a 69 percent chance of completing the project on or before 67 
time units.
Activity 
a 
m 
b 
te 
[(b – a)/6]2
1–2 
17 
29 
47 
30 
25
2–3 
 6 
12 
24 
13 
 9
2–4 
16 
19 
28 
20 
 4
3–5 
13 
16 
19 
16 
 1
4–5 
 2 
 5 
14 
 6 
 4
5–6 
 2 
 5 
 8 
 5 
 1
TABLE A7.1
Activity Times and 
Variances

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  243
FIGURE A7.2
Hypothetical 
Network
1
30
13
16
20
6
56
59
56
59
5
6
TE = 64
TE = 64
4
2
5
3
A
0
30
30
B
30
AON Network
AOA Network
43
13
D
43
59
16
C
30
50
20
E
50
56
6
F
59
64
64
5
FIGURE A7.3
Possible Project 
Durations
TE = 64
TS = 67
 
Conversely, the probability of completing the project by time period 60 is computed 
as follows:
              Z =
60 −64
√25 + 9 + 1 + 1
              
 = −4
√36
               = −0.67
               P ≈0.26
www.ebook3000.com

244  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
From Table A7.2, a Z value of −0.67 gives an approximate probability of 0.26, which 
is interpreted to mean there is about a 26 percent chance of completing the project on 
or before 60 time units. Note that this same type of calculation can be made for any 
path or segment of a path in the network.
 
When such probabilities are available to management, trade-off decisions can be 
made to accept or reduce the risk associated with a particular project duration. For 
example, if the project manager wishes to improve the chances of completing the proj-
ect by 64 time units, at least two choices are available. First, management can spend 
money up front to change conditions that will reduce the duration of one or more 
activities on the critical path. A more prudent, second alternative would be to allocate 
money to a contingency fund and wait to see how the project is progressing as it is 
implemented.
EXERCISES
1. Given the project information below, what is the probability of completing the 
National Holiday Toy project in 93 time units?
2. The Global Tea and Organic Juice companies have merged.
 
The following information has been collected for the “Consolidation Project.”
Act. ID 
Description 
Predecessor 
Optm. (a) 
Most likely (m) 
Pess. (b) 
Act time te 
Variance [(b − a)/6]2 
Critical
1 
Design package 
None 
 6 
12 
24
2 
Design product 
1  
16 
19 
28
3 
Build package 
1  
 4 
 7 
10
4 
Secure patent 
2  
 24 
27 
36
5 
Build product 
2  
17 
29 
47
6 
Paint 
3, 4, 5 
 4 
 7 
10
7 
Test market 
6  
13 
16 
19
Z Value 
Probability 
Z Value 
Probability
−3.0 
.001 
+0.0 
.500
−2.8 
.003 
+0.2 
.579
−2.6 
.005 
+0.4 
.655
−2.4 
.008 
+0.6 
.726
−2.2 
.014 
+0.8 
.788
−2.0 
.023 
+1.0 
.841
−1.8 
.036 
+1.2 
.885
−1.6 
.055 
+1.4 
.919
−1.4 
.081 
+1.6 
.945
−1.2 
.115 
+1.8 
.964
−1.0 
.159 
+2.0 
.977
−0.8 
.212 
+2.2 
.986
−0.6 
.274 
+2.4 
.992
−0.4 
.345 
+2.6 
.995
−0.2 
.421 
+2.8 
.997
TABLE A7.2
Z Values and 
Probabilities

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  245
 
 
 
 
Variance 
ID 
 Description 
Predecessor 
te 
[(b − a)/6]2
1 
Pilot production 
None  
 6 
 3
2 
Select channels of distrib. 
None  
 7 
 4
3 
Develop mktg. program 
None  
 4 
 2
4 
Test market 
1  
 4 
 2
5 
Patent 
1  
10 
 5
6 
Full production 
4  
16 
10
7 
Ad promotion 
3  
 3 
 2
8 
Release 
2, 5, 6, 7 
 2 
 1
 
1. Compute the expected time for each activity.
 
2. Compute the variance for each activity.
 
3. Compute the expected project duration.
 
4. What is the probability of completing the project by day 112? Within 116 days?
 
5. What is the probability of completing “Negotiate with Unions” by day 90?
3. The expected times and variances for the project activities are given below. What is 
the probability of completing the project in 25 periods?
Activity 
Description 
Predecessor 
a opt 
m ml 
b pess
  1 
Codify accounts 
None  
16 
19 
28
  2 
File articles of unification 
None  
30 
30 
30
  3 
Unify price and credit policy 
None  
60 
72 
90
  4 
Unify personnel policies 
None  
18 
27 
30
  5 
Unify data processing 
1  
17 
29 
47
  6 
Train accounting staff 
1  
 4 
 7 
10
  7 
Pilot run data processing 
5  
12 
15 
18
  8 
Calculate P & L and balance sheet 
6, 7  
 6 
12 
24
  9 
Transfer real property 
2  
18 
27 
30
10 
Train salesforce 
3  
20 
35 
50
11 
Negotiate with unions 
4  
40 
55 
100
12 
Determine capital needs 
8  
11 
20 
29
13 
Explain personnel policies 
11  
14 
23 
26
14 
Secure line of credit 
9, 12  
13 
16 
19
15 
End 
10, 13, 14 
 0 
 0 
 0
Case A7.1
International Capital, Inc.—Part A
International Capital, Inc. (IC), is a small investment banking firm that special-
izes in securing funds for small- to medium-sized firms. IC is able to use a stan-
dardized project format for each engagement. Only activity times and unusual 
circumstances change the standard network. Beth Brown has been assigned to this 
www.ebook3000.com

246  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
MANAGERIAL REPORT
Brown and other broker partners have a policy of passing their plan through a project 
review committee of colleagues. This committee traditionally checks that all details 
are covered, times are realistic, and resources are available. Brown wishes you to 
develop a report that presents a planned schedule and expected project completion 
time in workdays. Include a project network in your report. The average duration for a 
sourcing capital project is 70 workdays. IC partners have agreed it is good business to 
set up projects with a 95 percent chance of attaining the plan. How does this project 
stack up with the average project? What would the average have to be to ensure a 
95 percent chance of completing the project in 70 workdays?
Time in Workdays
Activity 
Optimistic 
Most Likely 
Pessimistic
A 
 4 
 7 
10
B 
 2 
 4 
 8
C 
 2 
 5 
 8
D 
16 
19 
28
E 
 6 
 9 
24
F 
 1 
 7 
13
G 
 4 
10 
28
H 
 2 
 5 
14
I 
 5 
 8 
17
J 
 2 
 5 
 8
K 
17 
29 
45
Case A7.2
Advantage Energy Technology Data Center Migration—
Part B
In Chapter 6, Brian Smith, network administrator at Advanced Energy Technology 
(AET), was given the responsibility of implementing the migration of a large data 
center to a new office location.
Activity 
Description 
Immediate Predecessor
A 
Start story draft using template 
— 
B 
Research client firm 
— 
C 
Create “due diligence” rough draft 
A, B 
D 
Coordinate needs proposal with client 
C 
E 
Estimate future demand and cash flows 
C 
F 
Draft future plans for client company 
E 
G 
Create and approve legal documents 
C 
H 
Integrate all drafts into first-draft proposal 
D, F, G
I 
Line up potential sources of capital 
G, F 
J 
Check, approve, and print final legal proposal 
H 
K 
Sign contracts and transfer funds 
I, J
client as project manager partner and has compiled the network information and 
activity times for the latest client as follows:

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  247
 
Time in Workdays
 
 
Optimistic 
Most Likely 
Pessimistic 
Immediate 
 
Task Name 
Dur. 
Dur. 
Dur. 
Predecessor 
Critical Path
  1 
AET DATA CENTER MIGRATION 
54 
68 
92 
 
  2 
 Team meeting 
 0.5 
 1 
 1.5 
 
✓
  3 
 Hire contractors 
 6 
 7 
 8 
2 
  4 
 Network design 
12 
14 
16 
2 
  5 
 Ventilation system 
— 
— 
— 
— 
  6 
  Order ventilation system 
18 
21 
30 
2 
  7 
  Install ventilation system 
 5 
 7 
 9 
6 
  8 
 New racks 
— 
— 
— 
— 
  9 
  Order new racks 
13 
14 
21 
2 
✓
10 
  Install racks 
17 
21 
25 
9 
✓
11 
 Power supplies and cables 
— 
— 
— 
— 
12 
  Order power supplies & cables 
 6 
 7 
 8 
2 
13 
  Install power supplies 
 5 
 5 
11 
12, 16 
14 
  Install cables 
 6 
 8 
10 
12, 16 
✓
15 
 Renovation of data center 
19 
20 
27 
3, 4 
16 
 City inspection 
 1 
 2 
 3 
3, 7, 10 
✓
17 
 Switchover Meetings 
— 
— 
— 
— 
18 
  Facilities 
 7 
 8 
 9 
14 
19 
  Operations/systems 
 5 
 7 
 9 
14 
20 
  Operations/telecommunications 
 6 
 7 
 8 
14 
21 
  Systems & applications 
 7 
 7 
13 
14 
22 
  Customer service 
 5 
 6 
13 
14 
✓
23 
 Power check 
 0.5 
 1 
 1.5 
13, 14, 15 
✓
24 
 Install test servers 
 5 
 7 
 9 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23  
✓
25 
 Management safety check 
 1 
 2 
 3 
7, 23, 24 
✓
26 
 Primary systems check 
 1.5 
 2 
2.5 
25 
✓
27 
 Set date for move 
 1 
 1 
 1 
26 
✓
28 
 Complete move 
 1 
 2 
3 
27 
✓
 
Careful planning was needed because AET operates in the highly competitive 
petroleum industry. AET is one of five national software companies that provide an 
accounting and business management package for oil jobbers and gasoline distribu-
tors. A few years ago, AET jumped into the “application service provider” world. 
Their large data center provides clients with remote access to AET’s complete suite of 
application software systems. Traditionally, one of AET’s primary competitive advan-
tages has been the company’s trademark IT reliability. Due to the complexity of this 
project, the Executive Committee insisted that preliminary analysis of the anticipated 
completion date be conducted.
 
Brian compiled the following information, in preparation for some PERT analysis:
1. Based on these estimates and the resultant expected project duration of 69 days, the 
executive committee wants to know what the probability is of completing the proj-
ect before a scheduled time (TS) of 68 days.
2. The significance of this project has the executive committee very concerned. The com-
mittee has decided that more analysis of the duration of each activity is needed. Prior 
to conducting that effort, they asked Brian to calculate what the expected project dura-
tion would have to be to ensure a 93 percent chance of completion within 68 days.
www.ebook3000.com

248  Chapter 7  Managing Risk
ADVANTAGE ENERGY TECHNOLOGY (AET)—ACCOUNTS  
PAYABLE SYSTEM
The AET sales department has been concerned about a new start-up company that is 
about to release an accounts payable system. Their investigation indicates that this new 
package will provide features which will seriously compete with AET’s current 
Accounts Payable system and in some cases exceed what AET offers.
 
Tom Wright, senior applications developer at AET, has been given the responsibil-
ity of analyzing, designing, developing, and delivering a new accounts payable system 
(A/P) for AET customers.
 
Complicating the issue is the concern of the sales department about AET’s recent 
inability to meet promised delivery dates. They have convinced CEO (Larry Martain) 
that a significant marketing effort will have to be expended to convince the clients they 
should wait for the  AET product rather than jump to a package provided by a new 
entry to the petroleum software business. Companion to this effort is the importance of 
the performance of the software development group.
 
Consequently, Tom has decided to take the following action: tighten up the estimat-
ing effort by his developers; incorporate some new estimating procedures; and use 
some PERT techniques to generate probabilities associated with his delivery dates.
 
Tom’s planning team made a first-cut at the set of activities and associated durations:
 
Time in Workdays
 
 
Optimistic 
Most Likely 
Pessimistic 
Immediate 
 
Task Name 
Dur. 
Dur. 
Dur. 
Predecessor 
Critical Path
  1 
ACCOUNTS PAYABLE SYSTEM 
 
 
 
 
  2 
 Planning meeting 
 1 
 1 
 2 
 
✓
  3 
 Team assignments 
 3 
 4 
 5 
2 
✓
  4 
 Program specification 
 
 
 
 
  5 
  Customer requirements 
 8 
10 
12 
3 
✓
  6 
  Feasibility study 
 3 
 5 
 7 
5 
  7 
  Systems analysis 
 6 
 8 
10 
5 
✓
  8 
  Prelim budget & schedule 
 1 
 2 
 3 
7 
✓
  9 
  Functional specification 
 3 
 5 
 7 
7 
✓
10 
  Prelim design 
10 
12 
14 
9 
✓
11 
  Configuration & perf needs 
 3 
 4 
 5 
10 
✓
12 
  Hardware requirements 
 4 
 6 
 8 
11 
✓
13 
  System specification 
 5 
 7 
 9 
10 
14 
  Detailed design 
12 
14 
16 
12, 13 
✓
15 
  Program specification 
 8 
10 
12 
14 
✓
16 
 Programming—first phase 
27 
32 
37 
15 
✓
17 
 Documentation 
14 
16 
18 
10 
18 
 Prototype 
 
 
 
 
19 
  Development 
 5 
 7 
 9 
16 
✓
20 
  User testing & feedback 
12 
14 
16 
19 
✓
21 
 Programming—second phase 
10 
12 
14 
16 
22 
 Beta testing 
18 
20 
22 
21 
23 
 Final documentation pkg 
 9 
10 
11 
17, 20 
✓
24 
 Training pkg 
 4 
 5 
 6 
21SS, 23 
✓
25 
 Product release 
 3 
 5 
 7 
22, 23, 24 
✓
SS = Start to Start lag

Chapter 7  Managing Risk  249
3. Based on these estimates and the critical path, the project duration is estimated at 
149 days. But an AET salesperson in the Southeast Region has discovered that the 
competing A/P package (with significant improvements) is scheduled for delivery 
in approximately 145 days. The sales force is very anxious to beat that delivery 
time. The executive committee asks Tom for an estimated probability of reducing 
his expected project duration by two days.
4. The executive committee is advised by Tom that after all the estimating was com-
pleted, he determined that one of his two critical systems analysts might have to 
move out of the area for critical family reasons. Tom is still very confident that with 
some staff rearrangements, assistance from a subcontractor, and some “hands on” 
activities on his part he can still meet the original delivery date, based on 149 days.
 
  This news is very disconcerting to the committee and the sales staff. At this 
point, the committee decides that based on the most recent delivery performance of 
AET, a modified, comfortable delivery date should be communicated to AET cli-
ents—one that Tom and his staff are very likely to meet. Consequently, Tom is 
asked to calculate what the expected project duration would have to be to ensure a 
98 percent chance of completion within 160 days—that is a “published, drop dead 
date” that can be communicated to the clients.
www.ebook3000.com

250
Scheduling Resources 
and Costs
OUTLINE
8.1 
Overview of the Resource Scheduling Problem
8.2 Types of Resource Constraints
8.3 Classiﬁcation of a Scheduling Problem
8.4 Resource Allocation Methods
8.5 Computer Demonstration of Resource- 
Constrained Scheduling
8.6 Splitting Activities
8.7 Beneﬁts of Scheduling Resources
8.8 Assigning Project Work
8.9 Multiproject Resource Schedules
8.10 Using the Resource Schedule to Develop  
a Project Cost Baseline
Summary
Appendix 8.1: The Critical-Chain Approach
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
8-1  Understand the differences between time- 
constrained and resource-constrained 
schedules.
8-2  Identify different types of resource constraints.
8-3  Describe how the smoothing approach is used 
on time-constrained projects.
8-4  Describe how leveling approach is used for 
resource-constrained projects.
8-5  Understand how project management soft-
ware creates resource-constrained schedules.
8-6  Understand when and why splitting tasks 
should be avoided.
8-7  Identify general guidelines for assigning  
people to speciﬁc tasks.
8-8  Identify common problems with multiproject 
resource scheduling.
8-9  Explain why a time-phased budget baseline is 
needed.
8-10  Create a time-phased project budget baseline.
C H A P T E R  E I G H T
8

251
Project network times are not a schedule until resources have been assigned. 
Cost estimates are not a budget until they have been time-phased.
We have consistently stressed that up-front planning results in big payoffs. For those 
who have diligently worked through the earlier planning processes chapters, you are 
nearly ready to launch your project. This chapter completes the final two planning 
tasks that become the master plan for your project—resource and cost scheduling. (See 
Figure 8.1.) This process uses the resource schedule to assign time-phased costs that 
provide the project budget baseline. Given this time-phased baseline, comparisons can 
be made with actual and planned schedule and costs. This chapter first discusses the 
process for developing the project resource schedule. This resource schedule will be 
used to assign the time-phased budgeted values to create a project budget baseline.
 
There are always more project proposals than there are available resources. The 
priority system needs to select projects that best contribute to the organization’s objec-
tives, within the constraints of the resources available. If all projects and their respec-
tive resources are computer scheduled, the feasibility and impact of adding a new 
project to those in process can be quickly assessed. With this information the project 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

252  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
priority team will add a new project only if resources are available. This chapter exam-
ines methods of scheduling resources so the team can make realistic judgments of 
resource availability and project durations. The project manager uses the same sched-
ule for implementing the project. If changes occur during project implementation, the 
computer schedule is easily updated and the effects easily assessed.
8.1 Overview of the Resource Scheduling Problem
After staff and other resources were assigned to her project, a project manager listed 
the following questions that still needed to be addressed:
∙ Will the assigned labor and/or equipment be adequate and available to deal with my 
project?
∙ Will outside contractors have to be used?
∙ Do unforeseen resource dependencies exist? Is there a new critical path?
∙ How much flexibility do we have in using resources?
∙ Is the original deadline realistic?
Clearly, this project manager has a good understanding of the problems she is facing. 
Any project scheduling system should facilitate finding quick, easy answers to these 
questions.
 
The planned network and activity project duration times found in previous chapters 
fail to deal with resource usage and availability. The time estimates for the work pack-
ages and network times were made independently with the implicit assumption that 
resources would be available. This may or may not be the case.
 
If resources are adequate but the demand varies widely over the life of the project, 
it may be desirable to even out resource demand by delaying noncritical activities 
(using slack) to lower peak demand and, thus, increase resource utilization. This pro-
cess is called resource smoothing.
 
On the other hand, if resources are not adequate to meet peak demands, the late start 
of some activities must be delayed, and the duration of the project may be increased. 
This process is called resource-constrained scheduling. One research study of more 
than 50 projects by Woodworth and Willie (1975) found that planned project network 
durations were increased 38 percent when resources were scheduled.
 
The consequences of failing to schedule limited resources are costly and project 
delays usually manifest themselves midway in the project when quick corrective action 
is difficult. An additional consequence of failing to schedule resources is ignoring the 
peaks and valleys of resource usage over the duration of the project. Because project 
resources are usually overcommitted and because resources seldom line up by avail-
ability and need, procedures are needed to deal with these problems. This chapter 
Understand the differ-
ences between time-
constrained and 
resource-constrained 
schedules.
8-1
LO
FIGURE 8.1
Project Planning 
Process
Scope/WBS
Network
Risk
Resource and Cost
Scheduling
Master Plan

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  253
FIGURE 8.2
Constraint Examples
Technical constraints
(A)
Resource constraints
Plan
(C)
Hire band
Decorate
hall
Purchase
refreshments
Plan
(B)
Decorate
hall
Purchase
refreshments
Hire band
Reception
Reception
Pour
Code
Frame
Test
Roof
Design
End
End
Start
Start
addresses methods available to project managers for dealing with resource utilization 
and availability through resource leveling and resource-constrained scheduling.
 
Up to now the start and sequence of activities has been based solely on technical or 
logical considerations. For example, a project network for framing a house might show 
three activities in a sequence: (1) pour foundation, (2) build frame, and (3) cover roof. 
A network for a new software project could place the activities in the network, as a 
sequence of (1) design, (2) code, and (3) test. In other words, you cannot logically 
perform activity 2 until 1 is completed, and so on. The project network depicts techni-
cal constraints (see Figure 8.2A). The network assumes the personnel and equipment 
are available to perform the required work. This is often not the case!
 
The absence or shortage of resources can drastically alter technical constraints. A proj-
ect network planner may assume adequate resources and show activities occurring in 
parallel. However, parallel activities hold potential for resource conflicts. For example, 
assume you are planning a wedding reception that includes four activities—(1) plan, 
(2) hire band, (3) decorate hall, and (4) purchase refreshments. Each activity takes one day. 
Activities 2, 3, and 4 could be done in parallel by different people. There is no technical 
reason or dependency of one on another (see Figure 8.2B). However, if one person must 
perform all activities, the resource constraint requires the activities be performed in 
sequence or series. Clearly the consequence is a delay of these activities and a very differ-
ent set of network relationships (see Figure 8.2C). Note that the resource dependency takes 
priority over the technological dependency but does not violate the technological depen-
dency; that is, hire, decorate, and purchase may now have to take place in sequence rather 
than concurrently, but they must all be completed before the reception can take place.
 
The interrelationships and interactions among time and resource constraints are 
complex for even small project networks. Some effort to examine these interactions 
before the project begins frequently uncovers surprising problems. Project managers 
www.ebook3000.com

254  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
In rare situations, physical factors 
cause activities that would normally 
occur in parallel to be constrained 
by contractual or environmental 
conditions. For example, in theory 
the renovation of a sailboat compartment might 
involve four to five tasks that can be done indepen-
dently. However, since space allows only one person 
to work at one time, all tasks have to be performed 
sequentially. Likewise, on a mining project it may be 
physically possible for only two miners to work in a 
shaft at a time. Another example would be the erec-
tion of a communication tower and nearby ground-
work. For safety considerations, the contract prohib-
its groundwork within 2,000 feet of the tower 
construction.
© Getty Images/iStockphoto
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  8 .1
Working in Tight Places
 
The procedures for handling physical factors are 
similar to those used for resource constraints.
who do not consider resource availability in moderately complex projects usually learn 
of the problem when it is too late to correct. A deficit of resources can significantly 
alter project dependency relationships, completion dates, and project costs. Project 
managers must be careful to schedule resources to ensure availability in the right quan-
tities and at the right time. Fortunately, there are computer software programs that can 
identify resource problems during the early project planning phase when corrective 
changes can be considered. These programs only require activity resource needs and 
availability information to schedule resources.
 
See the Snapshot from Practice 8.1: Working in Tight Places for a third constraint 
that impinges on project schedules.
8.2 Types of Resource Constraints
Resources are people, equipment, and material that can be drawn on to accomplish 
something. In projects the availability or unavailability of resources will often influ-
ence the way projects are managed.
1. People. This is the most obvious and important project resource. Human resources 
are usually classified by the skills they bring to the project—for example, programmer, 
mechanical engineer, welder, inspector, marketing director, supervisor. In rare cases 
some skills are interchangeable, but usually with a loss of productivity. The many dif-
fering skills of human resources add to the complexity of scheduling projects.
2. Materials. Project materials cover a large spectrum: for example, chemicals for 
a scientific project, concrete for a road project, survey data for a marketing project.
Material availability and shortages have been blamed for the delay of many projects. 
When it is known that a lack of availability of materials is important and probable, 
materials should be included in the project network plan and schedule. For example, 
delivery and placement of an oil rig tower in a Siberian oil field has a very small time 
window during one summer month. Any delivery delay means a one-year, costly delay. 
8-2
LO
Identify different types of 
resource constraints.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  255
Another example in which material was the major resource scheduled was the resurfac-
ing and replacement of some structures on the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco. 
Work on the project was limited to the hours between midnight and 5:00 a.m. with a 
penalty of $1,000 per minute for any work taking place after 5:00 a.m. Scheduling the 
arrival of replacement structures was an extremely important part of managing the five-
hour work-time window of the project. Scheduling materials has also become impor-
tant in developing products where time-to-market can result in loss of market share.
3. Equipment. Equipment is usually presented by type, size, and quantity. In some 
cases equipment can be interchanged to improve schedules, but this is not typical. Equip-
ment is often overlooked as a constraint. The most common oversight is to assume the 
resource pool is more than adequate for the project. For example, if a project needs one 
earthmoving tractor six months from now and the organization owns four, it is common 
to assume the resource will not delay the pending project. However, when the earthmov-
ing tractor is due on-site in six months, all four machines in the pool might be occupied 
on other projects. In multiproject environments it is prudent to use a common resource 
pool for all projects. This approach forces a check of resource availability across all proj-
ects and reserves the equipment for specific project needs in the future. Recognition of 
equipment constraints before the project begins can avoid high crashing or delay costs.
8.3 Classiﬁcation of a Scheduling Problem
Most of the scheduling methods available today require the project manager to classify the 
project as either time constrained or resource constrained. Project managers need to con-
sult their priority matrix (see Figure 4.2) to determine which case fits their project. One 
simple test to determine if the project is time or resource constrained is to ask, “If the criti-
cal path is delayed, will resources be added to get back on schedule?” If the answer is yes, 
assume the project is time constrained; if no, assume the project is resource constrained.
 
A time-constrained project is one that must be completed by an imposed date. If 
required, resources can be added to ensure the project is completed by a specific date. 
Although time is the critical factor, resource usage should be no more than is necessary 
and sufficient.
 
A resource-constrained project is one that assumes the level of resources avail-
able cannot be exceeded. If the resources are inadequate, it will be acceptable to delay 
the project, but as little as possible.
 
In scheduling terms, time constrained means time (project duration) is fixed and 
resources are flexible, while resource constrained means resources are fixed and time 
is flexible. Methods for scheduling these projects are presented in the next section.
8.4 Resource Allocation Methods
Assumptions
Ease of demonstrating the allocation methods available requires some limiting assump-
tions to keep attention on the heart of the problem. The rest of the chapter depends 
entirely on the assumptions noted here. First, splitting activities will not be allowed. 
This means once an activity is placed in the schedule, assume it will be worked on 
continuously until it is finished; hence, an activity cannot be started, stopped for a 
period of time, and then finished. Second, the level of resources used for an activity 
cannot be changed. These limiting assumptions do not exist in practice, but simplify 
learning. It is easy for new project managers to deal with the reality of splitting activi-
ties and changing the level of resources when they meet them on the job.
www.ebook3000.com

256  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
Time-Constrained Projects: Smoothing Resource Demand
Scheduling time-constrained projects focuses on resource utilization. When demand 
for a specific resource type is erratic, it is difficult to manage, and utilization may be 
very poor. Practitioners have attacked the utilization problem using resource leveling 
techniques that balance demand for a resource. Basically, all leveling techniques delay 
noncritical activities by using positive slack to reduce peak demand and fill in the val-
leys for the resources. An example will demonstrate the basic procedure for a time-
constrained project. See Figure 8.3.
 
For the purpose of demonstration, the Botanical Garden project uses only one 
resource (backhoes); all backhoes are interchangeable. The top bar chart shows the 
activities on a time scale. The dependencies are shown with the vertical connecting 
8-3
LO
Describe how the 
smoothing approach is 
used on time- 
constrained projects.
FIGURE 8.3 Botanical Garden
0
Design
Layout &
scarify
Walkways
Lighting
Number of
backhoes
required
Smoothed
number of
backhoes
required
Irrigation
Fence &
walls
Planting
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
0
4
1 Bh
1 Bh
1 Bh
1 Bh
2 Bh
2 Bh
1 Bh
1 Bh
3 Bh
2 Bh
3 Bh
2 Bh
3
2
1
4
3
2
1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
1 Bh
2 Bh
1 Bh
3 Bh
1 Bh
2 Bh

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  257
arrows. The horizontal arrows following activities represent activity slack (for example, 
irrigation requires six days to complete and has six days slack). The number of backhoes 
needed for each task is shown in the shaded activity duration block (rectangle). After the 
land has been scarified and the plan laid out, work can begin on the walkways, irriga-
tion, and fencing and retaining walls simultaneously. The middle chart shows the 
resource profile for the backhoes. For periods 4 through 10, four backhoes are needed.
 
Because this project is declared time constrained, the goal will be to reduce the peak 
requirement for the resource and thereby increase the utilization of the resource. A 
quick examination of the ES (early start) resource load chart suggests only two activi-
ties have slack that can be used to reduce the peak—fence and walls provide the best 
choice for smoothing the resource needs. Another choice could be irrigation, but it 
would result in an up and down resource profile. The choice will probably center on the 
activity that is perceived as having the least risk of being late. The smoothed resource 
loading chart shows the results of delaying the fence and walls activity. Note the differ-
ences in the resource profiles. The important point is the resources needed over the life 
of the project have been reduced from four to three (25 percent). In addition the profile 
has been smoothed, which should be easier to manage.
 
The Botanical Garden project schedule reached the three goals of smoothing:
∙ The peak of demand for the resource was reduced.
∙ The number of resources over the life of the project have been reduced.
∙ The fluctuations in resource demand were minimized.
The latter improves the utilization of resources. Backhoes are not easily moved from 
location to location. There are costs associated with changing the level of resources 
needed. The same analogy applies to the movement of people back and forth among 
projects. It is well known that people are more efficient if they can focus their effort on 
one project rather than multitasking their time among, say, three projects.
 
The downside of leveling is a loss of flexibility that occurs from reducing slack. The 
risk of activities delaying the project also increases because slack reduction can create 
more critical activities and/or near-critical activities. Pushing leveling too far for a 
perfectly level resource profile is risky. Every activity then becomes critical.
 
The Botanical Garden example gives a sense of the time-constrained problem and 
the smoothing approach. However, in practice the magnitude of the problem is very 
complex for even small projects. Manual solutions are not practical. Fortunately, the 
software packages available today have very good routines for leveling project 
resources. Typically, they use activities that have the most slack to level project 
resources. The rationale is those activities with the most slack pose the least risk. 
Although this is generally true, other risk factors such as reduction of flexibility to 
use reassigned resources on other activities or the nature of the activity (easy, com-
plex) are not addressed using such a simple rationale. It is easy to experiment with 
many alternatives to find the one that best fits your project and minimizes risk of 
delaying the project.
Resource-Constrained Projects
When the number of people and/or equipment is not adequate to meet peak demand 
requirements and it is impossible to obtain more, the project manager faces a resource-
constrained problem. Something has to give. The trick is to prioritize and allocate 
resources to minimize project delay without exceeding the resource limit or altering 
the technical network relationships.
8-4
LO
Describe how leveling 
approach is used for 
resource-constrained 
projects.
www.ebook3000.com

258  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
 
The resource scheduling problem is a large combinatorial one. This means even a 
modest-size project network with only a few resource types might have several thou-
sand feasible solutions. A few researchers have demonstrated optimum mathematical 
solutions to the resource allocation problem but only for small networks and very few 
resource types (Arrow and Hurowicz, 1977; Talbot and Patterson, 1979; Woodworth 
and Shanahan, 1988). The massive data requirements for larger problems make pure 
mathematical solutions (e.g., linear programming) impractical. An alternative 
approach to the problem has been the use of heuristics (rules of thumb) to solve large 
combinatorial problems. These practical decision or priority rules have been in place 
for many years.
 
Heuristics do not always yield an optimal schedule, but they are very capable of 
yielding a “good” schedule for very complex networks with many types of resources. 
The efficiency of different rules and combinations of rules has been well documented 
(Pascoe, 1965; Fendly, 1968; Davis and Patterson, 1975). However, because each proj-
ect is unique, it is wise to test several sets of heuristics on a network to determine the 
priority allocation rules that minimize project delay. The computer software available 
today makes it very easy for the project manager to create a good resource schedule for 
the project. A simple example of the heuristic approach is illustrated here.
 
Heuristics allocate resources to activities to minimize project delay; that is, heuris-
tics prioritize which activities are allocated resources and which activities are delayed 
when resources are not adequate.
 
The parallel method is the most widely used approach to apply heuristics, which 
have been found to consistently minimize project delay over a large variety of projects. 
The parallel method is an iterative process that starts from the beginning of project 
time and, when resources needed exceed the resources available, retains activities first 
by the priority rules:
1. Minimum slack.
2. Smallest duration.
3. Lowest activity identification number.
Those not able to be scheduled without delaying others are pushed out farther in time. 
However, do not attempt to move activities that have already started. When consider-
ing activities not to delay, consider the resources each activity uses. In any period when 
two or more activities require the same resource, the priority rules are applied. For 
example, if in period 5 three activities are eligible to start (i.e., have the same ES) and 
require the same resource, the first activity placed in the schedule would be the activity 
with the least slack (rule 1). However, if all activities have the same slack, the next rule 
would be invoked (rule 2), and the activity with the smallest duration would be placed 
in the schedule first. In very rare cases, when all eligible activities have the same slack 
and the same duration, the tie is broken by the lowest activity identification number 
(rule 3), since each activity has a unique ID number.
 
When a resource limit has been reached, the early start (ES) for succeeding activi-
ties not yet in the schedule will be delayed (and all successor activities not having free 
slack) and their slack reduced. In subsequent periods the procedure is repeated until the 
project is scheduled. The procedure is demonstrated next; see Figure 8.4. The shaded 
areas in the resource loading chart represent the “scheduling interval” of the time-
constrained schedule (ES through LF). You can schedule the resource any place within 
the interval and not delay the project. Scheduling the activity beyond the LF will delay 
the project.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  259
Period 
Action
 
 
 See Figure 8.4 
 
 0–1 
Only activity 1 is eligible. It requires 2 programmers.  
 
 
Load activity 1 into schedule.
 1–2 
No activities are eligible to be scheduled.
 2–3 
 Activities 2, 3, and 4 are eligible to be scheduled. Activity 3 has the least slack (0)—  
 apply rule 1. 
 
 
Load Activity 3 into schedule. 
 
 
Activity 2 is next with slack of 2; however, activity 2 requires 2 programmers and  
 
 
 only 1 is available. 
 
 
Delay activity 2. Update: ES = 3, slack = 1. 
 
 
The next eligible activity is activity 4, since it only requires 1 programmer. 
 
 
Load activity 4 into schedule.
 
 
 See Figure 8.5 
 
 3–4 
 Activity 2 is eligible but exceeds limit of 3 programmers in pool. 
 
 
Delay activity 2. Update: ES = 4, slack = 0.
 4–5 
 Activity 2 is eligible but exceeds limit of 3 programmers in pool. 
 
 
Delay activity 2. Update: ES = 5, LF = 11, slack = −1. 
 
 
Delay activity 7. Update: ES = 11, LF = 13, slack = −1.
 5–6 
 Activity 2 is eligible but exceeds limit of 3 programmers in pool. 
 
 
Delay activity 2. Update: ES = 6, LF = 12, slack = −2. 
 
 
Delay activity 7. Update: ES = 12, LF = 14, slack = −2.
 6–7 
 Activities 2, 5, and 6 are eligible with slack of −2, 2, and 0, respectively. 
 
 
Load activity 2 into schedule (rule 1). 
 
 
Because activity 6 has 0 slack, it is the next eligible activity.
 
 
Load activity 6 into schedule (rule 1). 
 
 
The programmer limit of 3 is reached. 
 
 
Delay activity 5. Update: ES = 7, slack = 1.
 7–8 
Limit is reached. No programmers available. 
 
 
Delay activity 5. Update: ES = 8, slack = 0.
 8–9 
 Limit is reached. No programmers available. 
 
 
Delay activity 5. Update: ES = 9, LF = 11, slack = −1.
 9–10 
 Limit is reached. No programmers available. 
 
 
Delay activity 5. Update: ES = 10, LF = 12, slack = −2.
 10–11 
 Activity 5 is eligible.  
Load activity 5 into schedule. 
 
 
(Note: Activity 6 does not have slack because there are no programmers available— 
 
 
 3 maximum.)
 11–12 
No eligible activities.
 12–13 
 Activity 7 is eligible.  
Load activity 7 into schedule.
The Parallel Method:
 
The programmers are limited to three. Follow the actions described in Figures 8.4 
and 8.5. Note how the limit of three programmers starts to delay the project.
 
Observe how it is necessary to update each period to reflect changes in activity early 
start and slack times so the heuristics can reflect changing priorities. When using the 
parallel scheduling method, the network in Figure 8.5 reflects the new schedule date of 
14 time units, rather than the time-constrained project duration of 12 time units. The 
network has also been revised to reflect new start, finish, and slack times for each 
activity. Note that activity 6 is still critical and has a slack of 0 time units because no 
resources are available (they are being used on activities 2 and 5). Compare the slack 
www.ebook3000.com

260  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
1
2
0
0
2
DUR
ES
LF
SL
ES resource load chart
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
ID
RES
2
0
2
0
1
2
2
2P
6
2
10
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
4
2
6
0
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
10
6
4
1
1
2
6
10
2
5
1
1
4
6
10
0
6
1
1
1
1
2
10
12
0
7
1
1
Total resource load
2P
5P
5P
4P
4P
4P
4P
1P
1P
1P
1P
0
2
2P
0
3
4
2
0
6
2
6
2P
0
2
6
4
2
10
2
8
2P
2
4
2
8
6
10
2
4
1P
6
5
2
8
2
10
6
8
1P
2
6
4
6
0
10
6
10
1P
0
7
2
10
0
12
10
12
1P
0
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
RES
Legend
SL
DUR
ES
LF
SL
Resource-constrained schedule through period 2–3
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
13
14
14
ID
RES
2
0
2
0
1
2
2
2P
6
2
10
2
3
1
2
X
4
2
6
0
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
10
6
4
1
1
2
6
10
2
5
4
6
10
0
6
2
10
12
0
7
Total resource load
2P
3P
3P
2P
2P
3P
Resource available
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
2P
2P
2P
1P
1P
1P
1P
2P
2P
2P
1P
1P
1P
1P
FIGURE 8.4 Resource-Constrained Schedule through Period 2–3

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  261
DUR
ES
LF
SL 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
ID
RES
2
0
2
0
1
2
2
2P
6
2 3 4
5 6
2 1 0
-1 -2
2
X
X
X
X
4
2
6
0
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
10
6
4
1
1
2
6
10
2
5
4
6
10
0
6
2
12
14
-2
7
X
X
Total resource load
2P
3P
3P
2P
2P
3P
Resource available
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
1
2
0
0
2
0
2
2P
0
3
4
2
0
6
2
6
2P
0
2
6
6
0
12
6
12
New, resource scheduled network
2P
0
4
2
4
2
6
2
4
1P
2
5
2
10
0
12
10
12
1P
0
6
4
6
0
10
6
10
1P
0
7
2
12
0
14
12
14
1P
0
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
RES
Legend
SL
DUR
ES
LF
SL
Final resource-constrained schedule
Resource-constrained schedule through period 5–6
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
13
14
14
ID
RES
2
0
2
0
1
2
2
2P
6
2
-1
1
-2
0
2
X
4
2
6
0
3
2
2
2
2
SL
SL
X
X
X
2
2
2
2
X
X
X
X
1
1
1
1
2
2
X
X
1
1
2
2
6
6 2
4
1
1
2
2 1 0
-1 -2
5
4
6
10
0
6
2
0 -1
-2
7
2P
3P
3P
2P
2P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
1P
1P
1
1
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
3P
0 -1
12 13
12 13
14
10 11
12
10 11
12
10 11
10 11
12
10 11
12
2 3 4
5 6
Total resource load
Resource available
6 7 8
9 10
2P
2P
2P
1P
1P
1P
1P
2P
2P
2P
1P
1P
1P
1P
FIGURE 8.5 Resource-Constrained Schedule through Period 5–6
www.ebook3000.com

262  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
for each activity found in Figures 8.4 and 8.5; slack has been reduced significantly. 
Note that activity 4 has only 2 units of slack rather than what appears to be 6 slack 
units. This occurs because only three programmers are available, and they are needed 
to satisfy the resource requirements of activities 2 and 5. Note that the number of criti-
cal activities (1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7) has increased from four to six.
 
This small example demonstrates the scenario of scheduling resources in real proj-
ects and the resulting increase in the risk of being late. In practice this is not a trivial 
problem! Managers who fail to schedule resources usually encounter this scheduling 
risk when it is too late to work around the problem, resulting in a  project delay.
 
Since manually using the parallel method is impractical on real-world projects because 
of size, project managers will depend on software programs to schedule project resources.
8.5 Computer Demonstration of Resource-Constrained Scheduling
Fortunately, project management software is capable of assessing and resolving com-
plicated resource-constrained schedules using heuristics similar to what was described 
above. We will use the EMR project to demonstrate how this is done using MS Project. 
It is important to note that the software is not “managing” the project. The software is 
simply a tool the project manager uses to view the project from different perspectives 
and conditions. See Snapshot from Practice 8.2: Assessing Resource Allocation for 
more tips on assessing resource problems.
Understand how project 
management software 
creates resource- 
constrained schedules.
8-5
LO
One of the strengths of today’s project 
management software is the ability to 
identify and provide options for resolv-
ing resource allocation problems. A 
project manager who uses MS Project 
to plan projects shared with us the following checklist 
for dealing with resource conﬂicts after preliminary 
assignment of resources has been made.
1. Assess whether you have overallocation problems 
(see Red in the resource sheet view).
2. Identify where and when conﬂicts occur by examin-
ing the resource usage view.
3. Resolve the problem by
a.  Replacing overallocated resources with appro-
priate resources that are available. Then ask if 
this solves the problem.
 
If not:
b.  Use the leveling tool and choose the level within 
slack option.
i. Does this solve the problem? (Are resources 
still overallocated?)
ii. Check the sensitivity of the network and ask 
if this is acceptable.
 
If not:
c. Consider splitting tasks.
i. Make sure to readjust task durations to take 
into account additional start-up and shut-
down time.
4. If 3 does not work then either:
a. Use level tool default option and ask if you can 
live with the new completion date.
 
If not:
b. Negotiate for additional resources to complete 
the project. If not possible
c. Consider reducing project scope to meet 
deadline.
While this checklist makes speciﬁc references to MS 
Project, the same steps can be used with most project 
management software.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  8 . 2
Assessing Resource Allocation

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  263
 
EMR is the name given to the development of a handheld electronic medical refer-
ence guide to be used by emergency medical technicians and paramedics. Figure 8.6 
contains a time-limited network for the design phase of the project. For the purpose of 
this example, we assume that only design engineers are required for the tasks and that 
the design engineers are interchangeable. The number of engineers required to perform 
each task is noted in the network, where 500 percent means five design engineers are 
needed for the activity. For example, activity 5, feature specs, requires four design 
engineers (400 percent).
 
The project begins January 1, and ends February 14, a duration of 45 workdays. 
The calendar for the project has been set up to work seven days a week so the reader 
can trace and more easily see the results and impacts of resources—similar to man-
ual solutions present in chapter exercises. The time-limited (constrained) bar chart 
for the project is shown in Figure 8.7. This bar chart incorporates the same informa-
tion used to develop the project network, but presents the project in the form of a bar 
chart along a time line.
 
Finally, a resource usage chart is presented for a segment of the project—January 15 
to January 23; see Figure 8.8A. Observe that the time-limited project requires 21 
design engineers on January 18 and 19 (168 hrs/8 hrs per engineer = 21 engineers). 
This segment represents the peak requirement for design engineers for the project. 
However, due to the shortage of design engineers and commitments to other projects, 
only eight engineers can be assigned to the project. This creates overallocation prob-
lems more clearly detailed in Figure 8.8B, which is a resource loading chart for design 
engineers. Notice that the peak is 21 engineers and the limit of 8 engineers is shown by 
the gray shaded area.
 
To resolve this problem we use the “leveling” tool within the software and first try 
to solve the problem by leveling only within slack. This solution would preserve the 
original finish date. However, as expected, this does not solve all of the allocation 
problems. The next option is to allow the software to apply scheduling heuristics and 
level outside of slack. The new schedule is contained in the revised, resource-limited 
network chart presented in Figure 8.9. The resource-limited project network indicates 
the project duration has now been extended to 2/26, or 57 workdays (versus 45 days 
time limited). The critical path is now 2, 3, 9, 13.
 
Figure 8.10 presents the project bar chart and the results of leveling the project 
schedule to reflect the availability of only eight design engineers. The application of 
the heuristics can be seen in the scheduling of the internal, external, and feature speci-
fication activities. All three activities were originally scheduled to start immediately 
after activity 1, architectural decisions.
 
This is impossible, since the three activities collectively require 14 engineers. The 
software chooses to schedule activity 5 first because this activity is on the original 
critical path and has zero slack (heuristic rule # 1). Next, and concurrently, activity 4 
is chosen over activity 3 because activity 4 has a shorter duration (heuristic rule # 2); 
internal specs, activity 3, is delayed due to the limitation of 8 design engineers. Notice 
that the original critical path no longer applies because of the resource dependencies 
created by having only eight design engineers. See Figure 8.9 for the original planned 
critical path.
 
Compare the bar chart in Figure 8.10 with the time-limited bar chart in Figure 8.7. 
For example, note the different start dates for activity 8 (screen). In the time-limited 
plan (Figure 8.7), the start date for activity 8 is 1/18, while the start date in the resource 
limited schedule (Figure 8.10) is 2/16, almost a month later!
www.ebook3000.com

264
Architectural decisions
Start:   1/1
Finish: 1/5
Res: Design Engineers [500%]
ID:   2
Dur: 5 days
EMR project
Start:   1/1
Finish: 2/14
Comp: 0%
ID:   1
Dur: 45 days
External specs
Start:   1/6
Finish: 1/12
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   4
Dur: 7 days
Feature specs
Start:   1/6
Finish: 1/15
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   5
Dur: 10 days
Internal specs
Start:   1/6
Finish: 1/17
Res: Design Engineers [500%]
ID:   3
Dur: 12 days
Screen
Start:   1/18
Finish: 1/19
Res: Design Engineers [300%]
ID:   8
Dur: 2 days
Database
Start:   1/16
Finish: 2/9
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   9
Dur: 25 days
Review design
Start:   2/10
Finish: 2/14
Res: Design Engineers [500%]
ID:   13
Dur: 5 days
Microphone-soundcard
Start:   1/16
Finish: 1/20
Res: Design Engineers [200%]
ID:   10
Dur: 5 days
Digital devices
Start:   1/16
Finish: 1/22
Res: Design Engineers [300%]
ID:   11
Dur: 7 days
Computer I/O
Start:   1/16
Finish: 1/20
Res: Design Engineers [300%]
ID:   12
Dur: 5 days
Case
Start:   1/18
Finish: 1/21
Res: Design Engineers [200%]
ID:   7
Dur: 4 days
Voice recognition SW
Start:   1/18
Finish: 1/27
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   6
Dur: 10 days
FIGURE 8.6 EMR Project Network View Schedule before Resources Leveled

265
ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Start
Tue 1/1
Tue 1/1
Sun 1/6
Sun 1/6
Sun 1/6
Fri 1/18
Fri 1/18
Fri 1/18
Wed 1/16
Wed 1/16
Wed 1/16
Wed 1/16
Sun 2/10
Finish
Thu 2/14
Sat 1/5
Thu 1/17
Sat 1/12
Tue 1/15
Sun 1/27
Mon 1/21
Sat 1/19
Sat 2/9
Sun 1/20
Tue 1/22
Sun 1/20
Thu 2/14
Late Start
Tue 1/1
Tue 1/1
Sat 1/19
Thu 1/24
Sun 1/6
Thu 1/31
Wed 2/6
Fri 2/8
Wed 1/16
Tue 2/5
Sun 2/3
Tue 2/5
Sun 2/10
Late Finish
Thu 2/14
Sat 1/5
Wed 1/30
Wed 1/30
Tue 1/15
Sat 2/9
Sat 2/9
Sat 2/9
Sat 2/9
Sat 2/9
Sat 2/9
Sat 2/9
Thu 2/14
Free Slack
0 days
0 days
0 days
5 days
0 days
13 days
19 days
21 days
0 days
20 days
18 days
20 days
0 days
Total Slack
27
January
0 days
0 days
13 days
18 days
0 days
13 days
19 days
21 days
0 days
20 days
18 days
20 days
0 days
Task Name
EMR project
Architectural decisions
Internal specs
External specs
Feature specs
Voice recognition SW
Case
Screen
Database
Microphone-soundcard
Digital devices
Computer I/O
Review design
29 31
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18 20 22 24 26 28 30
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
February
Summary
Task
Slack
Critical task
FIGURE 8.7 EMR Project before Resources Added
www.ebook3000.com

266  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
 
While resource bar graphs are commonly used to illustrate overallocation problems, 
we prefer to view resource usage tables like the one presented in Figure 8.8A. This 
table tells you when you have an overallocation problem and identifies activities that 
are causing the overallocation.
The Impacts of Resource-Constrained Scheduling
Like leveling schedules, the limited resource schedule usually reduces slack, reduces 
flexibility by using slack to ensure delay is minimized, and increases the number of 
critical and near-critical activities. Scheduling complexity is increased because 
resource constraints are added to technical constraints; start times may now have two 
constraints. The traditional critical path concept of sequential activities from the start 
to the end of the project is no longer meaningful. The resource constraints can break 
the sequence and leave the network with a set of disjointed critical activities.1 
3,024 hrs
200 hrs
480 hrs
224 hrs
320 hrs
320 hrs
64 hrs
48 hrs
800 hrs
80 hrs
168 hrs
120 hrs
200 hrs
T
72h
40h
32h
136h
40h
32h
16h
24h
24h
136h
40h
32h
16h
24h
24h
168h
32h
16h
24h
32h
16h
24h
24h
168h
32h
16h
24h
32h
16h
24h
24h
900%
Peak Units
Overallocated:
Design Engineers
Allocated:
2,500%
2,000%
1,500%
1,000%
500%
1,700%
1,700%
2,100%
2,100%
1,800%
1,300%
1,100%
800%
W
T
F
S
144h
32h
16h
32h
16h
24h
24h
S
104h
32h
16h
32h
24h
M
88h
32h
32h
24h
T
64h
32h
32h
W
Design engineers
Work
Jan 15
Jan 21
Resource Name
Architectural decisions
Internal specs
External specs
Feature specs
Voice recognition SW
Case
Screen
Database
Microphone-soundcard
Digital devices
Computer I/O
Review design
FIGURE 8.8A EMR Project—Time-Constrained Resource Usage View, January 15–23
FIGURE 8.8B  
Resource Loading 
Chart for 
EMR Project, 
January 15–23
1 See the appendix at the end of this chapter for more on how resource constraints affect project schedule.

267
Architectural decisions
Start:   1/1
Finish: 1/5
Res: Design Engineers [500%]
ID:   2
Dur: 5 days
EMR project
Start:   1/1
Finish: 2/26
Comp: 0%
ID:   1
Dur: 57 days
External specs
Start:   1/6
Finish: 1/12
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   4
Dur: 7 days
Feature specs
Start:   1/6
Finish: 1/15
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   5
Dur: 10 days
Internal specs
Start:   1/16
Finish: 1/27
Res: Design Engineers [500%]
ID:   3
Dur: 12 days
Screen
Start:   2/16
Finish: 2/17
Res: Design Engineers [300%]
ID:   8
Dur: 2 days
Database
Start:   1/28
Finish: 2/21
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   9
Dur: 25 days
Review design
Start:   2/22
Finish: 2/26
Res: Design Engineers [500%]
ID:   13
Dur: 5 days
Microphone-soundcard
Start:   1/16
Finish: 1/20
Res: Design Engineers [200%]
ID:   10
Dur: 5 days
Digital devices
Start:   1/26
Finish: 2/1
Res: Design Engineers [300%]
ID:   11
Dur: 7 days
Computer I/O
Start:   1/21
Finish: 1/25
Res: Design Engineers [300%]
ID:   12
Dur: 5 days
Case
Start:   2/12
Finish: 2/15
Res: Design Engineers [200%]
ID:   7
Dur: 4 days
Voice recognition SW
Start:   2/2
Finish: 2/11
Res: Design Engineers [400%]
ID:   6
Dur: 10 days
FIGURE 8.9 EMR Project Network View Schedule after Resources Leveled
www.ebook3000.com

268
ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Start
Tue 1/1
Tue 1/1
Wed 1/16
Sun 1/6
Sun 1/6
Sat 2/2
Tue 2/12
Sat 2/16
Mon 1/28
Wed 1/16
Sat 1/26
Mon 1/21
Fri 2/22
Finish
Thu 2/26
Sat 1/5
Sun 1/27
Sat 1/12
Tue 1/15
Mon 2/11
Fri 2/15
Sun 2/17
Thu 2/21
Sun 1/20
Fri 2/1
Fri 1/25
Tue 2/26
Late Start
Tue 1/1
Tue 1/1
Sun 1/20
Fri 1/25
Sun 1/6
Tue 2/12
Mon 2/18
Wed 2/20
Mon 1/28
Sun 2/17
Fri 2/15
Sun 2/17
Fri 2/22
Late Finish
Tue 2/26
Sat 1/5
Thu 1/31
Thu 1/31
Tue 1/15
Thu 2/21
Thu 2/21
Thu 2/21
Thu 2/21
Thu 2/21
Thu 2/21
Thu 2/21
Tue 2/26
Free Slack
0 days
0 days
0 days
15 days
0 days
10 days
6 days
4 days
0 days
32 days
20 days
27 days
0 days
Total Slack
27
January
0 days
0 days
4 days
19 days
0 days
10 days
6 days
4 days
0 days
32 days
20 days
27 days
0 days
Task Name
EMR project
Architectural decisions
Internal specs
External specs
Feature specs
Voice recognition SW
Case
Screen
Database
Microphone-soundcard
Digital devices
Computer I/O
Review design
29 31
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18 20 22 24 26 28 30
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21 23 25 27
February
Summary
Task
Slack
Critical task
5
4
4
4
4
4
2
3
3
2
5
5
FIGURE 8.10 EMR Project Resources Leveled

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  269
 Conversely, parallel activities can become sequential. Activities with slack on a time- 
constrained network can change from critical to noncritical.
8.6 Splitting Activities
Splitting tasks is a scheduling technique used to get a better project schedule and/or 
to increase resource utilization. A planner splits the continuous work included in an 
activity by interrupting the work and sending the resource to another activity for a 
period of time and then having the resource resume work on the original activity. 
Splitting can be a useful tool if the work involved does not include large start-up or 
shutdown costs—for example, moving equipment from one activity location to 
another. The most common error is to interrupt “people work,” where there are high 
conceptual start-up and shutdown costs. For example, having a bridge designer take 
time off to work on the design problem of another project may cause this individual 
to lose four days shifting conceptual gears in and out of two activities. The cost may 
be hidden, but it is real. Figure 8.11 depicts the nature of the splitting problem. The 
original activity has been split into three separate activities: A, B, and C. The shut-
down and start-up times lengthen the time for the original activity. One study reported 
that task switching can cost from 20 percent to 40 percent loss in efficiency (Rubin-
stein, Meyer, and Evans, 2001).
 
Some have argued that the propensity to deal with resource shortages by splitting 
is a major reason why projects fail to meet schedule (c.f., Goldratt, 1997; Newbold, 
1997). We agree. Planners should avoid the use of splitting as much as possible, 
except in situations where splitting costs are known to be small or when there is no 
alternative for resolving the resource problem. Computer software offers the splitting 
option for each activity; use it sparingly. See Snapshot from Practice 8.2: Assessing 
Resource Allocation.
Understand when and 
why splitting tasks 
should be avoided.
8-6
LO
Activity duration without splitting
Activity duration split into three segments—A, B, C
Activity A
Activity A
Activity B
Activity B
Activity C
Activity C
Activity duration split with shutdown and start-up
Shutdown
Start-up
FIGURE 8.11 
Splitting Activities
www.ebook3000.com

270  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
8.7 Beneﬁts of Scheduling Resources
It is important to remember that, if resources are truly limited and activity time esti-
mates are accurate, the resource-constrained schedule will materialize as the project is 
implemented—not the time-constrained schedule! Therefore, failure to schedule lim-
ited resources can lead to serious problems for a project manager. The benefit of creat-
ing this schedule before the project begins leaves time for considering reasonable 
alternatives. If the scheduled delay is unacceptable or the risk of being delayed too 
high, the assumption of being resource constrained can be reassessed. Cost-time trade-
offs can be considered. In some cases priorities may be changed. See Snapshot from 
Practice 8.3: U.S. Forest Service Resource Shortage.
 
Resource schedules provide the information needed to prepare time-phased work 
package budgets with dates. Once established, they provide a quick means for a proj-
ect manager to gauge the impact of unforeseen events such as turnover, equipment 
breakdowns, or transfer of project personnel. Resource schedules also allow project 
managers to assess how much flexibility they have over certain resources. This is use-
ful when they receive requests from other managers to borrow or share resources. 
Honoring such requests creates goodwill and an “IOU” that can be cashed in during a 
time of need.
A major segment of work in managing 
U.S. Forest Service (USFS) forests is 
selling mature timber to logging com-
panies that harvest the timber under 
contract conditions monitored by the 
Service. The proceeds are returned to the federal gov-
ernment. The budget allocated to each forest depends 
on the two-year plan submitted to the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture.
 
Olympic Forest headquarters in Olympia, Washington, 
was developing a two-year plan as a basis for funding. 
All of the districts in the forest submitted their timber sale 
projects (numbering more than 50) to headquarters, 
where they were compiled and aggregated into a project 
plan for the whole forest. The ﬁrst computer run was 
reviewed by a small group of senior managers to deter-
mine if the plan was reasonable and “doable.” Manage-
ment was pleased and relieved to note all projects 
appeared to be doable in the two-year time frame until a 
question was raised concerning the computer printout. 
“Why are all the columns in these projects labeled 
‘RESOURCE’ blank?” The response from an engineer 
was, “We don’t use that part of the program.”
 
The discussion that ensued recognized the impor-
tance of resources in completing the two-year plan and 
ended with a request to “try the program with resources 
© Seth Lazar/Alamy
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  8 . 3
U.S. Forest Service  
Resource Shortage
included.” The new output was startling. The two-year 
program turned into a three-and-a-half-year plan 
because of the shortage of speciﬁc labor skills such as 
road engineer and environmental impact specialist. 
Analysis showed that adding only three skilled people 
would allow the two-year plan to be completed on 
time. In addition, further analysis showed hiring only a 
few more skilled people, beyond the three, would allow 
an extra year of projects to also be compressed into the 
two-year plan. This would result in additional revenue 
of more than $3 million. The Department of Agriculture 
quickly approved the requested extra dollars for addi-
tional staff to generate the extra revenue.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  271
8.8 Assigning Project Work
When making individual assignments, project managers should match, as best they 
can, the demands and requirements of specific work with the qualifications and experi-
ence of available participants. In doing so, there is a natural tendency to assign the best 
people the most difficult tasks. Project managers need to be careful not to overdo this. 
Over time these people may grow to resent the fact that they are always given the 
toughest assignments. At the same time, less experienced participants may resent the 
fact that they are never given the opportunity to expand their skill/knowledge base. 
Project managers need to balance task performance with the need to develop the tal-
ents of people assigned to the project.
 
Project managers not only need to decide who does what but who works with 
whom. A number of factors need to be considered in deciding who should work 
together. First, to minimize unnecessary tension, managers should pick people with 
compatible work habits and personalities but who complement each other (i.e., one 
person’s weakness is the other person’s strength). For example, one person may be bril-
liant at solving complex problems but sloppy at documenting his or her progress. It 
would be wise to pair this person with an individual who is good at paying attention to 
details. Experience is another factor. Veterans should be teamed up with new hires—
not only so they can share their experience but also to help socialize the newcomers to 
the customs and norms of the organization. Finally, future needs should be considered. 
If managers have some people who have never worked together before but who have to 
later on in the project, they may be wise to take advantage of opportunities to have 
these people work together early on so that they can become familiar with each other. 
Finally, see the Snapshot in Practice 8.4: Managing Geeks for some interesting thoughts 
from the former CEO of Google on how to put together teams.
Identify general  
guidelines for assigning 
 people to speciﬁc tasks.
8-7
LO
Eric Schmidt, after a successful career 
at Sun Microsystems, took over strug-
gling Novell, Inc., and helped turn it 
around within two years. Four years 
later he became the CEO of Google. 
One of the keys to his success is his ability to manage 
the technical wizards who develop the sophisticated 
systems, hardware, and software that are the back-
bone of electronically driven companies. He uses the 
term “geek” (and he can, since he is one, with a Ph.D. 
in computer science) to describe this group of technol-
ogists who rule the cyberworld.
 
Schmidt has some interesting ideas about assign-
ing geeks to projects. He believes that putting geeks 
together in project teams with other geeks creates pro-
ductive peer pressure. Geeks care a great deal about 
how other geeks perceive them. They are good at judg-
ing the quality of technical work and are quick to praise 
as well as criticize each other’s work. Some geeks can 
be unbearably arrogant, but Schmidt claims that having 
them work together on projects is the best way to con-
trol them—by letting them control each other.
 
At the same time, Schmidt argues that too many 
geeks spoil the soup. By this he means that, when there 
are too many geeks on a development team, there is a 
tendency for intense technical navel gazing. Members 
lose sight of deadlines, and delays are inevitable. To 
combat this tendency, he recommends using geeks 
only in small groups. He urges breaking up large proj-
ects into smaller, more manageable projects so that 
small teams of geeks can be assigned to them. This 
keeps the project on time and makes the teams respon-
sible to each other.
*Russ Mitchel, “How to Manage Geeks,” Fast Company, 
May 31, 1999, pp. 175–80.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  8 . 4
Managing Geeks*
www.ebook3000.com

272  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
8.9 Multiproject Resource Schedules
For clarity we have discussed key resource allocation issues within the context of a 
single project. In reality resource allocation generally occurs in a multiproject environ-
ment where the demands of one project have to be reconciled with the needs of other 
projects. Organizations must develop and manage systems for efficiently allocating 
and scheduling resources across several projects with different priorities, resource 
requirements, sets of activities, and risks. The system must be dynamic and capable of 
accommodating new projects as well as reallocating resources once project work is 
completed. While the same resource issues and principles that apply to a single project 
also apply to this multiproject environment, application and solutions are more com-
plex, given the interdependency among projects.
 
The following lists three of the more common problems encountered in managing 
multiproject resource schedules. Note that these are macro manifestations of single-
project problems that are now magnified in a multiproject environment:
1. Overall schedule slippage. Because projects often share resources, delays in one 
project can have a ripple effect and delay other projects. For example, work on one 
software development project can grind to a halt because the coders scheduled for the 
next critical task are late in completing their work on another development project.
2. Inefficient resource utilization. Because projects have different schedules and 
requirements, there are peaks and valleys in overall resource demands. For example, 
a firm may have a staff of 10 electricians to meet peak demands when, under normal 
conditions, only 5 electricians are required.
3. Resource bottlenecks. Delays and schedules are extended as a result of shortages of 
critical resources that are required by multiple projects. For example, at one Lattice 
Semiconductor facility, project schedules were delayed because of competition over 
access to test equipment necessary to debug programs. Likewise, several projects at 
a U.S. forest area were extended because there was only one silviculturist on the staff.
To deal with these problems, more and more companies create project offices or depart-
ments to oversee the scheduling of resources across multiple projects. One approach to 
multiple project resource scheduling is to use a first come–first served rule. A project 
queue system is created in which projects currently under way take precedence over new 
projects. New project schedules are based on the projected availability of resources. This 
queuing tends to lead to more reliable completion estimates and is preferred on contracted 
projects that have stiff penalties for being late. The disadvantages of this deceptively sim-
ple approach are that it does not optimally utilize resources or take into account the priority 
of the project. See the Snapshot from Practice 8.5: Multiple Project Resource Scheduling.
 
Many companies utilize more elaborate processes for scheduling resources to increase 
the capacity of the organization to initiate projects. Most of these methods approach the 
problem by treating individual projects as part of one big project and adapting the sched-
uling heuristics previously introduced to this “megaproject.” Project schedulers monitor 
resource usage and provide updated schedules based on progress and resource availabil-
ity across all projects. One major improvement in project management software in recent 
years is the ability to prioritize resource allocation to specific projects. Projects can be 
prioritized in ascending order (e.g., 1, 2, 3, 4,…), and these priorities will override sched-
uling heuristics so that resources go to the project highest on the priority list. (Note: This 
improvement fits perfectly with organizations that use project priority models similar to 
those described in Chapter 2.) Centralized project scheduling also makes it easier to 
identify resource bottlenecks that stifle progress on projects. Once identified, the impact 
Identify common prob-
lems with multiproject 
resource scheduling.
8-8
LO

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  273
of the bottlenecks can be documented and used to justify acquiring additional equipment, 
recruiting critical personnel, or delaying the project.
 
Finally, many companies are using outsourcing as a means for dealing with their 
resource allocation problems. In some cases, a company will reduce the number of proj-
ects they have to manage internally to only core projects and outsource noncritical proj-
ects to contractors and consulting firms. In other cases, specific segments of projects are 
outsourced to overcome resource deficiencies and scheduling problems. Companies may 
hire temporary workers to expedite certain activities that are falling behind schedule or 
contract project work during peak periods when there are insufficient internal resources 
to meet the demands of all projects. The ability to more efficiently manage the ebbs and 
flows of project work is one of the major driving forces behind outsourcing today.
8.10 Using the Resource Schedule to Develop a Project Cost Baseline
Once resource assignments have been finalized we are able to develop a baseline bud-
get schedule for the project. Using your project schedule, you can time-phase work 
packages and assign them to their respective scheduled activities to develop a budget 
schedule over the life of your project. Understanding the reason for time-phasing your 
budget is very important. Without a time-phased budget good project schedule and 
cost control are impossible.
Why a Time-Phased Budget Baseline Is Needed
The need for a time-phased budget baseline is demonstrated in the following scenario. 
The development of a new product is to be completed in 10 weeks at an estimated cost 
Explain why a time-
phased budget baseline 
is needed.
8-9
LO
The case for a central source to over-
see project resource scheduling is well 
known by practitioners. Here is a syn-
opsis of a conversation with one mid-
dle manager.
 
Interviewer: Congratulations on acceptance of your 
multiproject scheduling proposal. Everyone tells me 
you were very convincing.
 
Middle Manager: Thanks. Gaining acceptance was 
easy this time. The board quickly recognized we have 
no choice if we are to keep ahead of competition by 
placing our resources on the right projects.
 
Interviewer: Have you presented this to the board 
before?
 
Middle Manager: Yes, but not this company. I pre-
sented the same spiel to the ﬁrm I worked for two years 
ago. For their annual review meeting I was charged to 
present a proposal suggesting the need and beneﬁts of 
central capacity resource planning for managing the 
projects of the ﬁrm.
 
I tried to build a case for bringing projects under 
one umbrella to standardize practices and to forecast 
and assign key people to mission critical projects. I 
explained how beneﬁts such as resource demands 
would be aligned with mission critical projects, proac-
tive resource planning, and a tool for catching resource 
bottlenecks and resolving conﬂicts.
 
Almost everyone agreed the idea was a good 
one. I felt good about the presentation and felt conﬁ-
dent something was going to happen. But the idea 
never really got off the ground; it just faded into the 
sunset.
 
With hindsight, managers really did not trust col-
leagues in other departments, so they only gave half-
hearted support to central resource planning. Manag-
ers wanted to protect their turf and ensure that they 
would not have to give up power. The culture there was 
simply too inﬂexible for the world we live in today. They 
are still struggling with constant conﬂicts among 
projects.
 
I’m glad I made the switch to this ﬁrm. The culture 
here is much more team-oriented. Management is com-
mitted to improving performance.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  8 . 5
Multiple Project  
Resource Scheduling
www.ebook3000.com

274  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
of $400,000 per week for a total cost of $4 million. Management wants a status report 
at the end of five weeks. The following information has been collected:
∙ Planned costs for the first five weeks are $2,000,000.
∙ Actual costs for the first five weeks are $2,400,000.
How are we doing? It would be easy to draw the conclusion there is a $400,000 cost over-
run. But we really have no way of knowing. The $400,000 may represent money spent to 
move the project ahead of schedule. Assume another set of data at the end of five weeks:
∙ Planned costs for the first five weeks are $2,000,000.
∙ Actual costs for the first five weeks are $1,700,000.
Is the project costing $300,000 less than we expected? Perhaps. But the $300,000 may rep-
resent the fact that the project is behind schedule and work has not started. Could it be the 
project is behind schedule and over cost? We cannot tell from these data. The many systems 
found in the real world that use only planned funds (a constant burn rate) and actual costs 
can provide false and misleading information. There is no way to be certain how much of 
the physical work has been accomplished. These systems do not measure how much work 
was accomplished for the money spent! Hence, without time-phasing cost to match your 
project schedule, it is impossible to have reliable information for control purposes.
Creating a Time-Phased Budget
By using information from your WBS and resource schedule, you can create a time-
phased cost baseline. Remember from the WBS for the PC Project in Chapters 4 and 5 
we integrated the WBS and OBS organization breakdown structure so the work pack-
ages could be tracked by deliverable and organization responsible. See Figure 8.12 for 
an example of the PC Prototype Project arranged by deliverable and organization unit 
responsible. For each intersection point of the WBS/OBS matrix, you see work pack-
age budgets and the total cost. The total cost at each intersection is called a cost or 
control account. For example, at the intersection of the Read/write head deliverable 
and the Production department we see there are three work packages with a total bud-
get of $200,000. The sum of all cost accounts in a column should represent the total 
costs for the deliverable. Conversely, the sum of the cost accounts in a row should 
represent the costs or budget for the organizational unit responsible to accomplish the 
work. You can continue to “roll up” costs on the WBS/OBS to total project costs. This 
WBS provides the information you can use to time phase work packages and assign 
them to their respective scheduled activities over the life of the project.
 
Recall, from the development of your work breakdown structure for each work 
package, the following information needed to be developed:
1. Define work (what).
2. Identify time to complete a work package (how long).
3. Identify a time-phased budget to complete a work package (cost).
4. Identify resources needed to complete a work package (how much).
5. Identify a single person responsible for units of work (who).
6. Identify monitoring points for measuring progress (how well).
Number three, time-phasing the work package, is critical for the final step of creating 
your budget baseline. The process of time-phasing work packages, which is illustrated 
next, is demonstrated in Figure 8.13. The work package has a duration of three weeks. 
Assuming labor, materials, and equipment are tracked separately, the work package 
Create a time-phased 
project budget baseline.
8-10
LO

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  275
costs for labor are distributed over the three weeks as they are expected to occur—
$40,000, $30,000, and $50,000 for each week, respectively. When the three-week work 
package is placed in the network schedule, the costs are distributed to the time-phased 
budget for the same three scheduled weeks. Fortunately, most single WPs become an 
Disk storage
units
$5,160
External
USB
500
Manufacturing
1,250
Organization
$1,660
Motor
10
Circuit
board
1,000
Chassis
frame
50
Read/write
head
600
Optical
3,000
Hard
disks
1,660
Total budget for cost account
Work package budget
10
10
120
120
140
260
400
50
130
180
Summarize by organizational units
 10
20
20
50
130
40
30
200
300
300
100
100
150
150
300
Design
600
Production
650
Test
220
Purchasing
10
Software
180
Summarte by deliverables 
FIGURE 8.12 Direct Labor Budget Rollup ($000)
FIGURE 8.13
Time-Phased Work 
Package Budget 
(labor cost only)
Work Package Description 
Work Package ID
Deliverable 
Responsible organization unit
Work Package Duration                     weeks
Page 
 
 
of
Project
Date
Estimator
Total labor cost
Test
1
PC Prototype
3/24/xx
CEG
$120,000
1
Test
3
1.1.3.2.3
Circuit board
Time-Phased Work Package Budget 
Labor cost only
Time-Phased Labor Budget ($000)
Work Periods--Weeks
Work
Package
Code
1.1.3.2.3
Labor
rate
$xxxx/
week
$40
$30
$50
$120
1
2
3
4
5
Total
Resource
Quality
testers
www.ebook3000.com

276  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
activity and the process of distributing costs is relatively simple. That is, the relationship 
is one-for-one. Such budget timing is directly from the work package to the activity.
 
In a few instances an activity will include more than one work package, where the pack-
ages are assigned to one responsible person or department and deliverable. In this case the 
work packages are consolidated into one activity. As seen in Figure 8.14, this activity 
includes two WPs. The first, WP-1.1.3.2.4.1 (Code), is distributed over the first three weeks. 
The second, WP-1.1.3.2.4.2 (Integration), is sequenced over weeks 3 and 4. The activity 
duration is four weeks. When the activity is placed in the schedule, the costs are distributed 
starting with the schedule start—$20,000, $15,000, $75,000, and $70,000, respectively.
 
These time-phased budgets for work packages are lifted from your WBS and are 
placed in your project schedule as they are expected to occur over the life of the proj-
ect. The outcome of these budget allocations is the project cost baseline (also called 
planned value—PV), which is used to determine cost and schedule variances as the 
project is implemented.
 
Figure 8.15 shows the Patient Entry Project network schedule, which is used to 
place the time-phased work packages’ budgets in the baseline. Figure 8.16 presents the 
project time-phased budget for the Patient Entry Project and the cumulative graph of 
the project budget baseline. In this figure you can see how the time-phased work pack-
age costs were placed into the network and how the cumulative project budget graph 
for a project is developed. Notice that costs do not have to be distributed linearly, but 
the costs should be placed as you expect them to occur.
 
You have now developed complete time and cost plans for your project. These project 
baselines will be used to compare planned schedule and costs using an integrative system 
called earned value. The application and use of project baselines to measure performance 
are discussed in detail in Chapter 13. With your project budget baseline established, you 
are also able to generate cash flow statements for your project like the one presented in 
Figure 8.17. Such statements prepare the firm to cover costs over the lifespan of the proj-
ect. Finally, with resource assignments finalized you are able to generate resource usage 
schedules for your project (see Figure 8.18). These schedules map out the full deployment 
of personnel and equipment and can be used to generate individual work schedules.
Work Package Description 
Work Package ID
Deliverable 
Responsible organization unit
Work Package Duration                   weeks
Page 
 
         of
Project
Date
Estimator
Total labor cost
Software
1
1
PC Prototype
3/24/xx
LGG
$180,000
Software
4
1.1.3.2.4.1 and 1.1.3.2.4.2
Circuit board
Time-Phased Labor Budget ($000)
Work Periods--Weeks
Work
Package
Code
1.1.3.2.4.1
Integration
1.1.3.2.4.2
Labor
rate
$2,000/
week
$2,500/
week
$20
$20
$15
$15
$15
$60
$75
$70
$70
$130
$180
$50
1
2
3
4
5
Total
Resource
Program’rs
System/
program’rs
Total
Time-Phased Work Package Budget 
Labor cost only
FIGURE 8.14 
Two Time-Phased 
Work Packages 
(labor cost only)

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  277
ID
Legend
DUR
Activity
description
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
3
3
Establish
entry codes
5
8
4
5
Get RFP
bids
1
6
Design
entry forms
2
5
7
6
Program
system
6
12
7
Establish
acct. codes
8
11
Collect
trial data
5
11
1
1
0
1
Merge data
& codes
11
Test
system
12
Patient Entry System Project
(Weeks)
1
3
3
2
9
0
0
1
1
4
3
4
4
4
1
0
6
6
0
12
9
2
10
14
12
0
2
2
5
6
8
1
12
9
2
14
6
3
Design
data system
FIGURE 8.15 Patient Entry Project Network
FIGURE 8.16
Patient Entry Time-
Phased Work 
Packages Assigned
Design data
system
Design entry
forms
Establish entry
codes
Get RFP bids
Collect trial
data
Establish account
codes
Program system
Merge data &
codes
Test system
Week total
Cumulative
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1
3
5
6
3
6
1
2
2
5
5
6
3
6
5
12
4
7
4
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
4
4
2
4
1
5
6
52
4
3
3
4
4
1
5
6
0
4
4
3
4
3
5
15
18
21
25
29
30
35
41
41
45
49
52
11
60
50
40
30
20
10
00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
ID
Dur.
Task
Budget
Cumulative
Baseline
Budget
(PV)
($000)
Week
www.ebook3000.com

278  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
CEBOO Project
Hardware
Hardware speciﬁcations
Hardware design 
Prototypes
Order GXs
Assemble preproduction models
Operating system
Kernel speciﬁcations
Drivers
OC drivers
Serial VO drivers
Memory management
Operating system documentation
Network interface
Utilities
Utilities speciﬁcations
Routine utilities
Complex utilities
Utilities documentation
Shell
System integration
Architectural decisions
Integration ﬁrst phase
System H/S test
Project documentation
Integration acceptance test
Total
Hardware documentation
January
February
March
$11,480.00
$24,840.00
$5,320.00
$20,400.00
$9,880.00
$10,240.00
$21,760.00
$3,360.00
$8,400.00
$5,760.00
$21,120.00
$7,680.00
$17,920.00
$20,160.00
$10,560.00
$12,320.00
$11,760.00
$12,880.00
$3,360.00
$23,120.00
$29,920.00
$14,960.00
$14,080.00
$24,320.00
April
May
June
July
$37,200.00
$44,960.00
$48,240.00
$55,120.00
$80,400.00
$56,240.00
$23,440.00
FIGURE 8.17
CEBOO Project 
Monthly Cash Flow 
Statement
FIGURE 8.18
CEBOO Project 
Weekly Resource 
Usage Schedule
I.  Suzuki
 
Hardware speciﬁcations
 
Hardware design
 
Hardware documentation
 
Operating system documentation
 
Utilities documentation
 
Architectural decisions
J.  Lopez
 
Hardware speciﬁcations
 
Hardware design
 
Prototypes
 
Kernel speciﬁcations
 
Utilities speciﬁcations
 
Architectural decisions
 
Integration ﬁrst phase
J.J.  Putz
 
Hardware documentation
 
Kernel speciﬁcations
 
Operating system documentation
 
Utilities documentation
 
Project documentation
R.  Sexon
 
Hardware speciﬁcations
 
Prototypes
 
Assemble preproduction models
 
OC drivers
 
Complex utilities
 
Integration ﬁrst phase
 
System H/S test
 
Integration acceptance test
12/30
1/6
1/13
1/20
1/27
2/03
24 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
24 hrs
24 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
16 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
24 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
12 hrs
24 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
16 hrs
40 hrs
20 hrs
40 hrs
20 hrs
24 hrs
24 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
24 hrs
24 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
40 hrs
12 hrs
20 hrs
20 hrs

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  279
Summary
Usage and availability of resources are major problem areas for project managers. 
Attention to these areas in developing a project schedule can point out resource bottle-
necks before the project begins. Project managers should understand the ramifications 
of failing to schedule resources. The results of resource scheduling are frequently 
 significantly different from the results of the standard CPM method.
 
With the rapid changes in technology and emphasis on time-to-market, catching 
resource usage and availability problems before the project starts can save the 
costs of crashing project activities later. Any resource deviations from plan and 
schedule that occur when the project is being implemented can be quickly recorded 
and the effect noted. Without this immediate update capability, the real negative 
effect of a change may not be known until it happens. Tying resource availability 
to a multiproject,  multiresource system supports a project priority process that 
selects projects by their contribution to the organization’s objectives and 
strategic plan.
 
Assignment of individuals to projects may not fit well with those assigned by com-
puter software routines. In these cases overriding the computer solution to accommo-
date individual differences and skills is almost always the best choice.
 
The project resource schedule is important because it serves as your time base-
line, which is used for measuring time differences between plan and actual. The 
resource schedule serves as the basis for developing your time-phased project cost 
budget baseline. The baseline (planned value, PV) is the sum of the cost accounts, 
and each cost account is the sum of the work packages in the cost account. Remem-
ber, if your budgeted costs are not time-phased, you really have no reliable way to 
measure performance. Although there are several types of project costs, the cost 
baseline is usually limited to direct costs (such as labor, materials, equipment) that 
are under the control of the project manager; other indirect costs can be added to 
project costs separately.
Key Terms
Heuristics, 258
Leveling, 256
Planned value (PV), 276
Resource-constrained 
project, 255
Resource smoothing, 252
Splitting, 269
Time-constrained  
project, 255
Time-phased budget 
baseline, 273
1. How does resource scheduling tie to project priority?
2. How does resource scheduling reduce flexibility in managing projects?
3. Present six reasons scheduling resources is an important task.
4. How can outsourcing project work alleviate the three most common problems asso-
ciated with multiproject resource scheduling?
5. Explain the risks associated with leveling resources, compressing or crashing proj-
ects, and imposed durations or “catch-up” as the project is being implemented.
6. Why is it critical to develop a time-phased baseline?
Review 
Questions
www.ebook3000.com

280  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
Exercises
1. Given the network plan that follows, compute the early, late, and slack times. What 
is the project duration? Using any approach you wish (e.g., trial and error), develop 
a loading chart for resources, Electrical Engineers (EE), and resource, Mechanical 
Engineers (ME). Assume only one of each resource exists. Given your resource 
schedule, compute the early, late, and slack times for your project. Which activities 
are now critical? What is the project duration now? Could something like this hap-
pen in real projects?
2
4
1
0
0
2
3
3
EE
ME
1
0
Develop a loading schedule for each resource below. (Figure 8.3)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Plan
9
10
11
12
4
1
6
2
5
6
7
4
1-EE
ID/RES
2-EE
3-ME
4-EE
5-ME
6-ME
7-EE
Fill in the times below for a resource activity schedule.
LS
ES
EF
LF
SL
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
Schedule
Start
End
EE
EE
ME
ME
EE
ME
EE
0
2. Given the network plan that follows, compute the early, late, and slack times. What 
is the project duration? Using any approach you wish (e.g., trial and error), develop 
a loading chart for resources Carpenters (C) and Electricians (E). Assume only one 

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  281
Carpenter is available and two Electricians are available. Given  your resource 
schedule, compute the early, late, and slack times for your project. Which activities 
are now critical? What is the project duration now?
Carpenter
Electrician
1
0
Develop a loading schedule for each resource below.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Plan
9
10
11
14
12
13
2
4
3
1
4
3
5
5
1
0
3
6
2
1-C
2-C
3-C
4-E
5-2-E
6-C
Fill in the times below for a resource activity schedule.
LS
ES
ID/RES
EF
LF
SL
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
Schedule
C
C
E
C
2-E
C
3. Compute the early, late, and slack times for the activities in the network that follows, 
assuming a time-constrained network. Which activities are critical? What is the 
time-constrained project duration?
 
 
Note: Recall, in the schedule resource load chart the time-constrained scheduling 
interval (ES through LF) has been shaded. Any resource scheduled beyond the 
shaded area will delay the project.
 
 
Assume you have only three resources and you are using a computer that uses 
software that schedules projects by the parallel method and following heuristics. 
Schedule only one period at a time!
 
 
Minimum slack
 
 
Smallest duration
 
 
Lowest identification number
www.ebook3000.com

282  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
 
Keep a log of each activity change and update you make each period—e.g., period 
0–1, 1–2, 2–3, etc. (Use a format similar to the one on page 259.) The log should 
include any changes or updates in ES and slack times each period, activities 
scheduled, and activities delayed. (Hint: Remember to maintain the technical 
dependencies of the network.) Use the resource load chart to assist you in schedul-
ing (see Figures 8.4 and 8.5).
 
 
List the order in which you scheduled the activities of the project. Which activi-
ties of your schedule are now critical?
 
 
Recompute your slack for each activity given your new schedule. What is the 
slack for activity 1? 4? 5?
2
4
0
1
3
0
3
5
0
4
6
5
4
6
3
DUR ES
LF
SL
Scheduled resource load chart with ES and slack updates
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
RES
3
0
4
1
4
0
4
0
5
0
6
1
6
4
10
0
4
5
10
1
3
10
13
0
ID
1
2
3
4
5
6
Resources scheduled
3
Resources available
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
2
1
2
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
2

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  283
4. *You have prepared the following schedule for a project in which the key resource 
is a tractor(s). There are three tractors available to the project. Activities A and D 
require one tractor to complete while activities B, C, E, and F require 2 tractors.
 
 
Develop a resource-constrained schedule in the loading chart that follows. Use 
the parallel method and heuristics given. Be sure to update each period as the com-
puter would do. Record the early start (ES), late finish (LF), and slack (SL) for the 
new schedule.
DUR ES
LF
SL 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
RES
4
5
4
5
3
2
ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
Resources scheduled
3
Resources available
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
1
2
2
1
2
2
A
4
0
4
1
1
1
5
1
B
5
0
5
0
0
0
5
2
C
4
4
8
2
2
6
10
2
D
5
5
10
0
0
5
10
1
F
2
10
12
0
0
10
12
2
E
3
5
8
2
2
7
10
2
Use the following heuristics:
Minimum slack
Smallest duration
Lowest identiﬁcation number
*The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix 1.
www.ebook3000.com

284  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
5. Develop a resource schedule in the loading chart that follows. Use the parallel 
method and heuristics given. Be sure to update each period as the computer would 
do. Note: activities 2, 3, 5, and 6 use two of the resource skills. Three of the resource 
skills are available. How has slack changed for each activity? Has the risk of being 
late changed? How?
4
8
3
0
0
8
3
5
1
3
5
1
3
3
8
4
4
2
5
3
6
2
2
5
8
3
2
1
1
1
1
2
3
3
6
10
8
2
2
8
0
10
0
List the order in which your
activities are scheduled
/_____ /_____ /_____ /
/_____ /_____ /_____ /
2
0
0
0
3
3
0
2
2
3
2
Use the following heuristics:
Minimum slack
Smallest duration
Lowest identiﬁcation number
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
DUR ES
LF
SL
What is the schedule slack for 1____, 3____, and 4_____?
Which activities are critical now? _____________________
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
ID
RES
1
0
3
1
3
0
3
2
4
1
8
3
5
3
8
4
3
5
2
6
Resources scheduled
3
Resources available
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
1
2
2
1
2
2
RES
6. You have prepared the following schedule for a project in which the key resource is 
a backhoe(s). This schedule is contingent on having 3 backhoes. You receive a call 
from your partner, Brooker, who desperately needs one of your backhoes. You tell 

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  285
Brooker you would be willing to let him have the backhoe if you are still able to 
complete your project in 11 months.
 
 
Develop a resource schedule in the loading chart that follows to see if it is pos-
sible to complete the project in 11 months with only 2 backhoes. Be sure to record 
the order in which you schedule the activities using scheduling heuristics. Activities 
5 and 6 require 2 backhoes, while activities 1, 2, 3, and 4 require 1 backhoe. No 
splitting of activities is possible. Can you say yes to Brooker’s request?
2
2
0
1
1
2
3
1
1
1
0
4
4
4
5
1
4
4
2
3
3
2
7
5
6
9
7
2
9
7
0
0
3
3
0
0
0
3
3
0
1
1
1
1
2
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
2
5
7
3
4
7
3
0
0
DUR ES
LF
SL
Schedule the resource load chart with ES and Slack updates
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
ID RES
1
5
4
1
2
3
1
2
3
3
0
3
2
7
3
4
4
7
0
5
2
0
0
0
2
3
7
9
0
6
Resources scheduled
2
Resources available
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
7. *You are one of three carpenters assigned to complete a short construction project. 
Right before the start of the project, one of your fellow carpenters was hospitalized 
and will not be available to work on the project.
 
 
Develop a resource-constrained schedule in the loading chart that follows to see 
how long the project will take with only 2 carpenters. Be sure to record the order in 
*The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix 1.
www.ebook3000.com

286  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
which you schedule the activities using the scheduling heuristics. Activities A, B, C, 
D, E, G, and H require 2 carpenters to complete. Activity F requires only 1 carpenter. 
No splitting of activities is possible.
 
 
You will receive a bonus if the project is completed within 15 days. Should you 
start planning how you will spend your bonus?
DUR ES
LF
SL 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
RES
2
1
3
1
2
3
2
2
ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Resources scheduled
2
Resources available
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
A
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
B
1
2
3
2
2
4
5
2
C
3
2
5
0
0
2
5
2
D
1
5
6
0
0
5
6
2
E
2
6
8
0
0
6
8
2
F
3
6
9
1
1
7
10
1
Use the following heuristics:
Minimum slack
Smallest duration
Lowest identiﬁcation number
G
2
8
10
0
0
8
10
2
H
2
10
12
0
0
10
12
2
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
8. Given the time-phased work packages, complete the baseline budget form for the 
project.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  287
Activity 1
Task
Budget
Activity 2
Activity 3
Activity 4
Activity 5
Total
Cumulative
4
6
10
8
3
31
4
1
3
2
2
4
2
2
2
3
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time-phased budget ($ 000)
Week
9. Given the time-phased work packages and network, complete the baseline budget 
form for the project.
3
Report
Design
Task
Budget
Time-Phased Budget
Week
11
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
5
2
21
8
40
Survey
Report
Cumulative
Total
Market Survey Project
WBS Work Package Cost by Week
Project Network
3
Design
0
3
3
0
0
3
Survey
3
WP Design
4
5
2
WP Survey
2
2
4
4
4
5
WP Report
3
3
2
1
6
2
3
www.ebook3000.com

288  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
10. *Given the time-phased work packages and network, complete the baseline budget 
form for the project.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Budget
ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
Total
Cumulative
40
32
48
18
28
40
206
A
4
0
4
1
1
1
5
B
5
0
5
0
0
0
5
C
4
4
8
2
2
6
10
D
5
5
10
0
0
5
10
F
2
10
12
0
0
10
12
E
3
5
8
2
2
7
10
Cost by Week
A
B
C
D
E
F
10
8
12
6
8
20
10
4
12
2
8
20
10
8
12
2
12
10
4
12
2
8
6
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
*The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix 1.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  289
11. Given the time-phased work packages and network, complete the baseline budget 
form for the project.
Legend
4
4
5
5
Prepare
marketing
3
2
2
3
Build
prototype
Soccer Toy Project
6
2
Assemble
& test
7
1
Launch
1
2
0
Design
prototype
Order
parts
Prepare
production
ID
DUR
ES
LS
EF
LF
SL
Description
Build
prototype
Design
prototype
Budget
24
30
10
64
30
36
12
206
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Order
parts
Prepare
prod’n
Prepare
market’g
Assemble
& test
Launch
Total
Cumulative
Soccer Toy Project
Design prototype
Build prototype
Order parts
Prepare production
Prepare marketing
Assemble & test
Launch
Time-phased Budget ($000)
Week
Cost by Week ($000)
1
12
2
3
4
5
12
10
10
10
16
10
5
5
22
16
6
12
6
0
6
18
18
12
www.ebook3000.com

290  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
12. The National Oceanic Research Institute is planning a research study on global 
warming in Antarctica. The 16-month network schedule is presented below. It is 
followed by budgets for each activity. Create a time-phased budget for the research 
project in the form provided.
A
3
0
0
0
Preliminary
plan
3
3
B
2
3
0
3
Detail
plan
5
5
C
2
5
2
7
Hire
staff
7
9
G
2
7
6
13
Plane
transportation
Global Warming Antarctic Research Project
Months.... ($000)
9
15
F
3
7
2
9
Purchase
clothing
10
12
K
3
10
2
12
Ship
supplies
13
15
L
1
15
0
15
Travel
16
16
E
1
7
6
13
Train
8
14
J
1
14
0
14
Test
equipment
15
15
D
1
5
0
5
Select
equipment
6
6
H
5
6
0
6
Get custom
equipment
11
11
I
3
11
0
11
Additional
equipment
14
14
Global Warming Antarctic Research Project  
Activity Time Phased Work Packages by Month ($000)
 
Task 
Duration 
Budget 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6
A 
Preliminary plan 
3 
 3 
1 
1 
1 
 
 
 
B 
Detail plan 
2 
 2 
1 
1 
 
 
 
 
C 
Hire staff 
2 
 4 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
D 
Select equipment 
1 
 5 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
E 
Train 
1 
 3 
3 
 
 
 
 
 
F 
Purchase clothing 
3 
 9 
3 
0 
6 
 
 
 
G 
Plane transportation 
2 
 60 
5 
55 
 
 
 
 
H 
Get custom equipment 
5 
 36 
5 
5 
10 
10 
6  
I 
Additional equipment 
3 
 20 
10 
5 
5 
 
 
 
J 
Test equipment 
1 
 6 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
K 
Ship all supplies 
5 
 15 
3 
3 
0 
0 
9  
L 
Travel 
1 
 9 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Total budget 
 
172

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  291
Arrow, K. J., and L. Hurowicz, Studies in Resource Allocation Process (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Brucker, P., A. Drexl, R. Mohring, L. Newmann, and E. Pesch, “Resource-constrained 
Project Scheduling: Notation, Classification, Models and Methods,” European 
 Journal of Operational Research, vol. 112 (1999), pp. 3–42.
Burgess, A. R., and J. B. Kellebrew, “Variations in Activity Level on Cyclical Arrow 
Diagrams,” Journal of Industrial Engineering, vol. 13 (March–April 1962),  
pp. 76–83.
Charnes, A., and W. W. Cooper, “A Network Interpretation and Direct Sub Dual 
Algorithm for Critical Path Scheduling,” Journal of Industrial Engineering,  
July–August 1962.
Davis, E. W., and J. Patterson, “A Comparison of Heuristic and Optimum Solutions 
in Resource-Constrained Project Scheduling,” Management Science, April 1975, 
pp. 944–955.
Demeulemeester, E. L., and W. S. Herroelen, Project Scheduling: A Research Hand-
book (Norwell, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002).
Fendly, L. G., “Towards the Development of a Complete Multi Project Scheduling 
System,” Journal of Industrial Engineering, vol. 19 (1968), pp. 505–15.
Goldratt, E., Critical Chain (Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1997).
Kurtulus, I., and E. W. Davis, “Multi-project Scheduling: Categorization of Heuristic 
Rules Performance,” Management Science, February 1982, pp. 161–72.
Newbold, R. C., “Leveraging Project Resources: Tools for the Next Century,” Pro-
ceedings of 28th Annual Project Management Institute, 1997 Seminars and Sympo-
sium (Newtown, PA: Project Management Institute, 1997), pp. 417–21.
Pascoe, T. L., “An Experimental Comparison of Heuristic Methods for Allocating 
Resources,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom, 1965.
Reinersten, D., “Is It Always a Bad Idea to Add Resources to a Late Project?” Electric 
Design, October 30, 2000, pp. 17–18.
Rubinstein, J., D. Meyer, and J. Evans, “Executive Control of Cognitive Processes in 
Task Switching,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Per-
formance, vol. 27, no. 4 (2001), pp. 763–97.
Talbot, B. F., and J. H. Patterson, “Optimal Methods for Scheduling Under Resource 
Constraints,” Project Management Journal, December 1979.
Wiest, J. D., “A Heuristic Model for Scheduling Large Projects with Unlimited 
Resources,” Management Science, vol. 18 (February 1967), pp. 359–77.
Woodworth, B. M., and C. J. Willie, “A Heuristic Algorithm for Resource Leveling 
in Multiproject, Multiresource Scheduling,” Decision Sciences, vol. 6 (July 1975), 
pp. 525–40.
Woodworth, B. M., and S. Shanahan, “Identifying the Critical Sequence in a Resource 
Constrained Project,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 6 (1988), 
pp. 89–96.
References
www.ebook3000.com

292  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
Case 8.1
Blue Mountain Cabin
Jack and Jill Smith have just retired and want to build a small, basic cabin in the Blue 
Mountains of Vermont. They have hired Daryl Hannah as the general contractor for the 
project. She has assembled a team of three workers to complete the project: Tom, Dick, 
and Harry. Daryl has negotiated a cost-plus contract with the Smiths whereby she will 
receive 15 percent beyond the cost of labor and materials.
 
Before they sign the contract the Smiths want an estimate of how much the project 
is likely to cost and how long it will take.
 
Darryl has estimated that the cost for materials, permits, etc., will total $40,000. She 
wants to determine labor costs as well as how long the project will take. This is one of sev-
eral projects Daryl is managing, and other than occasionally helping out, her role is strictly 
limited to supervising. She has devised the following master plan and assignments.
 
Note that Dick is the only skilled plumber in the group while Harry is the only 
skilled electrician. Tom is a general carpenter and can assist them with their work. 
Dick and Harry each get paid $300 a day while Tom gets paid $200 per day.
 
Darryl has negotiated a 10 percent management reserve to deal with unexpected 
problems. Unused funds will be returned to the Smiths.
Case 8.2
 Power Train, Ltd.
We have smashing systems for reporting, tracking, and controlling costs on design proj-
ects. Our planning of projects is better than any I have seen at other companies. Our 
scheduling seemed to serve us well when we were small and we had only a few projects. 
Now that we have many more projects and schedule using multiproject software, there 
are too many occasions when the right people are not assigned to the projects deemed 
important to our success. This situation is costing us big money, headaches, and stress!
Claude Jones, VP, Design and Operations
 
Prepare a short proposal for the Smiths that includes a Gantt chart with resources 
assigned, and cost estimates if the project starts on 8/1/16. Did resource limitations 
affect the final schedule? If so, how? What financial risks does this project face? What 
can the Smiths do to protect themselves against those risks?
ID 
Task 
Predecessor 
Time (days) 
Assignment
A 
Prepare Site 
      none 
2 
Tom, Dick, Harry
B 
Pour Foundation 
A 
2 
Tom, Dick, Harry
C 
Erect Frame 
B 
4 
Tom, Dick, Harry
D 
Roof 
C 
3 
Tom, Dick, Harry
E 
Windows/Doors 
D 
2 
Tom, Dick
F 
Electrical 
D 
2 
Harry, Tom
G 
Plumbing 
D 
2 
 Dick, Tom
H 
Rough-in-frame 
       E, F,G 
2 
Tom, Dick, Harry
I 
Clean up 
H 
1 
Tom, Dick, Harry

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  293
HISTORY
Power Train, Ltd. (PT), was founded in 1970 by Daniel Gage, a skilled mechanical 
engineer and machinist. Prior to founding PT he worked for three years as design engi-
neer for a company that designed and built transmissions for military tanks and trucks. 
It was a natural transition for Dan to start a company designing and building power 
trains for farm tractor companies. Today, Dan is no longer active in the management of 
PT but is still revered as its founder. He and his family still own 25 percent of the com-
pany, which went public in 1998. PT has been growing at a 6 percent clip for the last 
five years but expects industry growth to level off as supply exceeds demand.
 
Today, PT continues its proud tradition of designing and building the best-quality 
power trains for manufacturers of farm tractors and equipment. The company employs 
178 design engineers and has about 1,800 production and support staff. Contract 
design projects for tractor manufacturers represent a major portion of PT’s revenue. At 
any given time, about 45 to 60 design projects are going on concurrently. A small por-
tion of their design work is for military vehicles. PT only accepts military contracts 
that involve very advanced, new technology and are cost plus.
 
A new phenomenon has attracted management of PT to look into a larger market. 
Last year a large Swedish truck manufacturer approached PT to consider designing 
power trains for its trucks. As the industry consolidates, the opportunities for PT 
should increase because these large firms are moving to more outsourcing to cut infra-
structure costs and stay very flexible. Only last week a PT design engineer spoke to a 
German truck manufacturing manager at a conference. The German manager was 
already exploring outsourcing of drive trains to Porsche and was very pleased to be 
reminded of PT’s expertise in the area. A meeting is set up for next month.
CLAUDE JONES
Claude Jones joined PT in 1999 as a new MBA from the University of Edinburgh. He 
worked as a mechanical engineer for U.K. Hydraulics for five years prior to returning to 
school for the MBA. “I just wanted to be part of the management team and where the 
action is.” Jones moved quickly through the ranks. Today he is the vice president of 
design and operations. Sitting at his desk, Jones is pondering the conflicts and confusion 
that seem to be increasing in scheduling people to projects. He gets a real rush at the 
thought of designing power trains for large trucks; however, given their current project 
scheduling problems, a large increase in business would only compound their problems. 
Somehow these conflicts in scheduling have to be resolved before any serious thought 
can be given to expanding into design of power transmissions for truck manufacturers.
 
Jones is thinking of the problems PT had in the last year. The MF project is the first 
to come to mind. The project was not terribly complex and did not require their best 
design engineers. Unfortunately, the scheduling software assigned one of the most 
creative and expensive engineers to the MF project. A similar situation, but reversed, 
happened on the Deer project. This project involved a big customer and new hydro-
static technology for small tractors. In this project the scheduling software assigned 
engineers who were not familiar with small tractor transmissions. Somehow, thinks 
Jones, the right people need to be scheduled to the right projects. Upon reflection, this 
problem with scheduling has been increasing since PT went to multiproject schedul-
ing. Maybe a project office is needed to keep on top of these problems.
 
A meeting with the information technology team and software vendors was positive 
but not very helpful because these people are not really into detailed scheduling prob-
lems. The vendors provided all sorts of evidence suggesting the heuristics used—least 
www.ebook3000.com

294  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
slack, shortest duration, and identification number—are absolutely efficient in sched-
uling people and minimizing project delays. One project software vendor, Lauren, kept 
saying their software would allow PT to customize the scheduling of projects and 
people to almost any variation selected. Lauren repeated over and over, “If the standard 
heuristics do not meet your requirements, create your own heuristics that do.” Lauren 
even volunteered to assist in setting up the system. But she is not willing to spend time 
on the problem until PT can describe to her exactly what criteria will be used (and their 
sequence) to select and schedule people to projects.
WHAT NEXT?
Potential expansion into the truck power train business is not feasible until the confu-
sion in project scheduling is solved or reduced significantly. Jones is ready to tackle 
this problem, but he is not sure where to start. What criteria should he consider? What 
should be the sequence for selecting and assigning people to projects?
Appendix 8.1
The Critical-Chain Approach
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this appendix you should be able to:
A8-1  Deﬁne what is meant by the term “critical chain.”
A8-2 Identify the reasons why projects are late even when estimates are padded.
A8-3 Describe the basic critical-chain methodology.
A8-4 Describe the differences between critical-chain scheduling and the traditional approach to scheduling.
In practice, project managers carefully manage slack on sensitive resource-limited proj-
ects. If possible, they will add slack at the end of the project by committing to a comple-
tion date that goes beyond the scheduled date. For example, the plans say the project 
should be completed on April 1, although the official completion date is May 1. Other 
managers take a more aggressive approach to managing slack within the schedule. They 
use an early start schedule and prohibit use of slack on any activity or work package to 
be used unless authorized by the project manager. Progress by percent complete and by 
remaining time are carefully monitored. Activities that are beating estimated comple-
tion times are reported so that succeeding activities can start ahead of schedule. This 
ensures that the time gained is used to start a succeeding activity earlier and time is not 
wasted. The overall intent is to create and save slack as a time buffer to complete the 
project early or to cover delay problems that may creep up on critical activities or paths.
 
Eliyahu Goldratt, who championed the “theory of constraints” in his popular book 
The Goal, advocates an alternative approach to managing slack.1 He has coined the 
term “critical chain” to recognize that the project network may be constrained by 
both resource and technical dependencies. Each type of constraint can create task 
dependencies, and in the case of resource constraints, new task dependencies can be 
Deﬁne what is meant by 
the term “critical chain.”
A8-1
LO
1 E. Goldratt, The Goal (Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1997).

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  295
created! Remember how resource constraints shifted the critical path? If not, visit 
Figure 8.5 again. The critical chain refers to the longest string of dependencies that 
exist on the project. Chain is used instead of path, since the latter tends to be associ-
ated with just technical dependencies not resource dependencies. Goldratt uses the 
critical chain concept to develop strategies for accelerating the completion of proj-
ects. These strategies are based on his observations about time estimates of individ-
ual activities.
TIME ESTIMATES
Goldratt argues that there is a natural tendency for people to add safety (just-in-case) 
time to their estimations. It is believed that those who estimate activity times provide 
an estimate that has about an 80 to 90 percent chance of being completed on or 
before the estimated time. Hence, the median time (50/50 chance) is overestimated 
by approximately 30 to 40 percent. For example, a programmer may estimate that 
there is a 50/50 chance that he can complete an activity in six days. However, to 
ensure success and to protect against potential problems, he adds three days of safety 
time and reports that it will take nine days to complete the task. In this case the 
median (50/50) time is overestimated by approximately 50 percent. He now has a 
50/50 chance of completing the project three days ahead of the schedule. If this hid-
den contingency is pervasive across a project, then most activities in theory should 
be completed ahead of schedule.
 
Not only do workers add safety, but project managers like to add safety to ensure 
that they will be able to bring the project in ahead of schedule. They will add a month 
to a nine-month project to cover any delays or risks that might spring up. This situation 
raises an interesting paradox:
Why, if there is a tendency to overestimate activity durations, and add safety to the end of a 
project, do so many projects come in behind schedule?
Critical-Chain Project Management (CCPM) offers several explanations:
∙ Parkinson’s law: Work fills the time available. Why hustle to complete a task today 
when it isn’t due until tomorrow? Not only will the pace of work be dictated by 
deadline, but workers will take advantage of perceived free time to catch up on other 
things. This is especially true in matrix environments where workers will use this 
time to clear work backlog on other projects and duties.
∙ Self-protection: Participants fail to report early finishes out of fear that management 
will adjust their future standards and demand more next time. For example, if a team 
member estimates that a task will take seven days and delivers it in five, the next 
time he is asked for an estimate, the project manager may want to trim the estimate 
based on past performance. Peer pressure may also be a factor here: to avoid being 
labeled a “rate buster,” members may not report early finishes.
∙ Dropped baton: Goldratt uses the metaphor of project as relay race to illustrate 
the impact of poor coordination. Just as a runner’s time is lost if the next runner 
is not ready to receive the baton, so is the time gained from completing a task 
early lost if the next group of people are not ready to receive the project work. 
Poor communication and inflexible resource schedules prevent progress from 
occurring.
∙ Excessive multitasking: The norm in most organizations is to have project person-
nel work on several projects, activities, or assignments at the same time. This leads 
to costly interruptions and excessive task splitting. As pointed out in our discussion 
Identify the reasons why 
projects are late even 
when estimates are 
padded.
A8-2
LO
www.ebook3000.com

296  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
of splitting tasks, this adds time to each activity. When looked at in isolation the 
time loss may seem minimal, but when taken as a whole the transition costs can 
be staggering.
∙ Resource bottlenecks: In multiproject organizations projects are frequently delayed 
because test equipment or other necessary resources are tied up on other project work.
∙ Student syndrome (procrastination): Goldratt asserts that just as students delay 
writing a term paper until the last minute, workers delay starting tasks when they 
perceive that they have more than enough time to complete the task. The problem 
with delaying the start of a task is that obstacles are often not detected until the task 
is under way. By postponing the start of the task, the opportunity to cope with these 
obstacles and complete the task on time is compromised.
Critical-Chain in Action
CCPM’s solution to reducing project time overruns is to insist on people using the 
“true 50/50” activity time estimates (rather than estimates which have an 80 to 90 
percent chance of being completed before the estimated time); the 50/50 estimates 
result in a project duration about one-half the low risk of 80 to 90 percent estimates. 
This requires a corporate culture which values accurate estimates and refrains from 
blaming people for not meeting deadlines. According to CCPM, using 50/50 esti-
mates will discourage Parkinson’s law, the student syndrome, and self-protection 
from coming into play because there is less “free time” available. Productivity will 
be increased as individuals try to meet tighter deadlines. Similarly, the compressed 
time schedule reduces the likelihood of the dropped baton effect.
 
CCPM recommends inserting time buffers into the schedule to act as “shock absorb-
ers” to protect the project completion date against task durations taking longer than the 
50/50 estimate. The rationale is that by using 50/50 estimates you are in essence taking 
out all of the “safety” in individual tasks. CCPM also recommends using portions of 
this collective safety strategically by inserting time buffers where potential problems 
are likely to occur. There are three kinds of buffers in CCPM:
∙ Project buffer: First, since all activities along the critical chain have inherent uncer-
tainty that is difficult to predict, project duration is uncertain. Therefore, a project time 
buffer is added to the expected project duration. CCPM recommends using roughly 
50 percent of the aggregate safety. For example, if the modified schedule reduces the 
project duration by 20 days from 50 to 30, then a 10-day project buffer would be used.
∙ Feeder buffers: Buffers are added to the network where noncritical paths merge 
with the critical chain. These buffers protect the critical chain from being delayed.
∙ Resource buffers: Time buffers are inserted where scarce resources are needed for 
an activity. Resource time buffers come in at least two forms. One form is a time 
buffer attached to a critical resource to ensure that the resource is on call and avail-
able when needed. This preserves the relay race. The second form of time buffer is 
added to activities preceding the work of a scarce resource. This kind of buffer 
protects against resource bottlenecks by increasing the likelihood that the preceding 
activity will be completed when the resource is available.
 
All buffers reduce the risk of the project duration being late and increase the chance 
of early project completion.2 See Snapshot from Practice A8.1: Critical Chain Applied 
to Airplane Part Arrivals.
Describe the basic  
critical-chain 
methodology.
A8-3
LO
2 For more information on buffers, see: L. P. Leach, “Critical Chain Project Management Improves Project Performance,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 30, no. 2 (1999), pp. 39–51.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  297
Critical-Chain versus Traditional Scheduling Approach
To illustrate how CCPM affects scheduling let’s compare it with the traditional approach 
to project scheduling. We will first resolve resource problems in the way described in 
Chapter 8 and then using the CCPM method. Figure A8.1A shows the planned Air Con-
trol project network without any concern for resources. That is, activities are assumed to 
be independent and resources will be made available and/or are interchangeable.
 
Figure A8.1B depicts the bar chart for the project. The dark blue bars represent the 
durations of critical activities; the light blue bars represent the durations of noncritical 
activities; the gray bars represent slack. Note that the duration is 45 days and the criti-
cal path is represented by activities 1, 4, 6, 7, and 8.
 
Parallel activities hold potential for resource conflicts. This is the case in this project. 
Ryan is the resource for activities 3 and 6. If you insert Ryan in the bar chart in Figure 
A8.1B for activities 3 and 6, you can see activity 3 overlaps activity 6 by five days—an 
impossible situation. Because Ryan cannot work two activities simultaneously and no 
other person can take his place, a resource dependency exists. The result is that two 
activities (3 and 6) that were assumed to be independent now become dependent. Some-
thing has to give! Figure A8.2A shows the Air Control project network with the 
resources included. A pseudo-dashed arrow has been added to the network to indicate 
the resource dependency. The bar chart in Figure A8.2B reflects the revised schedule 
resolving the overallocation of Ryan. Given the new schedule, slack for some activities 
has changed. More importantly, the critical path has changed. It is now 1, 3, 6, 7, 8. The 
resource schedule shows the new project duration to be 50 days rather than 45 days.
Describe the differences 
between critical-chain 
scheduling and the 
traditional approach to 
scheduling.
A8-4
LO
In the past Spirit Aero Systems, manu-
facturer of airplane parts, were forced 
to delay product development projects 
as a result of missing parts for assem-
blies. Spirit management cycled 
through several approaches, such as lean, value chain, 
cycle time reduction, knowledge based engineering, to 
reduce the problem. Although each yielded minor 
improvements, the impacts were not substantial. 
Rework, overtime, delay costs, and vendor expediting 
costs continued to have signiﬁcant impact on costs, 
meeting commitments, and reputation. Spirit turned to 
critical-chain management methodology in a pilot 
project.
 
Joseph Zenisek, the critical-chain manager, said 
the choice of critical chain was “a game changer for 
us.” Spirit applied the critical-chain approach to assem-
bly of newly designed pylons (brackets) used for failure 
destruction testing of casings for a jet engine project. 
Zenisek credited success to three key factors:
΄
4aRMcW]UMadZRc^]ReRabcMacMf^aY_MPYMURd]cWZ
all parts and staff are available.
΄
6]bdaW]U_MacOdŪRabc^P^eRaf^aY_MPYMURbOheWUW-
lantly monitoring assembly parts that use a large num-
ber of parts or where rate or number used is high.
΄
5ReRZ^_W]UMb\MZZR]UW]RRaW]UcRM\c^\M]MUR
vendors and buffers to ensure that delivery of over 
300 parts arrived on time.
 
The critical chain program led to impressive results. 
The parts and staffing rule cut down on late deliveries 
and rework on partially completed work packages 
caused by missing parts. The result was a reduction of 
50 percent in overtime. Reducing delays reduced 
assembly cycle time by 18 percent. Work in process and 
work packages were also reduced since availability of 
buffer parts avoided delays. The critical-chain method 
led to better resource management and reduced stress.
 
Given the success of the critical-chain program, 
Spirit intends to expand the application of the critical-
chain method to new product development projects for 
their clients.
*Peter Fretty, “E Is in the Air,” PM Network, vol. 26, no. 2 
(February 2012),  pp. 50–56.
 S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  A 8 .1
Critical Chain Applied to  
Airplane Part Arrivals*
www.ebook3000.com

298  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
 
Now let’s apply the CCPM approach to the Air Control project. Figure A8.3 details 
many of the changes. First, notice that task estimates now represent approximations of 
the 50/50 rule. Second, observe that not all of the activities on the critical chain are 
technically linked. Manufacture custom parts is included because of previously defined 
resource dependency. Third, a project time buffer is added at the end of schedule. 
Finally, feeder buffers are inserted at each point where a noncritical activity merges 
with the critical chain.
 
The impact the CCPM approach has on the project schedule can best be seen in the 
Gantt chart presented in Figure A8.4. Notice first the late start times for each of the 
three noncritical activities. For example, under the critical path method, order vendor 
parts and software development would be scheduled to begin immediately after the 
order review. Instead they are scheduled later in the project. Three-day feeder buffers 
have been added to each of these activities to absorb any delays that might occur in 
these activities. Finally, instead of taking 50 days the project is now estimated to take 
only 27 days with a 10-day project buffer!
0
1  Order review 2
2 Order vendor parts 15
3 Produce std. parts 18
4 Design cust. parts 13
5 Software developm’t 18
6 Mfgr. cust. parts 15
7 Assemble 10
8 Test 5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Critical
Slack
Noncritical
FIGURE A8.1B
Air Control Project: 
Time Plan without 
Resources
Manufacture custom parts
Early start:  15
Early ﬁnish: 30
ID:    6
Dur: 15 days
Produce std. parts
Early start:  2
Early ﬁnish: 20
ID:    3
Dur: 18 days
Order vendor parts
Early start:   2
Early ﬁnish: 17
ID:    2
Dur: 15 days
Assemble
Early start:  30
Early ﬁnish: 40
ID:   7
Dur: 10 days
Design custom parts
Early start:   2
Early ﬁnish: 15
ID:    4
Dur: 13 days
Software development
Early start:  2
Early ﬁnish: 20
ID:   5
Dur: 18 days
Order review
Early start:  0
Early ﬁnish: 2
ID:   1
Dur: 2 days
Test
Early start:  40
Early ﬁnish: 45
ID:   8
Dur: 5 days
Project duration 45 days
FIGURE A8.1A Air Control Project: Time Plan without Resources

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  299
Manufacture custom parts
Early start:  20
Early ﬁnish: 35
Res: Ryan
ID:    6
Dur: 15 days
Produce std. parts
Early start:  2
Early ﬁnish: 20
Res: Ryan
ID:   3
Dur: 18 days
Order vendor parts
Early start:  2
Early ﬁnish: 17
Res: Carly
ID:   2
Dur: 15 days
Assemble
Early start:  35
Early ﬁnish: 45
Res: Dawn
ID:   7
Dur: 10 days
Design custom parts
Early start:  2
Early ﬁnish: 15
Res: Lauren
ID:   4
Dur: 13 days
Software development
Early start:  2
Early ﬁnish: 20
Res: Connor
ID:   5
Dur: 18 days
Order review
Early start:  0
Early ﬁnish: 2
Res: Ryan
ID:   1
Dur: 2 days
Test
Early start:  45
Early ﬁnish: 50
Res: Kevin
ID:   8
Dur: 5 days
Project duration 50 days
FIGURE A8.2A 
Air Control Project: Schedule with Resources Limited
0
1  Order review 2
2 Order vendor parts 15
3 Produce std. parts 18
4 Design cust. parts 13
5 Software developm’t 18
6 Mfgr. cust. parts 15
7 Assemble 10
8 Test 5
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Critical
Slack
Ryan
Carly
Ryan
Ryan
Dawn
Kevin
Lauren
Connor
Noncritical
FIGURE A8.2B
Air Control Project: 
Schedule with 
Resources Limited
Test
Project
buffer
Critical
chain
3
Order
review
1
FB
FB
Order
vendor parts
8
Produce
std. parts
8
Design
cust. parts
7
FB
FB
Feeder
buffer
Software
dev.
10
Task
DUR
Mfgr. cust.
parts
8
Assemble
6
FIGURE A8.3 Air Control Project: CCPM Network
www.ebook3000.com

300  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
Activity
1. Order review 
2. Order vendor parts
3. Produce std. parts
4. Design cust. parts
5. Software dev.
6. Mfgr. cust. parts
7. Assemble
8. Test
DUR
1
8
8
7
10
8
6
3
LS
0
7
1
1
11
11
18
24
LF
1
15
9
8
21
19
24
27
Buffer
0
3
0
3
3
0
0
12
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Activity
Buffer
FIGURE A8.4
Air Control Project 
Gantt Chart: CCPM 
Network
 
This example provides an opportunity for explaining the differences between 
buffers and slack. Slack is spare time inherent in the schedule of noncritical activi-
ties and can be determined by differences between the early start and late start of 
a specific activity. Buffers, on the other hand, are dedicated time blocks reserved 
to cover most likely contingencies and are monitored closely so, if they are not 
needed, subsequent activities can proceed on schedule. Buffers are needed in part 
because the estimates are based on 50/50 approximations, and therefore roughly 
half of the activities will take longer than planned. To protect against these extended 
activity durations, buffers are inserted to minimize the impact on the schedule. 
Buffers are not part of the project schedule and are used only when sound manage-
ment dictates it.
 
While not depicted in the figures, an example of a resource buffer would be to add 
six days to Ryan’s schedule (remember he is the critical resource that caused the sched-
ule to be extended). This would ensure that he could continue to work on the project 
beyond the 18th day in case either produce standard parts and/or manufacture custom 
parts takes longer than planned. Progress on these two tasks would be monitored 
closely, and his schedule would be adjusted accordingly.
CCPM and Splitting Tasks
Buffers do not address the insidious effects of pervasive task splitting, especially in 
a multiproject environment where workers are juggling different project assign-
ments. CCPM has three recommendations that will help to reduce the impact of 
splitting activities:
1. Reduce the number of projects so people are not assigned to as many projects 
concurrently.
2. Control start dates of projects to accommodate resource shortages. Don’t start proj-
ects until sufficient resources are available to work full time on the project.
3. Contract (lock in) for resources before the project begins.
Monitoring Project Performance
The CCPM method uses buffers to monitor project time performance. Remember 
that as shown in Figure A8.3 a project buffer is used to insulate the project against 

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  301
FIGURE A8.5
Project Control—
Buffer Management
OK
100%
Full buffer
time left
0%
No buffer
time left
Region III
Region II
Region I
Act
Watch
&
Plan
delays along the critical chain. For monitoring purposes, this buffer is typically 
divided into three zones—OK, Watch and Plan, and Act, respectively (see Figure 
A8.5). As the buffer begins to decrease and moves into the second zone, alarms are 
set off to seek corrective action. To be truly effective, buffer management requires 
comparing buffer usage with actual progress on the project. For example, if the proj-
ect is 75 percent complete and you have only used 50 percent of the project buffer, 
then the project is in pretty good shape. Conversely, if the project is only 25 percent 
complete and 50 percent of the buffer has already been used, you are in trouble and 
corrective action is needed. A method for estimating percentage complete is described 
in Chapter 13.
The CCPM Method Today
CCPM has generated considerable debate within the project management community. 
While sound in theory, support at this time is limited but growing. For example, Harris 
Semiconductor was able to build a new automated wafer fabrication facility within 
13 months using CCPM methods when the industry standard for such a facility is 
26–36 months. The Israeli aircraft industry has used CCPM techniques to reduce aver-
age maintenance work on aircraft from two months to two weeks. The U.S. Air Force 
and Navy as well as Boeing, Lucent Technologies, Intel, GM, and 3M are applying 
critical-chain principles to their multiproject environments.3
 
CCPM is not without critics. First, CCPM does not address the biggest cause of 
project delays, which is an ill-defined and unstable project scope. Second, some critics 
challenge Goldratt’s assumptions about human behavior. They question the tendency 
of experts to pad estimates and that employees act deliberately against the organization 
for their own interest and benefit (c.f., Button, 2011; Pinto, 1999). Critics also object 
to the insinuation that trained professionals would exhibit the student syndrome habits 
(Zalmanson, 2001). Third, evidence of success is almost exclusively anecdotal and 
based on single case studies or on computer modeling. The lack of systematic evidence 
raises questions about generalizability of application. CCPM may prove to work best 
for only certain kinds of projects (Raz, Barnes, & Dvir, 2003).
 
One of the keys to implementing CCPM is the culture of the organization. If the 
organization honors noble efforts that fail to meet estimates as it does efforts that do 
meet estimates, then greater acceptance will occur. Conversely, if management treats 
honest failure differently from success, then resistance will be high. Organizations 
adopting the CCPM approach have to invest significant energy to obtaining “buy-in” on 
the part of all participants to its core principles and allaying the fears that this system 
may generate.
3 Cited in materials developed by the Eliyahu Goldratt Institute (New Haven, CT) for a workshop attended by one of the 
authors entitled, “Project Management the TOC Way,” 1998.
www.ebook3000.com

302  Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs
Appendix Summary
Regardless of where one stands in the debate, the CCPM approach deserves credit for 
bringing resource dependency to the forefront, highlighting the modern ills of multi-
tasking, and forcing us to rethink conventional methods of project scheduling.
Appendix Review Questions
1. Explain how time is wasted in management of projects.
2. Distinguish between project and feeder buffers.
3. Buffers are not the same as slack. Explain.
Appendix Exercises
1. Check out the Goldratt Institute’s homepage at http://www.goldratt.com for current 
information on the application of critical-chain techniques to project management.
2. Apply critical-chain scheduling principles to the Print Software, Inc., project 
(Exercise 10) presented in Chapter 6. Revise the estimated time durations by 50 
percent except round up the odd time durations (i.e., 3 becomes 4). Draw a CCPM 
network diagram similar to the one contained in Figure A8.3 for the Print Soft-
ware project as well as a Gantt chart similar to Figure A8.4. How would these 
diagrams differ from the ones generated using the traditional scheduling 
technique?
Appendix References
Budd, C. S., and M. J. Cooper, “Improving On-time Service Delivery: The Case of 
Project as Product,” Human Systems Management, vol. 24, no. 1 (2005), pp. 67–81.
Button, S., “A Critical Look at Critical Chain”, EM 540 research Paper, March 2011.
Goldratt, E., Critical Chain (Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1997).
Herroelen, W., R. Leus, and E. Demeulemeester, “Critical Chain Project Scheduling: 
Do Not Oversimplify,” Project Management Journal,  vol. 33, no. 4 (2002),  
pp. 48–60.
Leach, L. P., “Critical Chain Project Management,” Proceedings of 29th Annual Proj-
ect Management Institute, 1998, Seminars and Symposium (Newtown, PA: Project 
Management Institute, 1998), pp. 1239–44.
Levine, H. A., “Shared Contingency: Exploring the Critical Chain,” PM Network, 
October 1999, pp. 35–38.
Newbold, R. C., Project Management in the Fast Lane: Applying the Theory of Con-
straints (Boca Raton, FL: St. Lucie Press, 1998).
Noreen, E., D. Smith, and J. Mackey, The Theory of Constraints and Its Implication for 
Management Accounting (Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1995).
Pinto, J., “Some Constraints on the Theory of Constraints: Taking a Critical Look at 
Critical Chain,” PM Network, vol. 13, no. 8 (1999), pp. 49–51.
Raz, T., R. Barnes, and D. Dvir, “A Critical Look at Critical Chain Project Manage-
ment,” Project Management Journal, December 2003, pp. 24–32.
Sood, S., “Taming Uncertainty: Critical-Chain Buffer Management Helps Minimize 
Risk in the Project Equation,” PM Network, March 2003, pp. 57–59.
Steyn, H., “An Investigation into the Fundamentals of Critical Chain Scheduling,” 
International Journal of Project Management, vol. 19 (2000), pp. 363–69.
Zalmanson, E., “Readers Feedback,” PM Network, vol. 15, no. 1 (2001), p. 4.

Chapter 8  Scheduling Resources and Costs  303
Case A8.1
The CCPM Dilemma
Pinyarat worked in the IT department of a diversified IT firm. She was describing the 
firm’s early encounters with critical-chain scheduling to a friend in another IT firm.
 
Three years ago management decided to add 10 percent time to all activity estimates 
because almost all projects were coming in late. One thought was people were simply 
working too hard and needed some relief. This approach did not work! Projects still 
came in late. Next, management decided to take away the extra time for activities and 
add 10 percent for project estimates to ensure project durations would be met. Again, 
nothing improved and projects continued to come in late. Recently, the firm hired a 
consultant who promoted critical-chain scheduling, which was implemented for all 
projects in her division. Almost all failed to perform.
 
Pinyarat explained, “The estimates were basically impossible. The activity dura-
tions got squeezed down to less than the 50 percent guideline. We were late on nearly 
every task. In addition, I was not allowed to put in a big enough project buffer, which 
only added to projects being late. One colleague who was working on six projects gave 
up and quit; he said he was killing himself and saw no hope of things getting better. My 
projects are not the only ones having big problems. Some people had no idea why 
anyone would use CCPM scheduling. To quote one of my best programmers: ‘They 
ask for an estimate and then they cut it 50 percent or more.’ What kind of game is this? 
Apparently they don’t trust us.”
 
A week later, to Pinyarat’s surprise, she was called to the IT manager’s office. 
Pinyarat imagined numerous bad scenarios of how the meeting would go—even to the 
remote possibility of being fired! The manager wanted the division to straighten out 
their project management practices and stop this business of nearly all IT projects 
being late. There were rumors of cleaning house or outsourcing IT work.
 
The manager believed Pinyarat, who passed the PMP exam, had the best chance of 
turning things around. He said, “Pinyarat, I’m nearing the desperate level; top manage-
ment is reaching the end of the rope with our division. We need to turn this around for 
both our sakes. Give me a plan that I can sponsor within the week.”
 
Pinyarat explained to her friend a few of her ideas—like squeezing estimates too far. 
But she said she would take any ideas she could get from anyone.
 
Give Pinyarat a report that identifies the key problems and a plan of action she can 
present to her sponsor. Limit your report to 800 words or less.
www.ebook3000.com

Reducing Project Duration
9
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
9-1 Understand the different reasons for crashing a 
project.
9-2 Identify the different options for crashing an activ-
ity when resources are not constrained.
9-3 Identify the different options for crashing an activ-
ity when resources are constrained.
9-4 Determine the optimum cost-time point in a proj-
ect network.
9-5 Understand the risks associated with compressing 
or crashing a project.
9-6 Identify different options for reducing the costs of 
a project.
OUTLINE
9.1 
Rationale for Reducing Project Duration
9.2 Options for Accelerating Project Completion
9.3 Project Cost–Duration Graph
9.4 Constructing a Project Cost–Duration Graph
9.5 Practical Considerations
9.6 What If Cost, Not Time, Is the Issue?
Summary
C H A P T E R  N I N E
304

In skating over thin ice our safety is in our speed.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
Imagine the following scenarios:
— After finalizing your project schedule, you realize the estimated completion date 
is two months beyond what your boss publicly promised an important customer.
— Five months into the project, you realize that you are already three weeks 
behind the drop-dead date for the project.
— Four months into a project top management changes its priorities and now tells 
you that money is not an issue. Complete the project ASAP!
What do you do?
 
This chapter addresses strategies for reducing project duration either prior to setting the 
baseline for the project or in the midst of project execution. Choice of options is based on 
the constraints surrounding the project. Here the project priority matrix introduced in 
Chapter 4 comes into play. For example, there are many more options available for reduc-
ing project time if you are not resource constrained than if you cannot spend more than 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
305 
www.ebook3000.com

306  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
your original budget. We will begin first by examining the reasons for reducing project 
duration followed by a discussion of different options for accelerating project completion. 
The chapter will conclude with the classic time-cost framework for selecting which activi-
ties to “crash.” Crash is a term that has emerged in the Project Management lexicon for 
shortening the duration of an activity or project beyond when it can be normally done.
9.1 Rationale for Reducing Project Duration
There are many good reasons for attempting to reduce the duration of a project. One of 
the more important reasons today is time to market. Intense global competition and 
rapid technological advances have made speed a competitive advantage. To succeed, 
companies have to spot new opportunities, launch project teams, and bring new prod-
ucts or services to the marketplace in a flash. Perhaps in no industry does speed matter 
as much as in the electronics industry. For example, a rule of thumb for moderate- to 
high-technology firms is that a six-month delay in bringing a product to market can 
result in a loss of market share of about 35 percent. In these cases, high-technology 
firms typically assume that the time savings and avoidance of lost profits are worth 
any additional costs to reduce time without any formal analysis. See the Snapshot from 
Practice 9.1: Smartphone Wars for more on this.
Understand the different 
reasons for crashing a 
project.
9-1
LO
Speed has been critical in business 
ever since the California Gold Rush. 
The smartphone industry is a good 
example of an intensely competitive 
business that places a premium on 
speed and innovation. Analysts forecast over 14 differ-
ent new smartphones on the market in 2016 including 
Acer Predator 6, Samsung Galaxy 7, and Iphone 7.
 
In order to survive, RIM, Samsung, Apple, and other 
smartphone manufacturers have become masters at 
project management. They have been able to cut the 
market release time of new phones from 12–18 months 
to 6–9 months. What is at stake is over $1 billion in 
forecasted sales of new smartphones.
© Rex Features/AP Images
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  9 .1
Smartphone Wars*
* Hall, C., and B. O’Boyle, “Best Smartphones to Look Forward 
to in 2016,” pocket-lint.com, accessed January 11, 2015.

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  307
 
Business survival depends not only on rapid innovation but also on adaptability. 
Global recession and energy crises have stunned the business world, and those compa-
nies that survive will be those that can quickly adapt to new challenges. This requires 
speedy project management! For example, the fate of the U.S. auto industry depends in 
part on how quickly they shift their efforts to develop fuel-efficient, alternative forms 
of transportation.
 
Another common reason for reducing project time occurs when unforeseen delays—
for example, adverse weather, design flaws, and equipment breakdown—cause sub-
stantial delays midway in the project. Getting back on schedule usually requires 
compressing the time on some of the remaining critical activities. The additional costs 
of getting back on schedule need to be compared with the consequences of being late. 
This is especially true when time is a top priority.
 
Incentive contracts can make reduction of project time rewarding—usually for both 
the project contractor and owner. For example, a contractor finished a bridge across a 
lake 18 months early and received more than $6 million for the early completion. The 
availability of the bridge to the surrounding community 18 months early to reduce 
traffic gridlock made the incentive cost to the community seem small to users. In 
another example, in a continuous improvement arrangement, the joint effort of the 
owner and contractor resulted in early completion of a river lock and a 50/50 split of 
the savings to the owner and contractor. See Snapshot from Practice 9.2: Northridge 
Earthquake for a classic example of a contractor who went to great lengths to quickly 
complete a project with a big payoff.
 
“Imposed deadlines” is another reason for accelerating project completion. For 
example, a politician makes a public statement that a new law building will be avail-
able in two years. Or the president of a software company remarks in a speech that new 
advanced software will be available in one year. Such statements too often become 
imposed project duration dates—without any consideration of the problems or cost of 
meeting such a date. The project duration time is set while the project is in its “con-
cept” phase before or without any detailed scheduling of all the activities in the proj-
ect. This phenomenon occurs very frequently in practice! Unfortunately, this practice 
almost always leads to a higher-cost project than one that is planned using low-cost 
and detailed planning. In addition, quality is sometimes compromised to meet dead-
lines. More important, these increased costs of imposed duration dates are seldom 
recognized or noted by project participants.
 
Sometimes very high overhead costs are recognized before the project begins. For 
example, it may cost $80,000 per day to simply house and feed a construction crew in 
the farthest reaches of Northern Alaska. In these cases it is prudent to examine the 
direct costs of shortening the critical path versus the overhead cost savings. Usually 
there are opportunities to shorten a few critical activities at less than the daily over-
head rate. Under specific conditions (which are not rare), huge savings are possible 
with little risk.
 
Finally there are times when it is important to reassign key equipment and/or people 
to new projects. Under these circumstances, the cost of compressing the project can be 
compared with the opportunity costs of not releasing key equipment or people.
9.2 Options for Accelerating Project Completion
Managers have several effective methods for crashing specific project activities when 
resources are not constrained. Several of these are summarized below.
www.ebook3000.com

308  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
On January 17, 1994, a 6.8-magnitude 
earthquake struck the Los Angeles 
basin, near suburban Northridge, 
causing 60 deaths, thousands of inju-
ries, and billions of dollars in property 
damage. Nowhere was the destructive power of nature 
more evident than in the collapsed sections of the free-
way system that disrupted the daily commute of an 
estimated 1 million Los Angelenos. The Northridge 
earthquake posed one of the greatest challenges to 
the California Department of Transportation (CalTrans) 
in its nearly 100-year history. To expedite the recovery 
process, Governor Pete Wilson signed an emergency 
declaration allowing CalTrans to streamline contracting 
procedures and offer attractive incentives for complet-
ing work ahead of schedule. For each day that the 
schedule was beaten, a sizable bonus was to be 
awarded. Conversely, for each day over the deadline, 
the contractor would be penalized the same amount. 
The amount ($50,000 to $200,000) varied depending 
on the importance of the work.
 
The incentive scheme proved to be a powerful 
motivator for the freeway reconstruction contractors. 
C. C. Myers, Inc., of Rancho Cordova, California, won 
the contract for the reconstruction of the Interstate 10 
bridges. Myers pulled out all stops to finish the project 
in a blistering 66 days—a whopping 74 days ahead of 
schedule—and earning a $14.8 million bonus! Myers 
took every opportunity to save time and streamline 
operations. They greatly expanded the workforce. For 
example, 134 iron-workers were employed instead of 
the normal 15. Special lighting equipment was set up 
so that work could be performed around the clock. 
Likewise, the sites were prepared and special materi-
als were used so that work could continue despite 
inclement weather that would normally shut down con-
struction. The work was scheduled much like an 
assembly line so that critical activities were followed by 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  9 . 2
Responding to the  
Northridge Earthquake*
the next critical activity. A generous incentive scheme 
was devised to reward teamwork and reach milestones 
early. Carpenters and iron-workers competed as teams 
against each other to see who could finish first.
 
Although C. C. Myers received a substantial bonus 
for finishing early, they spent a lot of money on over-
time, bonuses, special equipment, and other premiums 
to keep the job rolling along. CalTrans supported 
Myers’s efforts. With reconstruction work going on 24 
hours a day, including jackhammering and pile-driving, 
CalTrans temporarily housed many families in local 
motels. CalTrans even erected a temporary plastic 
soundwall to help reduce the construction noise travel-
ing to a nearby apartment complex. The double-layer 
curtain, 450 feet long and 20 feet high, was designed 
to reduce construction noise by 10 decibels.
 
Despite the difficulties and expense incurred  
by around-the-clock freeway building, most of Los 
Angeles cheered CalTrans’s quake recovery efforts. 
The Governor’s Office of Planning and Research issued 
a report concluding that for every day the Santa Monica 
Freeway was closed, it cost the local economy more 
than $1 million.
© David Butow/Corbis SABA
* Jerry B. Baxter, “Responding to the Northridge Earthquake,” 
PM Network (November 1994), pp. 13–22.
Options When Resources Are Not Constrained
Adding Resources 
The most common method for shortening project time is to assign additional staff and 
equipment to activities. There are limits, however, as to how much speed can be gained 
by adding staff. Doubling the size of the workforce will not necessarily reduce com-
pletion time by half. The relationship would be correct only when tasks can be parti-
tioned so minimal communication is needed between workers, as in harvesting a crop 
by hand or repaving a highway. Most projects are not set up that way; additional 
Identify the different  
options for crashing an 
activity when resources 
are not constrained.
9-2
LO

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  309
workers increase the communication requirements to coordinate their efforts. For 
example, doubling a team by adding two workers requires six times as much pairwise 
intercommunication than is required in the original two-person team. Not only is more 
time needed to coordinate and manage a larger team; there is the additional delay of 
training the new people and getting them up to speed on the project. The end result is 
captured in Brooks’s law: Adding manpower to a late software project makes it later.1
 
Frederick Brooks formulated this principle based on his experience as a project 
manager for IBM’s System/360 software project during the early 1960s. While subse-
quent research confirmed Brooks’s prediction, it also discovered that adding more 
people to a late project does not always cause the project to be later.2 The key is 
whether the new staff is added early so there is sufficient time to make up for lost 
ground once the new members have been fully assimilated.
Outsourcing Project Work
A common method for shortening the project time is to subcontract an activity. The 
subcontractor may have access to superior technology or expertise that will accelerate 
the completion of the activity. For example, contracting for a backhoe can accomplish 
in two hours what it can take a team of laborers two days to do. Likewise, by hiring a 
consulting firm that specializes in ADSI programming, a firm may be able to cut in 
half the time it would take for less experienced, internal programmers to do the work. 
Subcontracting also frees up resources that can be assigned to a critical activity and 
will ideally result in a shorter project duration. See Snapshot from Practice 9.3: Out-
sourcing in Bio-Tech. Outsourcing will be addressed more fully in Chapter 12.
In the face of increasing time-to- 
market pressures, many bio-tech firms 
are turning to outsourcing to expedite 
the drug development process. Panos 
Kalaritis, vice president of operations 
for Irix Pharmaceuticals, says that outsourcing process 
development can accelerate a drug’s evolution by 
allowing a pharmaceutical company to continue 
research while a contractor works on process optimiza-
tion. Susan Dexter of Lonza Biologics identified different 
types of outsourcing contracts including agreements for 
product development, clinical trial supplies, in-market 
or commercial supplies, and technology transfer. Often, 
she said, a given project can encompass more than one 
of the above stages over a period of several years.
 
Using a contractor, said Paul Henricks, business 
manager for Patheon Inc., gives the client company 
access to specialized knowledge and infrastructure as 
well as flexible resources and capacity. The sponsoring 
company can also manage risks by sharing responsi-
bilities through outsourcing.
 
“Communication is key to a successful outsourc-
ing relationship,” said Dan Gold, vice president of pro-
cess development for Covance, which was formerly 
Corning Bio. “Contractors and sponsors should both 
assign project managers, and the two must work 
together to maintain, track, and document project 
completion. There must be a concerted effort on the 
part of both parties to work as partners to complete 
the project.”
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  9 . 3
Outsourcing in Bio-Tech  
Picks Up Speed*
* Mathew Lerner, “Outsourcing in Bio-Technology Picks Up 
Speed,” Chemical Market Reporter, vol. 251, no. 14 (2002), 
p. 17.
1 Brooks’s The Mythical Man-Month (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994) is considered a classic on software project 
management.
2 R. L. Gordon and J. C. Lamb, “A Close Look at Brooks’ Law,” Datamation, June 1977, pp. 81–86.
www.ebook3000.com

310  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
Scheduling Overtime
The easiest way to add more labor to a project is not to add more people, but to 
 schedule overtime. If a team works 50 hours a week instead of 40, it might accomplish 
20 percent more. By scheduling overtime you avoid the additional costs of coordina-
tion and communication encountered when new people are added. If people involved 
are salaried workers, there may be no real additional cost for the extra work. Another 
advantage is that there are fewer distractions when people work outside normal hours.
 
Overtime has disadvantages. First, hourly workers are typically paid time and a half 
for overtime and double time for weekends and holidays. Sustained overtime work by 
salaried employees may incur intangible costs such as divorce, burnout, and turnover. 
The latter is a key organizational concern when there is a shortage of workers. Further-
more, it is an oversimplification to assume that, over an extended period of time, a 
person is as productive during his or her eleventh hour at work as during his or her 
third hour of work. There are natural limits to what is humanly possible, and extended 
overtime may actually lead to an overall decline in productivity when fatigue sets in 
(DeMarco, 2002).
 
Overtime and working longer hours is the preferred choice for accelerating project 
completion, especially when the project team is salaried. The key is to use overtime 
judiciously. Remember a project is a marathon not a sprint! You do not want to run out 
of energy before the finish line.
Establish a Core Project Team
As discussed in Chapter 3, one of the advantages of creating a dedicated core team to 
complete a project is speed. Assigning professionals full time to a project avoids the 
hidden cost of multitasking in which people are forced to juggle the demands of mul-
tiple projects. Professionals are allowed to devote their undivided attention to a spe-
cific project. This singular focus creates a shared goal that can bind a diverse set of 
professionals into a highly cohesive team capable of accelerating project completion. 
Factors that contribute to the emergence of high-performing project teams will be 
 discussed in detail in Chapter 11.
Do It Twice—Fast and Correctly
If you are in a hurry, try building a “quick and dirty” short-term solution, then go back 
and do it the right way. For example, pontoon bridges are used as temporary solutions 
to damaged bridges in combat. In business, software companies are notorious for 
releasing version 1.0 of products that are not completely finished and tested. Subse-
quent versions 1.1 . . . x correct bugs and add intended functionality to the product. 
The additional costs of doing it twice are often more than compensated for by the 
benefits of satisfying the deadline.
Options When Resources Are Constrained
A project manager has fewer options for accelerating project completion when addi-
tional resources are either not available or the budget is severely constrained. This is 
especially true once the schedule has been established. Below are some of these 
options, which are also available when resources are not constrained.
Improve the Efficiency of the Project Team
The project team may be able to improve productivity by implementing more efficient 
ways to do their work. This can be achieved by improving the planning and 
Identify the different  
options for crashing an 
activity when resources 
are constrained.
9-3
LO

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  311
organization of the project or eliminating barriers to productivity such as excessive 
bureaucratic interference and red tape.
Fast-Tracking
Sometimes it is possible to rearrange the logic of the project network so that critical 
activities are done in parallel (concurrently) rather than sequentially. This alternative is 
commonly referred to as fast tracking and is a good one if the project situation is right. 
When this alternative is given serious attention, it is amazing to observe how creative 
project team members can be in finding ways to restructure sequential activities in paral-
lel. As noted in Chapter 6, one of the most common methods for restructuring activities is 
to change a finish-to-start relationship to a start-to-start relationship. For example, instead 
of waiting for the final design to be approved, manufacturing engineers can begin building 
the production line as soon as key specifications have been established. Changing activi-
ties from sequential to parallel is not without risk. Late design changes can produce 
wasted effort and rework. Fast tracking requires close coordination among those respon-
sible for the activities affected and confidence in the work that has been completed.
Critical-Chain
Critical-chain project management (CCPM) is designed to accelerate project comple-
tion. As discussed in Appendix 8.1, it would be difficult to apply CCPM midstream in 
a project. CCPM requires considerable training and a shift in habits and perspectives 
that takes time to adopt. Although there have been reports of immediate gains, espe-
cially in terms of completion times, a long-term management commitment is probably 
necessary to reap full benefits. See the Snapshot from Practice 9.4: The Fastest House 
in the World for an extreme example of CCPM application.
Reducing Project Scope
Probably the most common response for meeting unattainable deadlines is to reduce or 
scale back the scope of the project. This invariably leads to a reduction in the functional-
ity of the project. For example, the new car will average only 25 mpg instead of 30, or the 
software product will have fewer features than originally planned. While scaling back the 
scope of the project can lead to big savings in both time and money, it may come at a cost 
of reducing the value of the project. If the car gets lower gas mileage, will it stand up to 
competitive models? Will customers still want the software minus the features?
 
The key to reducing a project scope without reducing value is to reassess the true 
specifications of the project. Often requirements are added under best-case, blue-sky 
scenarios and represent desirables, but not essentials. Here it is important to talk to the 
customer and/or project sponsors and explain the situation—you can get it your way 
but not until February. This may force them to accept an extension or to add money to 
expedite the project. If not, then a healthy discussion of what the essential require-
ments are and what items can be compromised in order to meet the deadline needs to 
take place. More intense reexamination of requirements may actually improve the 
value of the project by getting it done more quickly and for a lower cost.
 
Calculating the savings of reduced project scope begins with the work breakdown 
structure. Reducing functionality means certain tasks, deliverables, or requirements 
can be reduced or even eliminated. These tasks need to be found and the schedule 
adjusted. Focus should be on changes in activities on the critical path.
Compromise Quality
Reducing quality is always an option, but it is rarely acceptable or used. If quality is 
sacrificed, it may be possible to reduce the time of an activity on the critical path.
www.ebook3000.com

312  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
December 17, 
2002—After 
revving up 
their power 
tools and lin-
ing up volunteers, Shelby 
County Habitat for Humanity 
broke the world record for the 
fastest house ever built, clock-
ing in at 3 hours, 26 minutes, 
and 34 seconds. Former 
record holder New Zealand’s 
Habitat Affiliate Mannakau 
held the record for three years 
at 3 hours, 44 minutes, and 
59 seconds. The Alabama 
project beat the New Zealand 
record by 18 minutes.
 
“This was different than any construction project 
that I’ve ever been a part of,” said Project Manager 
Chad Calhoun. “The minute-by-minute schedule, the 
planning of each precise movement, the organization 
of all the teams and materials, could not have gone 
more smoothly on build day. All the long hours of plan-
ning definitely paid off.”
 
In preparation for the build, Habitat volunteers put 
the foundation in place and constructed prefabricated 
wall panels. Once the whistle blew at 11:00 a.m. on 
December 17th, the exterior wall panels were raised 
into place, followed by the interior panel, which took 
only 16 minutes. Special color coded teams of workers 
connected the wiring and plumbing, put in insulation, 
installed appliances, laid carpet and tile, installed light 
fixtures, painted the house inside, applied vinyl siding 
outside, and attached assembled front and back 
porches.
 
At the same time, the roof was constructed on 
the ground next to the house. Once the roof was 
completed—approximately 1½ hours later—a Steel City 
crane lifted the 14,000–pound roof assembly into 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  9 . 4
The Fastest House in the World*
place. Crews attached the roof while others completed 
the interior work. There was even time to lay sod, plant 
shrubbery, and decorate a Christmas tree in the front 
yard—all within the official build time of 3 hours,  
26 minutes, and 34 seconds.
 
The recipient of this wonderful holiday gift was 
Bonnie Lilly, a single mother and nursing technician 
who had applied to Habitat for Humanity three times 
before she was selected to receive the three-bedroom, 
two-bath home. “It’s amazing,” Lilly said. “Who am I to 
have this happen for me? A world record, hundreds of 
people coming together to build my house—I still can’t 
believe it.”
 
Habitat for Humanity is an international charitable 
organization that builds simple, affordable houses and 
sells them on a no-interest, no-profit basis to needy 
families.
© Blend Images/Ariel Skelley/Getty Images
* “The house that love built, really FAST—and just in time for 
Christmas kicker: Habitat for Humanity breaks world record 
set by New Zealand,” Erin Drummond, www.csre.com. 
“Shelby County, Ala. Builds fastest Habitat House in three and 
a half hours,” www.habitat.org/newsroom/2002archive.
 
In practice the methods most commonly used to crash projects are scheduling over-
time, outsourcing, and adding resources. Each of these maintains the essence of the 
original plan. Options that depart from the original project plan include do it twice and 
fast-tracking. Rethinking of project scope, customer needs, and timing become major 
considerations for these techniques.

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  313
9.3 Project Cost–Duration Graph
Nothing on the horizon suggests that the need to shorten project time will change. In 
fact, if anything the pressure to get projects done quicker and sooner is likely to 
increase in importance. The challenge for the project manager is to use a quick, logical 
method to compare the benefits of reducing project time with the cost. When sound, 
logical methods are absent, it is difficult to isolate those activities that will have the 
greatest impact on reducing project time at least cost. This section describes a proce-
dure for identifying the costs of reducing project time so that comparisons can be 
made with the benefits of getting the project completed sooner. The method requires 
gathering direct and indirect costs for specific project durations. Critical activities are 
searched to find the lowest direct-cost activities that will shorten the project duration. 
Total cost for specific project durations are computed and then compared with the 
benefits of reducing project time—before the project begins or while it is in progress.
Explanation of Project Costs
The general nature of project costs is illustrated in Figure 9.1, Project Cost–Duration 
Graph. The total cost for each duration is the sum of the indirect and direct costs. 
Indirect costs continue for the life of the project. Hence, any reduction in project dura-
tion means a reduction in indirect costs. Direct costs on the graph grow at an increas-
ing rate as the project duration is reduced from its original planned duration. With the 
information from a graph such as this for a project, managers can quickly judge any 
alternative such as meeting a time-to-market deadline. Further discussion of indirect 
and direct costs is necessary before demonstrating a procedure for developing the 
information for a graph similar to the one depicted in Figure 9.1.
Project Indirect Costs
Indirect costs generally represent overhead costs such as supervision, administration, 
consultants, and interest. Indirect costs cannot be associated with any particular work 
Determine the optimum 
cost-time point in a  
project network.
9-4
LO
60
50
40
30
20
10
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Project duration
Total
costs
Indirect
costs
Direct
costs
Optimum
cost-time
point
Low-cost
plan duration
point
Costs
0
FIGURE 9.1
Project Cost–
Duration Graph 
www.ebook3000.com

314  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
package or activity, hence the term. Indirect costs vary directly with time. That is, any 
reduction in time should result in a reduction of indirect costs. For example, if the 
daily costs of supervision, administration, and consultants are $2,000, any reduction in 
project duration would represent a savings of $2,000 per day. If indirect costs are a 
significant percentage of total project costs, reductions in project time can represent 
very real savings (assuming the indirect resources can be utilized elsewhere).
Project Direct Costs
Direct costs commonly represent labor, materials, equipment, and sometimes subcon-
tractors. Direct costs are assigned directly to a work package and activity, hence the 
term. The ideal assumption is that direct costs for an activity time represent normal 
costs, which typically mean low-cost, efficient methods for a normal time. When proj-
ect durations are imposed, direct costs may no longer represent low-cost, efficient 
methods. Costs for the imposed duration date will be higher than for a project duration 
developed from ideal normal times for activities. Because direct costs are assumed to 
be developed from normal methods and time, any reduction in activity time should add 
to the costs of the activity. The sum of the costs of all the work packages or activities 
represents the total direct costs for the project.
 
The major challenge faced in creating the information for a graph similar to Fig-
ure 9.1 is computing the direct cost of shortening individual critical activities and then 
finding the total direct cost for each project duration as project time is compressed; the 
process requires selecting those critical activities that cost the least to shorten. (Note: 
The graph implies that there is always an optimum cost-time point. This is only true if 
shortening a schedule has incremental indirect cost savings exceeding the incremental 
direct cost incurred. However, in practice there are almost always several activities in 
which the direct costs of shortening are less than the indirect costs.)
9.4 Constructing a Project Cost–Duration Graph
There are three major steps required to construct a project cost–duration graph:
1. Find total direct costs for selected project durations.
2. Find total indirect costs for selected project durations.
3. Sum direct and indirect costs for these selected durations.
The graph is then used to compare additional cost alternatives for benefits. Details of 
these steps are presented here.
Determining the Activities to Shorten
The most difficult task in constructing a cost–duration graph is finding the total direct 
costs for specific project durations over a relevant range. The central concern is to 
decide which activities to shorten and how far to carry the shortening process. Basi-
cally, managers need to look for critical activities that can be shortened with the small-
est increase in cost per unit of time. The rationale for selecting critical activities 
depends on identifying the activity’s normal and crash times and corresponding costs. 
Normal time for an activity represents low-cost, realistic, efficient methods for com-
pleting the activity under normal conditions. Shortening an activity is called crashing. 
The shortest possible time an activity can realistically be completed in is called its 
crash time. The direct cost for completing an activity in its crash time is called crash 
cost. Both normal and crash times and costs are collected from personnel most familiar 

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  315
with completing the activity. Figure 9.2 depicts a hypothetical cost–duration graph for 
an activity.
 
The normal time for the activity is 10 time units, and the corresponding cost is 
$400. The crash time for the activity is five time units and $800. The intersection of 
the normal time and cost represents the original low-cost, early-start schedule. The 
crash point represents the maximum time an activity can be compressed. The heavy 
line connecting the normal and crash points represents the slope, which assumes the 
cost of reducing the time of the activity is constant per unit of time. The assumptions 
underlying the use of this graph are as follows:
1. The cost-time relationship is linear.
2. Normal time assumes low-cost, efficient methods to complete the activity.
3. Crash time represents a limit—the greatest time reduction possible under realistic 
conditions.
4. Slope represents cost per unit of time.
5. All accelerations must occur within the normal and crash times.
Knowing the slope of activities allows managers to compare which critical activities to 
shorten. The less steep the cost slope of an activity, the less it costs to shorten one time 
period; a steeper slope means it will cost more to shorten one time unit. The cost per 
unit of time or slope for any activity is computed by the following equation:
 Cost slope = Rise
Run
 = Crash cost −Normal cost
Normal time −Crash time
 = CC −NC
NT −CT = $800 −$400
10 −5
 = $400
5
 = $80 per unit of time
In Figure 9.2 the rise is the y axis (cost) and the run is the x axis (duration). The slope of 
the cost line is $80 for each time unit the activity is reduced; the limit reduction of the 
FIGURE 9.2 
Activity Graph 
$800
600
400
200
0
5
10
Activity duration (units)
Normal
point
Crash point
Crash
cost
Normal
cost
Activity cost
0
www.ebook3000.com

316  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
activity time is five time units. Comparison of the slopes of all critical activities allows 
us to determine which activity(ies) to shorten to minimize total direct cost. Given the 
preliminary project schedule (or one in progress) with all activities set to their early-start 
times, the process of searching critical activities as candidates for reduction can begin. 
The total direct cost for each specific compressed project duration must be found.
A Simplified Example
Figure 9.3A presents normal and crash times and costs for each activity, the computed 
slope and time reduction limit, the total direct cost, and the project network with a 
duration of 25 time units. Note the total direct cost for the 25-period duration is $450. 
This is an anchor point to begin the procedure of shortening the critical path(s) and 
finding the total direct costs for each specific duration less than 25 time units. The 
maximum time reduction of an activity is simply the difference between the normal 
and crash times for an activity. For example, activity D can be reduced from a normal 
10
Activity
ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
$20
40
30
25
30
30
0
1
2
1
4
2
1
0
Maximum
crash
time
Direct costs
Crash
Normal
3
6
10
11
8
5
6
Time
$50
80
60
50
100
40
70
Cost
2
4
9
7
6
4
6
Time
$70
160
90
150
160
70
70
Cost
Slope
Time 25
C
6x
G
6
B
3
A
Initial total
direct cost
Total direct cost
Legend
ACT
DUR
$ 450
Total
direct cost $ 470
Activities changed
A
$20
$450
11
D
8
E
5
F
(A)
(B)
10
Time 24
C
6x
G
6
B
2x
A
11
D
8
E
5
F
FIGURE 9.3 
Cost–Duration 
Trade-off Example 

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  317
time of 11 time units to a crash time of 7 time units, or a maximum of 4 time units. The 
positive slope for activity D is computed as follows:
 Slope = Crash cost −Normal cost
Normal time −Crash time = $150 −$50
11 −7
 = $100
4
= $25 per period reduced
The network shows the critical path to be activities A, D, F, G. Because it is impossible 
to shorten activity G (“x” is used to indicate this), activity A is circled because it is the 
least-cost candidate; that is, its slope ($20) is less than the slopes for activities D and F 
($25 and $30). Reducing activity A one time unit cuts the project duration to 24 time 
units but increases the total direct costs to $470 ($450 + $20 = $470). Figure 9.3B 
reflects these changes. The duration of activity A has been reduced to two time units; the 
“x” indicates the activity cannot be reduced any further. Activity D is circled because it 
costs the least ($25) to shorten the project to 23 time units. Compare the cost of activity 
F. The total direct cost for a project duration of 23 time units is $495 (see Figure 9.4A).
FIGURE 9.4
Cost–Duration 
Trade-off Example 
(continued) 
Total
direct cost $ 495
Activities changed
D
$25
(A)
10
Time 23
C
6x
G
6
B
2x
A
10
D
8
E
5
F
Total
direct cost $ 525
Activities changed
F
$30
(B)
10
Time 22
C
6x
G
6
B
2x
A
10
D
8
E
4x
F
Total
direct cost $ 610
Activities changed
C
$30
D
$25
E
$30
(C)
9x
Time 21
C
6x
G
6
B
2x
A
9
D
7
E
4x
F
www.ebook3000.com

318  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
 
Observe that the project network in Figure 9.4A now has two critical paths—A, C, 
F, G and A, D, F, G. Reducing the project to 22 time units will require that activity F 
be reduced; thus, it is circled. This change is reflected in Figure 9.4B. The total direct 
cost for 22 time units is $525. This reduction has created a third critical path—A, B, E, 
G; all activities are critical. The least-cost method for reducing the project duration to 
21 time units is the combination of the circled activities C, D, E which cost $30, $25, 
$30, respectively, and increase total direct costs to $610. The results of these changes 
are depicted in Figure 9.4C. Although some activities can still be reduced (those with-
out the “x” next to the activity time), no activity or combination of activities will result 
in a reduction in the project duration.
 
With the total direct costs for the array of specific project durations found, the next 
step is to collect the indirect costs for these same durations. These costs are typically a 
rate per day and are easily obtained from the accounting department. Figure 9.5 pres-
ents the total direct costs, total indirect costs, and total project costs. These same costs 
are plotted in Figure 9.6. This graph shows that the optimum cost-time duration is 
22 time units and $775. Assuming the project will actually materialize as planned, any 
movement away from this time duration will increase project costs. The movement 
from 25 to 22 time units occurs because, in this range, the absolute slopes of the indi-
rect costs are greater than the direct cost slopes.
9.5 Practical Considerations
Using the Project Cost–Duration Graph
This graph, as presented in Figures 9.1 and 9.6, is valuable to compare any proposed 
alternative or change with the optimum cost and time. More importantly, the creation 
of such a graph keeps the importance of indirect costs in the forefront of decision 
Project
duration
25
24
23
22
21
Direct
costs
+
=
450
470
495
525
610
Indirect
costs
400
350
300
250
200
Total
costs
$850
820
795
775
810
FIGURE 9.5 Summary Costs by Duration 
$1,000
800
600
400
200
20
21
22
23
24
25
Duration (units)
Total
project
cost
$775
Total
direct
cost
Total
indirect
cost
Cost
0
Optimum
cost-time
point
FIGURE 9.6 Project Cost–Duration Graph 

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  319
making. Indirect costs are frequently forgotten in the field when the pressure for action 
is intense. Finally, such a graph can be used before the project begins or while the 
project is in progress. 
 
Creating the graph in the preproject planning phase without an imposed duration is 
the first choice because normal time is more meaningful. Creating the graph in the 
project planning phase with an imposed duration is less desirable because normal time 
is made to fit the imposed date and is probably not low cost. Creating the graph after 
the project has started is the least desirable because some alternatives may be ruled out 
of the decision process. Managers may choose not to use the formal procedure demon-
strated. However, regardless of the method used, the principles and concepts inherent 
in the formal procedure are highly applicable in practice and should be considered in 
any cost–duration trade-off decision.
Crash Times
Collecting crash times for even a moderate-size project can be difficult. The meaning 
of crash time is difficult to communicate. What is meant when you define crash time 
as “the shortest time you can realistically complete an activity”? Crash time is open to 
different interpretations and judgments. Some estimators feel very uncomfortable pro-
viding crash times. Regardless of the comfort level, the accuracy of crash times and 
costs is frequently rough at best, when compared with normal time and cost.
Linearity Assumption
Because the accuracy of compressed activity times and costs is questionable, the con-
cern of some theorists—that the relationship between cost and time is not linear but 
curvilinear—is seldom a concern for practicing managers. Reasonable, quick compari-
sons can be made using the linear assumption.3 The simple approach is adequate for 
most projects. There are rare situations in which activities cannot be crashed by single 
time units. Instead, crashing is “all or nothing.” For example, activity A will take  
10 days (for say $1,000) or it will take 7 days (for say $1,500), but no options exist in 
which activity A will take 8 or 9 days to complete. In a few rare cases of very large, 
complex, long-duration projects, the use of present value techniques may be useful; 
such techniques are beyond the scope of this text.
Choice of Activities to Crash Revisited
The cost–time crashing method relies on choosing the cheapest method for reducing 
the duration of the project. There are other factors that should be assessed beyond sim-
ply cost. First, the inherent risks involved in crashing particular activities need to be 
considered. Some activities are riskier to crash than others. For example, accelerating 
the completion of a software design code may not be wise if it increases the likelihood 
of errors surfacing downstream. Conversely, crashing a more expensive activity may 
be wise if fewer inherent risks are involved.
 
Second, the timing of activities needs to be considered. Crashing an early activity 
may be prudent if there is concern that subsequent activities are likely to be delayed, 
and absorb the time gained. Then the manager would still have the option of crashing 
final activities to get back on schedule.
 
Third, crashing frequently results in overallocation of resources. The resources 
required to accelerate a cheaper activity may suddenly not be available. Resource 
availability, not cost, may dictate which activities are crashed.
Understand the risks as-
sociated with compress-
ing or crashing a project.
9-5
LO
3Linearity assumes that the cost for crashing each day is constant.
www.ebook3000.com

320  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
 
Finally, the impact crashing would have on the morale and motivation of the project 
team needs to be assessed. If the least-cost method repeatedly signals a subgroup to 
accelerate progress, fatigue and resentment may set in. Conversely, if overtime pay is 
involved, other team members may resent not having access to this benefit. This situation 
can lead to tension within the entire project team. Good project managers gauge the 
response that crashing activities will have on the entire project team. See Snapshot from 
Practice 9.5: I’ll Bet You… for a novel approach to motivating employees to work faster.
Time Reduction Decisions and Sensitivity
Should the project owner or project manager go for the optimum cost-time? The 
answer is, “It depends.” Risk must be considered. Recall from our example that the 
The focus of this chapter has been on 
how project managers crash activities 
by typically assigning additional man-
power and equipment to cut significant 
time off of scheduled tasks. Project 
managers often encounter situations in which they need 
to motivate individuals to accelerate the completion of a 
specific, critical task. Imagine the following scenario.
 
Bruce Young just received a priority assignment 
from corporate headquarters. The preliminary engi-
neering sketches that were due tomorrow need to be 
e-mailed to the West Coast by 4:00 p.m. today so that 
the model shop can begin construction of a prototype 
to present to top management. He approaches Danny 
Whitten, the draftsman responsible for the task, whose 
initial response is, “That’s impossible!” While he agrees 
that it would be very difficult he does not believe that it 
is as impossible as Danny suggests or that Danny truly 
believes that. What should he do?
 
He tells Danny that he knows this is going to be a 
rush job, but he is confident that he can do it. When 
Danny balks, he responds, “I tell you what, I’ll make a 
bet with you. If you are able to finish the design by 
4:00, I’ll make sure you get two of the company’s tick-
ets to tomorrow night’s Celtics–Knicks basketball 
game.” Danny accepts the challenge, works feverishly 
to complete the assignment, and is able to take his 
daughter to her first professional basketball game.
 
Conversations with project managers reveal that 
many use bets like this one to motivate extraordinary 
performance. These bets range from tickets to sporting 
and entertainment events to gift certificates at high-class 
restaurants to a well-deserved afternoon off. For bets to 
work they need to adhere to the principles of expectancy 
theory of motivation.* Boiled down to simple terms, 
expectancy theory rests on three key questions:
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  9 . 5
I’II Bet You . . .
1. Can I do it (Is it possible to meet the challenge)?
2. Will I get it (Can I demonstrate that I met the chal-
lenge and can I trust the project manager will de-
liver his/her end of the bargain)?
3. Is it worth it (Is the payoff of sufficient personal 
value to warrant the risk and extra effort)?
If in the mind of the participant the answer to any of 
these three questions is no, then the person is unlikely 
to accept the challenge. However, when the answers 
are affirmative, then the individual is likely to accept 
the bet and be motivated to meet the challenge.
 
Bets can be effective motivational tools and add an 
element of excitement and fun to project work. But, the 
following practical advice should be heeded:
1. The bet has greater significance if it also benefits fam-
ily members or significant others. Being able to take a 
son or daughter to a professional basketball game al-
lows that individual to “score points” at home through 
work. These bets also recognize and reward the sup-
port project members receive from their families and 
reinforces the importance of their work to loved ones.
2. Bets should be used sparingly; otherwise every-
thing can become negotiable. They should be used 
only under special circumstances that require ex-
traordinary effort.
3. Individual bets should involve clearly recognizable 
individual effort, otherwise others may become 
jealous and discord may occur within a group. As 
long as others see it as requiring truly remarkable, 
“beyond the call of duty” effort, they will consider it 
fair and warranted.
* Expectancy Theory is considered one of the major theories 
of human motivation and was first developed by V. H. Vroom, 
Work and Motivation (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1964).

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  321
optimum project time point represented a reduced project cost and was less than the 
original normal project time (review Figure 9.6). The project direct-cost line near the 
normal point is usually relatively flat. Because indirect costs for the project are usually 
greater in the same range, the optimum cost-time point is less than the normal time 
point. Logic of the cost-time procedure suggests managers should reduce the project 
duration to the lowest total cost point and duration.
 
How far to reduce the project time from the normal time toward the optimum 
depends on the sensitivity of the project network. A network is sensitive if it has sev-
eral critical or near-critical paths. In our example project movement toward the opti-
mum time requires spending money to reduce critical activities, resulting in slack 
reduction and/or more critical paths and activities. Slack reduction in a project with 
several near-critical paths increases the risk of being late. The practical outcome can 
be a higher total project cost if some near-critical activities are delayed and become 
critical; the money spent reducing activities on the original critical path would be 
wasted. Sensitive networks require careful analysis. The bottom line is that compres-
sion of projects with several near-critical paths reduces scheduling flexibility and 
increases the risk of delaying the project. The outcome of such analysis will probably 
suggest only a partial movement from the normal time toward the optimum time.
 
There is a positive situation where moving toward the optimum time can result 
in very real, large savings—this occurs when the network is insensitive. A project 
network is insensitive if it has a dominant critical path, that is, no near-critical 
paths. In this project circumstance, movement from the normal time point toward 
the optimum time will not create new or near-critical activities. The bottom line 
here is that the reduction of the slack of noncritical activities increases the risk of 
their becoming critical only slightly when compared with the effect in a sensitive 
network. Insensitive networks hold the greatest potential for real, sometimes large, 
savings in total project costs with a minimum risk of noncritical activities becom-
ing critical.
 
Insensitive networks are not a rarity in practice; they occur in perhaps 25 percent of 
all projects. For example, a light rail project team observed from their network a 
 dominant critical path and relatively high indirect costs. It soon became clear that by 
spending some dollars on a few critical activities, very large savings of indirect costs 
could be realized. Savings of several million dollars were spent extending the rail line 
and adding another station. The logic found in this example is just as applicable to 
small projects as large ones. Insensitive networks with high indirect costs can produce 
large savings.
 
Ultimately, deciding if and which activities to crash is a judgment call requiring 
careful consideration of the options available, the costs and risks involved, and the 
importance of meeting a deadline.
9.6 What If Cost, Not Time, Is the Issue?
In today’s fast-paced world, there appears to be a greater emphasis on getting things 
done quickly. Still, organizations are always looking for ways to get things done 
cheaply. This is especially true for fixed-bid projects, where profit margin is derived 
from the difference between the bid and actual cost of the project. Every dollar saved 
is a dollar in your pocket. Sometimes, in order to secure a contract, bids are tight, 
which puts added pressure on cost containment. In other cases, there are financial 
incentives tied to cost containment.
Identify different options 
for reducing the costs of 
a project.
9-6
LO
www.ebook3000.com

322  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
 
Even in situations where cost is transferred to customers there is pressure to reduce 
cost. Cost overruns make for unhappy customers and can damage future business 
opportunities. Budgets can be fixed or cut, and when contingency funds are exhausted, 
then cost overruns have to be made up with remaining activities.
 
As discussed earlier, shortening project duration may come at the expense of over-
time, adding additional personnel, and using more expensive equipment and/or materi-
als. Conversely, sometimes cost savings can be generated by extending the duration of 
a project. This may allow for a smaller workforce, less-skilled (expensive) labor, and 
even cheaper equipment and materials to be used. Below are some of the more com-
monly used options for cutting costs.
Reduce Project Scope
Just as scaling back the scope of the project can gain time, delivering less than what 
was originally planned also produces significant savings. Again, calculating the sav-
ings of a reduced project scope begins with the work breakdown structure. However, 
since time is not the issue, you do not need to focus on critical activities. For example, 
on over-budget movie projects it is not uncommon to replace location shots with stock 
footage to cut costs.
Have Owner Take on More Responsibility
One way of reducing project costs is identifying tasks that customers can do them-
selves. Homeowners frequently use this method to reduce costs on home improvement 
projects. For example, to reduce the cost of a bathroom remodel, a homeowner may 
agree to paint the room instead of paying the contractor to do it. On IS projects, a cus-
tomer may agree to take on some of the responsibility for testing equipment or provid-
ing in-house training. Naturally, this arrangement is best negotiated before the project 
begins. Customers are less receptive to this idea if you suddenly spring it on them. An 
advantage of this method is that, while costs are lowered, the original scope is retained. 
Clearly this option is limited to areas in which the customer has expertise and the 
capability to pick up the tasks.
Outsourcing Project Activities or Even the Entire Project
When estimates exceed budget, it not only makes sense to re-examine the scope but 
also search for cheaper ways to complete the project. Perhaps instead of relying on 
internal resources, it would be more cost effective to outsource segments or even the 
entire project, opening up work to external price competition. Specialized subcontrac-
tors often enjoy unique advantages, such as material discounts for large quantities, as 
well as equipment that not only gets the work done more quickly but also less expen-
sively. They may have lower overhead and labor costs. For example, to reduce costs of 
software projects, many American firms outsource work to firms overseas where the 
salary of a software engineer is one-third that of an American software engineer. How-
ever, outsourcing means you have less control over the project and will need to have 
clearly definable deliverables.
Brainstorming Cost Savings Options
Just as project team members can be a rich source of ideas for accelerating project 
activities, they can offer tangible ways for reducing project costs. For example, one 
project manager reported that his team was able to come up with over $75,000 worth 

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  323
Summary
The need for reducing the project duration occurs for many reasons such as imposed 
duration dates, time-to-market considerations, incentive contracts, key resource needs, 
high overhead costs, or simply unforeseen delays. These situations are very common in 
practice and are known as cost-time trade-off decisions. This chapter presented a logi-
cal, formal process for assessing the implications of situations that involve shortening 
the project duration. Crashing the project duration increases the risk of being late. 
How far to reduce the project duration from the normal time toward the optimum de-
pends on the sensitivity of the project network. A sensitive network is one that has 
several critical or near-critical paths. Great care should be taken when shortening sen-
sitive networks to avoid increasing project risks. Conversely, insensitive networks rep-
resent opportunities for potentially large project cost savings by eliminating some 
overhead costs with little downside risk.
 
Alternative strategies for reducing project time were discussed within the context of 
whether or not the project is resource limited. Project acceleration typically comes at a 
cost of either spending money for more resources or compromising the scope of the 
project. If the latter is the case, then it is essential that all relevant stakeholders be con-
sulted so that everyone accepts the changes that have to be made. One other key point 
is the difference in implementing time-reducing activities in the midst of project exe-
cution versus incorporating them into the project plan. You typically have far fewer 
options once the project is under way than before it begins. This is especially true if 
you want to take advantage of the new scheduling methodologies such as fast-tracking 
and critical-chain. Time spent up front considering alternatives and developing contin-
gency plans will lead to time savings in the end.
Key Terms
Crashing, 314
Crash point, 315
Crash time, 314
Direct costs, 314
Fast-tracking, 311
Indirect costs, 313
Project Cost–Duration 
Graph, 313
1. What are five common reasons for crashing a project?
2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of reducing project scope to accelerate 
a project? What can be done to reduce the disadvantages?
3. Why is scheduling overtime a popular choice for getting projects back on schedule? 
What are the potential problems for relying on this option?
4. Identify four indirect costs you might find on a moderately complex project. Why 
are these costs classified as indirect?
5. How can a cost–duration graph be used by the project manager? Explain.
6. Reducing the project duration increases the risk of being late. Explain.
7. It is possible to shorten the critical path and save money. Explain how.
Review 
Questions
of cost saving suggestions without jeopardizing the scope of the project. Project 
managers should not underestimate the value of simply asking if there is a cheaper, 
better way.
www.ebook3000.com

324  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
1. Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using the 
least cost method. Reduce the schedule until you reach the crash point of the  network. 
For each move identify what activity(ies) was crashed and the adjusted total cost.
 
Note: The correct normal project duration, critical path, and total direct cost are 
provided.
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
50 
1 
3 
150
B 
100 
1 
3 
100
C 
60 
2 
4 
200
D 
60 
2 
3 
200
E 
70 
1 
4 
200
F 
0 
0 
1 
150
1x
F
3
B
3
A
3
D
Initial
project duration: 12
Total direct cost:
4
E
4
C
1,000
2. *Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using the 
least cost method. Reduce the schedule until you reach the crash point of the network. 
For each move identify what activity(ies) was crashed and the adjusted total cost.
 
Note: Choose B instead of C and E (equal costs) because it is usually smarter to 
crash early rather than late AND one activity instead of two activities
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
0 
 
2 
150
B 
100 
1 
3 
100
C 
50 
2 
4 
200
D 
40 
1 
4 
200
E 
50 
1 
3 
200
F 
0 
 
1 
150
1x
F
3
B
2x
A
6
C
Initial
project duration 13
Total direct cost
3
E
4
D
1,000
Exercises

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  325
3. Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using the 
least cost method. Reduce the schedule until you reach the crash point of the  network. 
For each move identify what activity(ies) was crashed and the adjusted total cost.
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
100 
1 
2 
150
B 
80 
1 
3 
100
C 
60 
1 
2 
200
D 
40 
1 
5 
200
E 
40 
2 
5 
200
F 
40 
2 
3 
150
G 
20 
1 
5 
200
H 
 
 
1 
200
16
1,400
Project duration
Total direct cost
B
D
G
C
2
A
2
3
E
5
5
5
H
1x
F
3
4. Given the data and information that follow, compute the total direct cost for each 
project duration. If the indirect costs for each project duration are $90 (15 time units), 
$70 (14), $50 (13), $40 (12), and $30 (11), compute the total project cost for each 
duration. What is the optimum cost-time schedule for the project? What is this cost?
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
  30 
1 
5 
    50
B 
  60 
2 
3 
    60
C 
    0 
0 
4 
    70
D 
  10 
1 
2 
    50
E 
  60 
3 
5 
  100
F 
100 
1 
2 
    90
G 
  30 
1 
5 
    50
H 
  40 
0 
2 
    60
I 
200 
1 
3 
    200
 
 
 
 
$730
D
I
E
F
G
C
H
Initial
project duration 15
Total direct cost $730
3
2
5
5
2
2
4
B
A
5
3
www.ebook3000.com

326  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
5. Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using the least 
cost method. Assume the total indirect cost for the project is $700 and there is a savings 
of $50 per time unit reduced. Record the total direct, indirect, and project costs for each 
duration. What is the optimum cost-time schedule for the project? What is the cost?
 
Note: The correct normal project duration and total direct cost are provided.
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
 
0 
2 
100
B 
100 
1 
3 
200
C 
40 
1 
5 
200
D 
60 
2 
3 
200
E 
20 
1 
5 
200
F 
40 
1 
4 
150
G 
 
0 
2 
150
G
C
D
E
A
B
F
Project duration 14
Total direct cost 1,200
2x
2x
4
5
5
3
3
6. If the indirect costs for each duration are $300 for 27 days, $240 for 26 days, $180 
for 25 days, $120 for 24 days, $60 for 23 days, and $50 for 22 days, compute the 
direct, indirect, and total costs for each duration. What is the optimum cost-time 
schedule? The customer offers you $10 for every day you shorten the project from 
your original network. Would you take it? If so for how many days?
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
  80 
2 
10 
    40
B 
  30 
3 
  8 
    10
C 
  40 
1 
  5 
    80
D 
  50 
2 
11 
    50
E 
100 
4 
15 
  100
F 
  30 
1 
  6 
    20
 
 
 
 
$300
B
F
C
D
Project duration
Total direct cost
A
E
10
8
5
15
11
6
27
$300

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  327
7. Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using the 
least cost method. Assume the total indirect cost for the project is $2,000 and there 
is a savings of $100 per time unit reduced. Calculate the total direct, indirect, and 
project costs for each duration. Plot these costs on a graph. What is the optimum 
cost-time schedule for the project?
 
Note: The correct normal project duration and total direct cost are provided.
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
 
0 
2 
200
B 
50 
1 
4 
1000
C 
200 
2 
5 
800
D 
200 
2 
5 
1000
E 
100 
1 
3 
800
F 
40 
1 
5 
1000
G 
40 
1 
4 
1000
H 
 
0 
1 
200
Total cost
8,000
Project duration 20
Direct cost
6,000
1x
H
5
C
5
F
4
G
5
D
4
B
2x
A
3
E
Indirect cost
2,000
8.* Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using 
the least cost method. Reduce the schedule until you reach the crash point of the 
network. For each move identify what activity(ies) was crashed, the adjusted 
total cost, and explain your choice if you have to choose between activities that 
cost the same.
 
  If the indirect cost for each duration is $1,500 for 17 weeks, $1,450 for 16 weeks, 
$1,400 for 15 weeks, $1,350 for 14 weeks, $1,300 for 13 weeks, $1,250 for 
12 weeks, $1,200 for 11 weeks, and $1,150 for 10 weeks, what is the optimum 
 cost-time schedule for the project? What is the cost?
* The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix One.
www.ebook3000.com

328  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
Act. 
Crash Cost (Slope) 
Maximum Crash Time 
Normal Time 
Normal Cost
A 
    0 
0 
3 
150
B 
100 
1 
4 
200
C 
  60 
1 
3 
250
D 
  40 
1 
4 
200
E 
    0 
0 
2 
250
F 
  30 
2 
3 
200
G 
  20 
1 
2 
250
H 
  60 
2 
4 
300
I 
200 
1 
2 
200
D
4
A
3x
I
2
E
G
Normal time
17
Total direct cost $2,000
C
F
2
H
4
2x
3
B
3
4
Abdel-Hamid, T., and S. Madnick, Software Project Dynamics: An Integrated Approach 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991).
Baker, B. M., “Cost/Time Trade-off Analysis for the Critical Path Method,” Journal 
of the Operational Research Society, vol. 48, no. 12 (1997), pp. 1241–44.
Brooks, F. P., Jr., The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering 
 Anniversary Edition (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Longman, Inc., 1994), pp. 15–26.
DeMarco, T., Slack: Getting Past Burnout, Busywork, and the Myth of Total  Efficiency 
(New York: Broadway, 2002).
Gordon, R. I. and J. C. Lamb, “A Closer Look at Brooke’s Law,” Datamation,  
June 1977, pp. 81–86.
Ibbs, C. W., S. A. Lee, and M. I. Li, “Fast-Tracking’s Impact on Project Change,” 
Project Management Journal, vol. 29, no. 4 (1998), pp. 35–42.
Khang, D. B., and M.Yin, “Time, Cost, and Quality Trade-off in Project Management,” 
International Journal of Project Management, vol. 17, no. 4 (1999), pp. 249–56.
Perrow, L. A., Finding Time: How Corporations, Individuals, and Families Can 
 Benefit From New Work Practices (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).
Roemer, T. R., R. Ahmadi, and R. Wang, “Time-Cost Trade-offs in Overlapped 
 Product Development,” Operations Research, vol. 48, no. 6 (2000), pp. 858–65.
Smith, P. G., and D. G. Reinersten, Developing Products in Half the Time (New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1995).
Verzuh, E., The Fast Forward MBA in Project Management, 4th ed. (New York: John 
Wiley, 2012).
Vroom, V. H., Work and Motivation (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1964).
References

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  329
Case 9.1
International Capital, Inc.—Part B
Given the project network derived in Part A of the case from Chapter 7, Brown also 
wants to be prepared to answer any questions concerning compressing the project 
duration. This question will almost always be entertained by the accounting depart-
ment, review committee, and the client. To be ready for the compression question, 
Brown has prepared the following data in case it is necessary to crash the project. (Use 
your weighted average times (te) computed in Part A of the International Capital case 
found in Chapter 7.)
Activity 
Normal Cost 
Maximum Crash Time 
Crash Cost/Day
A 
$ 3,000 
3 
$ 500
B 
      5,000 
2 
 1,000
C 
      6,000 
0 
     —
D 
    20,000 
3 
3,000
E 
    10,000 
2 
1,000
F 
      7,000 
1 
1,000
G 
    20,000 
2 
3,000
H 
      8,000 
1 
2,000
I 
      5,000 
1 
2,000
J 
      7,000 
1 
1,000
K 
    12,000 
6 
1,000
Total normal costs    =    $103,000  
 
Using the data provided, determine the activity crashing decisions and best-time cost 
project duration. Given the information you have developed, what suggestions would you 
give Brown to ensure she is well prepared for the project review committee? Assume the 
overhead costs for this project are $700 per workday. Will this alter your suggestions?
Case 9.2
Whitbread World Sailboat Race
Each year countries enter their sailing vessels in the nine-month Round the World 
Whitbread Sailboat Race. In recent years, about 14 countries entered sailboats in the 
race. Each year’s sailboat entries represent the latest technologies and human skills 
each country can muster.
 
Bjorn Ericksen has been selected as a project manager because of his past experi-
ence as a master helmsman and because of his recent fame as the “best designer of 
racing sailboats in the world.” Bjorn is pleased and proud to have the opportunity to 
design, build, test, and train the crew for next year’s Whitbread entry for his country. 
Bjorn has picked Karin Knutsen (as chief design engineer) and Trygve Wallvik (as 
master helmsman) to be team leaders responsible for getting next year’s entry ready for 
the traditional parade of all entries on the Thames River in the United Kingdom, which 
signals the start of the race.
www.ebook3000.com

330  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
 
As Bjorn begins to think of a project plan, he sees two parallel paths running 
through the project—design and construction and crew training. Last year’s boat will 
be used for training until the new entry can have the crew on board to learn mainte-
nance tasks. Bjorn calls Karin and Trygve together to develop a project plan. All three 
agree the major goal is to have a winning boat and crew ready to compete in next 
year’s competition at a cost of $3.2 million. A check of Bjorn’s calendar indicates he 
has 45 weeks before next year’s vessel must leave port for the United Kingdom to start 
the race.
THE KICKOFF MEETING
Bjorn asks Karin to begin by describing the major activities and the sequence required 
to design, construct, and test the boat. Karin starts by noting that design of the hull, 
deck, mast, and accessories should only take six weeks—given the design prints from 
past race entries and a few prints from other countries’ entries. After the design is 
complete, the hull can be constructed, the mast ordered, sails ordered, and accessories 
ordered. The hull will require 12 weeks to complete. The mast can be ordered and will 
require a lead time of eight weeks; the seven sails can be ordered and will take six 
weeks to get; accessories can be ordered and will take 15 weeks to receive. As soon as 
the hull is finished, the ballast tanks can be installed, requiring two weeks. Then the 
deck can be built, which will require five weeks. Concurrently, the hull can be treated 
with special sealant and friction-resistance coating, taking three weeks. When the deck 
is completed and mast and accessories received, the mast and sails can be installed, 
requiring two weeks; the accessories can be installed, which will take six weeks. When 
all of these activities have been completed, the ship can be sea-tested, which should 
take five weeks. Karin believes she can have firm cost estimates for the boat in about 
two weeks.
 
Trygve believes he can start selecting the 12-man or woman crew and securing their 
housing immediately. He believes it will take six weeks to get a committed crew on-site 
and three weeks to secure housing for the crew members. Trygve reminds Bjorn that 
last year’s vessel must be ready to use for training the moment the crew is on-site until 
the new vessel is ready for testing. Keeping the old vessel operating will cost $4,000 per 
week as long as it is used. Once the crew is on-site and housed, they can develop and 
implement a routine sailing and maintenance training program, which will take  
15 weeks (using the old vessel). Also, once the crew is selected and on-site, crew equip-
ment can be selected, taking only two weeks. Then crew equipment can be ordered; 
it will take five weeks to arrive. When the crew equipment and maintenance training 
program are complete, crew maintenance on the new vessel can begin; this should take 
10 weeks. But crew maintenance on the new vessel cannot begin until the deck is com-
plete and the mast, sails, and accessories have arrived. Once crew maintenance on the 
new vessel begins, the new vessel will cost $6,000 per week until sea training is complete. 
After the new ship maintenance is complete and while the boat is being tested, initial sail-
ing training can be implemented; training should take seven weeks. Finally, after the boat 
is tested and initial training is complete, regular sea training can be implemented—
weather permitting; regular sea training requires eight weeks. Trygve believes he can put 
the cost estimates together in a week, given last year’s expenses.
 
Bjorn is pleased with the expertise displayed by his team leaders. But he believes 
they need to have someone develop one of those critical path networks to see if they 
can safely meet the start deadline for the race. Karin and Trygve agree. Karin suggests 
the cost estimates should also include crash costs for any activities that can be 

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  331
 
Bjorn reviews the materials and wonders if the project will come in within the bud-
get of $3.2 million and in 45 weeks. Advise the Whitbread team of their situation.
TWO WEEKS LATER
Karin and Trygve submit the following cost estimates for each activity and corre-
sponding crash costs to Bjorn (costs are in thousands of dollars):
Constrain
Enhance
Accept
Time
Performance
Cost
FIGURE C9.1 
Project Priority 
Matrix: Whitbread 
Project 
 
Normal 
Normal 
Crash 
Crash
Activity  
Time 
Cost 
Time 
Cost
A 
Design 
6 
$   40 
2 
$   —
B 
Build hull 
12 
1,000 
2 
—
C 
Install ballast tanks 
2 
100 
0 
—
D Order mast 
8 
100 
1 
200
E 
Order sails 
6 
 40 
0 
—
F 
Order accessories 
15 
600 
2 
100
G Build deck 
5 
200 
0 
—
H Coat hull 
3 
 40 
0 
—
I 
Install accessories 
6 
300 
1 
100
J 
Install mast and sails 
2 
 40 
1 
40
K 
Test 
5 
 60 
1 
40
L 
Sea trials 
8 
200 
1 
250
M Select crew 
6 
 10 
1 
10
N Secure housing 
3 
 30 
0 
—
O Select crew equipment 
2 
 10 
0 
—
P 
Order crew equipment 
5 
 30 
0 
—
Q Routine sail/maintenance 
15 
 40 
3 
30
R 
Crew maintenance training 
10 
100 
1 
240
S 
Initial sail training 
7 
 50 
2 
150
 
Total direct cost 
$2,990
compressed and the resultant costs for crashing. Karin also suggests the team complete 
the following priority matrix for project decision making:
www.ebook3000.com

332  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
Case 9.3
Nightingale Project—A
You are the assistant project manager to Rassy Brown, who is in charge of the Nightingale 
project. Nightingale was the code name given to the development of a handheld electronic 
medical reference guide. Nightingale would be designed for emergency medical techni-
cians and paramedics who need a quick reference guide to use in emergency situations.
 
Rassy and her project team were developing a project plan aimed at producing 30 
working models in time for MedCON, the biggest medical equipment trade show each 
year. Meeting the MedCON October 25 deadline was critical to success. All the major 
medical equipment manufacturers demonstrated and took orders for new products at 
MedCON. Rassy had also heard rumors that competitors were considering developing 
a similar product, and she knew that being first to market would have a significant 
sales advantage. Besides, top management made funding contingent upon developing 
a workable plan for meeting the MedCON deadline.
 
The project team spent the morning working on the schedule for Nightingale. They 
started with the WBS and developed the information for a network, adding activities when 
needed. Then the team added the time estimates they had collected for each activity. Fol-
lowing is the preliminary information for activities with duration time and predecessors:
Activity 
Description 
Duration 
Predecessor
  1 
Architectural decisions 
10 
None
  2 
Internal specifications 
20 
1
  3 
External specifications 
18 
1
  4 
Feature specifications 
15 
1
  5 
Voice recognition 
15 
2,3
  6 
Case 
  4 
2,3
  7 
Screen 
  2 
2,3
  8 
Speaker output jacks 
  2 
2,3
  9 
Tape mechanism 
  2 
2,3
10 
Database 
40 
4
11 
Microphone/soundcard 
  5 
4
12 
Pager 
  4 
4
13 
Barcode reader 
  3 
4
14 
Alarm clock 
  4 
4
15 
Computer I/O 
  5 
4
16 
Review design 
10 
5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15
17 
Price components 
  5 
5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15
18 
Integration 
15 
16,17
19 
Document design 
35 
16
20 
Procure prototype components 
20 
18
21 
Assemble prototypes 
10 
20
22 
Lab test prototypes 
20 
21
23 
Field test prototypes 
20 
19,22
24 
Adjust design 
20 
23
25 
Order stock parts 
15 
24
26 
Order custom parts 
  2 
24
27 
Assemble first production unit 
10 
25, FS—8 time units
 
 
 
26, FS—13 time units
28 
Test unit 
10 
27
29 
Produce 30 units 
15 
28
30 
Train sales representatives 
10 
29

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  333
 
Use any project network computer program available to you to develop the schedule 
for activities (see Case Appendix for further instructions)—noting late and early times, 
the critical path, and estimated completion for the project.
 
Prepare a short memo that addresses the following questions:
1. Will the project as planned meet the October 25th deadline?
2. What activities lie on the critical path?
3. How sensitive is this network?
Case 9.4
Nightingale Project—B
Rassy and the team were concerned with the results of your analysis. They spent the 
afternoon brainstorming alternative ways for shortening the project duration. They 
rejected outsourcing activities because most of the work was developmental in nature 
and could only be done in-house. They considered altering the scope of the project by 
eliminating some of the proposed product features. After much debate, they felt they 
could not compromise any of the core features and be successful in the marketplace. 
They then turned their attention to accelerating the completion of activities through 
overtime and adding additional technical manpower. Rassy had built into her proposal 
a discretionary fund of $200,000. She was willing to invest up to half of this fund to 
accelerate the project, but wanted to hold onto at least $100,000 to deal with unex-
pected problems. After a lengthy discussion, her team concluded that the following 
activities could be reduced at the specified cost:
∙ Development of voice recognition system could be reduced from 15 days to 10 days 
at a cost of $15,000.
∙ Creation of database could be reduced from 40 days to 35 days at a cost of $35,000.
∙ Document design could be reduced from 35 days to 30 days at a cost of $25,000.
∙ External specifications could be reduced from 18 days to 12 days at a cost of $20,000.
∙ Procure prototype components could be reduced from 20 days to 15 days at a cost 
of $30,000.
∙ Order stock parts could be reduced from 15 days to 10 days at a cost of $20,000.
 
Ken Clark, a development engineer, pointed out that the network contained only 
finish-to-start relationships and that it might be possible to reduce project duration by 
creating start-to-start lags. For example, he said that his people would not have to wait 
for all of the field tests to be completed to begin making final adjustments in the 
design. They could start making adjustments after the first 15 days of testing. The 
project team spent the remainder of the day analyzing how they could introduce lags 
into the network to hopefully shorten the project. They concluded that the following 
finish-to-start relationships could be converted into lags:
∙ Document design could begin 5 days after the start of the review design.
∙ Adjust design could begin 15 days after the start of field test prototypes.
∙ Order stock parts could begin 5 days after the start of adjust design.
∙ Order custom parts could begin 5 days after the start of adjust design.
www.ebook3000.com

334  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
∙ Training sales representatives could begin 5 days after the start of test unit and com-
pleted 5 days after the production of 30 units.
As the meeting adjourns, Rassy turns to you and tells you to assess the options presented 
and try to develop a schedule that will meet the October 25th deadline. You are to pre-
pare a report to be presented to the project team that answers the following questions:
1. Is it possible to meet the deadline?
2. If so, how would you recommend changing the original schedule (Part A) and why? 
Assess the relative impact of crashing activities versus introducing lags to shorten 
project duration.
3. What would the new schedule look like?
4. What other factors should be considered before finalizing the schedule?
CASE APPENDIX: TECHNICAL DETAILS
Create your project schedule and assess your options based on the following 
information:
1. The project will begin the first working day in January, 2010.
2. The following holidays are observed: January 1, Memorial Day (last Monday in 
May), July 4, Labor Day (first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (fourth 
Thursday in November), December 25 and 26.
3. If a holiday falls on a Saturday, then Friday will be given as an extra day off; if it 
falls on a Sunday, then Monday will be given as a day off.
4. The project team works Monday through Friday, 8 hour days.
5. If you choose to reduce the duration of any one of the activities mentioned, then it 
must be for the specified time and cost (i.e., you cannot choose to reduce database 
to 37 days at a reduced cost; you can only reduce it to 35 days at a cost of $35,000).
6. You can only spend up to $100,000 to reduce project activities; lags do not contain 
any additional costs.
Case 9.5
The “Now” Wedding—Part A*
On December 31 of last year, Lauren burst into the family living room and announced 
that she and Connor (her college boyfriend) were going to be married. After recover-
ing from the shock, her mother hugged her and asked, “When?” The following conver-
sation resulted:
 
Lauren: January 21.
 
Mom: 
What?
 
Dad: 
The Now Wedding will be the social hit of the year. Wait a minute. Why so 
soon?
 
Lauren: 
Because on January 30 Connor, who is in the National Guard, will be ship-
ping out overseas. We want a week for a honeymoon.
* This case was adapted from a case originally written by Professor D. Clay Whybark, University of North Carolina,  
Chapel Hill, N.C.

Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration  335
 
Mom: 
But Honey, we can't possibly finish all the things that need to be done by 
then. Remember all the details that were involved in your sister's wedding? 
Even if we start tomorrow, it takes a day to reserve the church and recep-
tion hall, and they need at least 14 days' notice. That has to be done before 
we can start decorating, which takes 3 days. An extra $200 on Sunday 
would probably cut that 14 day notice to 7 days, though.
 
Dad: 
Oh, boy!
 
Lauren: 
I want Jane Summers to be my maid of honor.
 
Dad: 
But she's in the Peace Corps in Guatemala, isn't she? It would take her 10 
days to get ready and drive up here.
 
Lauren: 
But we could fly her up in 2 days and it would only cost $1,000.
 
Dad: 
Oh, boy!
 
Mom: 
And catering! It takes 2 days to choose the cake and decorations, and Jack's 
Catering wants at least 5 days' notice. Besides, we'd have to have those 
things before we could start decorating.
 
Lauren: 
Can I wear your wedding dress, Mom?
 
Mom: 
Well, we'd have to replace some lace, but you could wear it, yes. We could 
order the lace from New York when we order the material for the brides-
maids' dresses. It takes 8 days to order and receive the material. The pat-
tern needs to be chosen first, and that would take 3 days.
 
Dad: 
We could get the material here in 5 days if we paid an extra $20 to air-
freight it. Oh, boy!
 
Lauren: 
I want Mrs. Jacks to work on the dresses.
 
Mom: 
But she charges $48 a day.
 
Dad: 
Oh, boy!
 
Mom: 
If we did all the sewing we could finish the dresses in 11 days. If Mrs. 
Jacks helped we could cut that down to 6 days at a cost of $48 for each day 
less than 11 days. She is very good too.
 
Lauren: 
I don't want anyone but her.
 
Mom: 
It would take another 2 days to do the final fitting and 2 more days to clean 
and press the dresses. They would have to be ready by rehearsal night. We 
must have rehearsal the night before the wedding.
 
Dad: 
Everything should be ready rehearsal night.
 
Mom: 
We've forgotten something. The invitations!
 
Dad: 
We should order the invitations from Bob's Printing Shop, and that usually 
takes 7 days. I'll bet he would do it in 6 days if we slipped him an extra 
$20!
 
Mom: 
It would take us 2 days to choose the invitation style before we could order 
them and we want the envelopes printed with our return address.
 
Lauren: 
Oh! That will be elegant.
 
Mom: 
The invitations should go out at least 10 days before the wedding. If we let 
them go any later, some of the relatives would get theirs too late to come 
and that would make them mad. I'll bet that if we didn't get them out until 
8 days before the wedding, Aunt Ethel couldn't make it and she would 
reduce her wedding gift by $200.
 
Dad: 
Oh, boy!!
 
Mom: 
We'll have to take them to the Post Office to mail them and that takes a day. 
Addressing would take 3 days unless we hired some part-time girls and we 
can't start until the printer is finished. If we hired the girls we could prob-
ably save 2 days by spending $40 for each day saved.
www.ebook3000.com

336  Chapter 9  Reducing Project Duration
 
Lauren: 
We need to get gifts for the bridesmaids. I could spend a day and do that.
 
Mom: 
Before we can even start to write out those invitations we need a guest list. 
Heavens, that will take 4 days to get in order and only I can understand our 
address file.
 
Lauren: 
Oh, Mom, I'm so excited. We can start each of the relatives on a different 
job.
 
Mom: 
Honey, I don't see how we can do it. Why, I've got to choose the invitations 
and patterns and reserve the church and . . .
 
Dad: 
Why don't you just take $3,000 and elope. Your sister's wedding cost me 
$2,400 and she didn't have to fly people up from Guatemala, hire extra 
girls and Mrs. Jacks, use airfreight, or anything like that.
1. Using a yellow sticky approach shown in Snapshot from Practice 6.1, develop a 
project network for the “Now” Wedding.
2. Create a schedule for the wedding using MS Project. Can you reach the deadline of 
January 21 for the “Now” Wedding? If you cannot, what would it cost to make the 
January 21 deadline and which activities would you change?
Case 9.6
The “Now” Wedding—Part B
Several complications arose during the course of trying to meet the deadline of Janu-
ary 20 for the “Now” Wedding rehearsal. Since Lauren was adamant on having the 
wedding on January 21 (as was Connor for obvious reasons), the implications of each 
of these complications had to be assessed.
1. On January 1 the chairman of the Vestry Committee of the church was left unim-
pressed by the added donation and said he wouldn’t reduce the notice period from 
14 to 7 days.
2. Mother comes down with the three-day flu as she starts work on the guest list 
 January 2.
3. Bob’s Printing Shop press was down for one day on January 5 in order to replace 
faulty brushes in the electric motor.
4. The lace and dress material are lost in transit. Notice of the loss is received on 
 January 10.
Can the wedding still take place on January 21? If not, what options are available?

www.ebook3000.com

Being an Effective  
Project Manager
10
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
10-1 Understand the difference between leading and 
managing a project.
10-2 Understand the need to manage project 
stakeholders.
10-3 Identify and apply different “influence currencies” 
to build positive relations with others.
10-4 Create a stakeholder map and develop strategies 
for managing project dependencies.
10-5 Understand the need for a highly interactive man-
agement style on projects.
10-6 More effectively manage project expectations.
10-7 Develop strategies for managing upward 
relations.
10-8 Understand the importance of building trust and 
acting in an ethical manner while working on a 
project.
10-9 Identify the qualities of an effective project 
manager.
OUTLINE
10.1 Managing versus Leading a Project
10.2 Managing Project Stakeholders
10.3 Influence as Exchange
10.4 Social Network Building
10.5 Ethics and Project Management
10.6 Building Trust: The Key to Exercising Influence
10.7 Qualities of an Effective Project Manager
Summary
338
C H A P T E R  T E N

I couldn’t wait to be the manager of my own project and run the project 
the way I thought it should be done. Boy, did I have a lot to learn!
—First-time project manager
This chapter is based on the premise that one of the keys to being an effective project 
manager is building cooperative relationships among different groups of people to 
complete projects. Project success does not just depend on the performance of the 
project team. Success or failure often depends on the contributions of top manage-
ment, functional managers, customers, suppliers, contractors, and others.
 
The chapter begins with a brief discussion of the differences between leading and 
managing a project. The importance of managing project stakeholders is then intro-
duced. Managers require a broad influence base to be effective in this area. Different 
sources of influence are discussed and are used to describe how project managers 
build social capital. This management style necessitates constant interacting with dif-
ferent groups of people whom project managers depend on. Special attention is 
devoted to managing the critical relationship with top management and the importance 
of leading by example. The importance of gaining cooperation in ways that build and 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
339 
www.ebook3000.com

340  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
sustain the trust of others is emphasized. The chapter concludes by identifying per-
sonal attributes associated with being an effective project manager. Subsequent chap-
ters will expand on these ideas in a discussion of managing the project team and 
working with people outside the organization.
10.1 Managing versus Leading a Project
In a perfect world, the project manager would simply implement the project plan and 
the project would be completed. The project manager would work with others to for-
mulate a schedule, organize a project team, keep track of progress, and announce what 
needs to be done next, and then everyone would charge along. Of course no one lives 
in a perfect world, and rarely does everything go according to plan. Project partici-
pants get testy; they fail to get along with each other; other departments are unable to 
fulfill their commitments; technical glitches arise; work takes longer than expected. 
The project manager’s job is to get the project back on track. A manager expedites 
certain activities; figures out ways to solve technical problems; serves as peacemaker 
when tensions rise; and makes appropriate trade-offs among time, cost, and scope of 
the project.
 
However, project managers often do more than put out fires and keep the project on 
track. They also innovate and adapt to ever-changing circumstances. They sometimes 
have to deviate from what was planned and introduce significant changes in the project 
scope and schedule to respond to unforeseen threats or opportunities. For example, cus-
tomers’ needs may change, requiring significant design changes midway through the 
project. Competitors may release new products that dictate crashing project deadlines. 
Working relationships among project participants may break down, requiring a refor-
mulation of the project team. Ultimately, what was planned or expected in the begin-
ning may be very different from what was accomplished by the end of the project.
 
Project managers are responsible for integrating assigned resources to complete the 
project according to plan. At the same time they need to initiate changes in plans and 
schedules as persistent problems make plans unworkable. In other words, managers 
want to keep the project going while making necessary adjustments along the way. 
According to Kotter (1990) these two different activities represent the distinction 
between management and leadership. Management is about coping with complexity, 
while leadership is about coping with change.
 
Good management brings about order and stability by formulating plans and objec-
tives, designing structures and procedures, monitoring results against plans, and taking 
corrective action when necessary. Leadership involves recognizing and articulating the 
need to significantly alter the direction and operation of the project, aligning people to 
the new direction, and motivating them to work together to overcome hurdles pro-
duced by the change and to realize new objectives.
 
Strong leadership, while usually desirable, is not always necessary to successfully 
complete a project. Well-defined projects that encounter no significant surprises 
require little leadership, as might be the case in constructing a conventional apartment 
building in which the project manager simply administrates the project plan. Con-
versely, the higher the degree of uncertainty encountered on a project—whether in 
terms of changes in project scope, technological stalemates, breakdowns in coordina-
tion between people, and so forth—the more leadership is required. For example, 
strong leadership would be needed for a software development project in which the 
parameters are always changing to meet developments in the industry.
10-1
Understand the  
difference between  
leading and managing a 
project.
LO

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  341
 
It takes a special person to perform both roles well. Some individuals are great 
visionaries who are good at exciting people about change. Too often though, these 
same people lack the discipline or patience to deal with the day-to-day drudgeries of 
managing. Likewise, there are other individuals who are very well organized and 
methodical but lack the ability to inspire others.
 
Strong leaders can compensate for their managerial weaknesses by having trusted 
assistants who oversee and manage the details of the project. Conversely, a weak leader 
can complement his or her strengths by having assistants who are good at sensing the 
need to change and rallying project participants. Still, one of the things that make good 
project managers so valuable to an organization is that they have the ability to both 
manage and lead a project. In doing so they recognize the need to create a social net-
work that allows them to find out what needs to be done and obtain the cooperation 
necessary to achieve it.
10.2 Managing Project Stakeholders
First-time project managers are eager to implement their own ideas and manage their 
people to successfully complete their project. What they soon find out is that project 
success depends on the cooperation of a wide range of individuals, many of whom do 
not directly report to them. For example, during the course of a system integration 
project, a project manager was surprised by how much time she was spending negoti-
ating and working with vendors, consultants, technical specialists, and other functional 
managers:
Instead of working with my people to complete the project, I found myself being constantly 
pulled and tugged by demands of different groups of people who were not directly involved 
in the project but had a vested interest in the outcome.
Too often when new project managers do find time to work directly on the project, 
they adopt a hands-on approach to managing the project. They choose this style not 
because they are power-hungry egomaniacs but because they are eager to achieve 
results. They become quickly frustrated by how slowly things operate, the number of 
people that have to be brought on board, and the difficulty of gaining cooperation. 
Unfortunately, as this frustration builds, the natural temptation is to exert more pres-
sure and get more heavily involved in the project. These project managers quickly earn 
the reputation of “micro managing” and begin to lose sight of the real role they play on 
guiding a project.
 
Some new managers never break out of this vicious cycle. Others soon realize that 
authority does not equal influence and that being an effective project manager involves 
managing a much more complex and expansive set of interfaces than they had previ-
ously anticipated. They encounter a web of relationships that requires a much broader 
spectrum of influence than they felt was necessary or even possible.
 
For example, a significant project, whether it involves renovating a bridge, creating 
a new product, or installing a new information system, will likely involve in one way 
or another working with a number of different groups of stakeholders. First, there is 
the core group of specialists assigned to complete the project. This group is likely to be 
supplemented at different times by professionals who work on specific segments of the 
project. Second, there are the groups of people within the performing organization 
who are either directly or indirectly involved with the project. The most notable is top 
management, to whom the project manager is accountable. There are also other 
10-2
LO
Understand the need to 
manage project 
stakeholders.
www.ebook3000.com

342  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
managers who provide resources and/or may be responsible for specific segments of 
the project, and administrative support services such as human resources, finance, etc. 
Depending on the nature of the project, there are a number of different groups outside 
the organization that influence the success of the project; the most important is the 
customer for which the project is designed (see Figure 10.1).
 
Each of these groups of stakeholders brings different expertise, standards, priorities, 
and agendas to the project. Stakeholders are people and organizations that are actively 
involved in the project, or whose interests may be positively or negatively affected by the 
project (PMBOK, 2013). The sheer breadth and complexity of stakeholder relationships 
distinguish project management from regular management. To be effective, a project 
manager must understand how stakeholders can affect the project and develop methods 
for managing the dependency. The nature of these dependencies is identified here:
∙ The project team manages and completes project work. Most participants want to 
do a good job, but they are also concerned with their other obligations and how their 
involvement on the project will contribute to their personal goals and aspirations.
∙ Project managers naturally compete with each other for resources and the support 
of top management. At the same time they often have to share resources and 
exchange information.
∙ Administrative support groups, such as human resources, information systems, 
purchasing agents, and maintenance, provide valuable support services. At the same 
time they impose constraints and requirements on the project such as the documen-
tation of expenditures and the timely and accurate delivery of information.
FIGURE 10.1
Network of 
Stakeholders 
Project
manager
Project
Project
Team
Team
Project
managers
Functional
managers
Administrative
support
Top
management
Other
organizations
Customers
Government
agencies
Contractors
Project
sponsors

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  343
∙ Functional managers, depending on how the project is organized, can play a minor 
or major role toward project success. In matrix arrangements, they may be respon-
sible for assigning project personnel, resolving technical dilemmas, and overseeing 
the completion of significant segments of the project work. Even in dedicated proj-
ect teams, the technical input from functional managers may be useful, and accep-
tance of completed project work may be critical to in-house projects. Functional 
managers want to cooperate up to a point, but only up to a certain point. They are 
also concerned with preserving their status within the organization and minimizing 
the disruptions the project may have on their own operations.
∙ Top management approves funding of the project and establishes priorities within 
the organization. They define success and adjudicate rewards for accomplishments. 
Significant adjustments in budget, scope, and schedule typically need their approval. 
They have a natural vested interest in the success of the project, but at the same time 
have to be responsive to what is best for the entire organization.
∙ Project sponsors champion the project and use their influence to gain approval of 
the project. Their reputation is tied to the success of the project, and they need to be 
kept informed of any major developments. They defend the project when it comes 
under attack and are a key project ally.
∙ Contractors may do all the actual work, in some cases, with the project team 
merely coordinating their contributions. In other cases, they are responsible for 
ancillary segments of the project scope. Poor work and schedule slips can affect 
work of the core project team. While contractors’ reputations rest with doing good 
work, they must balance their contributions with their own profit margins and their 
commitments to other clients.
∙ Government agencies place constraints on project work. Permits need to be 
secured. Construction work has to be built to code. New drugs have to pass a rigor-
ous battery of U.S. Food and Drug Administration tests. Other products have to 
meet safety standards, for example, Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
standards.
∙ Other organizations, depending on the nature of the project, may directly or indi-
rectly affect the project. For example, suppliers provide necessary resources for 
completion of the project work. Delays, shortages, and poor quality can bring a 
project to a standstill. Public interest groups may apply pressure on government 
agencies. Customers often hire consultants and auditors to protect their interests on 
a project.
∙ Customers define the scope of the project, and ultimate project success rests in 
their satisfaction. Project managers need to be responsive to changing customer 
needs and requirements and to meeting their expectations. Customers are primarily 
concerned with getting a good deal and, as will be elaborated in Chapter 11, this 
naturally breeds tension with the project team.
These relationships are interdependent in that a project manager’s ability to work 
effectively with one group will affect her ability to manage other groups. For example, 
functional managers are likely to be less cooperative if they perceive that top manage-
ment’s commitment to the project is waning. Conversely, the ability of the project 
manager to buffer the team from excessive interference from a client is likely to 
increase her standing with the project team.
 
The project management structure being used will influence the number and degree 
of external dependencies that will need to be managed. One advantage of creating a 
www.ebook3000.com

344  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
dedicated project team is that it reduces dependencies, especially within the organiza-
tion, because most of the resources are assigned to the project. Conversely, a func-
tional matrix structure increases dependencies, with the result that the project manager 
is much more reliant upon functional colleagues for work and staff.
 
The old-fashioned view of managing projects emphasized planning and directing 
the project team; the new perspective emphasizes managing project stakeholders and 
anticipating change as the most important jobs. Project managers need to be able to 
assuage concerns of customers, sustain support for the project at higher levels of the 
organization, quickly identify problems that threaten project work, while at the same 
time defend the integrity of the project and the interests of the project participants.1
 
Within this web of relationships, the project manager must find out what needs to 
be done to achieve the goals of the project and build a cooperative network to accom-
plish it. Project managers must do so without the requisite authority to expect or 
demand cooperation. Doing so requires sound communication skills, political savvy, 
and a broad influence base. See the Snapshot from Practice 10.1: The Project Manager 
as Conductor for more on what makes project managers special. See Research High-
light 10.1: Give and Take for an interesting finding regarding this concept.
1 For a systematic treatise on stakeholder management, see: Lynda Bourne, Stakeholder Relationship Management  
(Farnham, England: Gower Publishing Ltd., 2009).
Metaphors convey meaning beyond 
words. For example, a meeting can be 
described as being difficult or “like 
wading through molasses.” A popular 
metaphor for the role of a project 
manager is that of conductor. The conductor of an 
orchestra integrates the divergent sounds of different 
instruments to perform a given composition and make 
beautiful music. Similarly, the project manager inte-
grates the talents and contributions of different spe-
cialists to complete the project. Both have to be good 
at understanding how the different players contribute 
to the performance of the whole. Both are almost 
entirely dependent upon the expertise and know-how 
of the players. The conductor does not have command 
of all the musical instruments. Likewise, the project 
manager usually possesses only a small proportion of 
the technical knowledge to make decisions. As such, 
the conductor and project manager both facilitate the 
performance of others rather than actually perform.
 
Conductors use their arms, baton, and other non-
verbal gestures to influence the pace, intensity, and 
involvement of different musicians. Likewise, project 
managers orchestrate the completion of the project by 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 0.1
The Project Manager as Conductor
managing the involvement and attention of project 
members. Project managers balance time and process 
and induce participants to make the right decisions at 
the right time just as the conductor induces the wind 
instruments to perform at the right moment in a move-
ment. Each controls the rhythm and intensity of work by 
managing the tempo and involvement of the players. 
Finally, each has a vision that transcends the music 
score or project plan. To be successful they must both 
earn the confidence, respect, and trust of their players.
© JGI/Jamie Grill/Blend Images LLC

345
10.3 Influence as Exchange
To successfully manage a project, a manager must adroitly build a cooperative network 
among divergent allies. Networks are mutually beneficial alliances that are generally gov-
erned by the law of reciprocity (Kaplan, 1984; Grant, 2013). The basic principle is that 
“one good deed deserves another, and likewise, one bad deed deserves another.” The pri-
mary way to gain cooperation is to provide resources and services for others in exchange 
for future resources and services. This is the age-old maxim: “Quid pro quo (something 
for something).” Or in today’s vernacular: “You scratch my back, I’ll scratch yours.”
 
Cohen and Bradford (1990) described the exchange view of influence as “curren-
cies.” If you want to do business in a given country, you have to be prepared to use the 
appropriate currency, and the exchange rates can change over time as conditions 
change. In the same way, what is valued by a marketing manager may be different from 
what is valued by a veteran project engineer, and you are likely to need to use different 
influence currency to obtain the cooperation of each individual. Although this analogy 
is a bit of an oversimplification, the key premise holds true that in the long run, “debit” 
and “credit” accounts must be balanced for cooperative relationships to work.  
Table 10.1 presents the commonly traded organizational currencies identified by 
Cohen and Bradford; they are then discussed in more detail in the following sections.
Task-Related Currencies
This form of influence comes in different forms and is based on the project manager’s 
ability to contribute to others’ accomplishing their work. Probably the most significant 
form of this currency is the ability to respond to subordinates’ requests for additional 
10-3
LO
Identify and apply differ-
ent “influence currencies” 
to build positive relations 
with others.
Adam Grant from the University of 
Pennsylvania identified three funda-
mental styles of social interaction 
with regard to the law of reciprocity:
Takers: Like to get more than give and 
put their own interests ahead of others.
Givers: Prefer to give more than they get and pay 
more attention to what others need.
Matchers: Strive to preserve an equal balance be-
tween giving and getting and operate on the prin-
ciple of fairness.
While Grant admits that people will shift from one 
style to another, he cites research that indicates that 
most people develop a primary interaction style. He 
goes on to review research on the relationship 
between interaction style and professional success. 
Not surprisingly, he found Givers tend to sink to the 
bottom of the success ladder. They make others better 
off but sacrifice their own success in the process.
 
Guess who was at the very top of the success lad-
der? It was Givers again! Grant goes on to explain this 
paradox by arguing that while it is true that many 
Givers are too caring and too timid, there are other 
Givers who are willing to give more than they receive, 
and still keep their own interests in sight, using them 
as a guide for choosing when, how, and to whom to 
give. These kind of Givers are able to create much 
bigger and more powerful social networks than 
Takers and Matchers. The good will they are able to 
generate is a major factor behind the success of this 
kind of Givers.
 
Grant claims that Abraham Lincoln is a perfect 
example of a Giver that climbed to the top. When he 
won the presidency in 1860, he recruited bitter com-
petitors whom he had earlier defeated to join his 
management team (Cabinet) in key positions. Grant 
predicts a Taker would have protected his ego and 
invited only “yes men” and a Matcher would have 
offered appointments to allies. Lincoln reported he 
needed the best men possible to run the country 
and by always focusing on what was best for the 
country he was able to forge an effective manage-
ment team.
Research Highlight 10.1
Give and Take*
* Adam Grant, Give and Take: A Revolutionary Approach to 
Success (New York: Viking Press, 2013).
www.ebook3000.com

346  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
Task-related currencies
Resources 
Lending or giving money, budget increases, personnel, etc.
Assistance 
Helping with existing projects or undertaking unwanted tasks.
Cooperation 
 Giving task support, providing quicker response time, or aiding 
implementation.
Information 
Providing organizational as well as technical knowledge.
Position-related currencies 
Advancement 
Giving a task or assignment that can result in promotion.
Recognition 
Acknowledging effort, accomplishments, or abilities.
Visibility 
 Providing a chance to be known by higher-ups or significant others in the 
organization.
Network/contacts 
Providing opportunities for linking with others.
Inspiration-related currencies
Vision 
 Being involved in a task that has larger significance for the unit, organiza-
tion, customer, or society.
Excellence 
Having a chance to do important things really well.
Ethical correctness 
Doing what is “right” by a higher standard than efficiency.
Relationship-related currencies
Acceptance 
Providing closeness and friendship.
Personal support 
Giving personal and emotional backing.
Understanding 
Listening to others’ concerns and issues.
Personal-related currencies 
Challenge/learning 
Sharing tasks that increase skills and abilities.
Ownership/involvement 
Letting others have ownership and influence.
Gratitude 
Expressing appreciation.
TABLE 10.1
Commonly Traded 
Organizational 
Currencies
Source: Adapted from A. R. 
Cohen and David L. Bradford, 
Influence without Authority 
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1990).
manpower, money, or time to complete a segment of a project. This kind of currency 
is also evident in sharing resources with another project manager who is in need. At a 
more personal level, it may simply mean providing direct assistance to a colleague in 
solving a technical problem.
 
Providing a good word for a colleague’s proposal or recommendation is another 
form of this currency. Because most work of significance is likely to generate some 
form of opposition, the person who is trying to gain approval for a plan or proposal can 
be greatly aided by having a “friend in court.”
 
Another form of this currency includes extraordinary effort. For example, fulfilling 
an emergency request to complete a design document in two days instead of the nor-
mal four days is likely to engender gratitude. Finally, sharing valuable information that 
would be useful to other managers is another form of this currency.
Position-Related Currencies
This form of influence stems from the manager’s ability to enhance others’ positions 
within their organization. A project manager can do this by giving someone a chal-
lenging assignment that can aid their advancement by developing their skills and abili-
ties. Being given a chance to prove yourself naturally generates a strong sense of 
gratitude. Sharing the glory and bringing to the attention of higher-ups the efforts and 
accomplishments of others generate goodwill.

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  347
 
Project managers confide that a useful strategy for gaining the cooperation of pro-
fessionals in other departments/organizations is figuring out how to make these people 
look good to their bosses. For example, a project manager worked with a subcontractor 
whose organization was heavily committed to total quality management (TQM). The 
project manager made it a point in top-level briefing meetings to point out how quality 
improvement processes initiated by the contractor contributed to cost control and 
problem prevention.
 
Another variation of recognition is enhancing the reputation of others within the 
firm. “Good press” can pave the way for lots of opportunities, while “bad press” can 
quickly shut a person off and make it difficult to perform. This currency is also evident 
in helping to preserve someone’s reputation by coming to the defense of someone 
unjustly blamed for project setbacks.
 
Finally, one of the strongest forms of this currency is sharing contacts with other 
people. Helping individuals expand their own networks by introducing them to key 
people naturally engenders gratitude. For example, suggesting to a functional manager 
that he should contact Sally X if he wants to find out what is really going on in that 
department or to get a request expedited is likely to engender a sense of indebtedness.
Inspiration-Related Currencies
Perhaps the most powerful form of influence is based on inspiration. Most sources of 
inspiration derive from people’s burning desire to make a difference and add meaning 
to their lives. Creating an exciting, bold vision for a project can elicit extraordinary 
commitment. For example, many of the technological breakthroughs associated with 
the introduction of the original Macintosh computer were attributed to the feeling that 
the project members had a chance to change the way people approached computers. A 
variant form of vision is providing an opportunity to do something really well. Being 
able to take pride in your work often drives many people.
 
Often the very nature of the project provides a source of inspiration. Discovering a 
cure for a devastating disease, introducing a new social program that will help those in 
need, or simply building a bridge that will reduce a major traffic bottleneck can pro-
vide opportunities for people to feel good about what they are doing and that they are 
making a difference. Inspiration operates as a magnet—pulling people as opposed to 
pushing people toward doing something.
Relationship-Related Currencies
These currencies have more to do with strengthening the relationship with someone 
than directly accomplishing the project tasks. The essence of this form of influence is 
forming a relationship that transcends normal professional boundaries and extends 
into the realm of friendship. Such relationships develop by giving personal and emo-
tional backing. Picking people up when they are feeling down, boosting their confi-
dence, and providing encouragement naturally breed goodwill. Sharing a sense of 
humor and making difficult times fun is another form of this currency. Similarly, 
engaging in non-work-related activities such as sports and family outings is another 
way relationships are naturally enhanced.
 
Perhaps the most basic form of this currency is simply listening to other people. 
Psychologists suggest that most people have a strong desire to be understood and that 
relationships break down because the parties stop listening to each other. Sharing per-
sonal secrets/ambitions and being a wise confidant also creates a special bond between 
individuals.
www.ebook3000.com

348  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
Personal-Related Currencies
This last form of currency deals with individual needs and an overriding sense of 
self-esteem. Some argue that self-esteem is a primary psychological need; the 
extent to which we can help others feel a sense of importance and personal worth 
will naturally generate goodwill. A project manager can enhance a colleague’s 
sense of worth by asking for help and seeking opinions, delegating authority over 
work and allowing individuals to feel comfortable stretching their abilities. This 
form of currency can also be seen in sincere expressions of gratitude for the contri-
butions of others. Care, though, must be exercised in expressing gratitude since it is 
easily devalued when overused. That is, the first thank you is likely to be more 
valued than the fiftieth.
 
The bottom line is that a project manager will be influential only insofar as she can 
offer something that others value. Furthermore, given the diverse cast of people a proj-
ect manager depends on, it is important that she be able to acquire and exercise differ-
ent influence currencies. The ability to do so will be constrained in part by the nature 
of the project and how it is organized. For example, a project manager who is in charge 
of a dedicated team has considerably more to offer team members than a manager who 
is given the responsibility of coordinating the activities of different professionals 
across different departments and organizations. In such cases, that manager will prob-
ably have to rely more heavily on personal and relational bases of influence to gain the 
cooperation of others.
10.4 Social Network Building
Mapping Stakeholder Dependencies
The first step to social network building is identifying those stakeholders on whom 
the project depends for success. The project manager and his or her key assistants need 
to ask the following questions:
∙ Whose cooperation will we need?
∙ Whose agreement or approval will we need?
∙ Whose opposition would keep us from accomplishing the project?
Many project managers find it helpful to draw a map of these dependencies. For exam-
ple, Figure 10.2 contains the dependencies identified by a project manager responsible 
for installing a new financial software system in her company.
 
It is always better to overestimate rather than underestimate dependencies. All too 
often, otherwise talented and successful project managers have been derailed because 
they were blindsided by someone whose position or power they had not anticipated. 
After identifying the stakeholders associated with your project, it is important to assess 
their significance. Here the power/interest matrix introduced in Chapter 3 becomes 
useful. Those individuals with the most power over and interest in the project are the 
most significant stakeholders and deserve the greatest attention. In particular, you 
need to “step into their shoes” and see the project from their perspective:
∙ What differences exist between myself and the people on whom I depend (goals, 
values, pressures, working styles, risks)?
∙ How do these different people view the project (supporters, indifferents, 
antagonists)?
10-4
LO
Create a stakeholder 
map and develop strate-
gies for managing proj-
ect dependencies.

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  349
∙ What is the current status of the relationship I have with the people I depend on?
∙ What sources of influence do I have relative to those on whom I depend?
Once you start this analysis you can begin to appreciate what others value and what 
currencies you might have to offer as a basis on which to build a working relation-
ship. You begin to realize where potential problems lie—relationships in which you 
have a current debit or no convertible currency. Furthermore, diagnosing another’s 
point of view as well as the basis for their positions will help you anticipate their 
reactions and feelings about your decisions and actions. This information is vital 
for selecting the appropriate influence strategy and tactics and producing win/win 
solutions.
 
For example, after mapping her dependency network, the project manager who was 
in charge of installing the software system realized that she was likely to have serious 
problems with the manager of the receipts department, who would be one of the pri-
mary users of the software. She had no previous history of working with this individ-
ual but had heard through the grapevine that the manager was upset with the choice of 
software and that he considered this project to be another unnecessary disruption of 
his department’s operation. 
 
Prior to project initiation the project manager arranged to have lunch with the 
manager, where she sat patiently and listened to his concerns. She invested addi-
tional time and attention to educate him and his staff about the benefits of the new 
software. She tried to minimize the disruptions the transition would cause in his 
department. She altered the implementation schedule to accommodate his prefer-
ences as to when the actual software would be installed and the subsequent training 
would occur. In turn, the receipts manager and his people were much more accept-
ing of the change, and the transition to the new software went more smoothly than 
anticipated.
Software
installation
project
Billing and
receipts
Purchasing
Top
management
Software
vendor
Inventory
Information
technology
manager
Information
technology
director
Shipping
FIGURE 10.2
Stakeholder Map for 
Financial Software 
Installation Project 
www.ebook3000.com

350  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
Management by Wandering Around (MBWA)
The preceding example illustrates a key point - project management is a “contact 
sport.” Once you have established who the key players are, then you initiate contact 
and begin to build a relationship with those players. Building this relationship requires 
an interactive management style employees at Hewlett-Packard refer to as “manage-
ment by wandering around” (MBWA) to reflect that managers spend the majority of 
their time outside their offices. MBWA is somewhat of a misnomer in that there is a 
purpose/pattern behind the “wandering.” Through face-to-face interactions, project 
managers are able to stay in touch with what is really going on in the project and build 
cooperation essential to project success.
 
Effective project managers initiate contact with key players to keep abreast of devel-
opments, anticipate potential problems, provide encouragement, and reinforce the 
objectives and vision of the project. They are able to intervene to resolve conflicts and 
prevent stalemates from occurring. In essence, they “manage” the project. By staying in 
touch with various aspects of the project they become the focal point for information on 
the project. Participants turn to them to obtain the most current and comprehensive 
information about the project which reinforces their central role as project manager.
 
We have also observed less-effective project managers who eschew MBWA and 
attempt to manage projects from their offices and computer terminals. Such managers 
proudly announce an open-door policy and encourage others to see them when a prob-
lem or an issue comes up. To them no news is good news. This allows their contacts to 
be determined by the relative aggressiveness of others. Those who take the initiative 
and seek out the project manager get too high a proportion of the project manager’s 
attention. Those people less readily available (physically removed) or more passive get 
ignored. This behavior contributes to the adage, “Only the squeaky wheel gets 
greased,” which breeds resentment within the project team.
 
Effective project managers also find the time to regularly interact with more distal 
stakeholders. They keep in touch with suppliers, vendors, top management, and other 
functional managers. In doing so they maintain familiarity with different parties, sus-
tain friendships, discover opportunities to do favors, and understand the motives and 
needs of others. They remind people of commitments and champion the cause of their 
project. They also shape people’s expectations (see Snapshot from Practice 10.2: Man-
aging Expectations). Through frequent communication they alleviate people’s con-
cerns about the project, dispel rumors, warn people of potential problems, and lay the 
groundwork for dealing with setbacks in a more effective manner.
 
Unless project managers take the initiative to build a supportive network up front, 
they are likely to see a manager (or other stakeholder) only when there is bad news or 
when they need a favor (e.g., they don’t have the data they promised or the project has 
slipped behind schedule). Without prior, frequent, easy give-and-take interactions 
around nondecisive issues, the encounter prompted by the problem is likely to provoke 
excess tension. The parties are more likely to act defensively, interrupt each other, and 
lose sight of the common goal.
 
Experienced project managers recognize the need to build relationships before they 
need them. They initiate contact with the key stakeholders at times when there are no 
outstanding issues or problems and therefore no anxieties and suspicions. On these 
social occasions, they naturally engage in small talk and responsive banter. They 
respond to others’ requests for aid, provide supportive counsel, and exchange informa-
tion. In doing so they establish good feelings which will allow them to deal with more 
serious problems down the road. When one person views another as pleasant, credible, 
10-5
LO
Understand the need for 
a highly interactive man-
agement style on 
projects.
10-6
LO
More effectively manage 
project expectations.

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  351
Dorothy Kirk, a project management 
consultant and program manager 
with Financial Solutions Group of 
Mynd, offers several keen insights 
about the art of managing stake-
holder expectations:
. . . expectations are hardy. All they need to take root 
is the absence of evidence to the contrary. Once 
rooted, the unspoken word encourages growth. They 
can develop and thrive without being grounded in re-
ality. For this reason, project managers do daily battle 
with unrealistic expectations.
She goes on to offer several tips for managing 
expectations:
΄
FVRfMhh^d_aRbR]cW]S^a\McW^]PM]RWcVRaPZMaWSh
or muddy expectations. For example, if you esti-
mate that a task will take 317 hours, you are set-
ting high expectations by your precision. The 
stakeholder is likely to be unhappy if it takes  
323 hours. The stakeholder will not be unhappy 
with 323 hours if you quoted an estimate of  
300–325 hours.
΄
DRP^U]WjRcVMcWcWb^]ZhVd\M]]McdaRc^W]cRa_aRcM
situation in one’s best interest. For example, if you 
tell someone it will be done by January, you are in-
clined to interpret it to your advantage and assume 
you have to the end of January, while the other per-
son believes it will be done January 1st.
΄
ERWjR ReRah ^__^acd]Wch c^ aRMZWU] Rg_RPcMcW^]b
with reality. Too often we avoid opportunities to ad-
just expectations because we hold onto a false 
hope that things will somehow work out.
΄
5^ ]^c MbY S^a bcMYRV^ZQRa bdUURbcW^]b S^a W\-
provement if you do not intend to do something 
with their input. Asking for their input raises 
expectations.
΄
EcMcRcVR^OeW^db͙IVMcWb^OeW^dbc^h^d\MhOR
obscure to others.
΄
5^]ͭc Me^WQ QRZWeRaW]U OMQ ]Rfb͙ 4^\\d]WPMcR
openly and in person. Expect some anger and frus-
tration. Do not get defensive in return. Be prepared 
to explain the impact of the problems. For example, 
never say the project is going to be late without be-
ing able to give a new date. Explain what you are 
doing to see that this does not continue to 
happen.
All stakeholders have expectations about the schedule, 
cost, and project benefits. Project managers need to 
listen for, understand, and manage these expectations.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 0. 2
Managing Expectations*
* D. Kirk, “Managing Expectations,” PM Network, August 
2000, pp. 59–62.
and helpful based on past contact, he or she is much more likely to be responsive to 
requests for help and less confrontational when problems arise.2
Managing Upward Relations
Research consistently points out that project success is strongly affected by the degree 
to which a project has the support of top management.3 Such support is reflected in an 
appropriate budget, responsiveness to unexpected needs, and a clear signal to others in 
the organization of the importance of the project and the need to cooperate.
 
Visible top management support is not only critical for securing the support of 
other managers within an organization, but it also is a key factor in the project man-
ager’s ability to motivate the project team. Nothing establishes a manager’s right to 
10-7
LO
Develop strategies for 
managing upward 
relations.
2 This discussion is based on Leonard R. Sayles, Leadership: Managing in Real Organizations (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1989) 
pp. 70–78.
3 See, for example: J. L. Pinto and S. K. Mantel, “The Causes of Project Failure,” IEEE Transactions in Engineering Manage-
ment, vol. 37, no. 4 (1990), pp. 269–76.
www.ebook3000.com

352  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
lead more than her ability to defend. To win the loyalty of team members, project 
managers have to be effective advocates for their projects. They have to be able to get 
top management to rescind unreasonable demands, provide additional resources, and 
recognize the accomplishments of team members. This is more easily said than done.
 
Working relationships with upper management are a common source of consterna-
tion. Laments like the following are often made by project managers about upper 
management:
They don’t know how much it sets us back losing Neil to another project.
I would like to see them get this project done with the budget they gave us.
I just wish they would make up their minds as to what is really important.
While it may seem counterintuitive for a subordinate to “manage” a superior, smart 
project managers devote considerable time and attention to influencing and garnering 
the support of top management. Project managers have to accept profound differences 
in perspective and become skilled at the art of persuading superiors.
 
Many of the tensions that arise between upper management and project managers 
are a result of differences in perspective. Project managers become naturally absorbed 
with what is best for their project. To them the most important thing in the world is 
their project. Top management should have a different set of priorities. They are con-
cerned with what is best for the entire organization. It is only natural for these two 
interests to conflict at times. For example, a project manager may lobby intensively for 
additional personnel only to be turned down because top management believes that the 
other departments cannot afford a reduction in staff. Although frequent communica-
tion can minimize differences, the project manager has to accept the fact that top man-
agement is inevitably going to see the world differently.
 
Once project managers accept that disagreements with superiors are more a ques-
tion of perspective than substance, they can focus more of their energy on the art of 
persuading upper management. But before they can persuade superiors, they must first 
prove loyalty.4 Loyalty in this context simply means that most of the time project man-
agers have to show that they consistently follow through on requests and adhere to the 
parameters established by top management without a great deal of grumbling or fuss. 
Once managers have proven loyalty to upper management, senior management is much 
more receptive to their challenges and requests.
 
Project managers have to cultivate strong ties with upper managers who are spon-
soring the project. As noted earlier, these are high-ranking officials who championed 
approval and funding of the project; as such, their reputations are aligned with the 
project. Sponsors are also the ones who defend the project when it is under attack in 
upper circles of management. They shelter the project from excessive interference (see 
Figure 10.3). Project managers should always keep such people informed of any prob-
lems that may cause embarrassment or disappointment. For example, if costs are 
beginning to outrun the budget or a technical glitch is threatening to delay the comple-
tion of the project, managers make sure that the sponsors are the first to know.
 
Timing is everything. Asking for additional budget the day after disappointing third-
quarter earnings are reported is going to be much more difficult than making a similar 
request four weeks later. Good project managers pick the optimum time to appeal to top 
management. They enlist their project sponsors to lobby their cause. They also realize 
there are limits to top management’s accommodations. Here, the Lone Ranger analogy 
is appropriate—you have only so many silver bullets, so use them wisely.
FIGURE 10.3
The Significance of a 
Project Sponsor 
Project sponsor
Project
4 Sayles, Leadership, pp. 136–45.

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  353
 
Project managers need to adapt their communication pattern to that of the senior 
group. For example, one project manager recognized that top management had a ten-
dency to use sports metaphors to describe business situations, so she framed a recent 
slip in schedule by admitting that “we lost five yards, but we still have two plays to 
make a first down.” Smart project managers learn the language of top management and 
use it to their advantage.
 
Finally, a few project managers admit ignoring chains of command. If they are con-
fident that top management will reject an important request and that what they want to 
do will benefit the project, they do it without asking permission. While acknowledging 
that this is very risky, they claim that bosses typically won’t argue with success.
Leading by Example
A highly visible, interactive management style is not only essential to building and 
sustaining cooperative relationships, it also allows project managers to utilize their 
most powerful leadership tool—their own behavior (Peters, 1988; Kouznes & Posner, 
2012). Often, when faced with uncertainty, people look to others for cues as to how to 
respond and demonstrate a propensity to mimic the behavior of people they respect.  
A project manager’s behavior symbolizes how other people should work on the proj-
ect. Through her behavior a project manager can influence how others act and respond 
to a variety of issues related to the project. (See Snapshot from Practice 10.3: Leading 
at the Edge for a dramatic example of this.)
 
To be effective, project managers must “walk the talk” (see Figure 10.4). Six aspects 
of leading by example are discussed next.
Priorities 
Actions speak louder than words. Subordinates and others discern project managers’ 
priorities by how they spend their time. If a project manager claims that this project is 
critical and then is perceived as devoting more time to other projects, then all his ver-
bal reassurances are likely to fall on deaf ears. Conversely, a project manager who 
takes the time to observe a critical test instead of simply waiting for a report affirms 
FIGURE 10.4
Leading by Example
Urgency
Standards 
of
               performance
Cooperation
Problem
solving
Ethics
Priorities
Leading
by
example
www.ebook3000.com

354  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
In 1914, the intrepid explorer Ernest 
Shackleton embarked on the Endur-
ance with his team of seamen and sci-
entists, intent upon crossing the 
unexplored Antarctic continent. What 
happened in the two years between their departure 
and their ultimate incredible rescue has rarely been 
matched in the annals of survival: a ship crushed by 
expanding ice pack . . . a crew stranded on the floes of 
the frozen Weddell Sea . . . two perilous treks in open 
boats across a raging Southern Ocean . . . a team 
marooned on the wild, forlorn Elephant Island, 
stretched to the limits of human endurance.
 
This adventure provided the basis for the book Lead-
ing at the Edge: Leadership Lessons from the Extraordi-
nary Saga of Shackleton’s Antarctic Expedition written 
by Dennis Perkins. Perkins provides numerous incidents 
of how Shackleton’s personal example influenced the 
behavior of his beleaguered crew. For example, from the 
beginning of the Trans-Atlantic expedition to its end, 
Shackleton consistently encouraged behavior that 
emphasized caring and respect:
After the destruction of the Endurance Shackleton 
heated hot milk for the crew and went from tent to 
tent with the “life giving” drink. After the sail to the 
island of South Georgia, when the exhausted crew 
had landed, Shackleton took the first watch, which he 
kept for three hours instead of the usual one.
Crew members emulated the caring behaviors that 
Shackleton modeled. A good example of this occurred 
during one of the most dramatic moments in the Endur-
ance saga. The food supply had dwindled to perilously 
low levels. Less than a week’s supply remained, and the 
tiny ration of seal steak usually served at breakfast was 
eliminated. The waste meat generally used to feed the 
dogs was inspected for edible scraps.
 
Under these wretched conditions, and after a wet 
sleepless night, an argument broke out among some of 
the team members. Caught in the middle, one crew 
member (Greenstreet) spilled his tiny ration of pow-
dered milk and shouted at the biologist (Clark). Alfred 
Lansing described what happened next:
Greenstreet paused to get his breath, and in that in-
stant his anger was spent and he suddenly fell silent. 
Everyone else in the tent became quiet, too, and 
looked at Greenstreet, shaggy-haired, bearded, and 
filthy with blubber soot, holding his empty mug in his 
hand and looking helplessly down into the snow that 
had thirstily soaked up his precious milk. The loss was 
so tragic he seemed almost on the point of weeping. 
Without speaking, Clark reached out and poured 
some milk into Greenstreet’s mug. Then Worsely, then 
Macklin, and Rickerson and Kerr, Orde-Lees, and fi-
nally Blackborrow. They finished in silence.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 0. 3
Leading at the Edge*
© Topham/The Image Works
* Adapted from Dennis N. T. Perkins, Leading at the Edge: 
Leadership Lessons from the Extraordinary Saga of  
Shackleton’s Antarctica Expedition (New York: AMACOM 
Press, 2000), pp. 94–95; and Alfred Lansing, Endurance: 
Shackleton’s Incredible Voyage (New York: Carroll &  
Graf, 1998), p. 127.
the importance of the testers and their work. Likewise, the types of questions project 
managers pose communicate priorities. By repeatedly asking how specific issues 
relate to satisfying the customer, a project manager can reinforce the importance of 
customer satisfaction.

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  355
Urgency 
Through their actions project managers can convey a sense of urgency, which can per-
meate project activities. This urgency in part can be conveyed through stringent dead-
lines, frequent status report meetings, and aggressive solutions for expediting the 
project. The project manager uses these tools like a metronome to pick up the beat of 
the project. At the same time, such devices will be ineffective if there is not also a cor-
responding change in the project manager’s behavior. If they want others to work faster 
and solve problems quicker, then they need to work faster. They need to hasten the 
pace of their own behavior. They should accelerate the frequency of their interactions, 
talk and walk more quickly, get to work sooner, and leave work later. By simply 
increasing the pace of their daily interaction patterns, project managers can reinforce a 
sense of urgency in others.
Problem Solving
How project managers respond to problems sets the tone for how others tackle prob-
lems. If bad news is greeted by verbal attacks, then others will be reluctant to be forth-
coming.5 If the project manager is more concerned with finding out who is to blame 
instead of how to prevent problems from happening again, then others will tend to 
cover their tracks and cast the blame elsewhere. If, on the other hand, project managers 
focus more on how they can turn a problem into an opportunity or what can be learned 
from a mistake, then others are more likely to adopt a more proactive approach to 
problem solving.
Cooperation 
How project managers act toward outsiders influences how team members interact 
with outsiders. If a project manager makes disparaging remarks about the “idiots” in 
the marketing department, then this oftentimes becomes the shared view of the entire 
team. If project managers set the norm of treating outsiders with respect and being 
responsive to their needs, then others will more likely follow suit.
Standards of Performance
Veteran project managers recognize that if they want participants to exceed project 
expectations then they have to exceed others’ expectations of a good project manager. 
They establish a high standard for project performance through the quality of their 
daily interactions. They respond quickly to the needs of others, carefully prepare and 
run crisp meetings, stay on top of all the critical issues, facilitate effective problem 
solving, and stand firm on important matters.
Ethics
How others respond to ethical dilemmas that arise in the course of a project will be 
influenced by how the project manager has responded to similar dilemmas. In many 
cases, team members base their actions on how they think the project manager would 
respond. If project managers deliberately distort or withhold vital information from 
customers or top management, then they are signaling to others that this kind of behav-
ior is acceptable. Project management invariably creates a variety of ethical dilemmas; 
this would be an appropriate time to delve into this topic in more detail.
5 This is the classic “kill the messenger” syndrome. This and other forces that contribute to distorting information can be 
found in Erik Larson and Jon King “The Systemic Distortion of Information: An On-going Management Challenge,” Organi-
zational Dynamics, Winter 1996, pp. 49–62.
www.ebook3000.com

356  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
10.5 Ethics and Project Management
Questions of ethics have already arisen in previous chapters that discussed padding of 
cost and time estimations, exaggerating pay-offs of project proposals, and so forth. 
Ethical dilemmas involve situations where it is difficult to determine whether conduct 
is right or wrong. 
 
In a survey of project managers, 81 percent reported that they encounter ethical 
issues in their work.6 These dilemmas range from being pressured to alter status 
reports, backdate signatures, compromising safety standards to accelerate progress, 
and approving shoddy work. The more recent work of Müller and colleagues suggests 
that the most common dilemma project managers face involves transparency issues 
related to project performance (Müller et al., 2013, 2014). For example, is it accept-
able to falsely assure customers that everything is on track when in reality you are 
doing so to prevent them from panicking and making matters even worse?
 
Project management is complicated work, and, as such, ethics invariably involve 
gray areas of judgment and interpretation. For example, it is difficult to distinguish 
deliberate falsification of estimates from genuine mistakes or the willful exaggeration 
of project payoffs from genuine optimism. It becomes problematic to determine 
whether unfulfilled promises were deliberate deception or an appropriate response to 
changing circumstances.
 
To provide greater clarity to business ethics, many companies and professional 
groups publish a code of conduct. Cynics see these documents as simply window 
dressing, while advocates argue that they are important, albeit limited, first steps. In 
practice, personal ethics do not lie in formal statutes but at the intersection of one’s 
work, family, education, profession, religious beliefs, and daily interactions. Most 
project managers report that they rely on their own private sense of right and wrong—
what one project manager called his “internal compass.” One common rule of thumb 
for testing whether a response is ethical is to ask, “Imagine that whatever you did was 
going to be reported on the front page of your local newspaper. How would you like 
that? Would you be comfortable?”
 
Unfortunately, scandals at Enron, Worldcom, and Arthur Andersen have demon-
strated the willingness of highly trained professionals to abdicate personal responsibil-
ity for illegal actions and to obey the directives of superiors (see Snapshot from 
Practice 10.4: The Collapse of Arthur Andersen). Top management and the culture of 
an organization play a decisive role in shaping members’ beliefs of what is right and 
wrong. Many organizations encourage ethical transgressions by creating a “win at all 
cost” mentality. The pressures to succeed obscure consideration of whether the ends 
justify the means. Other organizations place a premium on “fair play” and command a 
market position by virtue of being trustworthy and reliable.7
 
Many project managers claim that ethical behavior is its own reward. By following 
your own internal compass your behavior expresses your personal values. Others sug-
gest that ethical behavior is doubly rewarding. You not only are able to fall asleep at 
night but you also develop a sound and admirable reputation. As will be explored in 
the next section, such a reputation is essential to establishing the trust necessary to 
exercise influence effectively.
Understand the impor-
tance of building trust 
and acting in an ethical 
manner while working 
on a project.
10-8
LO
6 While this survey is a bit old, our conversations with project managers suggest that the results hold true today (J. Cabanis, 
“A Question of Ethics: The Issues Project Managers Face and How They Resolve Them,” PM Network, December 1995, 
pp. 8–28).
7 For a more in-depth discussion of ethics, see: L. Trevino and K. Nelson, Managing Business Ethics: Straight Talk about 
How to Do It Right, 5th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  357
10.6 Building Trust: The Key to Exercising Influence
The significance of trust can be discerned by its absence. Imagine how different a 
working relationship is when you distrust the other party as opposed to trusting them. 
Here is what one line manager had to say about how he reacted to a project manager he 
did not trust:
Whenever Jim approached me about something, I found myself trying to read between the 
lines to figure what was really going on. When he made a request, my initial reaction was 
“no” until he proved it.
“Think straight and talk straight”  
was the principle on which Arthur  
E. Andersen built his accounting firm in 
the early 1900s. It was a phrase his 
mother taught him and became the 
firm’s motto. The commitment to integrity and a sys-
tematic, planned approach to work were instrumental 
in Arthur Andersen becoming one of the largest and 
best-known accounting firms in the world.
 
According to the book, Inside Arthur Anderson by 
Susan Squires and colleagues:
Working for Arthur Andersen was not for everyone. 
It could be a tough culture. It was much too hierarchi-
cal and top down for the more free spirited. Many 
people left after less than two years, believing the re-
wards did not warrant the demands that were made 
on them. Others learned to play by the rules and 
some even thrived. To remain in the firm, staff mem-
bers were expected to work hard, respect authority of 
rank, and maintain a high level of conformity. In return 
they were rewarded with support, promotion, and the 
possibility of making partner. Those individuals who 
made a career with the firm grew old together, pro-
fessionally and personally, and most had never 
worked anywhere else. To these survivors, Andersen 
was their second family, and they developed strong 
loyalties to the firm and its culture. (p. 133)
On October 23, 2001, David Duncan told his Enron proj-
ect team that they needed to start complying with 
Andersen’s new policy on handling audit documents. 
The policy had been instituted to make sure that the 
firm’s extraneous paperwork could not be used in court 
cases. Although the document retention policy required 
that papers supporting the firm’s opinions and audit be 
retained, it allowed a broad category of secondary 
documents to be destroyed. The team reacted with 
stunned silence to Duncan’s directive. Then everyone 
got up and began racing to do what they had been told 
to do. No one asked Duncan to explain further. None 
asked whether what they were doing was wrong. No 
one questioned whether what he or she were doing 
might be illegal. Andersen’s Houston staff just reacted, 
following orders without question.
 
On November 9, 2001, the day after the Securities 
Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a subpoena to 
Andersen, the shredding stopped. More than one ton of 
documents had been destroyed and 30,000 e-mails 
and Enron-related computer files erased. According to 
Andersen’s legal defense team, the shredding was busi-
ness as usual. The lawyers claimed that the shredding 
was standard practice for eliminating unnecessary files. 
To the SEC, it appeared to be the start of a deep cover-
up operation. Subsequently one of the most respected 
accounting firms in the world closed its doors.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 0 . 4
The Collapse of Arthur Andersen*
© Stephen J. Carrera/AP Photo
* Susan E. Squires, Cynthia J. Smith, Lorna McDougall, and 
William R. Yeak, Inside Arthur Andersen: Shifting Values,  
Unexpected Consequences (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2004).
www.ebook3000.com

358  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
Conversely, trust is the “lubricant” that maintains smooth and efficient interactions. 
For example, here is what a functional manager had to say about how he dealt with a 
project manager he trusted:
If Sally said she needed something, no questions were asked. I knew it was important or she 
wouldn’t have asked. Likewise, if I needed something, I know she would come through for 
me if she could. 
Trust is an elusive concept. It is hard to nail down in precise terms why some project 
managers are trusted and others are not. One popular way to understand trust is to see 
it as a function of character and competence. Character focuses on personal motives 
(i.e., does he or she want to do the right thing?), while competence focuses on skills 
necessary to realize motives (i.e., does he or she know the right things to do?).
 
Stephen Covey resurrected the significance of character in the leadership litera-
ture in his best-selling Seven Habits of Highly Effective People. Covey criticized 
popular management literature as focusing too much on shallow human relations 
skills and manipulative techniques, which he labeled the personality ethic. He argues 
that at the core of highly effective people is a character ethic that is deeply rooted in 
personal values and principles such as dignity, service, fairness, the pursuit of truth, 
and respect.
 
One of the distinguishing traits of character is consistency. When people are guided 
by a core set of principles, they are naturally more predictable because their actions are 
consistent with these principles. Another feature of character is openness. When peo-
ple have a clear sense of who they are and what they value, they are more receptive to 
others. This trait provides them with the capacity to empathize and the talent to build 
consensus among divergent people. Finally, another quality of character is a sense of 
purpose. Managers with character are driven not only by personal ambitions but also 
for the common good. Their primary concern is what is best for their organization and 
the project, not what is best for themselves. This willingness to subordinate personal 
interests to a higher purpose garners the respect, loyalty, and trust of others.
 
The significance of character is summarized by the comments made by two team 
members about two very different project managers.
At first everyone liked Joe and was excited about the project. But after a while, people became 
suspicious of his motives. He had a tendency to say different things to different people. People 
began to feel manipulated. He spent too much time with top management. People began to 
believe that he was only looking out for himself. It was HIS project. When the project began 
to slip he jumped ship and left us holding the bag. I’ll never work for that guy again.
 
My first impression of Jack was nothing special. He had a quiet, unassuming management 
style. Over time I learned to respect his judgment and his ability to get people to work 
together. When you went to him with a problem or a request, he always listened carefully. 
If he couldn’t do what you wanted him to do, he would take the time to explain why. When 
disagreements arose he always thought of what was best for the project. He treated everyone 
by the same rules; no one got special treatment. I’d jump at the opportunity to work on a 
project with him again.
Character alone will not engender trust. We must also have confidence in the compe-
tency of individuals before we really trust them (Kanter, 1979). We all know well-
intended managers whom we like but do not trust because they have a history of 
coming up short on their promises. Although we may befriend these managers, we 
don’t like to work with or for them.
 
Competence is reflected at a number of different levels. First, there is task-related 
knowledge and skills reflected in the ability to answer questions, solve technical 

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  359
problems, and excel in certain kinds of work. Second, there is competence at an inter-
personal level demonstrated in being able to listen effectively, communicate clearly, 
resolve arguments, provide encouragement, and so forth. Finally, there is organiza-
tional competence. This includes being able to run effective meetings, set meaningful 
objectives, reduce inefficiencies, and build a social network. Too often there is a ten-
dency for young engineers and other professionals to place too much value on task or 
technical competence. They underestimate the significance of organizational skills. 
Veteran professionals, on the other hand, recognize the importance of management 
and place a greater value on organizational and interpersonal skills.
 
One problem new project managers experience is that it takes time to establish a 
sense of character and competency. Character and competency are often demonstrated 
when they are tested, such as when a tough call has to be made or when difficult prob-
lems have to be solved. Veteran project managers have the advantage of reputation and 
an established track record of success. Although endorsements from credible sponsors 
can help a young project manager create a favorable first impression, ultimately he or 
she will have to demonstrate character and competence during the course of dealings 
with others in order to gain their trust.
 
So far this chapter has addressed the importance of building a network of relation-
ships to complete the project based on trust and reciprocity. The next section examines 
the nature of project management work and the personal qualities needed to excel at it.
10.7 Qualities of an Effective Project Manager
Project management is, at first glance, a misleading discipline in that there is an inher-
ent logic to the process. There is a natural progression from formulating a project 
scope statement, to creating a WBS, developing a network, adding resources, finaliz-
ing a plan, and reaching milestones. However, when it comes to actually implementing 
and completing projects, this logic can quickly disappear. Project managers often 
encounter a much messier world, filled with inconsistencies and paradoxes. Effective 
project managers have to be able to deal with the contradictory nature of their work. 
Some of those contradictions are listed here:
∙ Innovate and maintain stability. Project managers have to put out fires, restore 
order, and get the project back on track. At the same time they need to be innovative 
and develop new, better ways of doing things. Innovations unravel stable routines 
and spark new disturbances that have to be dealt with.
∙ See the big picture while getting your hands dirty. Project managers have to see 
the big picture and how their project fits within the larger strategy of their firm. 
There are also times when they must get deeply involved in project work and tech-
nology. If they don’t worry about the details, who will?
∙ Encourage individuals but stress the team. Project managers have to motivate, 
cajole, and entice individual performers while at the same time maintaining team-
work. They have to be careful that they are considered fair and consistent in their 
treatment of team members while at the same time treating each member as a spe-
cial individual.
∙ Hands-off/Hands-on. Project managers have to intervene, resolve stalemates, solve 
technical problems, and insist on different approaches. At the same time they have 
to recognize when it is appropriate to sit on the sidelines and let other people figure 
out what to do.
Identify the qualities of 
an effective project 
manager.
10-9
LO
www.ebook3000.com

360  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
∙ Flexible but firm. Project managers have to be adaptable and responsive to events 
and outcomes that occur on the project. At the same time they have to hold the line 
at times and tough it out when everyone else wants to give up.
∙ Team versus organizational loyalties. Project managers need to forge a unified 
project team whose members stimulate one another to extraordinary performance. 
But at the same time they have to counter the excesses of cohesion and the team’s 
resistance to outside ideas. They have to cultivate loyalties to both the team and the 
parent organization.
Managing these and other contradictions requires finesse and balance. Finesse involves 
the skillful movement back and forth between opposing behavioral patterns (Sayles, 
1989). For example, most of the time project managers actively involve others, move 
by increment, and seek consensus. There are other times when project managers must 
act as autocrats and take decisive, unilateral action. Balance involves recognizing the 
danger of extremes and that too much of a good thing invariably becomes harmful. For 
example, many managers have a tendency to always delegate the most stressful, diffi-
cult assignments to their best team members. This habit often breeds resentment 
among those chosen (“why am I always the one who gets the tough work?”) and never 
allows the weaker members to develop their talents further.
 
There is no one management style or formula for being an effective project manager. 
The world of project management is too complicated for formulas. Successful project 
managers have a knack for adapting styles to specific circumstances of the situation.
 
So, what should one look for in an effective project manager? Many authors have 
addressed this question and have generated list after list of skills and attributes associ-
ated with being an effective manager (Posner, 1987; Shenhar and Nofziner, 1997; 
Turner and Müller, 2005). When reviewing these lists, one sometimes gets the impres-
sion that to be a successful project manager requires someone with superhuman pow-
ers. While we agree that not everyone has the right stuff to be an effective project 
manager, there are some core traits and skills that can be developed to successfully 
perform the job. Eight of these traits are noted below.
1. Systems thinking. Project managers must be able to take a holistic rather than a 
reductionist approach to projects. Instead of breaking up a project into individual 
pieces (planning, budget) and managing it by understanding each part, a systems 
perspective focuses on trying to understand how relevant project factors collectively 
interact to produce project outcomes. The key to success then becomes managing 
the interaction between different parts and not the parts themselves.8
2. Personal integrity. Before you can lead and manage others, you have to be able to 
lead and manage yourself (Bennis, 1989). Begin by establishing a firm sense of 
who you are, what you stand for, and how you should behave. This inner strength 
provides the buoyancy to endure the ups and downs of the project life cycle and the 
credibility essential to sustaining the trust of others.
3. Proactive. Good project managers take action before it is needed to prevent small 
concerns from escalating into major problems. They spend the majority of their 
time working within their sphere of influence to solve problems and not dwelling 
on things they have little control over. Project managers can’t be whiners.9
8 For a practical elaboration on what it means to be a systems thinker, see: Peter M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline (New York: 
Doubleday, 1990).
9 For a more extensive discussion of the habit of being proactive, see Stephen Covey, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective 
People (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1989), pp. 65–94.

4. High emotional intelligence (EQ). Project management is not for the meek. 
 Project managers have to have command of their emotions and be able to respond 
constructively to others when things get a bit out of control. See the Research 
Highlight 10.2: Emotional Intelligence to read more about this quality.
5. General business perspective. Because the primary role of a project manager is to 
integrate the contributions of different business and technical disciplines, it is 
important that a manager have a general grasp of business fundamentals and how 
the different functional disciplines interact to contribute to a successful business.
6. Effective time management. Time is a manager’s scarcest resource. Project man-
agers have to be able to budget their time wisely and quickly adjust their priorities. 
They need to balance their interactions so no one feels ignored.
7. Skillful politician. Project managers have to be able to deal effectively with a wide 
range of people and win their support and endorsement of their project. They need 
to be able to sell the virtues of their project without compromising the truth.
8. Optimist. Project managers have to display a can-do attitude. They have to be able 
to find rays of sunlight in a dismal day and keep people’s attention positive. A good 
sense of humor and a playful attitude are often a project manager’s greatest strength.
So how does one develop these traits? Workshops, self-study, and courses can upgrade 
one’s general business perspective and capacity for systems thinking. Training pro-
grams can improve emotional intelligence and political skills. People can also be 
361
Emotional intelligence (EQ) de-
scribes the ability or skill to per-
ceive, assess, and manage the 
emotions of oneself and others. Al-
though the notion of EQ emerged 
in the 1920s, it was not until Daniel 
Goleman published his book Emotional Intelligence 
that the concept captured the attention of business 
people and the public alike.
 
Goleman divided EQ into the following five 
emotional competences:
΄ Self-awareness—knowing your emotions, recog-
nizing feelings as they occur, and understanding 
the link between your emotions and your behav-
ior. Self-awareness is reflected in confidence, 
realistic assessment of personal strengths/weak-
nesses, and ability to make fun of oneself.
΄ Self-regulation—being able to control disrup-
tive impulses and moods and respond appro-
priately to situations. Self-regulation is reflected 
in trustworthiness and openness to change.
΄ Self-motivation—being able to gather up your 
feelings and pursue goals with energy, pas-
sion, and persistence. The hallmarks of self-
motivation include a strong desire to achieve 
and internal optimism.
΄ Empathy—being able to recognize the feelings of 
others and tuning into their verbal and nonverbal 
cues. Empathy is reflected in the ability to sustain 
relationships and in cross-cultural sensitivity.
΄ Social skills—being able to build social net-
works and rapport with different kinds of people. 
Social skills include being able to lead change, 
resolve conflicts, and build effective teams.
Not much imagination is needed to see how EQ 
would contribute to being an effective project 
manager.
 
In Goleman’s view, these competences build on 
each other in a hierarchy. At the bottom of his hier-
archy is self-awareness. Some level of self-aware-
ness is needed to move to self-regulation. 
Ultimately, social skills require all four of the other 
competences in order to begin to be proficient at 
leading others. Experts believe that most people 
can learn to significantly increase their EQ. Numer-
ous training programs and materials have emerged 
to help individuals realize their EQ potential.
Research Highlight 10.2
Emotional Intelligence*
* T. Bradberry, and J. Graves, The Emotional Intelligence 
Quick Book: How to Put Your EQ to Work (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 2005); J. Cabanis-Brewin, “The Human Task of a 
Project Leader: Daniel Goleman on the Value of High EQ,” 
PM Network, November 1999, pp. 38–42.
www.ebook3000.com

362  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
taught stress and time management techniques. However, we know of no workshop or 
magic potion that can transform a pessimist into an optimist or provide a sense of pur-
pose when there is not one. These qualities get at the very soul or being of a person. 
Optimism, integrity, and even being proactive are not easily developed if there is not 
already a predisposition to display them.
Summary
To be successful, project managers must build a cooperative network among a diverse 
set of allies. They begin by identifying who the key stakeholders on a project are, fol-
lowed by a diagnosis of the nature of the relationships, and the basis for exercising 
influence. Effective project managers are skilled at acquiring and exercising a wide 
range of influence. They use this influence and a highly interactive management style 
to monitor project performance and initiate appropriate changes in project plans and 
direction. They do so in a manner that generates trust, which is ultimately based on 
others’ perceptions of their character and competence.
 
Project managers are encouraged to keep in mind the following suggestions:
∙ Build relationships before you need them. Identify key players and what you can do 
to help them before you need their assistance. It is always easier to receive a favor 
after you have granted one. This requires the project manager to see the project in 
systems terms and to appreciate how it affects other activities and agendas inside 
and outside the organization. From this perspective they can identify opportunities 
to do good deeds and garner the support of others.
∙ Trust is sustained through frequent face-to-face contact. Trust withers through 
neglect. This is particularly true under conditions of rapid change and uncertainty 
that naturally engender doubt, suspicion, and even momentary bouts of paranoia. 
Project managers must maintain frequent contact with key stakeholders to keep 
abreast of developments, assuage concerns, engage in reality testing, and focus 
attention on the project. Frequent face-to-face interactions either directly or by tele-
conferencing affirm mutual respect and trust in each other.
Ultimately, exercising influence in an effective and ethical manner begins and ends 
with how you view the other parties. Do you view them as potential partners or obsta-
cles to your goals? If obstacles, then you wield your influence to manipulate and gain 
compliance and cooperation. If partners, you exercise influence to gain their commit-
ment and support. People who view social network building as building partnerships 
see every interaction with two goals: resolving the immediate problem/concern and 
improving the working relationship so that next time it will be even more effective. 
Experienced project managers realize that “what goes around comes around” and try 
at all cost to avoid antagonizing players for quick success.
Key Terms
Emotional intelligence  
 (EQ), 361
Inspiration-related 
 currencies, 347
Law of reciprocity, 345
Leading by example, 353
Management by wandering 
 around (MBWA), 350
Personal-related 
 currencies, 348
Position-related 
 currencies, 346
Proactive, 360
Relationship-related 
 currencies, 347
Social network  
 building, 348
Stakeholder, 342
Systems thinking, 360
Task-related  
 currencies, 345

1. Do an Internet search for the Keirsey Temperament Sorter Questionnaire and find a 
site that appears to have a reputable self-assessment questionnaire. Respond to the 
questionnaire to identify your temperament type. Read supportive documents asso-
ciated with your type. What does this material suggest are the kinds of projects that 
would best suit you? What does it suggest your strengths and weaknesses are as a 
project manager? How can you compensate for your weaknesses?
2. Access the Project Management Institute website and review the standards con-
tained in the PMI Member Ethical Standards section. How useful is the information 
for helping someone decide what behavior is appropriate and inappropriate?
3. You are organizing a benefit concert in your hometown that will feature local heavy 
metal rock groups and guest speakers. Draw a dependency map identifying the major 
groups of people that are likely to affect the success of this project. Who do you think 
will be most cooperative? Who do you think will be the least cooperative? Why?
4. You are the project manager responsible for the overall construction of a new inter-
national airport. Draw a dependency map identifying the major groups of people 
that are likely to affect the success of this project. Who do you think will be most 
cooperative? Who do you think will be the least cooperative? Why?
5. Identify an important relationship (co-worker, boss, friend) in which you are having 
trouble gaining cooperation. Assess this relationship in terms of the influence currency 
model. What kinds of influence currency have you been exchanging in this relation-
ship? Is the “bank account” for this relationship in the “red” or the “black”? What kinds 
of influence would be appropriate for building a stronger relationship with that person?
6. Each of the following seven mini-case scenarios involves ethical dilemmas associ-
ated with project management. How would you respond to each situation, and why?
Jack Nietzche
You returned from a project staffing meeting in which future project assignments were 
finalized. Despite your best efforts, you were unable to persuade the director of project 
management to promote one of your best assistants, Jack Nietzche, to a project manager 
position. You feel a bit guilty because you dangled the prospect of this promotion to 
motivate Jack. Jack responded by putting in extra hours to ensure that his segments of the 
project were completed on time. You wonder how Jack will react to this disappointment. 
More importantly, you wonder how his reaction might affect your project. You have five 
days remaining to meet a critical deadline for a very important customer. While it won’t 
Exercises
Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  363
1. What is the difference between leading and managing a project?
2. Why is a conductor of an orchestra an appropriate metaphor for being a project 
manager? What aspects of project managing are not reflected by this metaphor? 
Can you think of other metaphors that would be appropriate?
3. What does the exchange model of influence suggest you do to build cooperative 
relationships to complete a project?
4. What differences would you expect to see between the kinds of influence currencies 
that a project manager in a functional matrix would use and the influence a project 
manager of a dedicated project team would use?
5. Why is it important to build a relationship before you need it?
6. Why is it critical to keep the project sponsor informed?
7. Why is trust a function of both character and competence?
8. Which of the eight traits/skills associated with being an effective project manager is 
the most important? The least important? Why?
Review 
Questions
www.ebook3000.com

be easy, you believed you would be able to complete the project on time. Now you’re not 
so sure. Jack is halfway through completing the documentation phase, which is the last 
critical activity. Jack can be pretty emotional at times, and you are worried that he will 
blow up once he finds he didn’t get the promotion. As you return to your office, you 
wonder what you should do. Should you tell Jack that he isn’t going to be promoted? 
What should you say if he asks about whether the new assignments were made?
Seaburst Construction Project
You are the project manager for the Seaburst construction project. So far the project is 
progressing ahead of schedule and below budget. You attribute this in part to the good 
working relationship you have with the carpenters, plumbers, electricians, and machine 
operators who work for your organization. More than once you have asked them to 
give 110 percent, and they have responded.
 
One Sunday afternoon you decide to drive by the site and show it to your son. As 
you point out various parts of the project to your son, you discover that several pieces 
of valuable equipment are missing from the storage shed. When you start work again 
on Monday you are about to discuss this matter with a supervisor when you realize 
that all the missing equipment is back in the shed. What should you do? Why?
The Project Status Report Meeting
You are driving to a project status report meeting with your client. You encountered a 
significant technical problem on the project that has put your project behind schedule. 
This is not good news because completion time is the number one priority for the project. 
You are confident that your team can solve the problem if they are free to give their undi-
vided attention to it and that with hard work you can get back on schedule. You also 
believe if you tell the client about the problem, she will demand a meeting with your team 
to discuss the implications of the problem. You can also expect her to send some of her 
personnel to oversee the solution to the problem. These interruptions will likely further 
delay the project. What should you tell your client about the current status of the project?
Gold Star LAN project
You work for a large consulting firm and were assigned to the Gold Star LAN project. 
Work on the project is nearly completed and your clients at Gold Star appear to be pleased 
with your performance. During the course of the project, changes in the original scope 
had to be made to accommodate specific needs of managers at Gold Star. The costs of 
these changes were documented as well as overhead and submitted to the centralized 
accounting department. They processed the information and submitted a change order bill 
for your signature. You are surprised to see the bill is 10 percent higher than what you 
submitted. You contact Jim Messina in the accounting office and ask if a mistake has been 
made. He curtly replies that no mistake was made and that management adjusted the bill. 
He recommends that you sign the document. You talk to another project manager about 
this and she tells you off the record that overcharging clients on change orders is common 
practice in your firm. Would you sign the document? Why? Why not?
Cape Town Bio-Tech
You are responsible for installing the new Double E production line. Your team has 
collected estimates and used the WBS to generate a project schedule. You have confi-
dence in the schedule and the work your team has done. You report to top management 
that you believe that the project will take 110 days and be completed by March 5. The 
news is greeted positively. In fact, the project sponsor confides that orders do not have 
to be shipped until April 1. You leave the meeting wondering whether you should 
share this information with the project team or not.
364  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  365
Ryman Pharmaceuticals
You are a test engineer on the Bridge project at Ryman Pharmaceuticals in Nashville, 
Tennessee. You have just completed conductivity tests of a new electrochemical com-
pound. The results exceeded expectations. This new compound should revolutionize 
the industry. You are wondering whether to call your stockbroker and ask her to buy 
$20,000 worth of Ryman stock before everyone else finds out about the results. What 
would you do and why?
Princeton Landing
You are managing the renovation of the Old Princeton Landing Bar and Grill. The pro-
ject is on schedule despite receiving a late shipment of paint. The paint was supposed 
to arrive on 1/30, but instead arrived on 2/1. The assistant store manager apologizes 
profusely for the delay and asks if you would be willing to sign the acceptance form 
and backdate it to 1/30. He says he won’t qualify for a bonus that he has worked hard 
to meet for the past month if the shipment is reported late. He promises to make it up 
to you on future projects. What would you do and why?
Abrashoff, D. M., It’s Your Ship (New York: Business Plus, 2002).
Anand, V., B. E. Ashforth, and M. Joshi, “Business as Usual: The Acceptance and 
Perpetuation of Corruption in Organizations,” Academy of Management Executive, 
vol. 19, no. 4 (2005), pp. 9–23.
Ancona, D. G., and D. Caldwell, “Improving the Performance of New-Product Teams,” 
Research Technology Management, vol. 33, no. 2 (March-April 1990), pp. 25–29.
Badaracco, J. L., Jr., and A. P. Webb, “Business Ethics: A View from the Trenches,” 
California Management Review, vol. 37, no. 2 (Winter 1995), pp. 8–28.
Baker, B., “Leadership and the Project Manager,” PM Network, December 2002, p. 20.
Baker, W. E., Network Smart: How to Build Relationships for Personal and Organi-
zational Success (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994).
Bennis, W., On Becoming a Leader (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989).
Bertsche, R., “Seven Steps to Stronger Relationships between Project Managers and 
Sponsors,” PM Network, September 2014, pp. 50–55.
Bourne, L., Stakeholder Relationship Management (Farnham, England: Gower Pub-
lishing Ltd., 2009).
Bradberry, T., and J. Graves, The Emotional Intelligence Quick Book: How to Put 
Your EQ to Work (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005).
Cabanis, J., “A Question of Ethics: The Issues Project Managers Face and How They 
Resolve Them,” PM Network, December 1996, pp. 19–24.
Cabanis-Brewin, J., “The Human Task of a Project Leader: Daniel Goleman on the 
Value of High EQ,” PM Network, November 1999, pp. 38–42.
Cohen, A. R., and D. L. Bradford, Influence Without Authority (New York: John 
Wiley & Sons, 1990).
Covey, S. R., The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1989).
Dinsmore, P. C., “Will the Real Stakeholders Please Stand Up?” PM Network, 
December 1995, pp. 9–10.
References
www.ebook3000.com

Einsiedel, A. A., “Profile of Effective Project Managers,” Project Management Jour-
nal, vol. 31, no. 3 (1987), pp. 51–56.
Ferrazzi, K., Never Eat Alone and Other Secrets to Success One Relationship at a 
Time (Crown Publishers, 2005).
Gabarro, S. J., The Dynamics of Taking Charge (Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press, 1987).
Grant, A., Give and Take: A Revolutionary Approach to Success (New York: Viking 
Press, 2013).
Hill, L. A., Becoming a Manager: Mastery of a New Identity (Boston: Harvard Busi-
ness School Press, 1992).
Kanter, R. M., “Power Failures in Management Circuits,” Harvard Business Review, 
July–August, 1979, pp. 65–79.
Kaplan, R. E., “Trade Routes: The Manager’s Network of Relationships,” Organiza-
tional Dynamics, vol. 12, no. 4 (Spring 1984), pp. 37–52.
Kirk, D., “Managing Expectations,” PM Network, August 2000, pp. 59–62.
Kotter, J. P., “What Leaders Really Do,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 68, no. 3 
(May–June 1990), pp. 103–11.
Kouzes, J. M., and B. Z. Posner, Credibility: How Leaders Gain and Lose It, Why 
People Demand It (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1993).
Kouzes, J. M., and B. Z. Posner, The Leadership Challenge, 5th ed. (San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 2012).
Larson, E. W., and J. B. King, “The Systemic Distortion of Information: An Ongo-
ing Management Challenge,” Organizational Dynamics, vol. 24, no. 3 (Winter 
1996), pp. 49–62.
Lewis, M. W., M. A. Welsh, G. E. Dehler, and S. G. Green, “Product Development 
Tensions: Exploring Contrasting Styles of Project Management,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal, vol. 45, no. 3 (2002), pp. 546–64.
Müller, R., and R. Turner, “Leadership Competency Profiles of Successful Project 
Managers,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 28, no. 5 (July 2010), 
pp. 437–48.
Müller R., Erling S. Andersen, Ø. Kvalnes, J. Shao, S. Sankaran, J. R. Turner,  
C. Biesenthal, D. Walker, and S. Gudergan, “The Interrelationship of Governance, 
Trust, and Ethics in Temporary Organizations,” Journal of Project Management,  
vol. 44, no. 4 (August 2013), pp. 26-44.
Müller, R., R. Turner, E. Andersen, J. Shao, and O. Kvalnes, “Ethics, Trust, and 
 Goverance in Temporary Organizations,” Journal of Project Management, vol. 45, 
no. 4 (August/September 2014), pp. 39–54.
Peters, L. H., “A Good Man in a Storm: An Interview with Tom West,” Academy of 
Management Executive, vol. 16, no. 4 (2002), pp. 53–63.
Peters, L. H., “Soulful Ramblings: An Interview with Tracy Kidder,” Academy of 
Management Executive, vol. 16, no. 4 (2002), pp. 45–52.
Peters, T., Thriving on Chaos: Handbook for a Management Revolution (New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf, 1988).
366  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager

Pinto, J. K., and S. K. Mantel, “The Causes of Project Failure,” IEEE Transactions in 
Engineering Management, vol. 37, no. 4 (1990), pp. 269–76.
Pinto, J. K., and D. P. Sleven, “Critical Success Factors in Successful Project Implementa-
tion,” IEEE Transactions in Engineering Management, vol. 34, no. 1 (1987), pp. 22–27.
Posner, B. Z., “What It Takes to Be an Effective Project Manager,” Project Manage-
ment Journal, March 1987, pp. 51–55.
Project Management Institute, Leadership in Project Management Annual (Newtown 
Square, PA: PMI Publishing, 2006).
Project Management Institute, PMBOK Guide, 5th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project 
Management Institute, 2013).
Robb, D. J., “Ethics in Project Management: Issues, Practice, and Motive,” PM Network, 
December 1996, pp. 13–18.
Sayles, L. R., Leadership: Managing in Real Organizations (New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1989), pp. 70–78.
Sayles, L. R., The Working Leader (New York: Free Press, 1993).
Senge, P. M., The Fifth Discipline (New York: Doubleday, 1990).
Shenhar, A. J., and B. Nofziner, “A New Model for Training Project Managers,” Pro-
ceedings of the 28th Annual Project Management Institute Symposium, 1997, pp. 301–6.
Shtub, A., J. F. Bard, and S. Globerson, Project Management: Engineering,  Technology, 
and Implementation (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1994).
Trevino, L. K., and K. A. Nelson, Managing Business Ethics: Straight Talk about 
How to Do It Right, 5th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
Turner, J. R., and R. Müller, “The Project Manager Leadership Style as a Success 
Factor on Projects: A Literature Review,” Project Management Journal, vol. 36,  
no. 2 (2005), pp. 49–61.
Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  367
Case 10.1
The Blue Sky Project*
Garth Hudson was a 29-year-old graduate of Eastern State University (ESU) with a 
B.S. degree in management information systems. After graduation he worked for seven 
years at Bluegrass Systems in Louisville, Kentucky. While at ESU he worked part time 
for an oceanography professor, Ahmet Green, creating a customized database for a 
research project he was conducting. Green was recently appointed director of Eastern 
Oceanography Institute (EOI), and Hudson was confident that this prior experience 
was instrumental in his getting the job as information services (IS) director at the Insti-
tute. Although he took a significant pay cut, he jumped at the opportunity to return to 
his alma mater. His job at Bluegrass Systems had been very demanding. The long 
hours and extensive traveling had created tension in his marriage. He was looking for-
ward to a normal job with reasonable hours. Besides, Jenna, his wife, would be busy 
* Prepared by Erik Larson and V. T. Raja, senior instructor at the College of Business, Oregon State University.
www.ebook3000.com

pursuing her MBA at Eastern State University. While at Bluegrass, Hudson worked on 
a wide range of IS projects. He was confident that he had the requisite technical exper-
tise to excel at his new job.
 
Eastern Oceanography Institute was an independently funded research facility 
aligned with Eastern State University. Approximately 50 full- and part-time staff 
worked at the Institute. They worked on research grants funded by the National  Science 
Foundation (NSF) and the United Nations (UN), as well as research financed by pri-
vate industry. There were typically 7 to 9 major research projects under way at any one 
time as well as 20 to 25 smaller projects. One-third of the Institute’s scientists had 
part-time teaching assignments at ESU and used the Institute to conduct their own 
basic research.
FIRST YEAR AT EOI
Hudson made a point of introducing himself to the various groups of people upon his 
arrival at the Institute. Still, his contact with the staff had been limited. He spent most 
of his time becoming familiar with EOI’s information system, training his staff, 
responding to unexpected problems, and working on various projects. Hudson suffered 
from food allergies and refrained from informal staff lunches at nearby restaurants. He 
stopped regularly attending the biweekly staff meetings in order to devote more time to 
his work. He now only attended the meetings when there was a specific agenda item 
regarding his operation.
 
The IS staff at EOI consisted of two full-time assistants, Tom Jackson and Grant 
Hill. They were supported by five part-time student assistants from the computer sci-
ence department. Grant Hill was assigned full-time to a large five-year NSF grant 
aimed at creating a virtual library of oceanographic research. Hill worked out of the 
project leader’s office and had very little interaction with Hudson or Jackson.  Hudson’s 
relationship with Jackson was awkward from the start. He found out, after the fact, that 
Jackson thought he would get the job as director. They never talked about it, but he 
sensed tension the first couple of months on the job. One of the problems was that he 
and Jackson were totally different personalities. Jackson was gregarious and very talk-
ative. He had a habit of after lunch walking around the Institute talking to different 
scientists and researchers. Often this would lead to useful information. Hudson, on the 
other hand, preferred to stay in his office working on various assignments and ven-
tured out only when called upon. While Hudson felt Jackson was not on top of the 
latest developments as he was, he respected Jackson’s work.
 
Last month the system was corrupted by a virus introduced over the Internet. 
 Hudson devoted an entire weekend to restoring the system to operation. A recurring 
headache was one of the servers, code-named “Poncho,” that would occasionally shut 
down for no apparent reason. Instead of replacing it, he decided to nurse Poncho along 
until it could be replaced. His work was frequently interrupted by frantic calls from 
staff researchers who needed immediate help on a variety of computer-related prob-
lems. He was shocked at how computer illiterate some of the researchers were and how 
he had to guide them through some of the basics of e-mail management and database 
configuration. He did find time to help Assistant Professor Amanda Johnson on a proj-
ect. Johnson was the only researcher to respond to Hudson’s e-mail announcing that 
the IS staff was available to help on projects. Hudson created a virtual project office on 
the Internet so that Johnson could collaborate with colleagues from institutes in Italy 
and Thailand on a UN research grant. He looked forward to the day when he could 
spend more time on fun projects like that.
368  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  369
THE BLUE SKY CONVERSION PROJECT
The “Blue Sky” conversion project began in earnest four months ago. Ahmet Green 
returned from Washington, D.C., with grim news. The economic downturn was going 
to lead to a dramatic reduction in funding. He anticipated as much as a 25 percent 
reduction in annual budget over the next three to five years. This would lead to staff 
reductions and cutting operating costs. One cost-cutting measure was moving IT opera-
tions to the “cloud.” Green had first proposed the idea to Hudson after attending a meet-
ing with several directors of other institutes who faced similar financial challenges.
 
The basic strategy was to move all of the Institute’s databases, software, and even 
hardware to a “private cloud.” Staff would use their current PCs to simply access more 
powerful machines over the Internet. These powerful machines could be partitioned 
and configured differently as per the needs of research staff, giving each staff their 
own virtual machine (VM). Staff could also access, use, and share virtual servers over 
the Internet as needed. Hudson worked with the Institute’s accountant on a cost/benefit 
analysis. From their standpoint it made perfect sense. First, the Institute would not 
have to replace or upgrade aging computers and servers. Second, the Institute would 
enjoy significant IT savings since they would pay for only IT resources actually used. 
They would not have to make any major IT capital expenditures. Third, cloud comput-
ing would provide scientists greater flexibility by accessing desired resources or soft-
ware from anywhere at any time. And finally, once the system was up and running, the 
Institute would no longer need the services of at least one full-time IT worker. Green 
decided to name the project “Blue Sky” to put a positive spin on the conversion.
 
At first the associate directors balked at the idea. Some had a hard time conceptual-
izing what cloud computing meant. Others were worried about security and reliability. 
In the end they reluctantly signed off on the project when given alternative cost-cutting 
initiatives. Hudson assured them that cloud computing was the wave of the future and 
setting up or accessing virtual machines on the “cloud” was as simple as setting up or 
accessing their g-mail account.
 
The conversion project would be completed in stages. The first stage was selecting 
a provider. The next stage was migrating non–mission critical information to the cloud. 
The next stages would entail migrating each of the six big grant projects in waves to 
the cloud. The final stage would focus on the remaining smaller projects. Training 
would be an integral part of each stage. The Institute would maintain a back-up for all 
the data until 6 months after complete conversion. After that the cloud service provider 
would be responsible for backing up the data.
 
At first Jackson was excited about the project. He was savvy enough to realize that 
this was the future of computing and he was intrigued with how the whole system 
would work. His feelings soon changed when he started thinking about the potential 
ramifications for his job. He asked Hudson more than once what the department would 
look like after the conversion. Hudson replied vaguely that they would figure it out 
once the system was up and running.
 
A task force was formed, headed by Hudson, to select a cloud service provider. 
Hudson was surprised by how many choices there were. Plans and cost structures var-
ied considerably. After much deliberation the committee narrowed the choices to three. 
The first two were among the bigger providers in the industry, VMWARE and Micro-
soft. The third choice was a relatively new company, OpenRange, which offered a 
cheaper solution. Jackson argued that even though the bigger providers would cost 
more, they were a much safer bet. Hudson responded that he had confidence in Open-
Range and cutting costs was the primary goal behind the project. In the end, Hudson 
www.ebook3000.com

persuaded the committee to choose OpenRange. Not only would cost be significantly 
cheaper, but OpenRange would help in the training of the personnel. Hudson liked this 
idea; training was not his strength, and he wasn’t looking forward to holding senior 
scientists’ hands through the process.
 
It took Hudson and Jackson six weeks to identify non-critical data. Hudson worked 
on the back end while Jackson met with staff to identify non-critical information. The 
motto was when in doubt, leave it out. The actual migration only took a couple of days. 
Training proved to be more problematic. The staff sent by OpenRange appeared to be 
straight out of college. While enthusiastic, they were inexperienced in the art of getting 
older staff to accept and use new technology. Many trainers had the habit of simply 
doing things for the staff instead of showing them how to do it themselves. It all came 
to a head when a power outage at the OpenRange storage system shut down and dis-
rupted operations at the Institute for 36 hours.
 
Ahmet held an emergency meeting. Hudson reported that the power outage occurred 
in North East India and that OpenRange was expanding their back-up systems. Several 
members argued that the Institute should switch to one of the bigger providers. When 
this came up Hudson looked at Jackson and was relieved when he remained silent. In 
the end, Ahmet announced that it would be too costly to switch providers and Hudson 
and his staff would have to make the conversion work. Jackson stepped forward and 
volunteered to manage the training. Everyone agreed that the Institute should hire  
3 more part-time assistants to help the staff with the transition.
 
Hudson worked behind the scenes, coordinating with his counterparts at Open-
Range and planning the conversion of the next segment of the project. Jackson worked 
closely with the OpenRange trainers and refocused their attention on teaching. Resis-
tance was pretty high at first. Jackson used his personal contacts within the Institute to 
rally support for the change. He persuaded Hudson to change the conversion schedule 
to begin with those projects in which the leads were most supportive of the change. 
Training improved and Jackson created some useful training materials, including short 
videos on how to access the virtual machines.
 
One problem that occurred early in the process involved a graduate research assis-
tant who mistakenly hit the wrong commands and terminated her virtual machine 
instead of logging off. This resulted in complete loss of that machine’s data in the 
cloud. Fortunately, the Institute still had back-up and Jackson was able recover the 
work. Collaborating with some programmers at OpenRange, Jackson wrote a program 
that triggered a pop-up message on the screen warning users not to terminate their 
virtual machine when logging off.
CLOSING OUT THE BLUE SKY PROJECT
It took almost a year to complete the Blue Sky project. After the rocky beginning 
things went relatively smoothly. Acceptance was slow, but Jackson and his staff 
worked with the staff to demonstrate how the new system would make their work 
easier. Two student assistants were always on call to address any problem or question. 
Hudson spent most of his time interacting with the OpenRange counterparts and rarely 
ventured out of his office. He had his student assistants collect information from staff 
so he could configure the new virtual machines to exactly match staff needs. He put in 
long hours so that customized databases would work in the new environment. This 
proved to be a very difficult task and he was quite pleased with his work. Twice Open-
Range experienced momentary power shortages at their server facility which disrupted 
work at the Institute. Hudson was happy to report that OpenRange was breaking 
ground on an alternative server system in Ukraine.
370  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager

Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  371
Case 10.2
Tom Bray
Tom Bray was mulling over today’s work schedule as he looked across the bay at the 
storm that was rolling in. It was the second official day of the Pegasus project and now 
the real work was about to begin.
 
Pegasus was a two-month renovation project for AtlantiCorp, a major financial 
institution headquartered in Boston, Massachusetts. Tom’s group was responsible for 
installing the furniture and equipment in the newly renovated accounts receivable 
department on the third floor. The Pegasus project was a dedicated project team 
formed out of AtlantiCorp facilities department with Tom as the project lead.
 
Tom was excited because this was his first major league project and he was look-
ing forward to practicing a new management style—MBWA, aka management by 
wandering around. He had been exposed to MBWA in a business class in college, 
but it wasn’t until he attended an AtlantiCorp leadership training seminar that he 
decided to change how he managed people. The trainer was a devout MBWA cham-
pion (“You can’t manage people from a computer!”). Furthermore, the testimonies 
from his peers reinforced the difference that MBWA can make when it comes to 
working on projects.
 
Tom had joined the facilities group at AtlantiCorp five years earlier after working 
for EDS for six years. He quickly demonstrated technical competences and good work 
habits. He was encouraged to take all the internal project management workshops 
offered by AtlantiCorp. On his last two projects he served as assistant project manager 
responsible for procurement and contract management.
 
He had read books about the soft side of project management and MBWA made 
sense—after all, people not tools get projects done. His boss had told him he needed to 
refine his people skills and work on developing rapport with team members. MBWA 
seemed like a perfect solution.
 
Tom reviewed the list of team member names; some of the foreign names were real 
tongue twisters. For example, one of his better workers was from Thailand and her name 
was Pinyarat Sirisomboonsuk. He practiced saying “Pin-ya-răt See-rē-som-boon-sook.” 
 
When the Institute conducted a retrospective (project review) on the Blue Sky proj-
ect, some still questioned the choice of OpenRange as a cloud service provider, but 
praised Jackson’s work on helping the staff make the transition. Despite the criticism 
over the choice of OpenRange, Hudson felt good about the project. The system was up 
and running and the staff was beginning to enjoy the flexibility it provided. Besides, 
the Institute would achieve real savings from the new system.
 
Soon after the retrospective, Hudson was surprised when Ahmet walked into his 
office and closed the door. Ahmet began by thanking Hudson for his work on the proj-
ect. He then cleared his throat and said, “You know, Garth, one of the consequences of 
Blue Sky is reducing our IT staff. Grant Hill is needed for the data library project. So it 
comes down to you or Jackson. Frankly there is general agreement among the Associate 
Directors that Jackson is essential to the Institute. I know this might come as a surprise 
to you, and before I make a decision I want to give you a chance to change my mind.”
1. If you were Hudson, how would you respond to the director?
2. What mistakes did Hudson make?
3. What are the lessons to be learned from this case?
www.ebook3000.com

He got up, tucked in his shirt, and walked out of his office and down to the floor where 
his team was busy unloading equipment.
 
Tom said “Hi” to the first few workers he met until he encountered Jack and three 
other workers. Jack was busy pulling hardware out of a box while his teammates were 
standing around talking. Tom blurted, “Come on guys, we’ve got work to do.” They 
quickly separated and began unloading boxes.
 
The rest of the visit seemed to go well. He helped Shari unload a heavy box and 
managed to get an appreciative grin from Pinyarat when he almost correctly pro-
nounced her name. Satisfied, Tom went back up to his office thinking that MBWA 
wouldn’t be that tough to do.
 
After responding to e-mail and calling some vendors, Tom ventured back out to see 
how things were going downstairs. When he got there, the floor was weirdly quiet. Peo-
ple were busy doing their work and his attempts at generating conversation elicited stiff 
responses. He left thinking that maybe MBWA is going to be tougher than he thought.
1. What do you think is going on at the end of this case?
2. What should Tom do next and why?
3. What can be learned from this case?
372  Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager
Case 10.3
Cerberus Corporation*
Cerberus is a successful producer of specialty chemicals. It operates nine large campus 
sites in the United States, with a number of different business units on each site. These 
business units operate independently, with direct reporting to corporate headquarters. 
Site functions such as safety, environmental, and facilities management report to a host 
organization—typically the business unit that is the largest user of their services.
SUSAN STEELE
Susan Steele has worked in the Facilities group at the Cerberus Richmond site for the 
last two years. The Facilities manager, Tom Stern, reports to the General Manager of 
the largest business unit on site, the highly profitable Adhesives and Sealants Division. 
Susan started with Cerberus when she graduated with her business degree from 
Awsum University. She was excited about her new assignment—leading a project for 
the first time. She remembered Tom saying, “We’ve got office furniture dating back to 
the 80s. There are those ugly green-top desks that look like they came from military 
surplus! I’m especially concerned about computer workstation ergonomics—it’s a 
major issue that we absolutely must fix! I want you to lead a project to transition our 
office furniture to the new corporate standard.”
 
Susan assembled her project team: Jeff, the site safety/ergonomics engineer; 
Gretchen, the space planner; Cindy, the move coordinator; and Kari, the accounting 
liaison for Facilities. At their first meeting, everyone agreed that ergonomics was the 
most urgent concern. All five business units responded to a workstation survey that 
identified injury-causing ergonomics. The team was developing a plan to replace old 
desks with new, ergo-adjustable furniture by the end of the year. Susan asked Kari 
about the budget, and Kari responded, “Facilities should not pay for this. We want the 
individual business units to pay so that the costs will show where they are incurred.”
* Courtesy of John Sloan, Oregon State University.

 
Gretchen spoke up: “You know, we’ve got lots of department moves going on con-
stantly. Everybody is always jockeying for space and location as their business needs 
change. Besides the ergonomics, could we say that only corporate standard furniture 
gets moved? That would force changing some of the stuff that’s just plain ugly.” Every-
one agreed that this was a great idea.
 
Susan presented the project plan to Tom and got a green light to proceed.
JON WOOD
Jon Wood is a planning manager, with 22 years experience at Cerberus. His business 
unit, Photographic Chemicals Division (PCD), is losing money. Digital photography is 
continuing to reduce the size of the market, and PCD is having trouble matching the 
competition’s relentless price-cutting. Jon recently transferred to Richmond from cor-
porate headquarters, where he ran the economic forecasting group. He is considered a 
new broom, and he is determined to sweep clean.
 
One of Jon’s early actions was to negotiate with his general manager for a depart-
ment move. Money was tight, and the site facilities function charged an arm and a leg 
for moves (covering all their fixed overhead, the operations people groused). How-
ever, Jon felt it was important to move from Building 4, where they were next to 
Production, to Building 6, where they could be close to Marketing, Forecasting, and 
Accounting. His General Manager agreed, and there was lots of excitement in his 
team about their upcoming move. Jon assigned one of his planners, Richard, to work 
with the Facilities team on the layout and move plan for the group. Things seemed to 
be going fine—Jon saw Richard sitting down with the move coordinator, and they 
seemed to be on track.
 
The day before the move, Jon hung up the phone from a particularly tense telecon-
ference with a Canadian subcontractor. Production was not going well, and product 
availability would be tight for the rest of the quarter. Clustered around his desk were 
Richard, Cindy, and a person he hadn’t met yet, Susan. After hurried introductions, 
Susan told Jon that his filing cabinets could not be moved. The cabinets are large lat-
eral files, five feet wide and two feet deep, a combination of both filing cabinets and 
bookshelves. Jon brought them with him from Corporate because he thought they 
looked nice with their dark grey steel sides and wood veneer tops. Susan told him that 
he would have to replace them with new corporate standard cabinets, virtually the 
same size. Jon said, “You mean you want me to throw away perfectly good filing cabi-
nets and spend another $2,000 on new ones, just so they match? I won’t do it!”
 
Susan replied, “Then I won’t authorize the movement of the old cabinets.”
 
Jon said, “You’re joking—these cabinets are grey, the new ones are grey—the only 
difference is the wood top! You’d throw away $2,000 for nothing?”
 
Susan replied stiffly, “I’m sorry, that’s the policy.”
 
Jon said, “I don’t care what the policy is. If I have to move them myself, those cabi-
nets are not going to the dump. My division is losing money and I’m not going to 
throw money away. If you don’t like it, you’re going to have to get your general man-
ager to convince my general manager to make me do it. Now would you please leave 
so I can get some work done.”
1. If you were Susan, what would you do?
2. What, if anything, could Susan have done differently to avoid this problem?
3. What could the management of Cerberus do to more effectively manage situations 
like this?
Chapter 10  Being an Effective Project Manager  373
www.ebook3000.com

Managing Project Teams
11
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
11-1 Identify key characteristics of a high-performance 
project team.
11-2 Distinguish the different stages of team 
development.
11-3 Understand the impact situational factors have on 
project team development.
11-4 Identify strategies for developing a high- 
performance project team.
11-5 Distinguish functional conflict from dysfunctional 
conflict and describe strategies for encouraging 
functional conflict and discouraging dysfunctional 
conflict.
11-6 Understand the challenges of managing virtual 
project teams.
11-7 Recognize the different pitfalls that can occur in a 
project team.
OUTLINE
11.1 The Five-Stage Team Development Model
11.2 Situational Factors Affecting Team 
Development
11.3 Building High-Performance Project Teams
11.4 Managing Virtual Project Teams
11.5 Project Team Pitfalls
Summary
C H A P T E R  E L E V E N
374

Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
375 
11-1
LO
Identify key characteristics 
of a high-performance 
project team.
Coming together is a beginning. Keeping together is progress. Working 
together is success.
—Henry Ford
The magic and power of teams is captured in the term “synergy,” which is derived 
from the Greek word sunergos: “working together.” There is positive and negative 
synergy. The essence of positive synergy can be found in the phrase “The whole is 
greater than the sum of the parts.” Conversely, negative synergy occurs when the 
whole is less than the sum of the parts. Mathematically, these two states can be sym-
bolized by the following equations:
Positive Synergy 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 10
Negative Synergy 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 2 (or even −2)
Synergy perhaps can best be seen on a basketball court, a soccer pitch, or a football 
field where teammates play as one to defeat a superior foe (see Snapshot from 
Practice 11.1: The 2008 Olympic Redeem Team).
www.ebook3000.com

376  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
In the 2004 Olympics in Athens, 
twelve years after Magic Johnson and 
Michael Jordan led the U.S. Dream 
Team to Olympic gold in Barcelona, 
the U.S. Basketball Team composed of 
NBA stars lost not once but three times to international 
competition. For the first time in Olympic history the 
U.S. settled for a bronze medal in men’s basketball. 
Basketball was no longer America’s game.
 
An autopsy of the debacle in Athens turned up a 
severe case of negative synergy. The causes were many. 
The team featured only three holdovers from the group 
that had qualified the previous summer. Seven of the 
original invitees withdrew. In the end some 14 players 
turned down Uncle Sam, invoking excuses from family 
obligations to nagging injuries to the security situation in 
Greece. As a result, coach Larry Brown took charge of a 
team with an average age of 23 years, and it showed. 
Behind the scenes, problems of dress and punctuality 
festered and on the eve of the games Brown wanted to 
send several players home. The million-dollar players 
were overconfident, and assumed that their individual 
brilliance would prevail. An overreliance on one-on-one 
basketball and poor team defense doomed them as they 
lost games to Puerto Rico, Lithuania, and Argentina.
 
Enter Jerry Colangelo, 68, former coach, player, and 
president of the Phoenix Suns. “The way they conducted 
themselves left a lot to be desired,” he says of the 2004 
team. “Watching and listening to how people reacted to 
our players, I knew we’d hit bottom.” Colangelo told NBA 
commissioner David Stern that he would only assume 
duties as managing director if he was given complete 
control. As a measure of how abysmal the situation was, 
he immediately got what he asked for.
 
In 2005 Colangelo met face-to-face with every pro-
spective national player, to hear in their own words 
why they wanted to represent their country. The few 
good men to set things right wouldn’t be paid or guar-
anteed playing time, much less a starting spot. A key 
recruit was superstar LeBron James, who had been 
tagged “LeBronze” after his performance on the disap-
pointing 2004 team. Colangelo says, “I got buy-in. Half-
way through my talk with him, LeBron said, I’m in.” 
Kobe Bryant soon followed and all but two of the 30 
top NBA stars accepted Colangelo’s offer.
 
Mike Kryzewski, the college coach at Duke, was hired 
with one project objective in mind—win the gold medal. To 
do so he had to change the attitude of team USA. They 
had to subordinate their superstar egos and buy in to the 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 .1
The 2008 Olympic Redeem Team*
concept of team ball. A blessing in disguise was being 
knocked out of the 2006 world championship by a Greek 
team. The players came away from that disappointment 
committed to team ball as extra passes became the staple 
in practices. The change in attitude was evident in more 
subtle ways. The USA on the uniforms was bright red, 
while the players’ names were muted blue. The players no 
longer referred to hoops as “our game” and spoke about 
how it had become the world’s game. Even the team’s offi-
cial slogan (United We Rise) and unofficial nickname (the 
Redeem Team) implied room for improvement.
 
The team bought into a common objective. Team 
USA marched to the final gold medal game by beating 
opponents by an average margin of 30+ points. Experts 
marveled not so much at the victory margin, but by how 
well they played as a team. “Our goal is to win a gold 
medal and be humble about it,” said Jason Kidd, six-
time all-pro point guard, “and if we do it by 50, to make 
sure it’s because we’re playing the right way.” Nothing 
exemplified the right way more than a moment in the 
final, in which flawless ball movement from the 
Redeemers for 16 seconds, without a dribble being 
taken, culminated with Dwight Howard receiving a per-
fect pass for an uncontested dunk.
 
In the end, they didn’t dominate the gold medal 
game. Spain proved to be inspired opponents. They 
simply closed the game out and for the first time since 
NBA players have come to the Olympics, the USA 
played as a team rather than showboating individuals.
© Dusan Vranic/AP Photo
* Alexander Wolff, “The Redeem Team: New Nickname, New 
Outlook for U.S. at Olympics,” http://sportsillustrated.cnn 
.com/2008/writers/alexander_wolff/07/22/redeem.team0728 
/index.html; and Greg Varkonyi, “The Redeem Team Played 
Like a Dream in the Olympic Basketball Final,” http://www 
.sportingo.com/olympic-games/basketball/a10072_redeem 
-team-played-like-dream-olympic-basketball-final.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  377
 
Although less visible than in team sports, positive and negative synergy can also be 
observed and felt in the daily operations of project teams. Here is a description from 
one team member we interviewed:
Instead of operating as one big team we fractionalized into a series of subgroups. The marketing 
people stuck together as well as the systems guys. A lot of time was wasted gossiping and com-
plaining about each other. When the project started slipping behind schedule, everyone started 
covering their tracks and trying to pass the blame on to others. After a while we avoided direct 
conversation and resorted to e-mail. Management finally pulled the plug and brought in another 
team to salvage the project. It was one of the worst project management experiences in my life.
This same individual fortunately was also able to recount a more positive experience:
There was a contagious excitement within the team. Sure we had our share of problems and 
setbacks, but we dealt with them straight on and, at times, were able to do the impossible. 
We all cared about the project and looked out for each other. At the same time we challenged 
each other to do better. It was one of the most exciting times in my life.
 
The following is a set of characteristics commonly associated with high-performing 
teams that exhibit positive synergy:1
1. The team shares a sense of common purpose, and each member is willing to work 
toward achieving project objectives.
2. The team identifies individual talents and expertise and uses them, depending on the 
project’s needs at any given time. At these times, the team willingly accepts the influ-
ence and leadership of the members whose skills are relevant to the immediate task.
3. Roles are balanced and shared to facilitate both the accomplishment of tasks and 
feelings of group cohesion and morale.
4. The team exerts energy toward problem solving rather than allowing itself to be 
drained by interpersonal issues or competitive struggles.
5. Differences of opinion are encouraged and freely expressed.
6. To encourage risk taking and creativity, mistakes are treated as opportunities for 
learning rather than reasons for punishment.
7. Members set high personal standards of performance and encourage each other to 
realize the objectives of the project.
8. Members identify with the team and consider it an important source of both profes-
sional and personal growth.
High-performing teams become champions, create breakthrough products, exceed cus-
tomer expectations, and get projects done ahead of schedule and under budget. They 
are bonded together by mutual interdependency and a common goal or vision. They 
trust each other and exhibit a high level of collaboration.
11.1 The Five-Stage Team Development Model
Just as infants develop in certain ways during their first months of life, many experts 
argue that groups develop in a predictable manner. One of the most popular models 
identifies five stages (see Figure 11.1) through which groups develop into effective 
teams (Tuchman, 1965; Tuchman and Jensen, 1977):
11-2
LO
Distinguish the different 
stages of team 
development.
1 See E. H. Schein, Process Consultation, 2nd ed. (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1988), pp. 42–43; and R. Likert,  
New Patterns of Management (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961), pp. 162–77.
www.ebook3000.com

378  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
1. Forming. During this initial stage the members get acquainted with each other and 
understand the scope of the project. They begin to establish ground rules by trying 
to find out what behaviors are acceptable with respect to both the project (what role 
they will play, what performance expectations are) and interpersonal relations 
(who’s really in charge). This stage is completed once members begin to think of 
themselves as part of a group.
2. Storming. As the name suggests, this stage is marked by a high degree of internal 
conflict. Members accept that they are part of a project group but resist the con-
straints that the project and group put on their individuality. There is conflict over 
who will control the group and how decisions will be made. As these conflicts are 
resolved, the project manager’s leadership becomes accepted, and the group moves 
to the next stage.
3. Norming. The third stage is one in which close relationships develop and the group 
demonstrates cohesiveness. Feelings of camaraderie and shared responsibility for 
the project are heightened. The norming phase is complete when the group struc-
ture solidifies and the group establishes a common set of expectations about how 
members should work together.
4. Performing. The team operating structure at this point is fully functional and 
accepted. Group energy has moved from getting to know each other and how the 
group will work together to accomplishing the project goals.
5. Adjourning. For conventional work groups, performing is the last stage of their 
development. However, for project teams, there is a completion phase. During this 
stage, the team prepares for its own disbandment. High performance is no longer a 
top priority. Instead attention is devoted to wrapping up the project. Responses of 
members vary in this stage. Some members are upbeat, basking in the project 
team’s accomplishments. Others may be depressed over loss of camaraderie and 
friendships gained during the project’s life.
FIGURE 11.1
The Five-Stage Team 
Development Model 
Orientation to project
Emotional response to the
demands of the project
Open exchange of
relevent information
Emergence of a solution
Dissolution of the group
Testing and dependence
Intragroup conﬂict
Development of group
cohesion
Functional roles emerge
Stage 1: Forming
Stage 2: Storming
Stage 3: Norming
Stage 4: Performing
Stage 5: Adjourning
Project Activity
Group Process

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  379
 
This model has several implications for those working on project teams. The first is 
that the model provides a framework for the group to understand its own development. 
Project managers have found it useful to share the model with their teams. It helps 
members accept the tensions of the storming phase, and it directs their focus to moving 
toward the more productive phases. Another implication is that it stresses the impor-
tance of the norming phase, which contributes significantly to the level of productivity 
experienced during the performing phase. Project managers, as we shall see, have to 
take an active role in shaping group norms that will contribute to ultimate project suc-
cess. For an alternative model of group development see Research Highlight 11.1: The 
Punctuated Equilibrium Model of Group Development.
11.2 Situational Factors Affecting Team Development
Experience and research indicate that high-performance project teams are much more 
likely to develop under the following conditions:2
∙ There are 10 or fewer members per team.
∙ Members volunteer to serve on the project team.
∙ Members serve on the project from beginning to end.
∙ Members are assigned to the project full time.
∙ Members are part of an organization culture that fosters cooperation and trust.
∙ Members report solely to the project manager.
∙ All relevant functional areas are represented on the team.
∙ The project involves a compelling objective.
∙ Members are located within conversational distance of each other.
In reality, it is rare that a project manager is assigned a project that meets all of these 
conditions. For example, many projects’ requirements dictate the active involvement 
of more than 10 members and may consist of a complex set of interlocking teams com-
prising more than 100 professionals. In many organizations, functional managers or 
central manpower offices assign project members with little input from the project 
manager. To optimize resource utilization, team member involvement may be part 
time, and/or participants may move in and out of the project team on an as-needed 
basis. In the case of ad hoc task forces, no member of the team works full time on the 
project. In many corporations an NIH (not invented here) culture exists that discour-
ages collaboration across functional boundaries.
 
Team members often report to different managers, and, in some cases, the project 
manager will have no direct input over performance appraisals and advancement 
opportunities of team members. Key functional areas may not be represented during 
the entire duration of the project but may only be involved in a sequential manner. Not 
all projects have a compelling objective. It can be hard to get members excited about 
mundane projects such as a simple product extension or a conventional apartment 
complex. Finally, team members are often scattered across different corporate offices 
and buildings or, in the case of a virtual project, across the entire globe.
Understand the impact 
situational factors have 
on project team 
development.
11-3
LO
2 See, for example: G. C. Homans, Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1961); M. 
Sherif, Group Conflict and Cooperation: Their Social Psychology (Chicago: Aldine, 1967); J. J. Seta, P. B. Paulus, and J. Schkade, 
“Effects of Group Size and Proximity under Cooperative and Competitive Conditions,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, vol. 98, no. 2 (1976), pp. 47–53; and A. Zander, Making Groups Effective (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994).
www.ebook3000.com

380
Gersick’s research suggests that 
groups don’t develop in a universal 
sequence of stages as suggested by 
the five-phase model. Her research, 
which is based on the systems con-
cept of punctuated equilibrium, found that the timing 
of when groups form and actually change the way they 
work is highly consistent. What makes this research 
appealing is that it is based on studies of more than a 
dozen field and laboratory task forces assigned to com-
plete a specific project. This research reveals that each 
group begins with a unique approach to accomplishing 
its project that is set in its first meeting and includes the 
behavior and roles that dominate phase I. Phase I con-
tinues until one-half of the allotted time for project 
completion has expired (regardless of actual amount of 
time). At this midpoint, a major transition occurs that 
includes the dropping of the group’s old norms and 
behavior patterns and the emergence of new behavior 
and working relationships that contribute to increased 
progress toward completing the project. The last meet-
ing is marked by accelerated activity to complete the 
project. These findings are summarized in Figure 11.2.
 
The remarkable discovery in these studies was 
that each group experienced its transition at the same 
point in its calendar—roughly halfway between the 
first meeting and the completion deadline—despite 
the fact that some groups spent as little as an hour on 
their project while others spent six months. It was as if 
the groups universally experienced a midlife crisis at 
this point. The midpoint appeared to work like an 
alarm clock, heightening members’ awareness that 
time was limited and they needed to get moving. 
Within the context of the five-stage model, it suggests 
that groups begin by combining the forming and 
norming stages, then go through a period of low per-
forming, followed by storming, then a period of high 
performing, and finally adjourning.
 
Gersick’s findings suggest that there are natural 
transition points during the life of teams in which the 
group is receptive to change and that such a moment 
naturally occurs at the midpoint of a project. However, 
a manager does not want to have to wait 6 months on 
a complicated 12-month project for a team to get its act 
together! Here it is important to note that Gersick’s 
groups were working on relatively small-scale projects, 
i.e., a 4-person bank task force in charge of designing 
a new bank account in one month and a 12-person 
medical task force in charge of reorganizing two units 
of a treatment facility. In most cases no formal project 
plan was established. If anything, the results point to 
the importance of good project management and the 
need to establish deadlines and milestones. By impos-
ing a series of deadlines associated with important 
milestones, it is possible to create multiple transition 
points for natural group development. For example, a 
12-month construction project can be broken down 
into six to eight significant milestones with the chal-
lenge of meeting each deadline producing the pre-
requisite tension for elevating team performance.
Research Highlight 11.1
The Punctuated Equilibrium 
Model of Group Development*
FIGURE 11.2 The Punctuated Equilibrium Model of Group Development
High
Performance
Midpoint
Deadline
Completion
Start
First
meeting
Phase 2
Phase 1
Transition
* Connie J. Gersick, “Time and Transition in Work Teams:  
Toward a New Model of Group Development,” Academy of 
Management Journal, vol. 31, no. 1 (March 1988), pp. 9–41; 
and Connie J. Gersick, “Making Time Predictable Transitions 
in Task Groups,” Academy of Management Journal, vol. 32, 
no. 2 (June 1989), pp. 274–309.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  381
 
It is important for project managers and team members to recognize the situational 
constraints they are operating under and do the best they can. It would be naive to believe 
that every project team has the same potential to evolve into a high-performance team. 
Under less-than-ideal conditions, it may be a struggle just to meet project objectives. 
Ingenuity, discipline, and sensitivity to team dynamics are essential to maximizing the 
performance of a project team.
11.3 Building High-Performance Project Teams
Project managers play a key role in developing high-performance project teams. They 
recruit members, conduct meetings, establish a team identity, create a common sense 
of purpose or a shared vision, manage a reward system that encourages teamwork, 
orchestrate decision making, resolve conflicts that emerge within the team, and reju-
venate the team when energy wanes (see Figure 11.3). Project managers take advan-
tage of situational factors that naturally contribute to team development while 
improvising around those factors that inhibit team development. In doing so they 
exhibit a highly interactive management style that exemplifies teamwork and, as dis-
cussed in the previous chapter, manage the interface between the team and the rest of 
the organization.
Recruiting Project Members
The process of selecting and recruiting project members will vary across organiza-
tions. Two important factors affecting recruitment are the importance of the project 
and the management structure being used to complete the project. Often for high- 
priority projects that are critical to the future of the organization, the project manager 
will be given virtual carte blanche to select whomever he or she deems necessary. For 
less significant projects, personnel will simply be assigned to the project.
 
In many matrix structures, the functional manager controls who is assigned to the 
project; the project manager will have to work with the functional manager to obtain 
necessary personnel. Even in a project team where members are selected and assigned 
full time to the project, the project manager has to be sensitive to the needs of others. 
There is no better way to create enemies within an organization than to be perceived as 
unnecessarily robbing other departments of essential personnel.
Identify strategies for  
developing a high- 
performance project 
team.
11-4
LO
Recruit
team members
Superior
performance
Conduct project meetings
Establish team identity
Create a shared vision
Build a reward system
Manage decision making
Manage conﬂict
Rejuvenate the project team
FIGURE 11.3
Creating a High-
Performance  
Project Team
www.ebook3000.com

382  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
 
Experienced project managers stress the importance of asking for volunteers. How-
ever, this desirable step oftentimes is outside the manager’s control. Still, the value of 
having team members volunteer for the project as opposed to being assigned cannot be 
overlooked. Agreeing to work on the project is the first step toward building personal 
commitment to the project. Such commitment will be essential to maintain motivation 
when the project hits hard times and extra effort is required.
 
When selecting and recruiting team members, project managers naturally look for 
individuals with the necessary experience and knowledge/technical skills critical for 
project completion. At the same time, there are less obvious considerations that need 
to be factored into the recruitment process:
∙ Problem-solving ability. If the project is complex and fuzzy, then a manager wants 
people who are good at working under uncertainty and have strong problem- 
identification and problem-solving skills. These same people are likely to be bored 
and less productive working on straightforward projects that go by the book.
∙ Availability. Sometimes the people who are most available are not the ones wanted 
for the team. Conversely, if members recruited are already overcommitted, they 
may not be able to offer much.
∙ Technological expertise. Managers should be wary of people who know too much 
about a specific technology. They may be technology buffs who like to study but 
have a hard time settling down and doing the work.
∙ Credibility. The credibility of the project is enhanced by the reputation of the peo-
ple involved in the project. Recruiting a sufficient number of “winners” lends con-
fidence to the project.
∙ Political connections. Managers are wise to recruit individuals who already have a 
good working relationship with key stakeholders. This is particularly true for 
projects operating in a matrix environment in which a significant portion of the 
work will be under the domain of a specific functional department and not the core 
project team.
∙ Ambition, initiative, and energy. These qualities can make up for a lot of shortcom-
ings in other areas and should not be underestimated.
∙ Familiarity. Research suggests repeat collaboration stifles creativity and innova-
tion. On challenging, breakthrough projects it is wise to interject the team with 
experts who have little previous working experience with others. (Skilton and 
Dooley, 2010)
See Snapshot from Practice 11.2: Managing Martians for further advice on recruiting 
team members.
 
After reviewing needed skills, the manager should try to find out through 
the corporate grapevine who is good, who is available, and who might want to work 
on the project. Some organizations may allow direct interviews. Often a manager 
will have to expend political capital to get highly prized people assigned to the 
project.
 
In matrix environments, the project manager will have to request appoint-
ments with functional managers to discuss project requirements for staffing. The 
following documents should be available at these discussions: an overall proj-
ect scope statement, endorsements of top management, and a description of the 
tasks and general schedule that pertain to the people from their departments. Man-
agers need to be precise as to what attributes they are seeking and why they are 
important.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  383
Conducting Project Meetings
The First Project Team Meeting
Research on team development confirms what we have heard from project managers: 
The first project kick-off meeting is critical to the early functioning of the project 
team. According to one veteran project manager:
The first team meeting sets the tone for how the team will work together. If it is disorganized, 
or becomes bogged down with little sense of closure, then this can often become a self- 
fulfilling prophecy for subsequent group work. On the other hand, if it is crisply run, focus-
ing on real issues and concerns in an honest and straightforward manner, members come 
away excited about being part of the project team.
There are typically three objectives project managers try to achieve during the first 
meeting of the project team. The first is to provide an overview of the project, includ-
ing the scope and objectives, the general schedule, method, and procedures. The sec-
ond is to begin to address some of the interpersonal concerns captured in the team 
development model: Who are the other team members? How will I fit in? Will I be 
able to work with these people? The third and most important objective is to begin to 
model how the team is going to work together to complete the project. The project 
manager must recognize that first impressions are important; her behavior will be 
carefully monitored and interpreted by team members. This meeting should serve as 
an exemplary role model for subsequent meetings and reflect the leader’s style.
Donna Shirley’s 35-year career as aero-
space engineer reached a pinnacle in 
July 1997 when Sojourner—the solar-
powered, self-guided, microwave-oven-
sized rover—was seen exploring the 
Martian landscape in Pathfinder’s spectacular images 
from the surface of the red planet. The event marked a 
milestone in space exploration: No vehicle had ever 
before roamed the surface of another planet. Shirley, a 
manager at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory’s Mars Explora-
tion Program, headed the mostly male team that designed 
and built Sojourner. In her insightful memoir, Managing 
Martians, written with Danelle Morton, she makes the 
following observation about managing creative teams:
When you are managing really brilliant, creative  
people, at some point you find it’s impossible to com-
mand or control them because you can’t understand 
what they are doing. Once they have gone beyond 
your ability to understand them, you have a choice  
to make as a manager. You can limit them and the 
project by your intelligence, which I think is the wrong 
way to do it. Or you can trust them and use your  
management skills to keep them focused on the goal.
 
A lot of bad managers get threatened when their 
“subordinates” know more than they do. They either 
hire people who are inferior to them so they can 
always feel in control or they bottleneck people who 
know something they don’t so they can maintain con-
trol. The whole project suffers from the manager’s 
insecurities.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 . 2
Managing Martians*
Source: NASA/JPL
* Donna Shirley and Danelle Morton, Managing Martians  
(New York: Broadway Books, 1998), pp. 88–89.
www.ebook3000.com

384  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
 
The meeting itself comes in a variety of shapes and forms. It is not uncommon in 
major projects for the kick-off meeting to involve one or two days, often at a remote 
site away from interruptions. This retreat provides sufficient time for preliminary 
introduction, to begin to establish ground rules, and to define the structure of the proj-
ect. One advantage of off-site kick-off meetings is that they provide ample opportunity 
for informal interaction among members during breaks, meals, and evening activities; 
such informal interactions are critical to forming relationships.
 
However, many organizations do not have the luxury of holding elaborate retreats. 
In other cases the scope of a project does not warrant such an investment of time. In 
these cases, the key operating principle should be KISS (keep it simple, stupid!). Too 
often when constrained by time, project managers try to accomplish too much during 
the first meeting; in doing so, issues do not get fully resolved, and members come 
away with an information headache.
 
The project manager needs to remember that the primary goal is to run a productive 
meeting, and objectives should be realistic given the time available. If the meeting is 
only one hour, then the project manager should simply review the scope of the project, 
discuss how the team was formed, and provide an opportunity for members to intro-
duce themselves to the team.
Establishing Ground Rules
Whether as part of an elaborate first meeting or during follow-up meetings, the project 
manager must quickly begin to establish operational ground rules for how the team 
will work together. These ground rules involve not only organizational and procedural 
issues but also normative issues on how the team will interact with each other. 
Although specific procedures will vary across organizations and projects, some of the 
major issues that need to be addressed include the following:
Planning Decisions
∙ How will the project plan be developed?
∙ Will a specific project management software package be used? If so, which one?
∙ What are the specific roles and responsibilities of all the participants?
∙ Who needs to be informed of decisions? How will they be kept informed?
∙ What is the relative importance of cost, time, and performance?
∙ What are the deliverables of the project planning process?
∙ Who will approve and sign off at the completion of each deliverable?
∙ Who receives each deliverable?
Tracking Decisions
∙ How will progress be assessed?
∙ At what level of detail will the project be tracked?
∙ How will team members get data from each other?
∙ How often will they get this data?
∙ Who will generate and distribute reports?
∙ Who needs to be kept informed about project progress, and how will they  
be informed?
∙ What content/format is appropriate for each audience?

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  385
∙ Meetings
 
– Where will meetings be located?
 
– What kind of meetings will be held?
 
– Who will “run” these meetings?
 
– How will agendas be produced?
 
– How will information be recorded?
Managing Change Decisions
∙ How will changes be instituted?
∙ Who will have change approval authority?
∙ How will plan changes be documented and evaluated?
Relationship Decisions
∙ What department or organizations will the team need to interact with during the 
project?
∙ What are the roles and responsibilities of each organization (reviewer, approver, 
creator, user)?
∙ How will all involved parties be kept informed of deliverables, schedule dates, 
expectations, etc.?
∙ How will the team members communicate among themselves?
∙ What information will and won’t be exchanged?
 
Checklists like these are only a guide; items should be added or deleted as needed. 
Many of these procedures will have already been established by precedent and will 
only have to be briefly reviewed. For example, Microsoft Project or Primavera may be 
the standard software tool for planning and tracking. Likewise, a specific firm is likely 
to have an established format for reporting status information. How to deal with other 
issues will have to be determined by the project team. When appropriate, the project 
manager should actively solicit input from the project team members and draw upon 
their experience and preferred work habits. This process also contributes to their buy-
ing into the operational decisions. Decisions should be recorded and circulated to all 
members.
Establishing Team Norms
During the course of establishing these operational procedures, the project manager, 
through word and deed, should begin working with members to establish the norms for 
team interaction. Below are examples of some of the norms researchers have found 
associated with high-performance teams.3
∙ Confidentiality is maintained; no information is shared outside the team unless all 
agree to it.
∙ It is acceptable to be in trouble, but it is not acceptable to surprise others. Tell 
others immediately when deadlines or milestones will not be reached.
∙ There is zero tolerance for bulling a way through a problem or an issue.
3 See J. R. Katzenbach and D. K. Smith, The Wisdom of Teams (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1993); L. G. Bolman 
and T. E. Deal, “What Makes Teams Work,” Organizational Dynamics, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 34–45; R. Katz, “How a Team at 
Digital Equipment Designed the ‘Alpha’ Chips,” The Human Side of Managing Technological Innovation, R. Katz, ed.  
(New York: Oxford Press, 1997), pp. 137–148.
www.ebook3000.com

386  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
∙ Agree to disagree, but when a decision has been made, regardless of personal feel-
ings, move forward.
∙ Respect outsiders, and do not flaunt one’s position on the project team.
∙ Hard work does not get in the way of having fun.
 
One way of making these norms more tangible is by creating a team charter that goes 
beyond the scope statement of the project and states in explicit terms the norms and val-
ues of the team. This charter should be a collaborative effort on the part of the core team. 
Project managers can lead by proposing certain tenets, but they need to be open to sugges-
tions from the team. Once there is general agreement to the rules of conduct, each mem-
ber signs the final document to symbolize commitment to the principles it contains.
 
Unfortunately, in some cases charters become a meaningless ritual because the 
charter is signed and filed away, never to be discussed again. To have a lasting effect, 
the charter has to be a legitimate part of the project monitoring system. Just as the 
team reviews progress toward project objectives, the team assesses the extent to which 
members are adhering to the principles in the charter.
 
Project managers play a major role in establishing team norms through personal 
example. If they freely admit mistakes and share what they have learned from them, 
other team members will begin to do the same. At the same time, project managers 
need to intervene when they believe such norms are being violated. They should talk 
to offenders privately and clearly state their expectations. The amazing thing about 
groups is that once a group is cohesive, with well-established norms, the members will 
police themselves so that the manager doesn’t have to be the heavy. For example, one 
project manager confided that his team had a practice of having a small bean bag pres-
ent at every meeting. If any one member felt that a colleague was shooting hot air or 
shading the truth, he or she was obligated to toss the bean bag at the speaker. See 
Snapshot from Practice 11.3: Putting Ford on Fast Forward for examples of norms that 
encourage innovation.
Managing Subsequent Project Meetings
The project kick-off meeting is one of several kinds of meetings required to complete 
a project. Other meetings include status report meetings, problem-solving meetings, 
and audit meetings. Issues unique to these meetings will be discussed in subsequent 
chapters. For now, here are some general guidelines for running effective meetings. 
They speak directly to the person chairing the meeting:
∙ Start meetings on time regardless of whether everyone is present.
∙ Prepare and distribute an agenda prior to the meeting.
∙ Identify an adjournment time.
∙ Periodically take time to review how effective previous meetings have been.
∙ Solicit recommendations and implement changes.
∙ Assign good recordkeeping.
∙ Review the agenda before beginning, and tentatively allocate time for each item.
∙ Prioritize issues so that adjustments can be made given time constraints.
∙ Encourage active participation of all members by asking questions instead of mak-
ing statements.
∙ Summarize decisions, and review assignments for the next meeting.
∙ Prepare and distribute a summary of the meeting to appropriate people.
∙ Recognize accomplishments and positive behavior.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  387
 
Meetings are often considered anathema to productivity, but this does not have to be 
the case. The most common complaint is that meetings last too long. Establishing an 
agenda and adjournment time helps participants budget discussion time and provides a 
basis for expediting the proceedings. Recordkeeping can be an unwelcome, tedious 
task. Utilizing laptop computers to record decisions and information in real time can 
facilitate the communication process. Careful preparation and consistent application of 
these guidelines can make meetings a vital part of projects.
Establishing a Team Identity
One of the challenges project managers often face in building a team is the lack of full-
time involvement of team members. Specialists work on different phases of the project 
and spend the majority of their time and energy elsewhere. They are often members of 
multiple teams, each competing for their time and allegiance. Project expert J. D. Frame 
(1995) points out that for many of these specialists a specific project is an abstraction; 
as a consequence their level of motivation suffers. Project managers need to try to 
make the project team as tangible as possible to the participants by developing a 
unique team identity to which participants can become emotionally attached. Team 
meetings, co-location of team members, team names, and team rituals are common 
vehicles for doing so.
∙ Effective use of meetings. Periodic project team meetings provide an important 
forum for communicating project information. A less obvious function of project 
meetings is to help establish a concrete team identity. During project meetings, 
Adam Gryglak was given mission 
impossible: deliver an all-new Ford 
diesel engine in less than 36 months. 
The challenge was all the more daunt-
ing in that in the past Ford had out-
sourced design and manufacture of diesel engines to 
Navistar. Not only did he have to meet a ridiculous 
deadline, but he also had to build an in-house engine 
from scratch. Gryglak, the chief diesel engineer, knew 
that success depended on short-circuiting the design 
process at Ford. So he put together a team of hungry 
engineers, moved offsite, and shielded the team from 
anxious top management. He called the project Scor-
pion after the heavy metal band the Scorpions.
 
Progress was immediate. Specialists who were 
used to working only with their own kind became famil-
iar with what the other engineers were up to. “We 
saved months by knowing hourly what the other guys 
were thinking and what their problems were,” says Pat 
Morgan, a veteran Ford engineer. “The result was that 
the engine fit into the truck perfectly the first time, and 
that almost never happens.”
 
Gryglak also realized that engineers work harder 
and smarter when they are having fun. To relieve pres-
sure the engineers played jokes on each other, building 
full-size snowmen decorated with machine parts on each 
other’s desks. Gryglak encouraged friendly competition. 
After hitting a critical design milestone the team orga-
nized a Pinewood Derby contest. Pinewood Derby is a 
famous Cub Scout event where young boys whittle toy 
cars out of wood and race them down a ramp. These 
were engineers not Cub Scouts, so instead of wooden 
cars, the engineers milled cars out of aluminum. Some of 
the cars even had remote controls and engines.
 
The new Ford diesel engine was completed on time 
to critical acclaim. The engine was the first of its kind to 
use state-of-the-art antipollution technology that meets 
new federal standards. It also had the best fuel econ-
omy in its category and won’t need significant mainte-
nance for 300,000 miles. The engine is featured in the 
best-selling F-150 line of trucks and is considered one 
of the keys to Ford’s comeback.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 . 3
Putting Ford on Fast Forward*
* “Putting Ford on Fast Forward,” Businessweek, October 26, 
2009, pp. 58–59.
www.ebook3000.com

388  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
members see that they are not working alone. They are part of a larger project team, 
and project success depends on the collective efforts of all the team members. 
Timely gatherings of all the project participants help define team membership and 
reinforce a collective identity.
∙ Co-location of team members. The most obvious way to make the project team tan-
gible is to have members work together in a common space. This is not always pos-
sible in matrix environments where involvement is part time and members are 
working on other projects and activities. A worthwhile substitute for co-location is 
the creation of a project office, sometimes referred to as the project war room or 
clubhouse. Such rooms are the common meeting place and contain the most signifi-
cant project documentation. Frequently, their walls are covered with Gantt charts, 
cost graphs, and other output associated with project planning and control. These 
rooms serve as a tangible sign of project effort.
∙ Creation of project team name. The development of a team name such as the 
“A-Team” or “Casey’s Crusaders” is a common device for making a team more 
tangible. Frequently an associated team logo is also created. Again the project man-
ager should rely on the collective ingenuity of the team to come up with the appro-
priate name and logo. Such symbols then can be affixed to stationery, T-shirts, 
coffee mugs, etc., to help signify team membership.
∙ Get the team to build or do something together early on. Nothing reinforces a sense 
of a team more than working on something together. In the case of one international 
project, the manager simply hosted a potluck dinner where each member brought a 
dish his or her country was famous for.
∙ Team rituals. Just as corporate rituals help establish the unique identity of a firm, 
similar symbolic actions at the project level can contribute to a unique team subcul-
ture. For example, on one project members were given ties with stripes that corre-
sponded to the number of milestones on the project. After reaching each milestone, 
members would gather and cut the next stripe off their ties to signify progress.4 
Ralph Katz (2004) reports it was common practice for Digital Equipment’s alpha 
chip design team to recognize people who found a bug in the design by giving them 
a phosphorescent toy roach. The bigger the bug that was discovered, the bigger the 
toy roach received. Such rituals help set project work apart from mainstream opera-
tions and reinforce a special status.
Creating a Shared Vision
Unlike project scope statements, which include specific cost, completion dates, and 
performance requirements, a project vision involves the less tangible aspects of 
 project performance. It refers to an image a project team holds in common about how 
the project will look upon completion, how they will work together, and/or how cus-
tomers will accept the project. At its simplest level, a shared vision is the answer to the 
question, “What do we want to create?” Not everyone will have the same vision, but 
the images should be similar. Visions come in a variety of shapes and forms; they can 
be captured in a slogan or a symbol or can be written as a formal vision statement.
 
What a vision is, is not as important as what it does. A vision inspires members to 
give their best effort. (See Snapshot from Practice 11.4: A Good Man in a Storm.) 
Moreover, a shared vision unites professionals with different backgrounds and agendas 
to a common aspiration. It helps motivate members to subordinate their individual 
agendas and do what is best for the project. As psychologist Robert Fritz puts it, 
4 This anecdote was provided by Dr. Frances Hartman, University of Calgary, Alberta.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  389
“In the presence of greatness, pettiness disappears.”5 Visions also provide focus and 
help communicate less tangible priorities, helping members make appropriate judg-
ment calls. Finally, a shared vision for a project fosters commitment to the long term 
and discourages expedient responses that collectively dilute the quality of the project.
 
Visions can be surprisingly simple. For example, the vision for a new car could be 
expressed as a “pocket rocket.” Compare this vision with the more traditional product 
description—“a sports car in the midprice range.” The “pocket rocket” vision provides 
a much clearer picture of what the final product should be. Design engineers would 
immediately understand that the car will be both small and fast and that the car should 
be quick at the getaway, nimble in the turns, and very fast in the straightaways (Bowen 
et al., 1994). Alternatively, visions can be more concrete:
 
“The Helpdesk Automated Site (HASS) Version 4.5 will address the top 10 cus-
tomer complaints across the university without any negative impact on average perfor-
mance, reliability or response time across the system.”6
Once upon a time, back in 1976, Data 
General Corporation needed to come up 
quickly with a fast, reasonably priced 
32-bit mini-computer to compete with 
Digital Equipment Corporation’s VAX. 
Data General CEO Edson de Castro launched the Foun-
tainhead Project and gave it the best people and ample 
resources to complete the 32-bit initiative. As a back-up to 
the Fountainhead project, Data General created the Eagle 
project within the Eclipse group under the leadership of 
Tom West. Work on both projects began in 1978.
 
In 1980 Data General announced its new com-
puter, featuring simplicity, power, and low cost. This 
computer was not the Fountainhead from the well-
funded “best” DG group but the Eagle from Tom West’s 
underfunded Eclipse team. Tracy Kidder saw all this 
happen and told the story in The Soul of a New 
Machine, which won a Pulitzer Prize in 1982. This 
book, which Kidder thought might be of interest to a 
handful of computer scientists, has become a project 
management classic.
 
In the beginning of his book, Kidder introduces the 
readers to the book’s protagonist Tom West by telling 
the story of him sailing a yacht across rough seas off 
the coast of New England. Kidder’s title for the pro-
logue was “A Good Man in a Storm.”
 
Twenty years after Kidder’s book was published 
Tom West was interviewed by Lawrence Peters for the 
Academy of Management Executive. Below are some 
excerpts that capture Tom’s views on managing innova-
tive projects:
On selecting team members:
You explain to a guy what the challenge was, and 
then see if his eyes light up.
On motivating team members:
Challenge was everything. People, especially creative 
technical people who really want to make a differ-
ence, will do whatever is possible or whatever is  
necessary. I’ve done this more than once, and I’ve  
repeated it over and over. It seems to work.
On the importance of having a vision:
You’ve got to find a rallying cry. You need to have 
something that can be described very simply and has 
that sort of ring of truth to an engineer that says “yes 
that’s the thing to be doing right now.” Otherwise 
you’re going to be rolling rocks up hill all the time.
On the role of being a project manager:
You have to act as a cheerleader. You have to act as 
the instructor. You have to constantly bring to mind 
what the purpose is and what’s moving the ball to-
wards the goal post, and what’s running sideways, 
and you have to take up a lot of battles for them. I 
mean you really don’t want your design engineer ar-
guing with the guy in the drafting shop about why he 
ought to do it the designer’s way. I can do that, and I 
can pull rank too, and sometimes I did just that.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 . 4
A Good Man in a Storm*
* Tracy Kidder, The Soul of a New Machine (New York: Avon 
Books, 1981); Lawrence H. Peters, “‘A Good Man in a Storm’: 
An Interview with Tom West,” Academy of Management  
Executive, vol. 16, no. 4 (2002), pp. 42–43.
5 Quoted in P. Senge, The Fifth Discipline (New York, Doubleday,1990) p. 209.
6 S. Berkun, The Art of Project Management (Sebastopol. CA: O’Reilly, 2005), p. 79.
www.ebook3000.com

390  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
 
There appear to be four essential qualities of an effective vision (see Figure 11.4). 
First, its essential qualities must be able to be communicated. A vision is worthless if 
it only resides in someone’s head. Here, the use of concrete, image-based language is 
considered critical, e.g., “pocket rocket” (Murphy and Clark 2016). Second, visions 
have to be challenging but also realistic. For example, a task force directed at overhaul-
ing the curriculum at the college of business at a state university is likely to roll its 
collective eyes if the dean announces that their vision is to compete against the Har-
vard Business School. Conversely, developing the best undergraduate business pro-
gram in that state may be a realistic vision for that task force. Third, the project 
manager has to believe in the vision. Passion for the vision is an essential element of 
an effective vision. Finally, it should be a source of inspiration to others.
 
Once a project manager accepts the importance of building a shared vision, the next 
question is how to get a vision for a particular project. First, project managers don’t get 
visions. They act as catalysts and midwives for the formation of a shared vision of a project 
team (Smith, 1994). In many cases visions are inherent in the scope and objectives of the 
project. People get naturally excited about being the first ones to bring a new technology to 
the market or solving a problem that is threatening their organization. Even with mundane 
projects, there are often ample opportunities for establishing a compelling vision. One way 
is to talk to various people involved in the project and find out early on what gets them 
excited about the project. For some it may be doing a better job than on the last project or 
the satisfaction in the eyes of the customers when the project is over. Many visions evolve 
reactively in response to competition: for example, Samsung engineers trying to develop a 
next generation smartphone that critics will proclaim superior to the iPhone.
 
Some experts advocate engaging in formal vision-building meetings. These meetings 
generally involve several steps, beginning with members identifying different aspects of 
the project and generating ideal scenarios for each aspect. For example, on a construction 
project the scenarios may include “no accidents,” “no lawsuits,” “winning a prize,” or 
“how we are going to spend our bonus for completing the project ahead of schedule.” 
The group reviews and chooses the scenarios that are most appealing and translates them 
into vision statements for the project. The next step is to identify strategies for achieving 
the vision statements. For example, if one of the vision statements is that there will be no 
lawsuits, members will identify how they will have to work with the owner and subcon-
tractors to avoid litigation. Next, members volunteer to be the keeper of the flame for 
each statement. The vision, strategies, and the name of the responsible team member are 
published and distributed to relevant stakeholders.
Inspire others
Passion
Strategic sense
Communicate
FIGURE 11.4
Requirements for  
an Effective Project 
Vision

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  391
 
In more cases than not, shared visions emerge informally. Project managers collect 
information about what excites participants about the project. They test bits of their 
working vision in their conversations with team members to gauge the level of excite-
ment the early ideas elicit in others. To some extent they engage in basic market 
research. They seize opportunities to galvanize the team, such as a disparaging remark 
by an executive that the project will never get done on time or the threat of a compet-
ing firm launching a similar project. Consensus in the beginning is not essential. What 
is essential is a core group of at least one-third of the project team that is genuinely 
committed to the vision. They will provide the critical mass to draw others aboard. 
Once the language has been formulated to communicate the vision, then the statement 
needs to be a staple part of every working agenda, and the project manager should be 
prepared to deliver a “stump” speech at a moment’s notice. When problems or dis-
agreements emerge, all responses should be consistent with the vision.
 
Much has been written about visions and leadership. Critics argue that vision is a 
glorified substitute for shared goals. Others argue that it is one of the things that separate 
leaders from managers. The key is discovering what excites people about a project, being 
able to articulate this source of excitement in an appealing manner, and finally protecting 
and nurturing this source of excitement throughout the duration of the project.
Managing Project Reward Systems
Project managers are responsible for managing the reward system that encourages 
team performance and extra effort. One advantage they have is that often project work 
is inherently satisfying, whether it is manifested in an inspiring vision or simple sense 
of accomplishment. Projects provide participants with a change in scenery, a chance to 
learn new skills, and an opportunity to break out of their departmental cocoon. Another 
inherent reward is what was referred to in Tracy Kidder, The Soul of a New Machine, 
as “pinball”—project success typically gives team members an option to play another 
exciting game.7
 
Still, many projects are underappreciated, boring, interfere with other more signifi-
cant priorities, and are considered an extra burden. In some of these cases, the biggest 
reward is finishing the project so that team members can go back to what they really 
enjoy doing and what will yield the biggest personal payoffs. Unfortunately, when this 
attitude is the primary incentive, project quality is likely to suffer. In these circum-
stances, external rewards play a more important role in motivating team performance.
 
Most project managers we talk to advocate the use of group rewards. Because most 
project work is a collaborative effort, it only makes sense that the reward system would 
encourage teamwork. Recognizing individual members regardless of their accomplish-
ments can distract from team unity. Project work is highly interdependent, so it can 
become problematic to distinguish who truly deserves additional credit. Cash bonuses 
and incentives need to be linked to project priorities. It makes no sense to reward a 
team for completing their work early if controlling cost was the number one priority.
 
One of the limitations of lump-sum cash bonuses is that all too often they are 
consumed by the household budget to pay the dentist or mechanic. To have more 
value, rewards need to have lasting significance (Smith and Reinertsen, 1997). Many 
companies convert cash into vacation rewards, sometimes with corresponding time 
off. For example, there is one firm that rewarded a project team for getting the job 
done ahead of schedule with a four-day, all-expenses-paid trip to Walt Disney World 
for the members’ entire families. That vacation not only will be remembered for 
7 T. Kidder, The Soul of a New Machine (New York: Avon Books, 1981), pp. 221–22.
www.ebook3000.com

392  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
years, but it also recognizes spouses and children who, in a sense, also contributed to 
the project’s success. Similarly, other firms have been known to give members home 
computers and entertainment centers. Wise project managers negotiate a discretion-
ary budget so that they can reward teams' surpassing milestones with gift certificates 
to popular restaurants or tickets to sporting events. Impromptu pizza parties and 
barbecues are also used to celebrate key accomplishments.
 
Sometimes project managers have to use negative reinforcement to motivate project 
performance. For example, Ritti and Levy (2009) recount the story of one project man-
ager who was in charge of the construction of a new, state-of-the-art manufacturing 
plant. His project team was working with a number of different contracting firms. The 
project was slipping behind schedule, mostly because of a lack of cooperation among 
the different players. The project manager did not have direct authority over many key 
people, especially the contractors from the other companies. He did, however, have the 
freedom to convene meetings at his convenience. So the project manager instituted 
daily “coordination meetings,” which were required of all the principals involved, at 
6:00 a.m. The meetings continued for about two weeks until the project got back on 
schedule. At that time the project manager announced that the next meeting was can-
celed, and no further sunrise meetings were ever scheduled.8
 
While project managers tend to focus on group rewards, there are times when they 
need to reward individual performance. This is done not only to compensate extraordi-
nary effort but also to signal to the others what exemplary behavior is. Examples of 
this kind of rewards include:
∙ Letters of commendation. While project managers may not have responsibility for 
their team members’ performance appraisals, they can write letters commending 
their project performance. These letters can be sent to the workers’ supervisors to 
be placed in their personnel files.
∙ Public recognition for outstanding work. Superlative workers should be publicly 
recognized for their efforts. Some project managers begin each status review meet-
ing with a brief mention of project workers who have exceeded their project goals.
∙ Job assignments. Good project managers recognize that, while they may not have 
much budgetary authority, they do have substantial control over who does what, 
with whom, when, and where. Good work should be rewarded with desirable job 
assignments. Managers should be aware of member preferences and, when appro-
priate, accommodate them.
∙ Flexibility. Being willing to make exceptions to rules, if done judiciously, can be a 
powerful reward. Allowing members to work at home when a child is sick or excus-
ing a minor indiscretion can engender long-lasting loyalty.
 
Individual rewards should be used judiciously, and under extraordinary circum-
stances. Nothing undermines the cohesiveness of a team more than members begin-
ning to feel that others are getting special treatment or that they are being treated 
unfairly. Camaraderie and collaboration can quickly vanish only to be replaced by 
bickering and obsessive preoccupation with group politics. Such distractions can 
absorb energy that otherwise would be directed toward completing the project. Indi-
vidual rewards typically should be used only when everyone in the team recognizes 
that a member is deserving of special recognition.
8 R. R. Ritti and S. L. Levy, The Ropes to Skip and Ropes to Know: Studies in Organizational Theory and Behavior (New 
York: Wiley, 2009) pp. 93–94.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  393
Orchestrating the Decision-Making Process
Most decisions on a project do not require a formal meeting to discuss alternatives and 
determine solutions. Instead decisions are made in real time as part of the daily interac-
tions between project managers, stakeholders, and team members. For example, as a 
result of a routine “how’s it going?” question, a project manager discovers that a mechan-
ical engineer is stuck trying to meet the performance criteria for a prototype he is respon-
sible for building. The project manager and engineer go down the hallway to talk to the 
designers, explain the problem, and ask what, if anything, can be done. The designers 
distinguish which criteria are essential and which ones they think can be compromised. 
The project manager then checks with the marketing group to make sure the modifica-
tions are acceptable. They agree with all but two of the modifications. The project man-
ager goes back to the mechanical engineer and asks whether the proposed changes would 
help solve the problem. The engineer agrees. Before authorizing the changes he calls the 
project sponsor, reviews the events, and gets the sponsor to sign off on the changes. This 
is an example of how, by practicing MBWA (management by wandering around), project 
managers consult team members, solicit ideas, determine optimum solutions, and create 
a sense of involvement that builds trust and commitment to decisions.
 
Still, projects encounter problems and decisions that require the collective wisdom of 
team members as well as relevant stakeholders. Group decision making should be used 
when it will improve the quality of important decisions (Vroom and Jago, 1988). This is 
often the case with complex problems that require the input of a variety of different spe-
cialists. Group decision making should also be used when strong commitment to the 
decision is needed and there is a low probability of acceptance if only one person makes 
the decision. Participation is used to reduce resistance and secure support for the deci-
sion. Guidelines for managing group decision making are provided below.
Facilitating Group Decision Making
Project managers play a pivotal role in guiding the group decision-making process. 
They must remind themselves that their job is not to make a decision but to facilitate 
the discussion within the group so that the team reaches a consensus on the best pos-
sible solution. Consensus within this context does not mean that everyone supports the 
decision 100 percent, but that they all agree what the best solution is under the circum-
stances. Facilitating group decision making essentially involves four major steps. Each 
step is briefly described next with suggestions for how to manage the process.9
1. Problem identification. The project manager needs to be careful not to state the 
problem in terms of choices (e.g., should we do X or Y?). Rather the project man-
ager should identify the underlying problem to which these alternatives and proba-
bly others are potential solutions. This allows group members to generate 
alternatives, not just choose among them. One useful way of defining problems is to 
consider the gap between where a project is (i.e., the present state) and where it 
should be (desired state). For example, the project may be four days behind sched-
ule or the prototype weighs two pounds more than the specifications. Whether the 
gap is small or large, the purpose is to eliminate it. The group must find one or more 
courses of action that will change the existing state into the desired one.
 
 
If one detects defensive posturing during the problem identification discussion, 
then it may be wise to postpone the problem-solving step if possible. This allows for 
emotions to subside and members to gain a fresh perspective on the issues involved.
9 This discussion is based on the classic work of N. R. F. Maier, Problem-Solving Discussion and Conferences (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1963); and Problem Solving and Creativity in Individuals and Groups (Belmont, CA: Brooks-Cole, 1970).
www.ebook3000.com

394  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
2. Generating alternatives. Once there is general agreement as to the nature of the 
problem(s), then the next step is to generate alternative solutions. If the problem 
requires creativity, then brainstorming is commonly recommended. Here the 
team generates a list of possible solutions on a flipchart or blackboard. During 
that time the project manager establishes a moratorium on criticizing or evaluat-
ing ideas. Members are encouraged to “piggyback” on others’ ideas by extending 
them or combining ideas into a new idea. The object is to create as many alterna-
tives as possible no matter how outlandish they may appear to be. Some project 
managers report that for really tough problems they have found it beneficial to 
conduct such sessions away from the normal work environment; the change in 
scenery stimulates creativity.
3. Reaching a decision. The next step is to evaluate and assess the merits of alterna-
tive solutions. During this phase it is useful to have a set of criteria for evaluating 
the merits of different solutions. In many cases the project manager can draw upon 
the priorities for the project and have the group assess each alternative in terms of 
its impact on cost, schedule, and performance as well as reducing the problem gap. 
For example, if time is critical, then the solution that solves the problem as quickly 
as possible would be chosen.
 
 
During the course of the discussion the project manager attempts to build con-
sensus among the group. This can be a complicated process. Project managers need 
to provide periodic summaries to help the group keep track of its progress. They 
must protect those members who represent the minority view and ensure that such 
views get a fair hearing. They need to guarantee that everyone has an opportunity to 
share opinions and no one individual or group dominates the conversation. It may 
be useful to bring a two-minute timer to regulate the use of air time. When conflicts 
occur, managers need to apply some of the ideas and techniques discussed in the 
next section.
 
 
Project managers need to engage in consensus testing to determine what points 
the group agrees on and what are still sources of contention. They are careful not to 
interpret silence as agreement; they confirm agreement by asking questions. Ulti-
mately, through thoughtful interaction, the team reaches a “meeting of the minds” 
as to what solution is best for the project.
4. Follow-up. Once the decision has been made and implemented, it is important for 
the team to find the time to evaluate the effectiveness of the decision. If the decision 
failed to provide the anticipated solution, then the reasons should be explored and 
the lessons learned added to the collective memory bank of the project team.
Managing Conflict within the Project
Disagreements and conflicts naturally emerge within a project team during the life 
of the project. Participants will disagree over priorities, allocation of resources, 
the quality of specific work, solutions to discovered problems, and so forth. Some 
conflicts support the goals of the group and improve project performance. For 
example, two members may be locked in a debate over a design trade-off decision 
involving different features of a product. They argue that their preferred feature is 
what the primary customer truly wants. This disagreement may force them to talk 
to or get more information from the customer, with the result that they realize nei-
ther feature is highly valued, but instead the customer wants something else. On 
the other hand, conflicts can also hinder group performance. Initial disagreements 
can escalate into heated arguments with both parties storming out of the room and 
refusing to work together.
11-5
LO
Distinguish functional 
conflict from dysfunctional 
conflict and  describe 
strategies for encouraging 
functional conflict and 
discouraging dysfunctional 
conflict.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  395
Sources of conflict are likely to change as projects progress along the project life cycle 
(Thamhain and Wilemon, 1975; Posner, 1986; Adams and Brandt, 1988). Figure 11.5 
summarizes the major sources of conflict in each phase.
So far the discussion of team building 
has been directed primarily to signifi-
cant projects that command the atten-
tion and involvement of assigned 
members. But what about projects 
that have low priority for team members: the perfunc-
tory task forces that members begrudgingly join? the 
committee work people get assigned to do? the part-
time projects that pull members away from the critical 
work they would rather be doing? projects that cause 
members to privately question why they are doing this?
 
There is no magic wand available that transforms 
mildly interested, part-time project teams into high- 
performance teams. We interviewed several project 
managers about such project scenarios. They all agreed 
that these can be very difficult and frustrating assign-
ments and that there are limits to what is possible. Still, 
they offered tips and advice for making the best of the 
situation. Most of these tips focus on building commit-
ment to the project when it does not naturally exist.
 
One project manager advocated orchestrating a 
large “time” investment upfront on such projects—
either in the form of a lengthy meeting or a significant 
early assignment. He viewed this as a form of down 
payment that members would forfeit if they didn’t carry 
the project to completion.
 
Others emphasize interjecting as much fun into 
activities as possible. Here rituals discussed under 
building team identity come into play. People become 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 . 5
Managing Low-Priority Projects
committed because they enjoy working together on the 
project. One project manager even confided that the 
perfect attendance at her project meetings was due 
primarily to the quality of the doughnuts she provided.
 
Another strategy is to make the benefits of the project 
as real to the team members as possible. One project 
manager escalated commitment to a mandated accidents 
prevention task force by bringing accident victims to a 
project meeting. Another project manager brought the 
high-ranking project sponsor to recharge the team by rein-
forcing the importance of the project to the company.
 
Most project managers emphasized the importance of 
building a strong personal relationship with each of the 
team members. When this connection occurs, members 
work hard not so much because they really care about the 
project but because they don’t want to let the project 
manager down. Although not couched in influence cur-
rency terms, these managers talked about getting to 
know each member, sharing contacts, offering encourage-
ment, and extending a helping hand when needed.
 
Finally, all project managers cautioned that nothing 
should be taken for granted on low-priority projects. 
They recommend reminding people about meetings 
and bringing extra copies of materials to meetings for 
those who have forgotten them or can’t find them. Proj-
ect managers should remain in frequent contact with 
team members and remind them of their assignments. 
One manager summed it up best when he said, “Some-
times it all boils down to just being a good nag.”
Deﬁning
Planning
Executing
Delivery
Priorities
Procedures
Schedules
Priorities
Schedule
Schedule
Procedures
Technical
Technical
Workforce
Workforce
Priorities
Schedule
es
ule
Sche
ures
Techn
cal
Workf
rce
Prior
dule
ical
orce
ties
Sched
d
n
fo
f
it
ities
dures
dules
Priori
Sched
Proced
Techn
Workf
ti
du
du
ni
fo
f
FIGURE 11.5
Sources of Conflict 
over the Project Life 
Cycle 
www.ebook3000.com

396  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
 
During project definition, the most significant sources of conflict are priorities, 
administrative procedures, and schedule. Disputes occur over the relative impor-
tance of the project compared with other activities, which project management 
structure to use (especially how much control the project manager should have), 
the personnel to be assigned, and the scheduling of the project into existing 
workloads.
 
During the planning phase, the chief source of conflict remains priorities, followed 
by schedules, procedures, and technical requirements. This is the phase where the proj-
ect moves from a general concept to a detailed set of plans. The relative importance of 
the project is still trying to be established as well as project priorities (time, cost, 
scope). Disagreements often emerge over the final schedule, the assignment of 
resources, communication and decision making procedures, and technical require-
ments for the project.
 
During the execution phase, friction arises over schedule slippage, technical prob-
lems, and staff issues. Milestones become more difficult to meet because of accumu-
lating schedule slippages. This leads to tension within the team as delays prevent 
others from starting or completing their work. Managing the trade-offs between time, 
cost, and performance becomes paramount. Project managers must decide between 
letting the schedule slip, investing additional funds to get back on track, or scaling 
back the scope of the project in order to save time. Technical problems involve finding 
solutions to unexpected problems and integrating the contributions of different people. 
The strain of the project may be expressed in interpersonal conflicts as well as pres-
sures to use resources more effectively.
 
During the delivery phase, the level of conflict tends to subside. On troubled proj-
ects schedules continue to be the biggest source of conflict as schedule slippages 
make it more difficult to meet target completion dates. Pressures to meet objectives 
coupled with growing anxiety over future assignments increase interpersonal ten-
sions. Technical problems are rare since most of them have been worked out during 
the earlier phases.
Encouraging Functional Conflict
The demarcation between functional and dysfunctional conflict is neither clear nor 
precise. In one team, members may exchange a diatribe of four-letter expletives and 
eventually resolve their differences. Yet in another project team, such behavior would 
create irreconcilable divisions and would prohibit the parties from ever working 
together productively again. The distinguishing criterion is how the conflict affects 
project performance, not how individuals feel. Members can be upset and dissatisfied 
with the interchange, but as long as the disagreement furthers the objectives of the 
project, then the conflict is functional. Project managers should recognize that conflict 
is an inevitable and even a desirable part of project work; the key is to encourage func-
tional conflict and manage dysfunctional conflict.
 
A shared vision can transcend the incongruities of a project and establish a common 
purpose to channel debate in a constructive manner. Without shared goals there is no 
common ground for working out differences. In the previous example involving the 
design trade-off decision, when both parties agreed that the primary goal was to sat-
isfy the customer, there was a basis for more objectively resolving the dispute. There-
fore, agreeing in advance which priority is most important—cost, schedule, or 
scope—can help a project team decide what response is most appropriate.
 
Sometimes it’s not the presence of conflict, but the absence of conflict that is the 
problem. Oftentimes as a result of compressed time pressures, self-doubt, and the 

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  397
desire to preserve team harmony, members are reluctant to voice objections. This hesi-
tation robs the team of useful information that might lead to better solutions and the 
avoidance of critical mistakes. Project managers need to encourage healthy dissent in 
order to improve problem solving and innovation. They can demonstrate this process 
by asking tough questions and challenging the rationale behind recommendations. 
They can also orchestrate healthy conflict by bringing in people with different points 
of view to critical meetings.
 
Project managers can legitimize dissent within the team by designating someone to 
play the role of devil’s advocate or by asking the group to take 15 minutes to come up 
with all the reasons the team should not pursue a course of action. Functional conflict 
plays a critical role in obtaining a deeper understanding of the issues and coming up 
with the best decisions possible.
 
One of the most important things project managers can do is model an appropriate 
response when someone disagrees or challenges their ideas. They need to avoid acting 
defensively and instead encourage critical debate. They should exhibit effective listen-
ing skills and summarize the key issues before responding. They should check to see if 
others agree with the opposing point of view. Finally, project managers should value 
and protect dissenters. Organizations have a tendency to create too many yes-men, and 
the emperor needs to be told when he doesn’t have any clothes on.
Managing Dysfunctional Conflict
Managing dysfunctional conflict is a much more challenging task than encouraging 
functional conflict. First, dysfunctional conflict is hard to identify. A manager might 
have two highly talented professionals who hate each other’s guts, but in the heat of 
competition they produce meritorious results. Is this a pleasant situation? No. Is it 
functional? Yes, as long as it contributes to project performance. Conversely, some-
times functional conflict degenerates into dysfunctional conflict. This change occurs 
when technical disagreements evolve into irrational personality clashes or when failure 
to resolve an issue causes unnecessary delays in critical project work.
 
The second major difficulty managers face is that there is often no easy solution to 
dysfunctional conflict. Project managers have to decide among a number of different 
strategies to manage it; here are five possibilities:
1. Mediate the conflict. The manager intervenes and tries to negotiate a resolution by 
using reasoning and persuasion, suggesting alternatives and the like. One of the 
keys is trying to find common ground. In some cases the project manager can make 
the argument that the win/lose interchange has escalated to the point that it has 
become lose/lose for everyone and now is the time to make concessions.
2. Arbitrate the conflict. The manager imposes a solution to the conflict after listen-
ing to each party. The goal is not to decide who wins but to have the project win. In 
doing so, it is important to seek a solution that allows each party to save face; oth-
erwise the decision may provide only momentary relief. One project manager 
admits that she has had great success using a King Solomon approach to resolving 
conflict. She confides she announces a solution that neither party will like and gives 
the opponents two hours to come up with a better solution they can both agree on.
3. Control the conflict. Reducing the intensity of the conflict by smoothing over dif-
ferences or interjecting humor is an effective strategy. If feelings are escalating, the 
manager can adjourn the interaction and hope cooler heads prevail the next day. If 
the conflict continues to escalate, project assignments may need to be rearranged if 
possible so that two parties don’t have to work together.
www.ebook3000.com

398  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
4. Accept it. In some cases the conflict will outlive the life of the project and, though 
a distraction, it is one the manager has to live with.
5. Eliminate the conflict. Sometimes the conflict has escalated to the point that it is 
no longer tolerable. If there is a clear villain then only he or she should be removed. 
If, as is often the case, both parties are at fault, then it would be wise if possible to 
eliminate both individuals. Their removal would give a clear signal to the others on 
the team that this kind of behavior is unacceptable.
 
In summary, project managers establish the foundation for functional conflict by estab-
lishing clear roles and responsibilities, developing common goals or a shared vision, and 
using group incentives that reward collaboration. Project managers have to be adroit at 
reading body language to identify unspoken disagreement. They also have to keep in touch 
with what is going on in a project to identify small problems that might escalate into big 
conflicts. Well-timed humor and redirecting the focus to what is best for the project can 
alleviate the interpersonal tensions that are likely to flare up on a project team.
Rejuvenating the Project Team
Over the course of a long project, a team sometimes drifts off course and loses momen-
tum. The project manager needs to swing into action to realign the team with the proj-
ect objectives and step on the pedal. There are both formal and informal ways of doing 
this. Informally, the project manager can institute new rituals like the “toy roaches” to 
reenergize a team. On one project that was experiencing rough going, the project man-
ager stopped work and took the team bowling to relieve frustrations. On another proj-
ect, a manager showed her team the movie The Shawshank Redemption to rekindle 
hope and commitment to success.
 
Another option is to have the project sponsor give a pep talk to the “troops.” In other 
cases, a friendly challenge can reinvigorate a team. For example, one project sponsor offered 
to cook a five-course meal if the project got back on track and hit the next milestone.
 
Sometimes more formal action needs to be taken. The project manager may recog-
nize the need for a team-building session devoted to improving the work processes of 
the team. This meeting is particularly appropriate if she senses that the team is 
approaching a transition point in its development. The goal of such a session is to 
improve the project team’s effectiveness through better management of project 
demands and group processes. It is an inward look by the team at its own performance, 
behavior, and culture for the purpose of eliminating dysfunctional behaviors and 
strengthening functional ones. The project team critiques its performance, analyzes its 
way of doing things, and attempts to develop strategies to improve its operation.
 
Oftentimes an external consultant is hired, or an internal staff specialist is assigned 
to facilitate the session. This process brings a more objective, outside perspective to 
the table, frees the project manager to be part of the process, and provides a specialist 
trained in group dynamics. Furthermore, if preliminary information is to be collected, 
team members may be more candid and open to an outsider.
 
One caveat about using outside consultants is that too often managers resort to this 
as a method for dealing with a problem that they have been unable or unwilling to deal 
with. The marching order to the consultant is “fix my team for me.” What the manag-
ers fail to recognize is that one of the keys to fixing the team is improving the working 
relationship between themselves and the remainder of the team. For such sessions to 
be effective, project managers have to be willing to have their own role scrutinized and 
be receptive to changing their own behavior and work habits based on the comments 
and suggestions of the project team.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  399
 
Consultants use a wide variety of team-building techniques to elevate team perfor-
mance. Here is a brief description of one of the more common approaches. The first step is 
to gather information and make a preliminary diagnosis of team performance. Whether 
through individual interviews or in a group forum, the consultant asks general questions 
about the project team performance, that is, what obstacles are getting in the way of the 
team being able to perform better? This information is summarized in terms of themes. 
When everyone has understood the themes, the group ranks them in terms of both their 
importance and the extent the team has ownership over them. This last dimension is criti-
cal. Ownership refers to whether the team has direct influence over the issue. For example, 
a team probably has little influence over delivery of contracted supplies, but team members 
do control how quickly they inform each other of sudden changes in plans.
 
If the group becomes preoccupied with issues outside its control, the meeting can 
quickly evolve into a demoralizing gripe session. Therefore, the most important issues 
they have direct control over become the subjects of the agenda. During the course of 
the meeting, much interpersonal and group process information will be generated, 
and that is examined too. Thus, the group works on two sets of items: the agenda 
items and the items that emerge from the interaction of the participants. This is where 
the expertise of the external facilitator becomes critical for identifying interaction 
patterns and their implications for team performance.
 
As important problems are discussed, alternatives for action are developed. The 
team-building session concludes by deciding on specific action steps for remedying 
problems and setting target dates for who will do what, when. These assignments can 
be reviewed at project status meetings or at a special follow-up session.
 
It has become fashionable to link team-building activities with outdoor experiences. 
The outdoor experience—whether it is whitewater rafting down the Rogue River in 
Oregon or rock climbing in Colorado—places group members in a variety of physi-
cally challenging situations that must be mastered through teamwork, not individual 
effort. By having to work together to overcome difficult obstacles, team members are 
supposed to experience increased self-confidence, more respect for another’s capabili-
ties, and a greater commitment to teamwork. No empirical data are available to sup-
port such exotic endeavors other than the enthusiastic support of the participants. Such 
activities are likely to provide an intense common experience that may accelerate the 
social development of the team. Such an investment of time and money communicates 
the importance of teamwork and is considered by some a perk for being on the project. 
At the same time, unless the lessons from these experiences can be immediately trans-
ferred to actual project work, their significance is likely to vanish.
11.4 Managing Virtual Project Teams
Building a high-performance project team among a mixture of part-time and full-time 
members is a challenging task. Consider how much more challenging it is to build a 
team when members cannot engage in face-to-face interactions. Such would be the 
case for a virtual project team in which the team members are geographically situ-
ated so that they may seldom, if ever, meet face-to-face as a team. For example, 
Hewlett-Packard’s integrated circuit business headquarters and a portion of the R&D 
facilities are located in Palo Alto, California; the two wafer fabrication operations are 
located in Corvallis, Oregon, and Fort Collins, Colorado; and the packaging assembly 
process is primarily in Singapore and Korea. It is not uncommon for professionals at 
each of these locations to be involved in the same project. When team members are 
Understand the challenges 
of managing virtual 
 project teams.
11-6
LO
www.ebook3000.com

400  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
spread across different time zones and continents, the opportunity for direct communi-
cation is severely limited. Electronic communication such as the Internet, e-mail, and 
teleconferencing takes on much more importance in virtual projects because this is 
the primary means of communication. See Snapshot from Practice 11.6: Managing 
Virtual Global Teams for an example of how this works.
Carl A. Singer, a senior program man-
ager at IBM Global Services, described 
how global time zones were used to 
complete a time intensive project. The 
project required subject matter 
experts (SMEs) to document existing best practices in 
maintenance domain and to port these into a knowl-
edge management tool. The most proficient SMEs 
available were on opposite sides of the globe—Australia 
and Scotland. Review and control of the project was 
from the United States.
 
Management realized that just working harder and 
smarter was not going to meet the time and quality tar-
gets. For this project they used the dimension of time to 
their benefit. Applying sound management principles as 
well as taking advantage of electronic communication 
systems, the team was able to create a virtual 24-hour 
workday for quick responses and accelerated reviews.
 
Each team consisted of veteran professionals famil-
iar with the rigors of time-pressured consulting proj-
ects. A local point person was identified for each team 
and mutually agreed-upon targets, terminology, and 
processes were established.
 
An all-hands kick-off meeting was organized in 
which participants were able to socialize, understand 
local and projectwide constraints, and finalize an 
agreed-upon plan. The meeting was held at a corpo-
rate hotel with dining accommodations. The facility 
was considered an “assisted living community for IBM 
consultants.” This hastened recovery from jet lag and 
provided an interruption-free work environment.
 
Upon returning to their home bases, each team 
created the majority of their deliverables indepen-
dently with periodic three-way conference calls to 
maintain coordination. A project control book was 
established electronically so that all participants had 
access to the latest project documents.
 
The final phase of the project required intense 
interfacing and reviews between the teams. These 
reviews necessitated changes to deal with concerns, 
differences among subprojects, and other issues. It 
was here that the worldwide nature of the project was 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 . 6
Managing Virtual Global Teams*
leveraged. Using a “dry cleaning approach” (in by 
5 p.m. out by 9 a.m.) team members in Australia and 
Scotland were able to address issues generated during 
the U.S.-based external reviews and provide concrete 
responses by the beginning of the next business day. 
Conference calls at 6:00 a.m. (U.S. EST) were used to 
coordinate responses and resolve issues. Conference 
calls at the end of the U.S. workday were used to final-
ize issues and assignments. Figure 11.6 depicts the 
24-hour clock used to align communication schedules.
 
Telephone conferencing was used instead of video-
conferencing due to the setup lead time and because it 
would force participants to leave their offices. E-mail 
was used extensively for general communication. An 
electronic repository of project work was used to coor-
dinate global involvement. In practice, a participant 
could draft a document and deposit it electronically 
only to wake up the next day to find the document 
annotated with suggested revisions. Likewise, one 
could start the day by checking an in-basket populated 
with documents to review and issues to address. Over 
time, “G’day” and “Cheers” crept into the U.S. speech—
a clear indicator of team cohesion.
 
Singer identified a number of lessons learned from 
the project. These included:
΄
FVRMZZ͹VM]QbYWPY͹^SS\RRcW]UfMbPaWcWPMZS^aRbcMO-
lishing goals and procedures as well as “rules of 
courtesy.”
΄
>^^bR]cVRaRW]bͿRbcMOZWbVPZRMaQRZWeRaMOZRbM]Q
then step out of the way and let the professionals 
do their work.
΄
6bcMOZWbVM]QR]S^aPRMUaRRQ͹d_^]`dMZWchbcM]-
dards and deliverable templates.
΄
?MW]cMW]MaRUdZMabPVRQdZR^SP^]SRaR]PRPMZZb͜
even if only to say “Hello, we have nothing to talk 
about today.” Conference calls should be guided by 
pre-established agendas, note-taking procedures, 
and reviews.
* Carl A. Singer, “Leveraging a Worldwide Project Team,” PM 
Network, April 2001, pp. 36–40.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  401
 
Two of the biggest challenges involved in managing a virtual project team are 
developing trust and effective patterns of communication (Lipsinger and DeRosa, 
2010). Trust is difficult to establish in virtual project management. Unlike working as 
a traditional team, where members can see whether someone has done what they say 
they have done, virtual team members depend on the word of distant members. At the 
FIGURE 11.6 24-Hour Global Clock 
United
States
(East Coast)
Australia
Scotland
Prime time
Secondary time
Downtime
Comments
12 midnight
1 AM
2 AM
3 AM
4 AM
5 AM
6 AM
7 AM
8 AM
9 AM
10 AM
11AM
12 noon
1 PM
2 PM
3 PM
4 PM
5 PM
6 PM
7 PM
8 PM
9 PM
10 PM
11 PM
12 midnight
2 PM
3 PM
4 PM
5 PM
6 PM
7 PM
8 PM
9 PM
10 PM
11 PM
12 midnight
1 AM
2 AM
3 AM
4 AM
5 AM
6 AM
7 AM
8 AM
9 AM
10 AM
11 AM
12 noon
1 PM
2PM
5 AM
6 AM
7 AM
8 AM
9 AM
10 AM
11 AM
12 noon
1 PM
2 PM
3 PM
4 PM
5 PM
6 PM
7 PM
8 PM
9 PM
10 PM
11 PM
12 midnight
1 AM
2 AM
3 AM
4 AM
5 AM
Australia handoff for off-shift review
3-way conferencing window (primary)
3-way conferencing window (primary)
3-way conferencing window (primary)
 
Scotland handoff for off-shift review
3-way conferencing window (secondary)
3-way conferencing window (secondary)
U.S. handoff for off-shift review
www.ebook3000.com

402  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
same time, it can be difficult to trust someone whom you may have met only one or 
two times or not at all. Geographical separation also prohibits the informal social inter-
actions that are often essential to building camaraderie among team members. As one 
virtual team member put it, “You can’t have a beer together over the Internet.”
 
So how can a project manager facilitate the development of trust within a virtual 
team? First, if it is impossible to hold a face-to-face meeting in the beginning, manag-
ers need to orchestrate the exchange of social information—who everyone is and some 
personal background information during the initial electronic interchange. Second, 
they need to set clear roles for each team member. Ideally, specific tasks should be 
assigned to each member so that they can make an immediate contribution to the proj-
ect. Trust in virtual projects grows through team member reliability, consistency, and 
responsiveness (Coutu, 1998). Finally, the project manager must consistently display 
enthusiasm and an action orientation in all messages; this spirit will hopefully spread 
to other team members.
 
The second major challenge for managing a virtual project team is to establish 
effective patterns of communication. E-mail and faxes are great for communicating 
facts—but not the feelings behind the facts; nor do they allow for real-time communi-
cation. Conference calls and project chat rooms can help, but they also have their limi-
tations. Videoconferencing is a significant improvement over nonvisual electronic 
forms of communication. Still, it is a very expensive medium, and real-time interaction 
is available on only the most advanced and expensive systems. The maxim is match 
technology to the communication need. Here are some guidelines developed by 3M for 
use on their distributed projects:10
∙ When to e-mail. To distribute important information and news in a one-to-one or 
one-to-many frame of reference.
∙ When to use electronic bulletin boards. To encourage discussion and flush out 
diversity of opinion on issues.
∙ When to videoconference. Videoconference when you need to see each other’s face 
and expressions. This is important during the early phases of a project, when you 
are building relationships and developing a common understanding of what needs 
to be done. Use, again, when working on critical decisions and/or contentious 
issues.
∙ When to use conference calls. When people in different locations are working with 
common documents, presentations, sketches, and models. Use for status report 
meetings and to sustain social camaraderie.
∙ When to fly. Fly to build or repair trust. Use travel budget to get all key players 
together early on to instill commitment to the goals of the project and engage in 
team-building activities.
 
Even with the best communication system, managers have to overcome the problem 
of time zone differences, cultural nuances, and finding a convenient time for people to 
conference.
 
Below are some additional tips for alleviating communication problems and 
enhancing the performance of virtual teams:
1. Don’t let team members vanish. Virtual teams often experience problems getting 
in touch with each other. Use Internet scheduling software to store members’ 
calendars.
10 “3M Meeting Network,” from www.3M.com/meetings, accessed 6/6/2002.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  403
2. Establish a code of conduct to avoid delays. Team members need to agree not 
only on what, when, and how information will be shared but also on how and when 
they will respond to it. Develop a priority system to distinguish messages that 
require immediate response from those with longer time frames.
3. Establish clear norms and protocols for surfacing assumptions and conflicts. 
Because most communication is nonvisual, project managers cannot watch body 
language and facial expressions to develop a sense of what is going on. They need 
to probe deeper when communicating to force members to explain their viewpoints, 
actions, and concerns more clearly; they must double-check comprehension.
4. Use electronic video technology to verify work. Instead of relying on others’ 
judgment, have members “show” work that has been done via Internet video. This 
can avoid costly misunderstanding and provide useful feedback.
5. Share the pain. Do not require everyone to conform to your time zone and prefer-
ences. Rotate meeting times so that all team members have a turn working accord-
ing to their clock.
 
To some extent managing a virtual project team is no different from managing a 
regular project team. The key is working within the constraints of the situation to 
develop effective ways for team members to interact and combine their talents to com-
plete the project.
11.5 Project Team Pitfalls
High-performance project teams can produce dramatic results. However, like any good 
thing, there is a dark side to project teams that managers need to be aware of. In this 
section we examine in more detail some of the pathologies that high-performance 
project teams can succumb to and highlight what project managers can do to reduce 
the likelihood of these problems occurring.
Groupthink
Janis (1982) first identified groupthink as a factor that influenced the misguided 1961 
Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba. His term refers to the tendency of members in highly 
cohesive groups to lose their critical evaluative capabilities. This malady appears when 
pressures for conformity are combined with an illusion of invincibility to suspend crit-
ical discussion of decisions. As a result decisions are made quickly with little consid-
eration of alternatives; often the practice leads to fiascoes that, after the fact, appear 
totally improbable. Some of the symptoms of groupthink include the following:
∙ Illusion of invulnerability. The team feels invincible. It is marked by a high degree 
of esprit de corps, an implicit faith in its own wisdom, and an inordinate optimism 
that allows group members to feel complacent about the quality of their decisions.
∙ Whitewash of critical thinking. The group members discuss only a few solutions, 
ignoring alternatives; they fail to examine the adverse consequences that could fol-
low their preferred course of action; and they too quickly dismiss any alternatives 
that, on the surface, appear to be unsatisfactory.
∙ Negative stereotypes of outsiders. “Good guy/bad guy” stereotypes emerge in which 
the group considers any outsiders who oppose their decisions as the bad guys, who 
are perceived as incompetent and malicious and whose points are unworthy of seri-
ous consideration.
11-7
LO
Recognize the different 
pitfalls that can occur in 
a project team.
www.ebook3000.com

404  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
∙ Direct pressure. When a team member does speak out or question the direction in 
which the team is headed, direct pressure is applied to the dissenter. He or she is 
reminded that speed is important and that the aim is agreement, not argument.
Bureaucratic Bypass Syndrome
Project teams are often licensed to get things done without having to go through nor-
mal protocols of the parent organization. Bypassing bureaucratic channels is appealing 
and invigorating. However, if bypassing becomes a way of life, it results in the rejec-
tion of bureaucratic policies and procedures, which provide the glue for the overall 
organization. A team that operates outside the organization may alienate other workers 
who are constrained by the norms and procedures of the organization; eventually, these 
outside bureaucrats will find ways to put up roadblocks and thwart the project team 
(Johansen et al., 1991).
Team Spirit Becomes Team Infatuation
High-performance project teams can be a tremendous source of personal satisfac-
tion. The excitement, chaos, and joy generated by working on a challenging project 
can be an invigorating experience. Leavitt and Lipman-Blumen (1995) even go so 
far as to say that team members behave like people in love. They become infatuated 
with the challenge of the project and the talent around them. This total preoccupa-
tion with the project and the project team, while contributing greatly to the remark-
able success of the project, can leave in its wake a string of broken professional and 
personal relationships that contribute to burnout and disorientation upon completion 
of the project.
Going Native
Going native is a phrase first used by the British Foreign Service during colonial 
times to describe agents who assumed the customs, values, and prerogatives of their 
foreign country assignment.11 They did so to the point that they were no longer rep-
resenting the best interests of the British government but rather those of the natives. 
This same phenomenon can occur within project teams working abroad or in those 
who become closely identified with their customers. In essence, the customer’s 
interests take precedence over the parent organization’s interests. This change in 
viewpoint can lead to excessive scope creep and open defiance of corporate policy 
and interests.
 
Dealing with these maladies is problematic because, in most cases, they are a 
distortion of a good thing, rather than a simple evil. Awareness is the first step for 
prevention. The next step is to take preemptive action to reduce the likelihood of 
these pitfalls occurring. For example, managers can reduce the isolation of the proj-
ect team by creating work-related connections outside the project team. These inter-
actions naturally occur in a matrix environment where members work on multiple 
projects and maintain ties to their home department. Likewise, the isolation of dedi-
cated project teams can be reduced by the timely involvement of external specialists. 
In either case, the active involvement of relevant members of the parent organization 
at project status meetings can help maintain the link between the project and the rest 
of the organization. If the team appears to be suffering from groupthink, then the 
project manager can encourage functional conflict by playing a devil’s advocate role 
11 Movie examples of this include Avatar (2010), The Sleeping Dictionary (2003), and Lawrence of Arabia (1962).

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  405
to encourage dissent or using a structured problem-solving approach like the nomi-
nal group technique (see Snapshot from Practice 11.7: Nominal Group Technique). 
Finally, formal team-building sessions may reveal dysfunctional norms and refocus 
the attention of the team on project objectives.
GE Appliances, U.S. West, Marriott Corp., 
and Hewlett-Packard are among the 
many firms that use nominal group 
technique (NGT) to guide decisions 
on projects. The NGT begins by gath-
ering project team members and/or stakeholders 
around a table and identifying the project problem at 
hand. Each member then writes his or her solutions. 
Next, each member presents his or her solution to the 
group, and the leader writes these solutions on a chart. 
No criticism is allowed. This process continues until all 
of the ideas have been expressed. Each solution then is 
discussed and clarified by the group. After all the ideas 
have been discussed, the group members privately 
rank-order their preferred solutions. The balloting is tal-
lied to create a rank-ordering of each solution. These 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 1 . 7
Nominal Group Technique*
* Andrew Delbeeq, Andrew H. Van de Ven, and D. H. Gustafson, 
Group Techniques for Program Planning (Glenview, II: Scott 
Foresman, 1975).
steps are repeated if necessary to refine the list further 
in order to get the most preferred solution.
 
NGT provides an orderly process for dealing with 
potentially inflammatory problems. It also prevents 
groupthink from occurring. NGT discourages any pres-
sure to conform to the wishes of a high-status, powerful 
group member since all ideas are discussed and all pref-
erences are expressed privately. Creativity should be 
enhanced since members are able to offer a solution 
based on their expertise and viewpoint. Finally, impor-
tant decisions can be made in a relatively timely manner. 
NGT works best when there is a well-defined problem.
Project managers often work under less-than-ideal conditions to develop a cohesive 
team committed to working together and completing the project to the best of their 
abilities. They have to recruit personnel from other departments and manage the tem-
porary involvement of team members. They often have to bring strangers together and 
quickly establish a set of operational procedures that unite their efforts and contribu-
tions. They have to be skilled at managing meetings so that they do not become a 
burden but rather a vehicle for progress. Project managers need to forge a team identity 
and a shared vision that command the attention and allegiance of participants. Project 
managers have to encourage functional conflict that contributes to superior solutions 
while being on guard against dysfunctional conflict that can break a team apart. In 
doing these things, they have to be careful not to do too good a job and avoid the pit-
falls of excessive group cohesion.
 
While agendas, charters, visions, rewards, and so forth are important tools and tech-
niques, it has been emphasized both in this chapter and in Chapter 10 that the most 
important tool a project manager has to build an effective project team is his or her 
own behavior. Just as the founding members of an organization shape the culture of the 
organization, the project manager shapes and influences the internal culture of the 
project team. A positive example can define how team members respond to changes, 
how they handle new tasks, and how they relate to one another and the rest of the orga-
nization. There is no easy way to lead by example. It requires personal conviction, 
discipline, sensitivity to team dynamics, and a constant awareness of how personal 
actions are perceived by others.
Summary
www.ebook3000.com

406  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
Key Terms
Brainstorming, 394
Dysfunctional  
conflict, 396
Functional conflict, 396
Groupthink, 403
Nominal group technique  
(NGT), 405
Positive synergy, 377
Project kick-off  
meeting, 383
Project vision, 388
Team building, 399
Virtual project  
team, 399
Review 
Questions
1. What are the differences between the five-stage model of team development and the 
punctuated equilibrium model?
2. What are the elements of an effective project vision? Why are they important?
3. Why should a project manager emphasize group rewards over individual rewards?
4. What is the difference between functional and dysfunctional conflict on a project?
5. When would it be appropriate to hold a formal team-building session on a project?
6. What are the unique challenges to managing a virtual project team?
7. What can a project manager do to avoid some of the pitfalls of a highly cohesive 
project team?
Exercises
1. The following activities are based on a recently completed group project that you 
have been involved in. This project may have been a student project, a work project, 
or an extracurricular project.
 
a.  Analyze the development of the team in terms of the five-phase model and the 
punctuated equilibrium model. Which model does the best job of describing how 
the team evolved?
 
b.  Analyze the group in terms of the nine situational factors that influence team 
development. What factors positively contributed to group performance? What 
factors negatively contributed to group performance? How did the group try to 
overcome the negative factors? What could you have done differently to over-
come these negative factors?
 
c.  Analyze how effectively the group managed meetings. What did the group do 
well? What didn’t the group do well? If the group were formed again, what spe-
cific recommendations would you make about how the group should manage 
meetings?
2. Assume that you have the following decision-making options: (1) make the deci-
sion on your own with available information, (2) consult others before making a 
decision, and (3) call a meeting and reach a consensus, seeking to arrive at a final 
decision everyone can agree on. Which approach would you use to make each of the 
following decisions and why?
 
a.  You are the project leader for Casino Night on campus, a charitable event orga-
nized by your group to raise money for the homeless. The event was a big suc-
cess, garnering a net profit of $3,500. Before the event your team researched 
nearby organizations that support the homeless and to whom the money could be 
given. You narrowed the choices to the “Chunk of Coal House” and “St. Mary’s 
Soup Kitchen.” Eventually your group decided that the funds be given to Chunk 
of Coal. You are about to write a check to its director when you read in the local 
newspaper that the Chunk of Coal House has terminated operations. What 
should you do with the money?

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  407
 
b.  You are a golf course designer hired by Trysting Tree Golf Club to renovate their 
golf course. You have worked closely with the board of directors of the club to 
develop a new layout that is both challenging and aesthetically pleasing. Every-
one is excited about the changes. The project is nearly 75 percent complete when 
you encounter problems on the 13th hole. The 13th hole at Trysting Tree is a 
125-yard par three in which golfers have to hit their tee shots over a lake to a 
modulated green. During the construction of the new tee box, workers discov-
ered that an underground spring runs beneath the box to the lake. You inspected 
the site and agreed with the construction supervisor that this could create serious 
problems, especially during the rainy winter months. After surveying the area, 
you believe the only viable option would be to extend the hole to 170 yards and 
create elevated tees on the adjacent hillside.
 
c.  You are the leader of a new product development project. Your team has worked 
hard on developing a third-generation product that incorporates new technology 
and meets customer demands. The project is roughly 50 percent complete. You 
have just received a report from the marketing department detailing a similar 
product that is about to be released by a competitor. The product appears to uti-
lize radical new design principles that expand the functionality of the product. 
This poses a serious threat to the success of your project. Top management is 
considering canceling your project and starting over again. They want you to 
make a recommendation.
3. The following activities are based on a current or recently completed group project 
that you have been involved in. This project may be a student project, a work proj-
ect, or an extracurricular project.
 
a.  How strong is the team identity on this project and why?
 
b. What could participants do to strengthen team identity?
 
c.  What kind of informal activities could be used to rejuvenate the team? Why 
would these activities work?
References
Adams, J. R., and S. E. Brandt, “Behavioral Implications of the Project Lifecyle,” 
Project Management Handbook, 2nd ed., D. I. Cleland and W. R. King, eds.,  
(New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988), pp. 206–30.
Berkun, S., The Art of Project Management (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly, 2005).
Bolman, D. G., and T. E. Deal, “What Makes Teams Work,” Organizational 
 Dynamics, vol. 21, no. 2 (1992), pp. 34–45.
Bowen, K. H., K. B. Clark, C. A. Holloway, and S. C. Wheelwright, The Perpetual 
Enterprise Machine, (New York: Oxford Press, 1994).
Cleland, D. I., “Team Building: The New Strategic Weapon,” PM Network, vol. 11, 
no. 1 (1997).
Coutu, D. L., “Organization Trust in Virtual Teams,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 
76, no. 3 (1998), pp. 20–21.
DeMarco, T., and T. Lister, Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Dorsett House, 1999).
www.ebook3000.com

408  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
Ericksen, J., and L. Dyer, “Right from the Start: Exploring the Effects of Early Team 
Events on Subsequent Project Team Performance,” Administrative Science Quarterly, 
vol. 49, no. 3 (2004), pp. 438–71.
Frame, J. D., Managing Projects in Organizations (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 
1995).
Hackman, J. R., Leading Teams: Setting the Stage for Great Performances (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Business School Press, 2002).
Homans, G. C., Social Behavior: Its Elementary Forms (New York: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1961).
Janis, I. L., Groupthink (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1982).
Johansen, R., D. Sibbett, S. Benson, A. Martin, R. Mittman, and P. Saffo, Leading 
Business Teams: How Teams can use Technology and Group Process Tools to 
Enhance Performance (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1991).
Katz, R., “How a Team at Digital Equipment Designed the ‘Alpha’ Chip,” The 
Human Side of Managing Technological Innovation, 2nd ed., ed. Ralph Katz  
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004), pp. 121–33.
Katzenbach, J. R., and D. K. Smith, The Wisdom of Teams (Boston: Harvard  Business 
School Press, 1993).
Kidder, T., The Soul of a New Machine (New York: Avon Books, 1981).
Kirkman, B. L., B. Rosen, C. B. Gibson, P. E. Tesluk, and S. O. McPherson, “Five 
Challenges to Virtual Team Success: Lessons From Sabre, INC.,” Academy of 
 Management Executive, vol. 16, no. 2 (2002), pp. 67–79.
Kuruppuarachchi, P. “Virtual Team Concepts in Projects: A Case Study,” Project 
Management Journal, June 2009, pp. 19–33.
Leavitt, H. J., and J. Lipman-Blumen, “Hot Groups,” Harvard Business Review,  
vol. 73 (1995), pp. 109–16.
Likert, R., New Patterns in Management, (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961).
Linetz, B. P., and K. P. Rea, Project Management for the 21st Century (San Diego: 
Academic Press, 2001).
Lipsinger, R., and D. DeRosa, Virtual Team Success: A Practical Guide for Working 
and Leading from a Distance (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2010).
Maier, N. R. F., Problem Solving and Creativity in Individuals and Groups (Belmont, 
CA: Brooks-Cole, 1970).
Maier, N. R. F., Problem-Solving Discussion and Conference (New York:  
McGraw-Hill, 1963).
Malhotra, A., A. Majchrzak, and B. Rosen, “Leading Virtual Teams,” Academy of 
Management Perspectives, vol. 21, no. 1 (2007), pp. 60–70.
Maznevski, M. L., and K. M. Chudoba, “Bridging Space over Time: Global  
Virtual Team Dynamics and Effectiveness,” Organization Science, vol. 11. no. 5  
(September–October 2000), pp. 473–92.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  409
Murphy, C. and J. Clark, “Picture This: How the Language of Leaders Drives 
 Performance,” Organizational Dynamics, 45 (2), March, 2016, pp. 139–146.
Peters, T., Thriving on Chaos: Handbook for a Management Revolution (New York: 
Knopf, 1988).
Posner, B. Z., “What’s All the Fighting About? Conflicts in Project Management,” 
IEEE Transactions in Engineering Management, EM-33, 1986, pp. 207–211.
Ritti, R. R., and S. L. Levy, The Ropes to Skip and the Ropes to Know: Studies in 
Organizational Theory and Behavior (New York: Wiley, 2009).
Senge, P. M., The Fifth Discipline (New York: Doubleday, 1990).
Seta, J. J., P. B. Paulus, and J. Schkade, “Effects of Group Size and Proximity under 
Cooperative and Competitive Conditions,” Journal of Personality and Social 
 Psychology, vol. 98, no. 2 (1976), pp. 47–53.
Sherif, M., Group Conflict and Cooperation: Their Social Psychology (Chicago: 
Aldine, 1967).
Siebdrat, F., M. Hoegl, and H. Ernst, “How to Manage Virtual Teams,” MIT Sloan 
Management Review, http://sloanreview.mit.edu/the-maazine/2009-summer/50412 
/how-to manage-virtual teams/2009.
Skilton, P. F., and K. J. Dooley, “The Effects of Repeat Collaboration on Creative 
Abrasion,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 35, no. 1 (2010), pp. 118–34.
Smith, B. J., “Building Shared Visions: How to Begin,” The Fifth Discipline Field-
book: Strategies and Tools for Building a Learning Organization, ed. P. M. Senge,  
C. Roberts, R. B. Ross, B. J. Smith, and A. Kleiner (New York: Doubleday, 1994), 
pp. 312–327.
Smith, P. G., and D. G. Reinertsen, Developing Products in Half the Time (New 
York: Wiley, 1997, 2nd ed).
Thamhain, H. J., and D. L. Wilemon, “Conflict Management in Project Life Cycle,” 
Sloan Management Review, vol. 16, no. 3 (1975), pp. 31–41.
Thoms, P., “Creating a Shared Vision with a Project Team,” PM Network, January 
1997, pp. 33–35.
3M, “Leading a Distributed Team,” www.3m.com/meetingnetwork/readingroom 
/meetingguide_distribteam.html. Accessed June 6, 2006.
Tuchman, B. W., “Development Sequence of Small Groups,” Psychological Bulletin, 
vol. 63 (1965), pp. 384–399.
Tuchman, B. W., and M. C. Jensen, “Stages of Small Group Development Revisited,” 
Group and Organizational Studies, vol. 2 (1977), pp. 419–427.
Vroom, V. H., and A. G. Jago, The New Leadership (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1988).
Zander, A., Making Groups Effective (San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994).
www.ebook3000.com

410  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
Case 11.1
Kerzner Office Equipment
Amber Briggs looked nervously at her watch as she sat at the front of a large table in 
the cafeteria at Kerzner Office Equipment. It was now 10 minutes after 3:00 and only 
10 of the 14 members had arrived for the first meeting of the Kerzner anniversary task 
force. Just then two more members hurriedly sat down and mumbled apologies for 
being late. Briggs cleared her throat and started the meeting.
KERZNER OFFICE EQUIPMENT
Kerzner Office Equipment is located in Charleston, South Carolina. It specializes in 
the manufacture and sales of high-end office furniture and equipment. Kerzner enjoyed 
steady growth during its first five years of existence with a high-water employment 
mark of more than 1,400 workers. Then a national recession struck, forcing Kerzner to 
lay off 25 percent of its employees. This was a traumatic period for the company. 
Justin Tubbs was brought in as the new CEO, and things began to slowly turn around. 
Tubbs was committed to employee participation and redesigned operations around the 
concept of self-managing teams. The company soon introduced an innovative line of 
ergonomic furniture designed to reduce back strain and carpal tunnel. This line of 
equipment proved to be a resounding success, and Kerzner became known as a leader 
in the industry. The company currently employs 1,100 workers and has just been 
selected for the second straight time by the Charleston Post and Courier as one of the 
10 best local firms to work for in South Carolina.
AMBER BRIGGS
Amber Briggs is a 42-year-old human resource specialist who has worked for Kerzner 
for the past five years. During this time she has performed a variety of activities 
involving recruitment, training, compensation, and team building. David Brown, vice 
president of human resources, assigned Briggs the responsibility for organizing 
Kerzner’s 10th anniversary celebration. She was excited about the project because she 
would report directly to top management.
 
CEO Tubbs briefed her as to the purpose and objectives of the celebration. Tubbs 
stressed that this should be a memorable event and that it was important to celebrate 
Kerzner’s success since the dark days of the layoffs. Moreover, he confided that he had 
just read a book on corporate cultures and believed that such events were important for 
conveying the values at Kerzner. He went on to say that he wanted this to be an employee 
celebration—not a celebration conjured up by top management. As such, she would be 
assigned a task force of 14 employees from each of the major departments to organize 
and plan the event. Her team was to present a preliminary plan and budget for the event 
to top management within three months. When discussing budgets, Tubbs revealed that 
he felt the total cost should be somewhere in the $150,000 range. He concluded the 
meeting by offering to help Briggs in any way he could to make the event a success.
 
Soon thereafter Briggs received the list of the names of the task force members, 
and she contacted them either by phone or e-mail to arrange today’s meeting. She 
had to scramble to find a meeting place. Her cubicle in human resources was too 
small to accommodate such a group, and all the meeting rooms at Kerzner were 
booked or being refurbished. She settled on the cafeteria because it was usually 

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  411
deserted in the late afternoon. Prior to the meeting she posted the agenda on a flip-
chart (see Figure C11.1) adjacent to the table. Given everyone’s busy schedules, the 
meeting was limited to just one hour.
THE FIRST MEETING
Briggs began the meeting by saying, “Greetings. For those who don’t know me, I’m 
Amber Briggs from human resources and I’ve been assigned to manage the 10th anni-
versary celebration at Kerzner. Top management wants this to be a special event—at 
the same time they want it to be our event. This is why you are here. Each of you rep-
resents one of the major departments, and together our job is to plan and organize the 
celebration.” She then reviewed the agenda and asked each member to introduce him/
herself. The tall, red-haired woman to the right of Briggs broke the momentary silence 
by saying, “Hi, I’m Cara Miller from Plastics. I guess my boss picked me for this task 
force because I have a reputation for throwing great parties.”
 
In turn each member followed suit. Below is a sampling of their introductions:
 
“Hi, I’m Mike Wales from maintenance. I’m not sure why I’m here. Things have 
been a little slow in our department, so my boss told me to come to this meeting.”
 
“I’m Megan Plinski from domestic sales. I actually volunteered for this assignment. 
I think it will be a lot of fun to plan a big party.”
 
“Yo, my name is Nick Psias from accounting. My boss said one of us had to join 
this task force, and I guess it was my turn.”
 
“Hi, I’m Rick Fennah. I’m the only one from purchasing who has been here since 
the beginning. We’ve been through some rough times, and I think it is important to 
take time and celebrate what we’ve accomplished.”
 
“Hi, I’m Ingrid Hedstrom from international sales. I think this is a great idea, but I 
should warn you that I will be out of the country for most of the next month.”
 
“I’m Abby Bell from engineering. Sorry for being late, but things are a bit crazy in 
my department.”
 
Briggs circled the names of the two people who were absent and circulated a roster so 
that everyone could check to see if their phone numbers and e-mail addresses were cor-
rect. She then summarized her meeting with Tubbs and told the group that he expected 
them to make a formal presentation to top management within 10 weeks. She acknowl-
edged that they were all busy people and that it was her job to manage the project as 
efficiently as possible. At the same time, she reiterated the importance of the project and 
that this would be a very public event: “If we screw up, everyone will know about it.”
 
Briggs went over the ground rules and emphasized that from now on meetings 
would start on time and that she expected to be notified in advance if someone was 
going to be absent. She summarized the first part of the project as centering on five 
key questions: when, where, what, who, and how much? She created a stir in the group 
when she responded to a question about cost by informing them that top management 
was willing to pay up to $150,000 for the event. Megan quipped, “This is going to be 
one hell of a party.”
 
Briggs then turned the group’s attention to identifying a common meeting time. 
After jousting for 15 minutes, she terminated the discussion by requesting that each 
member submit a schedule of free time over the next month by Friday. She would use 
this information and a new planning software to identify optimal times. She ended the 
meeting by thanking the members for coming and asking them to begin soliciting 
ideas from co-workers about how this event should be celebrated. She announced that 
3:00
3:15
3:30
3:45
4:00
Introductions
Project overview
Ground rules
Meeting times
Adjourn
Agenda
FIGURE C11.1 
Celebration Task  
Force 
www.ebook3000.com

412  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
she would meet individually with each of them to discuss their role on the project. The 
meeting was adjourned at 4:00 p.m.
1. Critique Briggs’s management of the first meeting. What, if anything, should she 
have done differently?
2. What barriers is she likely to encounter in completing this project?
3. What can she do to overcome these barriers?
4. What should she do between now and the next meeting?
Case 11.2
Ajax Project
Tran was taking his dog Callie on her evening walk as the sun began to set over the coastal 
range. He looked forward to this time of the day. It was an opportunity to enjoy some peace 
and quiet. It was also a time to review events on the Ajax project and plot his next moves.
 
Ajax is the code name given by CEBEX for a high-tech security system project 
funded by the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD). Tran is the project manager and his 
core team consisted of 30 full-time hardware and software engineers.
 
Tran and his family fled Cambodia when he was four years old. He joined the U.S. 
Air Force when he was 18 and used the education stipend to attend Washington State 
University. He joined CEBEX upon graduating with a dual degree in mechanical and 
electrical engineering. After working on a variety of projects for 10 years Tran decided 
he wanted to enter management. He went to night school at the University of Washington 
to earn an MBA.
 
Tran became a project manager for the money. He also thought he was good at it. He 
enjoyed working with people and making the right things happen. This was his fifth project 
and up to now he was batting .500, with half of his projects coming ahead of schedule. Tran 
was proud that he could now afford to send his oldest child to Stanford University.
 
Ajax was one of many defense projects the CEBEX Corporation had under contract 
with DOD. CEBEX is a huge defense company with annual sales in excess of $30 bil-
lion and more than 120,000 employees worldwide. CEBEX’s five major business areas 
are Aeronautics, Electronic Systems, Information & Technology Services, Integrated 
Systems & Solutions, and Space Systems. Ajax was one of several new projects spon-
sored by the Integrated Systems & Solutions division aimed at the homeland security 
business. CEBEX was confident that it could leverage its technical expertise and polit-
ical connections to become a major player in this growing market. Ajax was one of 
several projects directed at designing, developing, and installing a security system at 
an important government installation.
 
Tran had two major concerns when he started the Ajax project. The first was the 
technical risks inherent in the project. In theory the design principles made sense and 
the project used proven technology. Still the technology had never been applied in the 
field in this matter. From past experience, Tran knew there was a big difference 
between the laboratory and the real world. He also knew that integrating the audio, 
optical, tactile, and laser subsystems would test the patience and ingenuity of his team.
 
The second concern involved his team. The team was pretty much split down the 
middle between hardware and electrical engineers. Not only did these engineers have 
different skill sets and tend to look at problems differently, but generational differences 
between the two groups were evident as well. The hardware engineers were almost all 

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  413
former military, family men with conservative attire and beliefs. The electrical engi-
neers were a much motlier crew. They tended to be young, single, and at times very 
cocky. While the hardware engineers talked about the Seattle Mariners, raising teenag-
ers, and going to Palm Desert to play golf, the software engineers talked about Vapor, 
the latest concert at the Gorge amphitheater, and going mountain biking in Peru.
 
To make matters worse, tension between these two groups within CEBEX festered 
around salary issues. Electrical engineers were at a premium, and the hardware engi-
neers resented the new hires’ salary packages, which were comparable to what they 
were earning after 20 years of working for CEBEX. Still the real money was to be 
made from the incentives associated with project performance. These were all contin-
gent on meeting project milestones and the final completion date.
 
Before actual work started on the project, Tran arranged a two-day team-building 
retreat at a lodge on the Olympic peninsula for his entire team as well as key staff from 
the government installation. He used this time to go over the major objectives of the 
project and unveil the basic project plan. An internal consultant facilitated several 
team-building activities that made light of cross-generational issues. Tran felt a real 
sense of camaraderie within the team.
 
The good feelings generated from the retreat carried over to the beginning of the 
project. The entire team bought into the mission of the project and technical challenges 
it represented. Hardware and electrical engineers worked side by side to solve prob-
lems and build subsystems.
 
The project plan was built around a series of five tests, with each test being a more 
rigorous verification of total system performance. Passing each test represented a key 
milestone for the project. The team was excited about conducting the first Alpha test one 
week early—only to be disappointed by a series of minor technical glitches that took two 
weeks of problem solving to resolve. The team worked extra hard to make up for the lost 
time. Tran was proud of the team and how hard members had worked together.
 
The Alpha II test was conducted on schedule, but once again the system failed to 
perform. This time three weeks of debugging was needed before the team received the 
green light to move to the next phase of the project. By this time, team goodwill had 
been tested, and emotions were a bit frayed. A cloud of disappointment descended 
over the team as hopes of bonuses disappeared with the project falling further behind 
schedule. This was augmented by cynics who felt that the original schedule was unfair 
and the deadlines were impossible to begin with.
 
Tran responded by starting each day with a status meeting where the team reviewed 
what they accomplished the previous day and set new objectives for that day. He 
believed these meetings were helpful in establishing positive momentum and reinforc-
ing a team identity among the engineers. He also went out of his way to spend more 
time with the “troops,” helping them solve problems, offering encouragement, and a 
sincere pat on the back when one was deserved.
 
He was cautiously optimistic when the time came to conduct the Alpha III test. It 
was the end of the day when the switch was turned on, but nothing happened. Within 
minutes the entire team heard the news. Screams could be heard down the hallway. 
Perhaps the most telling moment was when Tran looked down at the company’s park-
ing lot and saw most of his project team walking by themselves to their cars.
 
As his dog Callie chased some wild bunnies, Tran pondered what he should do next.
1. How effective has Tran been as a project manager? Explain.
2. What problem(s) does Tran face?
3. How would you go about solving them? Why?
www.ebook3000.com

414  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
Case 11.3
Franklin Equipment, Ltd.*
Franklin Equipment, Ltd. (FEL), with headquarters and main fabrication facilities in 
Saint John, New Brunswick, was founded 75 years ago to fabricate custom-designed 
large machines for construction businesses in the Maritime Provinces. Over the years 
its product lines became strategically focused on creating rock-crushing equipment for 
dam and highway construction and for a few other markets that require the processing 
of aggregate. FEL now designs, fabricates, and assembles stationary and portable 
rock-crushing plants and services its own products and those of its competitors.
 
In the 1970s, FEL began to expand its market from the Maritime Provinces to the 
rest of Canada. FEL currently has several offices and fabrication facilities throughout 
the country. More recently, FEL has made a concerted effort to market its products 
internationally.
 
Last month, FEL signed a contract to design and fabricate a rock-crushing plant for 
a Middle East construction project, called Project Abu Dhabi. Charles Gatenby secured 
this contract and has been assigned as project manager. This project is viewed as a 
coup because FEL has wanted to open up markets in this area for a long time and has 
had difficulty getting prospective customers to realize that FEL is a Canadian firm and 
not from the United States. Somehow these customers view all North American ven-
dors as the same and are reluctant to employ any of them because of international 
political considerations.
 
A project of this scope typically starts with the selection of a team of managers 
responsible for various aspects of the design, fabrication, delivery, and installation of 
the product. Manager selection is important because the product design and fabrica-
tion vary with the unique needs of each customer. For example, the terrain, rock char-
acteristics, weather conditions, and logistical concerns create special problems for all 
phases of plant design and operations. In addition, environmental concerns and labor 
conditions vary from customer to customer and from region to region.
 
In addition to the project manager, all projects include a design engineer; an oper-
ations manager, who oversees fabrication and on-site assembly; and a cost accoun-
tant, who oversees all project financial and cost reporting matters. Each of these 
people must work closely together if a well-running plant is to be delivered on time 
and within cost constraints. Because international contracts often require FEL to 
employ host nationals for plant assembly and to train them for operations, a human 
resource manager is also assigned to the project team. In such cases, the human 
resource manager needs to understand the particulars of the plant specifications and 
then use this knowledge to design selection procedures and assess particular training 
needs. The human resource manager also needs to learn the relevant labor laws of 
the customer’s country.
 
FEL assigns managers to project teams based on their expertise and their availabil-
ity to work on a particular project given their other commitments. This typically means 
that managers without heavy current project commitments will be assigned to new 
projects. For instance, a manager finishing one project will likely be assigned a man-
agement position on a new project team. The project manager typically has little to say 
about who is assigned to his or her team.
* Courtesy of John A. Drexler Jr., Oregon State University.

Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams  415
 
Because he secured Project Abu Dhabi and has established positive working rela-
tionships with the Abu Dhabi customer, Gatenby was assigned to be project manager. 
Gatenby has successfully managed similar projects. The other managers assigned to 
Project Abu Dhabi are Bill Rankins, a brilliant design engineer, Rob Perry, operations 
manager with responsibility for fabrication and installation, Elaine Bruder, finance and 
cost accounting manager, and Sam Stonebreaker, human resource manager. Each of 
these managers has worked together on numerous past projects.
 
A few years ago, FEL began contracting for team facilitator services from several 
consulting firms to help new project teams operate effectively. Last month, FEL 
recruited Carl Jobe from one of these consulting firms to be a full-time internal con-
sultant. A number of managers, including Gatenby, were so impressed with Jobe’s 
skills that they convinced FEL top management of the need to hire a permanent inter-
nal facilitator; Jobe was the obvious choice.
 
Because Gatenby was instrumental in hiring Jobe at FEL, he was excited at the 
prospect of using Jobe to facilitate team building among Project Abu Dhabi team 
members. Gatenby was very proud of having secured this project and had expected to 
be appointed project manager. He knew that this project’s success would be instrumen-
tal in advancing his own career.
 
Gatenby told Jobe, “This project is really important to FEL and to me personally. I 
really need for you to help us develop into a team that works well together to achieve 
the project’s goals within budget. I’ve observed your success in developing teams on 
other projects, and I expect you’ll do the same for Project Abu Dhabi. I’ll take care of 
you if you help me make this work.”
 
Jobe outlined for Gatenby how he would proceed. Jobe would begin by interview-
ing team members individually to learn their perceptions of each other and of the 
promises and pitfalls of being involved in this project. Meetings of the entire team 
would follow these interviews using the information he collected to help establish a 
team identity and a shared vision.
 
Jobe interviewed Bruder first. She expressed skepticism about whether the project 
could succeed. During the interview, Bruder appeared to be distant, and Jobe could not 
figure out why he had not established good rapport with her. Bruder intimated that she 
expected a lot of cost overruns and a lot of missed production deadlines. But not know-
ing Jobe well, Bruder was reluctant to identify any specific barriers to the project’s 
success. While she would not directly say so, it was clear to Jobe that Bruder did not 
want to be a part of Project Abu Dhabi. Jobe left this interview confused and wonder-
ing what was going on.
 
Jobe’s next interview was with Perry, the operations manager. Perry has worked at 
FEL for 15 years, and he immediately came to the point: “This project is not going to 
work. I cannot understand why upper management keeps assigning me to work on 
projects with Rankins. We simply cannot work together, and we don’t get along. I’ve 
disliked him from day one. He keeps dropping the fact that he has earned all these 
advanced degrees from Purdue. And he keeps telling us how things are done there. I 
know he’s better educated than I am, and he’s really smart. But I’m smart too and am 
good at what I do. There’s no need for Rankins to make me feel like an idiot because I 
don’t have a degree. Jobe, I’ll be honest with you. Rankins has only been here for five 
years, but I hold him personally responsible for my problem with alcohol, and for its 
resulting effect on my marriage. I got divorced last year, and it’s Rankins’s fault.”
 
Jobe next talked with Rankins, who said, “I don’t care what you do. Perry and I 
simply can’t work closely together for the nine months it will take to get it done. One 
of us will kill the other. Ever since I arrived at FEL, Perry has hated my guts and 
www.ebook3000.com

416  Chapter 11  Managing Project Teams
does everything he can to sabotage my designs. We usually worry about customers 
creating change orders; here it’s the fabrication and operations manager who is 
responsible for them. Perry second-guesses everything I do and makes design 
changes on his own, and these are always bad decisions. He is out of control. I swear 
he stays awake at nights thinking up ways to ruin my designs. I don’t have this prob-
lem with any other manager.”
 
Jobe left these interviews thoroughly discouraged and could not imagine what 
would come up in his interview with Stonebreaker. But Stonebreaker was quite posi-
tive: “I enjoy these international projects where I get to travel abroad and learn about 
different cultures. I can’t wait to get started on this.”
 
Jobe asked Stonebreaker about the ability of various team members to work 
together. Stonebreaker replied, “No problem! We’ve all worked together before and 
have had no problems. Sure, there have been ruffled feathers and hurt feelings between 
Rankins and Perry. Rankins can be arrogant and Perry stubborn, but it’s never been 
anything that we can’t work around. Besides, both of them are good at what they do—
both professionals. They’ll keep their heads on straight.”
 
Jobe was even more bewildered. Gatenby says this project’s success rides on Jobe’s 
facilitation skills. The finance manager appears to want off this project team. The 
design engineer and operations manager admit they detest each other and cannot work 
together. And the human resources manager, having worked on projects with Perry 
and Rankins before, expects a rosy working relationship and anticipates no problems.
 
Jobe had a second meeting with Gatenby. Before discussing the design of the team-
building sessions, he asked questions to learn what Gatenby thought about the ability 
of team members to work together. Gatenby admitted that there has been very bad 
blood between Perry and Rankins, but added, “That’s why we hired you. It’s your job 
to make sure that the history between those two doesn’t interfere with Project Abu 
Dhabi’s success. It’s your job to get them to work well together. Get it done.”
 
Their dialogue toward the end of this meeting progressed as follows:
 
Jobe: 
 “Why do you expect Rankins and Perry to work well together, given their 
history? What incentives do they have to do so?”
 Gatenby:   “As you should know, FEL requires formal goal setting between project 
managers and functional managers at the beginning of each project. I’ve 
already done this with Bruder, Stonebreaker, Perry, and Rankins. Perry 
and Rankins have explicit goals stating they must work well together and 
cooperate with each other.”
 
Jobe: 
“What happens if they do not meet these goals?”
 Gatenby:  “I’ve already discussed this with top management. If it appears to me after 
two months that things are not working out between Perry and Rankins, 
FEL will fire Rankins.”
 
Jobe: 
“Does Perry know this?”
 Gatenby:  “Yes.”
1. Evaluate the criteria FEL uses to assign managers to project teams. What efficien-
cies do these criteria create? What are the resulting problems?
2. Why is it even more important that project team members work well together on 
international projects such as Project Abu Dhabi?
3. Discuss the dilemma that Jobe now faces.
4. What should Jobe recommend to Gatenby?

www.ebook3000.com

Outsourcing: Managing 
Interorganizational Relations
12
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
12-1 Understand the advantages and disadvantages of 
outsourcing project work.
12-2 Describe the basic elements of a Request for  
Proposal (RFP).
12-3 Identify best practices for outsourcing project work.
12-4 Practice principled negotiation.
12-5 Describe the met-expectations model of customer 
satisfaction and its implications for working with 
customers on projects.
OUTLINE
12.1 Outsourcing Project Work
12.2 Request for Proposal (RFP)
12.3 Best Practices in Outsourcing Project Work
12.4 The Art of Negotiating
12.5 A Note on Managing Customer Relations
Summary
Appendix 12.1: Contract Management
C H A P T E R  T W E L V E
418

. . . being a good partner has become a key corporate asset. I call it a 
company’s collaborative advantage. In the global economy, a well-developed 
ability to create and sustain fruitful collaborations gives companies a  
significant competitive leg up.
—Rosabeth Moss Kanter, Harvard Business School professor
It is rare in today’s flat world to find important projects that are being completed 
totally in-house. Outsourcing or contracting significant segments of project work to 
other companies is commonplace. For example, nine states attempting to unify the 
accounting of all their state agencies did not have the internal resources to implement 
such a large project. Hence, project teams were formed consisting of personnel from 
software, hardware, and accounting firms to implement the projects. Small high-tech 
firms outsource research to determine what features customers value in new products 
they are developing. Even industry giants such as Microsoft and Intel commonly hire 
independent firms to test new products they are developing.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
419 
www.ebook3000.com

420  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
 
Contracting project work has long been the norm in the construction industry, where 
firms hire general contractors who, in turn, hire and manage cadres of subcontractors to 
create new buildings and structures. For example, the Chunnel project, which created a 
transportation tunnel between France and England, involved more than 250 organiza-
tions. Contracting is not limited to large projects. For example, an insurance company 
worked with an outside contractor to develop an answering service that directs custom-
ers to specific departments and employees. The trend for the future suggests that more 
and more projects will involve working with people from different organizations.
 
This chapter extends the previous two chapters’ discussion of building and manag-
ing relations by focusing specifically on issues surrounding working with people from 
other organizations to complete a project. First, the advantages and disadvantages of 
outsourcing project work are introduced. This is followed by a discussion of Request 
for Proposals (RFPs) and the solicitation process. Best practices used by firms to out-
source and collaborate with each other on are discussed next. The focus then shifts to 
the art of negotiating, which is at the heart of effective collaboration. Negotiating skills 
and techniques for resolving disagreements and reaching optimal solutions are then 
presented. The chapter closes with a brief, but important, note on managing customer 
relations. In addition, an appendix on contract management is included to augment our 
discussion of how organizations work together on projects.
12.1 Outsourcing Project Work
The term outsourcing has traditionally been applied to the transferring of business 
functions or processes (e.g., customer support, IT, accounting) to other, often foreign 
companies. For example, when you call your Internet provider to solve a technical 
problem you are likely to talk to a technician in Bangalore, India, or Bucharest, Romania. 
Outsourcing is now being applied to contracting significant chunks of project work. 
For example, Apple and Motorola work closely with manufacturers in China to develop 
next-generation smartphones. Toyota and DaimlerChrysler collaborate with suppliers 
to develop new automobile platforms.
 
The shift toward outsourcing is readily apparent in the film industry. During the 
golden era of Hollywood, huge, vertically integrated corporations made movies. Stu-
dios such as MGM, Warner Brothers, and 20th Century–Fox owned large movie lots 
and employed thousands of full-time specialists—set designers, camera people, film 
editors, and directors. Star actors like Humphrey Bogart and Marilyn Monroe were 
signed to exclusive studio contracts for a set number of films (e.g., six films over three 
years). Today, most movies are made by a collection of individuals and small compa-
nies who come together to make films project-by-project. This structure allows each 
project to be staffed with the talent most suited to its demands rather than choosing 
from only those people the studio employs. This same approach is being applied to the 
creation of new products and services. For example, see Figure 12.1.
 
Figure 12.1 depicts a situation in which a zero-gravity reclining chair is being devel-
oped. The genesis for the chair comes from a mechanical engineer who developed the 
idea in her garage. The inventor negotiates a contract with a catalog firm to develop and 
manufacture the chair. The catalog company in turn creates a project team of manufac-
turers, suppliers, and marketing firms to create the new chair. Each participant adds req-
uisite expertise to the project. The catalog firm brings its brand name and distribution 
channels to the project. Tool and die firms provide customized parts which are delivered 
to a manufacturing firm that will produce the chair. Marketing firms refine the design, 
develop packaging, and test market potential names. A project manager is assigned by 
the catalog firm to work with the inventor and the other parties to complete the project.
12-1
LO
Understand the advan-
tages and disadvantages 
of outsourcing project 
work.

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  421
 
Many outsourced projects operate in a virtual environment in which people are 
linked by computers, faxes, computer-aided design systems, and video teleconferenc-
ing. They rarely, if ever, see one another face-to-face. On other projects, participants 
from different organizations work closely together, for example, at a construction site 
or in shared office space. In either case, people come and go as services are needed, 
much as in a matrix structure, but they are not formal members of one organization, 
just technical experts who form a temporary alliance with an organization, fulfill their 
contractual obligations, and then move on to the next project.
 
The advantages of outsourcing project work are many:
1. Cost reduction. Companies can secure competitive prices for contracted services, 
especially if the work can be outsourced offshore. Furthermore, overhead costs are 
dramatically cut since the company no longer has to internally maintain the con-
tracted services.
2. Faster project completion. Not only can work be done more cheaply, but it can also 
be done faster. Competitive pricing means more resources for the dollar. For exam-
ple, you can hire three Indian software engineers for the price of one American 
software engineer. Furthermore, outsourcing can provide access to equipment that 
can accelerate completion of project tasks. For example, by contracting a backhoe 
operater you are able to accomplish in four hours what it would take a landscaping 
crew four days to complete.
3. High level of expertise. A high level of expertise and technology can be brought to 
bear on the project. A company no longer has to keep up with technological 
advances. Instead, it can focus on developing its core competencies and hire firms 
with the know-how to work on relevant segments of the project.
4. Flexibility. Organizations are no longer constrained by their own resources but can 
pursue a wide range of projects by combining their resources with talents of other  
companies. Small companies can instantly go global by working with foreign partners.
Marketing
ﬁrm
Tool & die
ﬁrms
Advertising
ﬁrm
Parts
suppliers
Manufacturer
Project
manager
Catalog
company
Inventor
Legal ﬁrm
Reclining
chair
FIGURE 12.1
Reclining Chair 
Project
www.ebook3000.com

422  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
BACKGROUND
In 2002 the basic design and plans 
for  Boeing’s 787 Dreamliner were 
accepted and given the charter to 
“Go.” The Dreamliner boasts the latest 
design and revolutionary technology in the history of 
commercial air travel. But the project met bumpy 
weather. The first 787 aircraft, scheduled to be tested 
in July 2007, was delayed until December 2009. Orders 
for the advanced 787 grew quickly to over 800 planes. 
This rosy picture presented Boeing with a giant-sized 
headache. For various reasons (such as design, out-
sourcing, and labor issues) delivery dates slipped 
behind three years or more and costs ballooned to sev-
eral billion dollars. Many analysts blame outsourcing 
work to foreign suppliers for a majority of the cost and 
schedule overruns.
KEY FACTORS INFLUENCING 
OUTSOURCING DECISION
The Dreamliner outsourcing decision that gave 70 per-
cent of plane content to outside suppliers included 
30 percent to foreign suppliers. These percentages are 
greater than any previous commercial plane built by 
Boeing. Boeing’s outsourcing rationale was based on 
typical economic considerations of cost, sales, and risk. 
In Boeing’s case this meant:
Cost. Establishing partnerships with suppliers to lower 
risks and development costs, along with gaining 
some valuable expertise and process innovation.
Sales. Farming out numerous designs and compo-
nents to foreign countries (e.g., Sweden, Italy, South 
Korea, and China) with the expectation that these 
countries will buy planes from Boeing in the future.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 2 .1
The Boeing 787 Dreamliner*
Risk. Recognizing the need to balance risk of out-
sourcing at the organizational and operational levels 
is crucial. The different levels are co-dependent. Tak-
ing gigantic steps away from successful outsourcing 
small amounts of past aircraft to foreign suppliers in-
creases risk. The complexities in coordinating new 
technology and advance capabilities are daunting.
© Kyodo/AP Photo
* http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/sundaybuzz 
/2014125414_sundaybuzz06.html; http://atwonline.com 
/aircraft-engines-components/news/boeing-commercial 
-airplanes-ceo-concedes-787-outsourcingbackfired.  
Accessed: 1/12/2013.
The disadvantages of outsourcing project work are less well documented:
1. Coordination breakdowns. Coordination of professionals from different organiza-
tions can be challenging, especially if the project work requires close collaboration 
and mutual adjustment. Breakdowns are exacerbated by physical separation with 
people working in different buildings, different cities, if not different countries.
2. Loss of control. There is potential loss of control over the project. The core team 
depends on other organizations that they have no direct authority over. While long-
term survival of participating organizations depends on performance, a project may 
falter when one partner fails to deliver.
3. Conflict. Projects are more prone to interpersonal conflict since the different par-
ticipants do not share the same values, priorities, and culture. Trust, which is essen-
tial to project success, can be difficult to forge when interactions are limited and 
people come from different organizations.

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  423
Clearly, the outsourcing decision ricocheted. Costs are 
over budget, some sales have been rescinded, custom-
ers are seeking compensation for delays, and potential 
ROI is reduced.
IMPACTS
Boeing’s brand has been seriously tarnished by delays 
and mismanagement. The process to manage the 
logistics of outsourcing was not able to handle the vol-
ume of logistical problems and change management 
issues. Chronic delays of a few nonperforming partners 
induced Boeing to buy out or support partners and con-
sumed cash. Wall Street estimates cost overruns range 
between 12 and 18 billion dollars over the original 
planned investment of $5 billion. Lessons learned from 
outsourcing of the 787 Dreamliner can point the way to 
bring back the shine to Boeing’s reputation as the 
leader in design, technology, and integration.
LESSONS LEARNED
The lessons learned in the Dreamliner launch have 
been well documented. A few obvious relevant lessons 
are noted in suggestion form here:
΄
;QR]cWShM]QM]MZhjRMZZaWbYb^S^dcb^daPW]UMc^aUM-
nization and component levels. For example, assess 
the risks and implications of farming out large por-
tions (30 percent) of the design and manufacture of 
crucial components to foreign suppliers. Outsourc-
ing tends to work better in noncore areas.
΄
FV^a^dUVZhW]eRbcWUMcR_Mac]RabVW_PM_MOWZWcWRbM]Q
resources. Due diligence reduces problems.
΄
5ReRZ^__a^PRbbRbS^a`dWPYZhMQQaRbbW]UWbbdRb
and problems. Increase liaison and supervision of 
supply chain logistics with outsource partners.
΄
DRP^]bWQRabRaW^dbZhcVRW\_ZWPMcW^]b^SSMa\W]U
out key expertise. This runs the risk of becoming 
fully reliant on suppliers and transferring unique 
intellectual property. Partners get risk-free technical 
know-how, high margin markets for component 
parts over the life of the plane, and perhaps the fu-
ture ability to become a future competitor.
΄
FVRaWbY^S^dcb^daPW]UP^\_ZRg͜VWUVcRPV]^Z^Uh
components carries the burden of careful coordina-
tion and liaison.
 
Boeing executives have acknowledged the prob-
lems associated with outsourcing large portions of 
the 787 Dreamliner. For example, Boeing’s Commer-
cial Airplanes Chief, Jim Albaugh, expressed to stu-
dents at Seattle University, “We spent a lot more 
money in trying to recover [the project] than we ever 
would have spent if we’d tried to keep the key tech-
nologies closer to home. The pendulum swung too 
far.” He added that, in part, chasing the financial mea-
sure of return on assets led Boeing astray. Boeing 
CEO Jim McNerney noted that the 787 game plan may 
have been overly ambitious, incorporating too many 
firsts all at once.
THE FUTURE
Although Boeing’s 787 outsourcing experience was 
very costly, outsourcing will continue and evolve. Les-
sons learned will prompt aircraft builders to reevaluate 
future outsourcing and move on. Expect to see empha-
sis on risk- and cost-sharing partnerships.
 
The major short-term challenge for Boeing is to 
ramp up production to satisfy the hundreds of waiting 
orders. Boeing can recoup by adjusting their integra-
tive outsourcing and logistics model as a top priority.
4. Security issues. Depending on the nature of the project, trade and business secrets 
may be revealed. This can be problematic if the contractor also works for your com-
petitor. Confidentiality is another concern and companies have to be very careful 
when outsourcing processes like payroll, medical transcriptions, and insurance 
information.
5. Political hot potato. Foreign outsourcing of work is perceived as a major cause of 
underemployment and U.S. companies are under increased pressure to keep jobs 
local. Furthermore, companies like Apple have been criticized for the oppressive 
labor practices of some of their suppliers in China.
 
Few people disagree that reducing costs is the primary motive behind outsourcing 
project work. However, there are limits to outsourcing (see Snapshot from Practice 12.1: 
Boeing 787 Dreamliner), and there appears to be a shift away from simply nailing the 
best low-cost deal to securing services from companies that provide the best value in 
www.ebook3000.com

424  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
terms of both cost and performance. Performance is not limited to simply the quality 
of specific work but also ability to collaborate and work together. Companies are doing 
their homework to determine “Can we work with these people?”
12.2 Request for Proposal (RFP)
Once an organization decides to outsource project work, the customer or project man-
ager is frequently responsible for developing a Request for Proposal (RFP).
 
The responsible project manager will require input from all stakeholders connected 
to the activities covered in the RFP. The RFP will be announced to external contractors/
vendors with adequate experience to implement the project. For example, government 
projects frequently advertise with a “request for proposal” to outside contractors for 
roads, buildings, airports, military hardware, space vehicles. Similarly, businesses use 
RFPs to solicit bids for building a clean room, developing a new manufacturing pro-
cess, delivering software for insurance billing, conducting a market survey. In all of 
these examples, requirements and features should be in enough detail that contractors 
have a clear description of the final deliverable that will meet the customer’s needs.
 
RFPs are important. In practice, the most common error is to offer an RFP that lacks 
sufficient detail. This lack of detail typically results in conflict issues, misunderstand-
ings, often legal claims between the contractor and owner, and, ultimately, a dissatisfied 
customer. All RFPs are different, but the outline in Figure 12.2 is a good starting point 
for the development of a detailed RFP. Each step is briefly described next.
1. Summary of needs and request for action. The background and a simple descrip-
tion of the final project deliverable are given first. For example, through simulated 
war games, the U.S. Navy has found their giant warships of the past are too vulner-
able against today’s technology (an example is the Silkworm antiship missiles). In 
addition, the Navy’s mission has shifted to supporting ground forces and peace-
keeping missions, which require getting closer to shore. As a result, the Navy is 
revamping ships for near-shore duty. The Navy will select three designs for further 
refinement from the responses to its RFP. In general, it is expected that the new ship 
will be capable of at least 55 knots, measure between 80 and 250 feet in length, and 
be fitted with radar absorbing panels to thwart guided missiles.
2. Statement of work (SOW) detailing the scope and major deliverables. For 
example, if the project involves a market research survey, the major deliverables 
could be design, data collection, data analysis, and providing recommendations by 
February 21, 2014, for a cost not to exceed $300,000.
3. Deliverable specifications/requirements, features, and tasks. This step should be 
very comprehensive so bid proposals from contractors can be validated and later 
12-2
LO
Describe the basic ele-
ments of a Request for 
Proposal (RFP).
FIGURE 12.2
Request for Proposal
1. Summary of needs and request for action
2. Statement of work (SOW) detailing the scope and major deliverables
3. Deliverable specifications/requirements, features, and tasks
4. Responsibilities—vendor and customer
5. Project schedule
6. Costs and payment schedule
7. Type of contract
8. Experience and staffing
9. Evaluation criteria

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  425
used for control. Typical specifications cover physical features such as size, quan-
tity, materials, speed, and color. For example, an IT project might specify require-
ments for hardware, software, and training in great detail. Tasks required to 
complete deliverables can be included if they are known.
4. Responsibilities—vendor and customer. Failing to spell out the responsibilities 
for both parties is notorious for leading to serious problems when the contractor 
implements the project. For example, who pays for what? (If the contractor is to be 
on site, will the contractor be required to pay for office space?) What are the limits 
and exclusions for the contractor? (For example, who will supply test equipment?) 
What communication plan will be used by the contractor and owner? If escalation 
of an issue becomes necessary, what process will be used? How will progress be 
evaluated? Well-defined responsibilities will avoid many unforeseen problems later.
5. Project schedule. This step is concerned with getting a “hard” schedule which can 
be used for control and evaluating progress. Owners are usually very demanding in 
meeting the project schedule. In today’s business environment, time-to-market is a 
major “hot button” that influences market share, costs, and profits. The schedule 
should spell out what, who, and when.
6. Costs and payment schedule. The RFP needs to set out very clearly how, when, 
and the process for determining costs and conditions for progress payments.
7. Type of contract. Essentially there are two types of contracts—fixed-price and 
cost-plus. Fixed-price contracts agree on a price or lump sum in advance, and it 
remains as long as there are no changes to the scope provisions of the agreement. 
This type is preferred in projects that are well defined with predictable costs and 
minimal risks. The contractor must exercise care estimating cost because any under-
estimating of costs will cause the contractor’s profit to be reduced. In cost-plus 
contracts the contractor is reimbursed for all or some of the expenses incurred dur-
ing performance of the contract. This fee is negotiated in advance and usually 
involves a percent of total costs. “Time and materials” plus a profit factor are typi-
cal of cost-plus contracts. Both types of contracts can include incentive clauses for 
superior performance in time and cost, or in some cases, penalties—for example, 
missing the opening date of a new sports stadium. Appendix 12.1 elaborates further 
on contract management.
8. Experience and staffing. The ability of the contractor to implement the project 
may depend on specific skills; this necessary experience should be specified, along 
with assurance such staff will be available for this project.
9. Evaluation criteria. The criteria for evaluating and awarding the project contract 
should be specified. For example, selection criteria frequently include methodol-
ogy, price, schedule, and experience; in some cases these criteria are weighted. Use 
of the outline in Figure 12.2 will help to ensure key items in the proposal are not 
omitted. A well-prepared RFP will provide contractors with sufficient guidelines to 
prepare a proposal that clearly meets the project and customer’s needs.
Selection of Contractor from Bid Proposals
Interested contractors respond to project RFPs with a written bid proposal. It is likely 
that several contractors will submit bid proposals to the customer.
 
The final step in the RFP process is to select the contractor who best meets the require-
ments requested in the RFP. The selection criteria given in the RFP are used to evaluate 
which contractor is awarded the contract to implement the project. Losing contractors 
www.ebook3000.com

426  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
should be given an explanation of the key factors that led to the selection of the winning 
contractor/vendor; appreciation for their participation and effort should be acknowledged. 
See Figure 12.3, Contractor Evaluation Template, adapted from one used in practice.
12.3 Best Practices in Outsourcing Project Work
This section describes some of the best practices we have observed being used by 
firms that excel in project management (see Figure 12.4). Although the list is by no 
means comprehensive, it reflects strategies used by organizations with extensive out-
sourcing experience. These practices reveal an underlying theme in how firms 
approach contracted work on projects. Instead of the traditional master–slave relation-
ship between owner and provider or buyer and seller, all parties work together as part-
ners sharing the ultimate goal of a successful project.
 
Differences between the traditional approach and the partnering approach to man-
aging contracted relationships are summarized in Table 12.1.1 Partnering requires 
more than a simple hand-shake. It typically entails a significant commitment of time 
and energy to forge and sustain collaborative relations among all parties. This commit-
ment is reflected in the seven best practices which will be discussed next.
Well-Defined Requirements and Procedures
Convincing people from different professions, organizations, and cultures to work 
together is difficult. If expectations and requirements are fuzzy or open to debate, this is 
even harder. Successful firms are very careful in selecting the work to be outsourced. 
They often choose to contract only work with clearly defined deliverables with 
Identify best practices 
for outsourcing project 
work.
12-3
LO
FIGURE 12.3 Contractor Evaluation Template
Contractor Evaluation Template 
Maximum Weight 
Proposal 1 
Proposal 2 
Proposal 3 
Proposal 4
Contractor qualifications 
Weight = 10
Technical skills available 
Weight = 20
Understanding of contract and conditions 
Weight = 5
Financial strength to implement project 
Weight = 15
Understanding of proposal specifications 
Weight = 10
Innovativeness and originality of proposal 
Weight = 5
Reputation for delivering on time and budget 
Weight = 15
Price 
Weight = 20
 Total 
100
  W	
  			
	
  W	
			
  			
  	
  				
  L	
FIGURE 12.4
Best Practices in 
Outsourcing Project 
Work
1 C. Cowan, C. F. Gray, and E. W. Larson, “Project Partnering,” Project Management Journal, 12 (4) December 1992, pp. 5–15.

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  427
TABLE 12.1 
Key Differences 
Between Partnering 
and Traditional 
Approaches to 
Managing 
Contracted 
Relationships
Partnering Approach 
Traditional Approach
Mutual trust forms the basis for strong working 
Suspicion and distrust; each party is wary of the  
 relationships.  
 motives for actions by the other.
Shared goals and objectives ensure common 
Each party’s goals and objectives, while similar,  
 direction.  
 are geared to what is best for them.
Joint project team exists with high level of 
Independent project teams; teams are spatially  
 interaction.  
 separated with managed interactions.
Open communications avoid misdirection and 
Communications are structured and guarded. 
 bolster effective working relationships.
Long-term commitment provides the opportunity 
Single project contracting is normal. 
 to attain continuous improvement.
Objective critique is geared to candid 
Objectivity is limited due to fear of reprisal and lack  
 assessment of performance.  
 of continuous improvement opportunity.
Access to each other’s organization resources 
Access is limited with structured procedures and  
 is available.  
 self-preservation taking priority over total  
 
 optimization.
Total company involvement requires 
Involvement is normally limited to project-level  
 commitment from CEO to team members.  
 personnel.
Integration of administrative systems 
Duplication and/or translation takes place with  
 equipment takes place.  
 attendant costs and delays.
Risk is shared jointly among the partners, which 
Risk is transferred to the other party. 
 encourages innovation and continuous  
 improvement.
measurable outcomes. For example, contractors hire electric firms to install heating and 
air-conditioning systems, electronic firms use design firms to fabricate enclosures for 
their products, and software development teams outsource the testing of versions of their 
programs. In all of these cases, the technical requirements are spelled out in detail. Even 
so, communicating requirements can be troublesome, especially with foreign providers 
(see the Snapshot from Practice 12.2: Four Strategies for Communicating with Outsourc-
ers), and extra care has to be taken to ensure that expectations are understood.
 
Not only do requirements have to be spelled out, but the different firms’ project 
management systems need to be integrated. Common procedures and terminology 
need to be established so that different parties can work together. This can be problem-
atic when you have firms with more advanced project management systems working 
with less developed organizations. Surprisingly, this often is the case when U.S. firms 
outsource software work to India. We have heard reports that Indian providers are 
shocked at how unsystematic their U.S. counterparts are in their approach to managing 
software projects.
 
The best companies address this issue up front instead of waiting for problems to 
emerge. First they assess “fit” between providers’ project management methods and 
their own project management system. This is a prime consideration in choosing ven-
dors. Work requirements and deliverables are spelled out in detail in the procurement 
process. They invest significant time and energy to establishing project communica-
tion systems to support effective collaboration.
 
Finally, whenever you work with other organizations on projects, security is an 
important issue. Security extends beyond competitive secrets and technology to 
include access to information systems. Firms have to establish robust safeguards to 
prevent information access and the introduction of viruses due to less secure provider 
systems. Information technology security is an additional cost and risk that needs to be 
addressed up front before outsourcing project work.
www.ebook3000.com

428  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
Dr. Adam Kolawa offers four strategies 
for overcoming poor communication 
with offshore project partners.
STRATEGY 1: RECOGNIZE 
CULTURAL DIFFERENCES
Realize that not everyone you communicate with shares 
your assumptions. What is obvious to you is not neces-
sarily obvious to your partner. This is especially true with 
foreign outsourcers. As an American, you likely assume 
that laws are generally obeyed. Believe it or not, that’s 
generally not true in most of the world, where laws are 
guidelines that are not necessarily followed. This can 
lead to major communication problems! You think if you 
write a contract, everybody is going to adhere to it. For 
many people, a contract is merely a suggestion.
STRATEGY 2: CHOOSE THE RIGHT WORDS
When you explain your requirements to an outsourcer, 
word choice is critical. For many outsourcers, English is 
still a foreign language—even in India, where both out-
sourcing and the English language are common. No 
matter how prevalent English has become, your out-
sourcer might have a basic understanding of each 
word you utter yet be not completely clear on the exact 
meaning of the message you’re trying to convey. This is 
why you should speak in a direct manner using short 
sentences made of basic, simple words.
STRATEGY 3: CONFIRM YOUR REQUIREMENTS
You should take the following steps to confirm that the 
outsourcer thoroughly understands your requirements:
1. Document your requirements. Follow up your con-
versations in writing. Commit your requirements to 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 2 . 2
Four Strategies for Communicating  
with Outsourcers*
paper for the outsourcer. Many people understand 
written language better than spoken language, 
probably because they have more time to process 
the message.
2. Insist your outsourcer re-document your require-
ments. Leave nothing to chance. Require outsourc-
ers to write the requirements in their own words. If 
outsourcers cannot relay to you what you explained 
to them, then they didn’t understand.
3. Request a prototype. After the requirements are 
written, ask the outsourcer to create a prototype 
for you. This is a safety net to ensure that your 
wants and needs are positively understood. Ask the 
provider to sketch what you want your final product 
to look like or build a quick, simple program that 
reflects how the final product will look.
STRATEGY 4: SET DEADLINES
Another important cultural difference relates to sched-
ules and deadlines. To most Americans, a deadline is a 
set completion date. In many other cultures, a deadline 
is a suggestion that maybe something will be finished 
by that indicated date. To ensure that outsourced work 
is completed on time it is imperative to add a penalty 
clause to your contract or enforce late fees.
 
Although these strategies were directed toward 
working with foreign outsourcers, you would be sur-
prised to find how many project managers use them 
when working with their American counterparts!
*Adam Kolawa, “Four Strategies for Communicating with 
 Outsourcers,” Enterprise Systems Journal at www.esj.com, 
accessed September 13, 2005.
Extensive Training and Team-Building Activities
Too often managers become preoccupied with the plans and technical challenges of 
the project and assume that people issues will work themselves out over time. Smart 
firms recognize that people issues are as important, if not more important, than techni-
cal issues. They train their personnel to work effectively with people from other orga-
nizations and countries. This training is pervasive. It is not limited to management but 
involves all the people, at all levels, who interact with and are dependent upon out-
sourcers. Whether in a general class on negotiation or a specific one on working with 
Chinese programmers, team members are provided with a theoretical understanding of 
the barriers to collaboration as well as the skills and procedures to be successful.
 
The training is augmented by interorganizational team-building sessions designed to 
forge healthy relationships before the project begins. Team-building workshops involve 
the key players from the different firms, for example, engineers, architects, lawyers, 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  429
specialists, and other staff. In many cases, firms find it useful to hire an outside consultant 
to design and facilitate the sessions. Such a consultant is typically well-versed in interor-
ganizational team building and can provide an impartial perspective to the workshop.
 
The length and design of the team-building sessions will depend on the experience, 
commitment, and skill level of the participants. For example, one project, in which the 
owner and the contractors were relatively inexperienced at working together, utilized a 
two-day workshop. The first day was devoted to ice-breaking activities and establish-
ing the rationale behind partnering. The conceptual foundation was supported by exer-
cises and minilectures on teamwork, synergy, win/win, and constructive feedback. The 
second day began by examining the problems and barriers that prevented collaboration 
in the past. Representatives from the different organizations were separated and each 
asked the following:
∙ What actions do the other groups engage in that create problems for us?
∙ What actions do we engage in that we think create problems for them?
∙ What recommendations would we make to improve the situation?
 
The groups shared their responses and asked questions on points needing clarifica-
tion. Agreements and disparities in the lists were noted and specific problems were 
identified. Once problem areas were noted, each group was assigned the task of iden-
tifying its specific interests and goals for the project. Goals were shared across groups, 
and special attention was devoted to establishing what goals they had in common. 
Recognition of shared goals is critical for transforming the different groups into a 
cohesive team.
 
The team-building sessions often culminate with the creation of a partnering char-
ter signed by all of the participants. This charter states their common goals for the proj-
ect as well as the procedures that will be used to achieve these goals (see Figure 12.5 for 
an example of the first page of a project charter).
Well-Established Conflict Management Processes in Place
Conflict is inevitable on a project and, as pointed out in the previous chapter, disagree-
ments handled effectively can elevate performance. Dysfunctional conflict, however, can 
catch fire and severely undermine project success. Outsourced projects are susceptible to 
conflicts since people are unaccustomed to working together and have different values 
and perspectives. Successful firms invest significant time and energy up front in estab-
lishing the “rules of engagement” so that disagreements are handled constructively.
 
Escalation is the primary control mechanism for dealing with and resolving prob-
lems. The basic principle is that problems should be resolved at the lowest level within 
a set time limit (say, 24 hours), or they are “escalated” to the next level of manage-
ment. If so, the principals have the same time limit to resolve the problem, or it gets 
passed on to the next higher level. No action is not an option. Nor can one participant 
force concessions from the other by simply delaying the decision. There is no shame in 
pushing significant problems up the hierarchy; at the same time, managers should be 
quick to point out to subordinates those problems or questions that they should have 
been able to resolve on their own.
 
If possible, key personnel from the respective organizations are brought together to 
discuss potential problems and responses. This is usually part of a coordinated series 
of team-building activities discussed earlier. Particular attention is devoted to estab-
lishing the change management control system where problems often erupt. People 
who are dependent on each other try to identify potential problems that may occur and 
www.ebook3000.com

430  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
FIGURE 12.5 Project Partnering Charter 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  431
agree in advance how they should be resolved. See the Snapshot from Practice 12.3: 
“Partnering” a Flu Shot for Projects for the benefits of doing this.
 
Finally, principled negotiation is the norm for resolving problems and reaching 
agreements. This approach, which emphasizes collaborative problem solving, is dis-
cussed in detail later in this chapter.
Frequent Review and Status Updates
Project managers and other key personnel from all involved organizations meet on a 
regular basis to review and assess project performance. Collaborating as partners is 
considered a legitimate project priority which is assessed along with time, cost, and 
performance. Teamwork, communication, and timely problem resolution are evalu-
ated. This provides a forum for identifying problems not only with the project but also 
with working relationships so that they can be resolved quickly and appropriately.
 
More and more companies are using online surveys to collect data from all proj-
ect participants about the quality of working relations (see Figure 12.6 for a partial 
example). With this data one can gauge the “pulse” of the project and identify issues 
that need to be addressed. Comparison of survey responses period by period permits 
tracking areas of improvement and potential problems. In some cases, follow-up 
team-building sessions are used to focus on specific problems and recharge 
collaboration.
 
Finally, when the time to celebrate a significant milestone arrives, no matter who is 
responsible, all parties gather if possible to celebrate the success. This reinforces a 
Before starting a bond-financed school 
construction project, Ohio does what a 
theater company does before opening 
night—it holds a dress rehearsal. Led 
by Cleveland-based Project Manage-
ment Consultants, state and local school officials, con-
struction managers, and architects get together before 
building begins to figure out how to talk to each other 
and how to handle problems. Each party discusses 
problems that have occurred in the past and collec-
tively they problem solve ways for preventing them 
from occurring on the current project. Consultants help 
participants develop a set of guidelines for working 
together.
 
Just as a theatrical dress rehearsal can allow a 
company to find and fix glitches before they ruin a 
show, preconstruction partnering can find early solu-
tions to problems before they become lawsuits. For 
example, during the discussions it becomes apparent 
that different parties are interpreting a key requirement 
differently. Instead of waiting for this difference to 
escalate into a major problem, the parties reach a 
shared understanding before work begins.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 2 . 3
“Partnering” a Flu Shot  
for Projects*
* Mary Wisneiski, “Partnering Used to Curb Costs in Ohio 
School Construction,” Bond Buyer, 11/22/2000, 334 (31023) 
3/4p, 2bw.
 
“This works because traditionally everyone does 
their own work on a project, behind their own walls,” 
said Jeffrey Applebaum, a construction lawyer and 
managing director of Project Management Consultants, 
a wholly owned subsidiary of the law firm of Thomp-
son, Hine, & Flory. “We’re taking down the walls. This is 
more efficient.”
 
“We couldn’t be more pleased with this process,” 
said Randy Fischer, executive director of the Ohio 
School Facilities Commission, which distributes state 
money to school construction projects. “We are cur-
rently administering $3 billion of construction, and we 
don’t have any major disputes.”
 
Crystal Canan, chief of contract administration for 
the commission, offered a medical metaphor, compar-
ing partnering to a “flu shot” that will prevent the debil-
itating effects of litigation, work stoppages, and 
communication breakdowns. “Every building construc-
tion project is a candidate for the flu,” Canan said. “We 
see partnering as a vaccination.”
www.ebook3000.com

432  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
common purpose and project identity. It also establishes positive momentum going 
into the next phase of the project.
Co-Location When Needed
One of the best ways to overcome interorganizational friction is to have people from 
each organization working side by side on the project. Smart companies rent or make 
available the necessary accommodations so that all key project personnel can work 
collectively together. This allows the high degree of face-to-face interaction needed to 
coordinate activities, solve difficult problems, and form a common bond. This is espe-
cially relevant for complex projects in which close collaboration from different parties 
is required to be successful. For example, the U.S government provides housing and 
common office space for all key contractors responsible for developing disaster 
response plans.
 
Our experience tells us that co-location is critical and well worth the added expense 
and inconvenience. When creating this is not practically possible, the travel budget for 
the project should contain ample funds to support timely travel to different 
organizations.
 
Co-location is less relevant for independent work that does not require ongoing 
coordination between professionals from different organizations. This would be the 
case if you are outsourcing discrete, independent deliverables like beta testing or a 
marketing campaign. Here normal channels of communication can handle the coordi-
nation issues.
Evaluation of partnering process: attitudes, teamwork, process.
(Collected separately from owner and contractor participants, compared, and
aggregated.)
1. Communications between the owner/contractor personnel are
1
2
3
4
5
Difficult,
guarded
Not evident or
inconsistent
Ignored
Cool, detached,
unresponsive,
removed
Personal issues
Easy, open,
up front
Obvious and
consistent
Attacked
promptly
Genuine,
unreserved,
complete
Treated as
project problems
2. Top management support of partnering process is
3. Problems, issues, or concerns are
4. Cooperation between owner and contractor personnel is
5. Responses to problems, issues, or concerns frequently become
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
FIGURE 12.6 
Sample Online Survey 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  433
Fair and Incentive-Laden Contracts
When negotiating contracts the goal is to reach a fair deal for all involved. Managers 
recognize that cohesion and cooperation is undermined if one party feels he or she is 
being unfairly treated by others. They also realize that negotiating the best deal in terms 
of price can come back to haunt them with shoddy work and change order gouging.
 
Performance-based contracts, in which significant incentives are established based 
on priorities of the project, are becoming increasingly popular. For example, if time is 
critical, then contractors accrue payoffs for beating deadlines; if scope is critical, then 
bonuses are issued for exceeding performance expectations. At the same time contrac-
tors are held accountable with penalty clauses for failure to perform up to standard, 
meet deadlines, and/or control costs. More specific information about different types 
of contracts is presented in this chapter’s appendix on contract management.
 
Companies recognize that contracts can discourage continuous improvement and 
innovation. Instead of trying some new, promising technique that may reduce costs, 
contractors will avoid the risks and apply tried and true methods to meet contracted 
requirements. Companies that treat contractors as partners consider continuous 
improvement as a joint effort to eliminate waste and pursue opportunities for cost sav-
ings. Risks as well as benefits are typically shared 50/50 between the principals, with 
the owner adhering to a fast-track review of proposed changes.
 
How the U.S. Department of Defense reaps the benefits of continuous improvement 
through value engineering is highlighted in the Snapshot from Practice 12.4: Value 
Engineering Awards.
Long-Term Outsourcing Relationships
Many companies recognize that major benefits can be enjoyed when outsourcing 
arrangements extend across multiple projects and are long term. For example, Corning 
and Toyota are among the many firms that have forged a network of long-term strate-
gic partnerships with their suppliers. The average large corporation is involved in 
around 30 alliances today versus fewer than 3 in the early 1990s. Among the many 
advantages for establishing a long-term partnership are the following:
∙ Reduced administrative costs—The costs associated with bidding and selecting a 
contractor are eliminated. Contract administration costs are reduced as partners 
become knowledgeable of their counterpart’s legal concerns.
∙ More efficient utilization of resources—Contractors have a known forecast of 
work while owners are able to concentrate their workforce on core businesses and 
avoid the demanding swings of project support.
∙ Improved communication—As partners gain experience with each other, they 
develop a common language and perspective, which reduces misunderstanding and 
enhances collaboration.
∙ Improved innovation—The partners are able to discuss innovation and associated 
risks in a more open manner and share risks and rewards fairly.
∙ Improved performance—Over time partners become more familiar with each oth-
er’s standards and expectations and are able to apply lessons learned from previous 
projects to current projects.
 
Working as partners is a conscious effort on the part of management to form col-
laborative relationships with personnel from different organizations to complete a 
project. For outsourcing to work, the individuals involved need to be effective 
www.ebook3000.com

434  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
negotiators capable of merging interests and discovering solutions to problems that 
contribute to the project. The next section addresses some of the key skills and tech-
niques associated with effective negotiation.
12.4 The Art of Negotiating
Effective negotiating is critical to successful collaboration. All it takes is one key prob-
lem to explode to convert a sense of “we” into “us versus them.” At the same time, nego-
tiating is pervasive through all aspects of project management work. Project managers 
must negotiate support and funding from top management. They must negotiate staff and 
technical input from functional managers. They must coordinate with other project man-
agers and negotiate project priorities and commitments. They must negotiate within their 
project team to determine assignments, deadlines, standards, and priorities. Project man-
agers must negotiate prices and standards with vendors and suppliers. A firm under-
standing of the negotiating process, skills, and tactics is essential to project success.
 
Many people approach negotiating as if it is a competitive contest. Each negotiator 
is out to win as much as he or she can for his or her side. Success is measured by how 
Practice principled 
negotiation.
12-4
LO
As part of an effort to cut costs the 
United States Department of Defense 
(DoD) issues annual Value Engineering 
Awards. Value engineering is a sys-
tematic process to analyze functions 
to identify actions to reduce cost, increase quality, and 
improve mission capabilities across the entire spec-
trum of DoD systems, processes, and organizations. 
The Value Engineering Awards Program is an acknowl-
edgment of outstanding achievements and encourages 
additional projects to improve in-house and contractor 
productivity.
 
In 2015, 48 different individuals and project teams 
received recognition from the DoD, reporting over $5.5 
billion in savings or cost reduction.
 
One team that received an award was AMRDEC 
Maintenance Engineering Division at Corpus Christ, 
Texas, which reported a savings of $66 million with 91 
value engineering projects completed.
 
Kevin Rees leads a team of 62 employees respon-
sible for the airworthiness of all helicopters that go 
through the depot in South Texas for maintenance.
“Each aircraft component has an overhaul manual 
that requires parts to be replaced at certain times. 
Those parts have to be thrown away,” Rees said. “We 
worked to repair and reclass those parts so they 
wouldn’t have to be thrown away. We used new tech-
nologies for welding repairs, composite repairs, 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 2 . 4
U.S. Department of Defense’s  
Value Engineering Awards*
* K. Hawkins “AMCOM, Partners Take Home Big Wins for Value 
Engineering,” www.army.mil, June 26, 2015.
plating repairs, metal spray repairs and technology 
repairs. There are 20,000 to 25,000 engine parts, 
and we are working to reclaim those parts when they 
have to be replaced.”
“Value engineering is so important to what we are 
doing, especially in these days with budgets coming 
down. It’s nice to be able to save cost while also im-
proving quality,” Rees said. “But it goes beyond that 
for us as a team. We all have an intrinsic motivation. 
We want to do well for the taxpayer and the Soldier. 
We take a lot of pride in our work. Getting recognized 
isn’t our motivator, but it does encourage us.”
© Cultura Creative/Alamy RF

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  435
much is gained compared with the other party. While this may be applicable when 
negotiating the sale of a house, it is not true for project management. Project manage-
ment is not a contest! First, the people working on the project, whether they represent 
different companies or departments within the same organization, are not enemies or 
competitors but rather allies or partners. They have formed a temporary alliance to 
complete a project. For this alliance to work requires a certain degree of trust, coopera-
tion, and honesty. Second, if conflicts escalate to the point where negotiations break 
down and the project comes to a halt, then everyone loses. Third, unlike bartering with 
a street vendor, the people involved on project work have to continue to work together. 
Therefore, it behooves them to resolve disagreements in a way that contributes to 
healthy working relationships. Finally, as pointed out in the previous chapter, conflict 
on a project can be good. When dealt with effectively it can lead to innovation, better 
decisions, and more creative problem solving.
 
Project managers accept this noncompetitive view of negotiation and realize that 
negotiation is essentially a two-part process: The first part deals with reaching an 
agreement; the second part is the implementation of that agreement. It is the imple-
mentation phase, not the agreement itself, that determines the success of negotiations. 
All too often, managers reach an agreement with someone only to find out later that 
they failed to do what they agreed to do or that their actual response fell far short of 
expectations. Experienced project managers recognize that implementation is based on 
satisfaction not only with the outcome but also with the process by which the agree-
ment was reached. If someone feels bullied or tricked into doing something, this feel-
ing will invariably be reflected by half-hearted performance.
 
Veteran project managers do the best they can to merge individual interests with 
what is best for the project and come up with effective solutions to problems. Fisher 
and Ury from the Harvard Negotiation Project champion an approach to negotiating 
that embodies these goals.2 It emphasizes developing win/win solutions while protect-
ing yourself against those who would take advantage of your forthrightness. Their 
approach is called principled negotiation and is based on four key points listed in 
Table 12.2 and discussed in the following sections.
1. Separate the People from the Problem
Too often personal relations become entangled with the substantive issues under con-
sideration. Instead of attacking the problem(s), people attack each other. Once people 
feel attacked or threatened their energy naturally goes to defending themselves, and 
not to solving the problem. The key, then, is to focus on the problem—not the other 
person—during the negotiation. Avoid personalizing the negotiation and framing the 
negotiation as a contest. Instead, try to keep the focus on the problem to be resolved. In 
Fisher and Ury’s words: Be hard on the problem, soft on the people.
 
By keeping the focus on the issues and not the personalities, negotiators are better 
able to let the other person blow off steam. On important problems it is not uncommon 
for people to become upset, frustrated, and angry. However, one angry attack produces 
2 R. Fisher and W. Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without Giving In, 2nd ed. (New York: Penguin Books, 1991).
1. Separate the people from the problem. 
2. Focus on interests, not positions. 
3. Invent options for mutual gain. 
4. When possible, use objective criteria.
TABLE 12.2
Principled 
Negotiation
www.ebook3000.com

436  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
an angry counterattack, and the discussion quickly escalates into a heated argument, an 
emotional chain reaction.
 
In some cases people use anger as a means of intimidating and forcing concessions 
because the other person wishes to preserve the relationship. When people become emo-
tional, negotiators should keep a cool head and remember the old German proverb, “Let 
anger fly out the window.”3 In other words, in the face of an emotional outburst, imagine 
opening a window and letting the heat of the anger out the window. Avoid taking things 
personally, and redirect personal attacks back to the question at hand. Don’t react to the 
emotional outburst, but try to find the issues that triggered it. Skilled negotiators keep 
their cool under stressful times and, at the same time, build a bond with others by empa-
thizing and acknowledging common sources of frustration and anger.
 
While it is important to separate the people from the problem during actual negotia-
tions, it is beneficial to have a friendly rapport with the other person prior to negotiating. 
Friendly rapport is consistent with the social network tenet introduced in Chapter 10 of 
building a relationship before you need it. If, in the past, the relationship has been 
marked by healthy give-and-take, in which both parties have demonstrated a willing-
ness to accommodate the interests of the other, then neither individual is likely to 
adopt an immediate win/lose perspective. Furthermore, a positive relationship adds a 
common interest beyond the specific points of contention. Not only do both parties 
want to reach an agreement that suits their individual interests, but they also want to do 
so in a manner that preserves their relationship. Each is therefore more likely to seek 
solutions that are mutually beneficial.
2. Focus on Interests, Not Positions
Negotiations often stall when people focus on positions:
 
I’m willing to pay $10,000. No, it will cost $15,000.
 
I need it done by Monday. That’s impossible, we can’t have it ready until 
Wednesday.
 
While such interchanges are common during preliminary discussions, managers 
must prevent this initial posturing from becoming polarized. When such positions are 
stated, attacked, and then defended, each party figuratively begins to draw a line he or 
she will not cross. This line creates a win/lose scenario in which someone has to lose 
by crossing the line in order to reach an agreement. As such, the negotiations can 
become a war of wills, with concessions being seen as a loss of face.
 
The key is to focus on the interests behind your positions (what you are trying to 
achieve) and separate these goals from your ego as best you can. Not only should you 
be driven by your interests, but you should try to identify the interests of the other 
party. Ask why it will cost so much or why it can’t be done by Monday. At the same 
time, make your own interests come alive. Don’t just say that it is critical that it be 
done by Monday; explain what will happen if it isn’t done by Monday.
 
Sometimes when the true interests of both parties are revealed, there is no basis for 
conflict. Take, for example, the Monday versus Wednesday argument. This argument 
could apply to a scenario involving a project manager and the production manager of a 
small, local firm that was contracted to produce prototypes of a new generation of 
computer mouse. The project manager needs the prototypes on Monday to demon-
strate to a users’ focus group. The production manager said it would be impossible. 
The project manager said this would be embarrassing because marketing had spent a 
3 Ibid.

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  437
lot of time and effort setting up this demonstration. The production manager again 
denied the request and added that he already had to schedule overtime to meet the 
Wednesday delivery date. However, when the project manager revealed that the pur-
pose of the focus group was to gauge consumers’ reactions to the color and shape of 
the new devices, not the finished product, the conflict disappeared. The production 
manager told the project manager that she could pick up the samples today if she 
wanted because production had an excess supply of shells.
 
When focusing on interests, it is important to practice the communication habit: 
Seek first to understand, then to be understood. This involves what Stephen Covey 
calls empathetic listening, which allows a person to fully understand another person’s 
frame of reference—not only what that person is saying but also how he or she feels. 
Covey asserts that people have an inherent need to be understood. He goes on to 
observe that satisfied needs do not motivate human behavior, only unsatisfied needs 
do. People try to go to sleep when they are tired, not when they are rested. The key 
point is that until people believe they are being understood, they will repeat their points 
and reformulate their arguments.4 If, on the other hand, you satisfy this need by seek-
ing first to understand, then the other party is free to understand your interests and 
focus directly on the issues at hand. Seeking to understand requires discipline and 
compassion. Instead of responding to the other person by asserting your agenda, 
respond by summarizing both the facts and feelings behind what the other person has 
said and checking the accuracy of comprehension.
3. Invent Options for Mutual Gain
Once the individuals involved have identified their interests, then they can explore 
options for mutual gain. This is not easy. Stressful negotiations inhibit creativity and 
free exchange. What is required is collaborative brainstorming in which people work 
together to solve the problem in a way that will lead to a win/win scenario. The key 
to brainstorming is separating the inventing from the deciding. Begin by taking 
15 minutes to generate as many options as possible. No matter how outlandish any 
option is, it should not be subject to criticism or immediate rejection. People should 
feed off the ideas of others to generate new ideas. When all the possible options are 
exhausted, then sort through the ideas that were generated to focus on those with the 
greatest possibilities.
 
Clarifying interests and exploring mutual options create the opportunity for dove-
tailing interests. Dovetailing means one person identifies options that are of low cost 
to them but of high interest to the other party. This is only possible if each party knows 
what the other’s needs are. For example, in negotiating price with a parts supplier, a 
project manager learned from the discussion that the supplier was in a cash flow 
squeeze after purchasing a very expensive fabrication machine. Needed cash was the 
primary reason the supplier had taken such a rigid position on price. During the brain-
storming session, one of the options presented was to prepay for the order instead of 
the usual payment on delivery arrangement. Both parties seized on this option and 
reached an amicable agreement in which the project manager would pay the supplier 
for the entire job in advance in exchange for a faster turnaround time and a significant 
price reduction. Such opportunities for win/win agreements are often overlooked 
because the negotiators become fixated on solving their problems and not on opportu-
nities to solve the other person’s problems.
4 S. R. Covey, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1990).
www.ebook3000.com

438  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
4. When Possible, Use Objective Criteria
Most established industries and professions have developed standards and rules to help 
deal with common areas of dispute. Both buyers and sellers rely on the blue book to 
establish price parameters for a used car. The construction industry has building codes 
and fair practice policies to resolve proof of quality and safe work procedures. The 
legal profession uses precedents to adjudicate claims of wrongdoing.
 
Whenever possible, you should insist on using external, objective criteria to settle 
disagreements. For example, a disagreement arose between a regional airlines firm and 
the independent accounting team entrusted with preparing the annual financial state-
ment. The airline firm had made a significant investment by leasing several used air-
planes from a larger airline. The dispute involved whether this lease should be 
classified as an operating or capital lease. This was important to the airline because if 
the purchase was classified as an operating lease, then the associated debt would not 
have to be recorded in the financial statement. However, if the purchase was classified 
as a capital lease, then the debt would be factored into the financial statement and the 
debt/equity ratio would be much less attractive to stockholders and would-be investors. 
The two parties resolved this dispute by deferring to formulas established by the 
Financial Accounting Standards Board. As it turns out the accounting team was cor-
rect, but, by deferring to objective standards, they were able to deflect the disappoint-
ment of the airline managers away from the accounting team and preserve a 
professional relationship with that firm.
Dealing with Unreasonable People
Most people working on projects realize that in the long run it is beneficial to work 
toward mutually satisfying solutions. Still, occasionally you encounter someone who 
has a dominant win/lose attitude about life and will be difficult to deal with. Fisher and 
Ury recommend that you use negotiation jujitsu when dealing with such a person. That 
is, when the other person begins to push, don’t push back. As in the martial arts, avoid 
pitting your strengths against another’s directly; instead use your skill to step aside and 
turn that person’s strength to your ends. When someone adamantly sets forth a posi-
tion, neither reject it nor accept it. Treat it as a possible option and then look for the 
interests behind it. Instead of defending your ideas, invite criticism and advice. Ask 
why it’s a bad idea and discover the other’s underlying interest.
 
Those who use negotiation jujitsu rely on two primary weapons. They ask questions 
instead of making statements. Questions allow for interests to surface and do not pro-
vide the opponent with something to attack. The second weapon is silence. If the other 
person makes an unreasonable proposal or attacks you personally, just sit there and 
don’t say a word. Wait for the other party to break the stalemate by answering your 
question or coming up with a new suggestion.
 
The best defense against unreasonable, win/lose negotiators is having what Fisher and 
Ury call a strong BATNA (best alternative to a negotiated agreement). They point out 
that people try to reach an agreement to produce something better than the result of not 
negotiating with that person. What those results would be is the true benchmark for 
determining whether you should accept an agreement. A strong BATNA gives you the 
power to walk away and say, “No deal unless we work toward a win/win scenario.”
 
Your BATNA reflects how dependent you are on the other party. If you are negoti-
ating price and delivery dates and can choose from a number of reputable suppliers, 
then you have a strong BATNA. If on the other hand there is only one vendor who can 
supply you with specific, critical material on time, then you have a weak BATNA. 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  439
Under these circumstances you may be forced to concede to the vendor’s demands. At 
the same time, you should begin to explore ways of increasing your BATNA for future 
negotiations. This can be done by reducing your dependency on that supplier. Begin to 
find substitutable material or negotiate better lead times with other vendors.
 
Negotiating is an art. There are many intangibles involved. This section has 
reviewed some time-tested principles of effective negotiating based on the ground-
breaking work of Fisher and Ury. Given the significance of negotiating, you are 
encouraged to read their book as well as others on negotiating. In addition, attending 
training workshops can provide an opportunity to practice these skills. You should also 
take advantage of day-to-day interactions to sharpen negotiating acumen.
12.5 A Note on Managing Customer Relations
In Chapter 4 it was emphasized that ultimate success is not determined by whether the 
project was completed on time, within budget, or according to specifications, but 
whether the customer is satisfied with what has been accomplished. Customer satisfac-
tion is the bottom line. Bad news travels faster and farther than good news. For every 
happy customer who shares his satisfaction regarding a particular product or service 
with another person, a dissatisfied customer is likely to share her dissatisfaction with 
eight other people. Project managers need to cultivate positive working relations with 
clients to preserve their reputations.
 
Customer satisfaction is a complex phenomenon. One simple but useful way of 
viewing customer satisfaction is in terms of met expectations. According to this 
model, customer satisfaction is a function of the extent to which perceived perfor-
mance (or outcome) exceeds expectations. Mathematically, this relationship can be 
represented as the ratio between perceived performance and expected performance 
(see Figure 12.7). When performance falls short of expectations (ratio < 1), the cus-
tomer is dissatisfied. If the performance matches expectations (ratio = 1), the customer 
is satisfied. If the performance exceeds expectations (ratio > 1), the customer is very 
satisfied or even delighted.
 
High customer satisfaction is the goal of most projects. However, profitability is 
another major concern. Exceeding expectations typically entails additional costs. 
For example, completing a construction project two weeks ahead of schedule may 
involve significant overtime expenses. Similarly, exceeding reliability requirements 
for a new electronic component may involve considerably more design and debug-
ging effort. Under most circumstances, the most profitable arrangement occurs when 
the customer’s expectations are only slightly exceeded. Returning to the mathemati-
cal model, with all other things being equal, one should strive for a satisfaction ratio 
of 1.05, not 1.5!
 
The met-expectations model of customer satisfaction highlights the point that 
whether a client is dissatisfied or delighted with a project is not based on hard facts 
and objective data but on perceptions and expectations. For example, a customer may 
be dissatisfied with a project that was completed ahead of schedule and under budget 
Describe the met- 
expectations model of 
customer satisfaction 
and its implications for 
working with customers 
on projects.
12-5
LO
FIGURE 12.7 
The Met-Expectations 
Model of Customer 
Satisfaction
0.90  
Dissatisfied  = Perceived performance 
Expected performance  = 
1.10 
Very satisfied
www.ebook3000.com

440  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
if he thought the work was poor quality and that his fears and concerns were not ade-
quately addressed. Conversely, a customer may be very satisfied with a project that 
was over budget and behind schedule if she felt the project team protected her interests 
and did the best job possible under adverse circumstances.
 
Project managers must be skilled at managing customer expectations and percep-
tions. Too often they deal with these expectations after the fact when they try to 
alleviate a client’s dissatisfaction by carefully explaining why the project cost more 
or took longer than planned. A more proactive approach is to begin to shape the 
proper expectations up front and accept that this is an ongoing process throughout 
the life of a project. Project managers need to direct their attention both to the cus-
tomer’s base expectations, the standard by which perceived performance will be 
evaluated, and to the customer’s perceptions of actual performance. The ultimate 
goal is to educate clients so that they can make a valid judgment as to project 
performance.
 
Managing customer expectations begins during the preliminary project approval 
phase of negotiations. It is important to avoid the temptation to oversell the virtues of 
a project to win approval because this may create unrealistic expectations that may be 
too difficult, if not impossible, to achieve. At the same time, project proponents have 
been known to lower customer expectations by underselling projects. If the estimated 
completion time is 10 to 12 weeks, they will promise to have the project completed 
within 12 to 14 weeks, therefore increasing the chances of exceeding customer expec-
tations by getting the project completed early.
 
Once the project is authorized, the project manager and team need to work closely 
with the client organization to develop a well-defined project scope statement that 
clearly states the objectives, parameters, and limits of the project work. The project 
scope statement is essential to establishing customer expectations regarding the proj-
ect. It is critical that all parties are in agreement as to what is to be accomplished and 
that people are reading as best they can from the same page. It is also important to 
share significant risks that might disrupt project execution. Customers do not like sur-
prises, and if they are aware in advance of potential problems they are much more 
likely to be accepting of the consequences.
 
Once the project is initiated it is important to keep customers abreast of project 
progress. The days when you would simply take orders from customers and tell them 
to return when the project is done are over. More and more organizations and their 
project managers are treating their customers as de facto members of the project team 
and are actively involving them in key aspects of project work. In the case of consult-
ing assignments project managers sometimes morph into a member of the client orga-
nization (see Research Highlight 12.1: IT Project Managers).
 
Project managers need to keep customers informed of project developments so that 
customers can make adjustments in their own plans. When circumstances dictate 
changing the scope or priorities of the project, project managers need to be quick to 
spell out as best they can the implications of these changes to the customers so that 
they can make an informed choice. Active customer involvement allows customers to 
naturally adjust their expectations in accordance with the decisions and events that 
transpire on a project, while at the same time, the customer’s presence keeps the proj-
ect team focused on the customer’s objectives for the project.
 
Active customer involvement also provides a firmer basis for assessing project per-
formance. The customer not only sees the results of the project but also acquires 
glimpses of the effort and actions that produced those results. Naturally project man-
agers want to make sure these glimpses reflect favorably on their project teams, so they 

441
Webber and Torti studied the multi-
ple roles project managers play on 
IT projects. Based on a comprehen-
sive set of interviews with project 
managers and clients in three dif-
ferent information-technology service 
organizations, they identified five key roles critical 
to successfully implement IT projects in client orga-
nizations: entrepreneur, politician, friend, marketer, 
and coach. They are described in part in Table 12.3.
 
Webber and Torti observed that instead of main-
taining a clearly defined relationship with the client, 
project managers become part of the client 
organization. They report that project managers 
attempt to “dress like the client, act like the client, and 
participate in the client organization’s activities (i.e., 
social gatherings, blood drives, etc.).” They become 
such an integral part of their existence that many cli-
ent employees, over the course of time, forget that 
the project manager is not an employee of the client 
organization. This helps establish a degree of trust 
essential to effective collaboration.
Research Highlight 12.1
IT Project Managers Doubling as 
Client Account Executives*
* S. S. Webber, and M. T. Torti, “Project Managers Doubling 
as Client Account Executives,” Academy of Management 
 Executive, vol. 18, no. 1 (2004), pp. 60–71.
TABLE 12.3 Project Roles, Challenges, and Strategies
Project Manager Roles 
Challenges 
Strategies
Entrepreneur 
Navigate unfamiliar surroundings 
Use persuasion to influence others
Politician 
Understand two diverse cultures  
Align with the powerful individuals 
 
 (parent and client organization) 
Friend 
Determine the important relationships  
Identify common interests and 
 
 to build and sustain outside the  
 experiences to bridge a 
 
 team itself 
 friendship with the client
Marketer 
Understand the strategic objectives 
Align new ideas/proposals with  
 
 of the client organization  
 the strategic objectives of the  
 
 
 client organization
Coach 
Motivate client team members 
Provide challenging tasks to build  
 
 without formal authority  
 the skills of the team members
exercise extra care that customer interactions are handled in a competent and profes-
sional manner. In some respects, customer perceptions of performance are shaped 
more by how well the project team deals with adversity than by actual performance. 
Project managers can impress customers with how diligently they deal with unex-
pected problems and setbacks. Likewise, industry analysts have noted that customer 
dissatisfaction can be transformed into customer satisfaction by quickly correcting 
mistakes and being extremely responsive to customer concerns.
 
Managing customer relations on a project is a broad topic; we have only highlighted 
some of the central issues involved. This brief segment concludes with two words of 
advice passed on by veteran project managers:
 
Speak with one voice. Nothing erodes confidence in a project more than for a cus-
tomer to receive conflicting messages from different project members. The project 
manager should remind team members of this fact and work with them to ensure 
that appropriate information is shared with customers.
 
Speak the language of the customer. Too often project members respond to cus-
tomer inquiries with technical jargon that exceeds the customer’s vocabulary. Proj-
ect managers and members need to describe problems, trade-offs, and solutions in 
ways that the customer can understand.
www.ebook3000.com

442  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
Outsourcing has become an integral part of project management. More and more com-
panies are collaborating with each other on projects to compete in today’s business 
world. The advantages of outsourcing include cost reduction, quicker completion 
times, greater flexibility, and higher level of expertise. Disadvantages include coordi-
nation problems, loss of control, conflicts, security issues and political fallout.
 
A number of proactive best practices have emerged among firms that have mas-
tered the outsourcing process. These practices include establishing well-defined 
requirements and procedures and utilizing fair and incentive-laden contracts. Team-
building sessions are held before the project begins to forge relationships between 
personnel from different organizations. Escalation guidelines for resolving conflicts 
are established, as are provisions for process improvement and risk sharing. On 
highly critical work, arrangements are made so that key personnel work together, 
face to face. Joint assessments of how well people are collaborating is the norm dur-
ing status report briefings. Finally, many companies are realizing the benefits of 
forming long-term alliances with each other on projects. The ultimate goal is to 
work together as partners.
 
Effective negotiating skills are essential to working on projects as partners. 
People need to resolve differences at the lowest level possible in order to keep the 
project on track. Veteran project managers realize that negotiating is not a competi-
tive game and work toward collaborative solutions to problems. They accomplish 
this by separating people from the problem, focusing on interests and not positions, 
inventing options for mutual gain, and relying on objective criteria whenever pos-
sible to resolve disagreements. They also recognize the importance of developing 
a strong BATNA, which provides them with the leverage necessary to seek col-
laborative solutions.
 
Customer satisfaction is the litmus test for project success. Project managers need 
to take a proactive approach to managing customer expectations and perceptions. 
They need to actively involve customers in key decisions and keep them abreast of 
important developments. Active customer involvement keeps the project team 
focused on the objectives of the project and reduces misunderstandings and 
dissatisfaction.
Summary
Key Terms
Best alternative to a 
negotiated agreement  
 (BATNA), 438
Escalation, 429
Met-expectations, 439
Outsourcing, 420
Partnering charter, 429
Principled  
 negotiation, 435
1. Why do firms outsource project work?
2. What are the best practices used by firms to outsource project work?
3. What does the term “escalate” refer to, and why is it essential to project success?
4. Why is the principled negotiation approach recommended for negotiating agree-
ments on projects?
5. What does the acronym BATNA refer to, and why is it important to being a suc-
cessful negotiator?
6. How can a project manager influence customer expectations and perceptions?
Review 
Questions

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  443
1. Break into groups of four to five students. Assign half of the groups the role of 
Owner and the other half the role of Contractor.
 
Owners: After saving for many years you are about to hire a contractor to build your 
“dream home.” What are your objectives for this project? What concerns or issues 
do you have about working with a general contractor to build your home?
 
Contractors: You specialize in building customized homes. You are about to meet 
with prospective owners to begin to negotiate a contract for building their “dream 
home.” What are your objectives for this project? What concerns or issues do you 
have about working with the owners to build their home?
 
Each Owner group meets with another Contractor group and shares their objec-
tives, concerns, and issues.
 
Identify what objectives, issues, and concerns you have in common and which 
ones are unique. Discuss how you could work together to realize your objectives. 
What would be the keys to working as partners on this project?
2. Enter “outsourcing” in an Internet search engine and browse different websites. 
Who appears to be interested in outsourcing? What are the advantages of outsourc-
ing? What are the disadvantages? Does outsourcing mean the same thing to differ-
ent people? What are future trends in outsourcing?
3. Break into four groups and review the instructions for “Get the most you can” exer-
cise provided by your teacher. Complete the exercise. What was your initial strat-
egy? Did it change? If so, why? What does this exercise tell you about our ability to 
collaborate with each other?
Exercises
References
Covey, S. R., The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1990).
Cowan, C., C. F. Gray, and E. W. Larson, “Project Partnering,” Project Management 
Journal, vol. 12, no. 4 (December 1992), pp. 5–15.
DiDonato, L. S., “Contract Disputes: Alternatives for Dispute Resolution (Part 1),” 
PM Network, May 1993, pp. 19–23.
Drexler, J. A., and E. W. Larson, “Partnering: Why Project Owner-Contractor 
 Relationships Change,” Journal of Construction Engineering and Management,  
vol. 126, no. 4 (July/August 2000), pp. 293–397.
Dyer, S., Partner Your Project (Warwickshire, UK: Pendulum Pub., 1997).
Economy, P., Business Negotiating Basics (Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin Professional 
 Publishing, 1994).
Fisher, R., and W. Ury, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement without Giving In, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Penguin Books, 1991).
Hedberg, B., G. Dahlgren, J. Hansson, and N. Olve, Virtual Organizations and 
Beyond (New York: Wiley, 1997).
Hoang, H., and F. T. Rothaermel, “The Effect of General and Partner-Specific 
 Alliance Experience on Joint R&D Project Performance,” Academy of Management 
Journal, vol. 48, no. 2 (2005), pp. 332–345.
Kanter, R. M., “Collaborative Advantage: The Art of Alliances,” Harvard Business 
Review, July–August 1994, pp. 92–113.
www.ebook3000.com

444  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
Kezsbom, D. S., D. L. Schilling, and K. A. Edward, Dynamic Project Management 
(New York: Wiley, 1989).
Larson, E. W., “Partnering on Construction Projects: A Study of the Relationship 
between Partnering Activities and Project Success,” IEEE Transactions in 
 Engineering Management, vol. 44, no. 2 (May 1997), pp. 188–195.
Larson, E. W., “Project Partnering: Results of a Study of 280 Construction Projects,” 
Journal of Management Engineering, vol. 11, no. 2 (March/April 1995), pp. 30–35.
Larson, E. W., and J. A. Drexler, “Barriers to Project Partnering: Report from the 
 Firing Line,” Project Management Journal, vol. 28, no. 1 (March 1997), pp. 46–52.
Magenau, J. M., and J. K. Pinto, “Power, Influence, and Negotiation in Project Man-
agement,” in The Wiley Guide to Managing Projects, P. W. G. Morris and J. K. Pinto, 
eds. (New York: Wiley, 2004), pp. 1033–60.
Maurer, I., “How to Build Trust in Inter-organizational Projects: The Impact of Proj-
ect Staffing and Project Rewards on the Formation of Trust, Knowledge Acquisition, 
and Product Innovation,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 28,  
no. 7 (2010), pp. 629–37.
Nambisan, S., “Designing Virtual Customer Environments for New Product Develop-
ment: Toward a Theory,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 27, no. 3 (2002),  
pp. 392–413.
Nissen, M. E., “Procurement: Process Overview and Emerging Project Management 
Techniques,” in The Wiley Guide to Managing Projects, P. W. G. Morris and J. K. 
Pinto, eds. (New York: Wiley, 2004), pp. 643–54.
Quinn, R. E., S. R. Faerman, M. P. Thompson, and M. R. McGrath, Becoming a 
Master Manager: A Competency Framework (New York: Wiley, 1990).
Schultzel, H. J., and V. P. Unruh, Successful Partnering: Fundamentals for Project 
Owners and Contractors (New York: Wiley, 1996).
Shell, G. R., Bargaining for Advantage: Negotiation Strategies for Reasonable 
 People (New York: Penguin, 2000).
Case 12.1
Shell Case Fabricators
BACKGROUND
Shell Case Fabricators (SCF) designs and builds shell casings that enclose electronic 
products such as calculators, cell phones, modems. Typically the cases are plastic or 
plastic compounds. SCF has six different production lines that cover different types of 
product. For example, the largest high-volume production line for modems can pro-
duce three different colors and two models (vertical and flat). Air Connection Links 
(ACL) is the biggest customer that buys product from this line. This high-output line 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  445
now runs at full capacity on an eight-hour shift. The other five lines run smaller quan-
tities and tend to meet the needs of other specialty products manufactured by different 
smaller firms.
 
Ninety-five percent of SCF’s product casings line is designed by the original hard-
ware manufacturer. Getting a casing to the production stage requires a great deal of 
collaboration and interaction between the original hardware and case design manufac-
turer (e.g., ACL) and SCF’s shell design engineers and production department. The 
latest new product of ACL is a modem designed to be used for monitoring water activ-
ity in bays, e.g., ship traffic, pollution, floating debris. Because of the product’s high 
functionality and low cost, potential demand for the new product is out of sight. It 
seems every country with small bays used for shipping wants enough underwater 
modems to cover their respective bays.
THE UNDERWATER MODEM PROJECT
At SCF each new product is assigned a project manager to coordinate and manage the 
shell design, budgets, and manufacturing startup. Songsee is SCF’s star project man-
ager and is the project manager of the shell for the new short-range, underwater acous-
tical modem. The shell casing for the underwater modem required special design, 
materials, custom equipment, and a seal to withstand pressure to 50 meters. Air 
 Connection Links, the product owner, needs sixty thousand modems in 91 days (next 
January 15) for the Estuary Control Institute meeting in Hong Kong.
CLIENT CHANGE REQUEST
Songsee has felt the project was moving along smoothly, with the exception of 
being two weeks behind schedule. She feels she can “lean on” the design depart-
ment to put the project on top priority and make up the two weeks. Yesterday, 
ACL’s project manager, Sabin, came in with a “simple change.” Change the outer 
shell shape from rectangular to dome shape; it will improve performance 2 per-
cent. Songsee couldn’t believe Sabin. He knows better. He knows the engineering 
implications, and it is NOT simple! Yet Sabin tells Songsee, “It shouldn’t cost 
much.” Songsee imagined a sharp retort, but she counted to five and aborted. At 
this late stage of the game, changes and schedule compression cost big money! 
Songsee said she would get together with her team and start on a new time and 
cost estimate today. She told Sabin he would have to give her a written change 
request of the new requirements by tomorrow. Sabin appeared disappointed. “Why 
don’t we just add €100,000 to the price and get on with it? We have been doing 
business with SCF for six years. With expected demand out of sight, SCF will 
break even quickly and have a great profit on the production side.” Songsee sighed. 
“Let’s proceed with the change order process. I will bring your request to the 
change order governance committee.”
 
Songsee’s meeting with her team about the change went about as expected. 
Every department moaned about changing at this late date. The guesstimate cost 
and time estimates were over triple Sabin’s idea of €100,000. For example, design-
ing a new seal for a dome style modem will require a new custom water sealing 
approach, possibly an untested different sealant, and new molds. Has ACL frozen 
the design of the new style modem? Songsee asked the team to come in with a 
more detailed estimate by tomorrow afternoon, before her meeting with the change 
order governance committee.
www.ebook3000.com

446  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
THE NEXT DAY (FRIDAY)
Sabin called from ACL at midmorning the next day. “Our senior management is upset 
that we have to be so formal for such a small change. They just want to get on with the 
project and meet the time to market launch date. €100,000 seems like a fair price. They 
believe you need to talk to your management. They want a response by Monday.”
 
The team estimates came close to yesterday’s guesstimate (€391,000). Not good 
news. Songsee knew the answer of the change committee would be to hold for the full 
amount. She was right. The change committee believed the costs are there and need to 
be covered to meet the launch date. The committee was also concerned that priorities 
and resource scheduling would have to change for SCF’s design and production depart-
ments. In three hours she would meet with senior management to decide to accept the 
client’s request at their price or come up with an alternate plan. Songsee realized she 
should have several options for senior management to consider, along with a 
recommendation.
1. Should SCF accept or reject ACL’s request? Which option would you select? What 
risks are involved?
2. How should SCF negotiate with ACL? How can SCF and ACL develop a positive, 
long-range relationship? Give some specifics.
Case 12.2
The Accounting Software Installation Project
Sitting in her office, Karin Chung is reviewing the past four months of the large corpo-
rate accounting software installation project she has been managing. Everything 
seemed so well planned before the project started. Each company division had a task 
force that provided input into the proposed installation along with potential problems. 
All the different divisions had been trained and briefed on exactly how their division 
would interface and use the forthcoming accounting software. All six contractors, 
which included one of the Big Four consulting companies, assisted in developing the 
work breakdown structure—costs, specifications, time.
 
Karin hired a consultant to conduct a one-day “partnering” workshop attended by 
the major accounting heads, a member of each task force group, and key representa-
tives from each of the contractors. During the workshop, several different team-
building exercises were used to illustrate the importance of collaboration and 
effective communication. Everyone laughed when Karin fell into an imaginary acid 
pit during a human bridge-building exercise. The workshop ended on an upbeat note 
with everyone signing a partnering charter that expressed their commitment to work-
ing together as partners to complete the project.
TWO MONTHS LATER
One task force member came to Karin to complain that the contractor dealing with 
billing would not listen to his concerns about problems that could occur in the Virginia 
division when billings are consolidated. The contractor had told him, the task force 
member, he had bigger problems than consolidation of billing in the Virginia division. 
Karin replied, “You can settle the problem with the contractor. Go to him and explain 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  447
how serious your problem is and that it will have to be settled before the project is 
completed.”
 
Later in the week in the lunchroom she overheard one consulting contractor bad-
mouthing the work of another—“never on time, interface coding not tested.” In the 
hallway the same day an accounting department supervisor told her that tests showed 
the new software will never be compatible with the Georgia division’s accounting 
practices.
 
While concerned, Karin considered these problems typical of the kind she had 
encountered on other smaller software projects.
FOUR MONTHS LATER
The project seemed to be falling apart. What happened to the positive attitude fostered at 
the team-building workshop? One contractor wrote a formal letter complaining that another 
contractor was sitting on a coding decision that was delaying their work. The letter went 
on: “We cannot be held responsible or liable for delays caused by others.” The project was 
already two months behind, so problems were becoming very real and serious. Karin 
finally decided to call a meeting of all parties to the project and partnering agreement.
 
She began by asking for problems people were encountering while working on the 
project. Although participants were reluctant to be first for fear of being perceived as a 
complainer, it was not long before accusations and tempers flared out of control. It was 
always some group complaining about another group. Several participants complained 
that others were sitting on decisions that resulted in their work being held up. One 
consultant said, “It is impossible to tell who’s in charge of what.” Another participant 
complained that although the group met separately on small problems, it never met as 
a total group to assess new risk situations that developed.
 
Karin felt the meeting had degenerated into an unrecoverable situation. Commitment 
to the project and partnering appeared to be waning. She quickly decided to stop the 
meeting and cool things down. She spoke to the project stakeholders: “It is clear that we 
have some serious problems, and the project is in jeopardy. The project must get back on 
track, and the backbiting must stop. I want each of us to come to a meeting Friday morn-
ing with concrete suggestions of what it will take to get the project back on track and 
specific actions of how we can make it happen. We need to recognize our mutual inter-
dependence and bring our relationships with each other back to a win/win environment. 
When we do get things back on track, we need to figure out how to stay on track.”
1. Why does this attempt at project partnering appear to be failing?
2. If you were Karin, what would you do to get this project back on track?
3. What action would you take to keep the project on track?
Case 12.3
Buxton Hall
Chad Cromwell, head of university housing, gazed up at the tower at Buxton Hall and 
smiled as he walked toward the landmark building.
 
Buxton Hall was built in 1927 as a residential complex for over 350 students at 
Pacifica State University. At the time Buxton was the tallest building on campus, and 
www.ebook3000.com

448  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
its tower had a panoramic view of the athletic fields and coastal range. Buxton quickly 
became a focal point at Pacifica State. Students perched on the tower dominated the 
campus during the annual spring water fight with their huge slingshots and catapults. 
The first intranet on the Pacific coast was created at Buxton that linked students’ com-
puters and allowed them to share printers. Around the 1970s, some student artists 
began the tradition of painting their room doors. Whether a Rolling Stones logo or 
Bugs Bunny on a skateboard, these colorful doors were an artistic legacy that caught 
the attention of students and faculty.
 
Buxton Hall served as a residence hall for the university for many years, but 
time was not kind to the stately building. Leaks destroyed plaster in the interior. 
Wiring and plumbing became outdated and so dangerous that the building was 
deemed unsafe. Buxton Hall’s doors were closed to students and windows boarded 
up at the end of the 1996 spring quarter. For 10 years Buxton sat silent and over 
time became a symbol of the general decline of Pacifica State. Now thanks to state 
bonds and generous contributions, Buxton Hall was about to be reopened after a 
$20 million renovation.
18 MONTHS AGO
Chad and key representatives from university facilities were engaged in the second 
of a two-day partnering workshop. Also in attendance were managers from Craw-
ford Construction, the chief contractor for the Buxton renovation project, as well as 
several key subcontractors and architects from the firm of Legacy West. During the 
first day a consultant ran them through a series of team-building and communica-
tion exercises that accentuated the importance of open communication, principle 
negotiation, and win/win thinking. The second day began with the “project from 
hell” exercise, with each group describing the worst project they had ever worked 
on. Chad was surprised that the people from Crawford and Legacy West descrip-
tions were very similar to his own. For example, each group talked about how frus-
trating it was when changes were made without proper consultation or costs were 
hidden until it was too late to do anything about them. This was followed by a dis-
cussion of the best project they had ever worked on. The consultant then asked the 
groups which of the two they wanted the Buxton project to be. A genuine sense of 
common purpose emerged, and everyone became actively engaged in spelling out 
in specific terms how they wanted to work together. The session concluded with all 
of the participants signing a partnering charter followed by a picnic and a friendly 
softball game.
12 MONTHS AGO
Chad was on his way, with Nick Bolas, to meet Dat Nguyen, the Crawford Project 
Manager, on the third floor at Buxton tower. Dat had contacted him to discuss a prob-
lem with the tile work in one of the communal bathrooms. Dat’s people had completed 
the work, but Nick, who was a Pacifica facilities manager, refused to sign off on it 
claiming that it was not up to spec. After a 24-hour impasse, the Crawford foreman 
exercised the escalation clause in partnering agreement and passed the issue up to 
management’s level to be resolved. Dat and Chad inspected the work. While both 
agreed that the job could have been prettier, it did meet specification and Chad told 
Nick to sign off on it.
 
Chad met Dat again later in the day at the weekly Buxton status report meeting. The 
meeting kicked off with a brief review of what had been accomplished during the past week. 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  449
Discussion centered on the removal of elm trees. Alternative strategies for dealing 
with the city inspector, who had a reputation of being a stickler for details, were con-
sidered. The project was two weeks behind schedule, which was an important issue 
since it was imperative that the building be ready for students to move in at the 2008 
fall term. The project was also on a very tight budget, and the management reserve had 
to be carefully administered. Renovation of existing buildings was always a bit of a 
gamble, since you never knew what you would find once you began tearing down 
walls. Fortunately, only small amounts of asbestos were found, but rot was much more 
severe than anticipated.
 
The meeting included a partnering assessment. The results of a Web survey filled 
out by all the principals were distributed. The results revealed a dip in the ratings 
between the Crawford foremen and university officials regarding timely collaboration 
and effective problem solving. One of Chad’s people said that the primary source of 
frustration was Crawford foremen failing to respond to e-mail and telephone messages. 
Dat asked for the names of his people and said he would talk to each of them. The 
Crawford foremen complained that the university officials were being too nit-picky. 
“We don’t have the time or money to do A+ work on everything,” argued a foreman. 
Chad told Dat and his people that he would talk to the facilities guys and ask them to 
focus on what was really important.
6 MONTHS AGO
The project status report meeting started on time. Crawford had been able to make up 
for lost time, and it now looked like the building would open on time. Chad was glad 
to see that the partnering assessment had been positive and steady over the past month. 
The big issue was the surge in costs consuming all but $50,000 of management reserve. 
With six months to go everyone knew that this would not cover all the change orders 
needed to have the building ready. After all, there was already $24,000 worth of change 
orders pending.
 
Chad looked across the table and saw nothing but grim faces. Then one of the 
Crawford foremen proposed postponing treating all of the exterior walls. “Instead of 
cleaning and preserving the entire brick building, let’s only do the front entrance and 
the North and South walls that the public sees. We can just refurbish the interior court 
walls as well as the West side. This would be adequate for at least eight years, in which 
time money should be available to complete the job.”
 
At first Chad didn’t like this idea, but eventually he realized that this was the only 
way they could have the building ready for the students. Friendly arguments broke out 
over which exterior segments needed the full treatment and which ones didn’t. The 
whole team ended up touring the outside of the building identifying what kind of work 
needed to be done. In the end, only 70 percent of exterior brick walls were recondi-
tioned according to plan with a savings of over $250,000. While this boost to the 
reserve would still make things tight, everyone felt that they now had a fighting chance 
to complete the project on time.
TODAY
As Chad mingled with a glass of champagne, no one talked about the walls that still 
needed to be refurbished—tonight was a night to celebrate. All of the major partici-
pants and their spouses were at the party, and the university was hosting a five-
course meal at the top of the tower. During the toasts, jokes were exchanged and 
www.ebook3000.com

450  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
stories told about the ghosts in the west wing and the discovery of a dead skunk in 
the south basement. Everyone talked about how proud they felt about bringing back 
to life the grand old building. More than one person mentioned that this was much 
more satisfying than tearing down an old relic and constructing a new building. The 
president of the university concluded the festivities by thanking everyone for their 
hard work and proclaiming that Buxton would become a bright, shining icon for 
Pacifica State.
1. How successful was this project?
2. What best practices were evident in the case? How did they contribute to project 
objectives?
Case 12.4
Goldrush Electronics Negotiation Exercise
OBJECTIVE
The purpose of this case is to provide you with an opportunity to practice 
negotiations.
PROCEDURE
STEP 1
The class is divided into four groups, each comprising the project management group 
for one of four projects at Goldrush Electronics.
STEP 2
Read the Goldrush Electronics “Background Information” section given below. Then 
read the instructions for the project you represent. Soon you will meet with the man-
agement of the other projects to exchange personnel. Plan how you want to conduct 
those meetings.
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Goldrush Electronics (GE) produces a range of electronic products. GE has a strong 
commitment to project management. GE operates as a projectized organization with 
each project organized as a fully dedicated team. The compensation system is based on 
a 40 + 30 + 30 formula. Forty percent is based on your base salary, 30 percent on your 
project performance, and 30 percent on overall performance of the firm.
 
Four new product development projects have been authorized. They are code 
named: Alpha, Beta, Theta, and Zeta. The preliminary assignment of personnel is 
listed below. You are assigned to represent the management of one of these 
projects.
 
The policy at GE is that once preliminary assignments are made, project man-
agers are free to exchange personnel as long as both parties agree to the transac-
tion. You will have the opportunity to adjust your team by negotiating with other 
project managers.

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  451
Alpha Project
Software Engineer 
Hardware Engineer 
Design Engineer
Jill 
Cameron 
Mitch
John 
Chandra 
Marsha
Beta Project
Software Engineer 
Hardware Engineer 
Design Engineer
Jake 
Casey 
Mike
Jennifer 
Craig 
Maria
Theta Project
Software Engineer 
Hardware Engineer 
Design Engineer
Jack 
Chuck 
Monika
Johan 
Cheryl 
Mark
Zeta Project
Software Engineer 
Hardware Engineer 
Design Engineer
Jeff 
Carlos 
Max
Juwoo 
Chad 
Maile
Personnel may be traded for one or more other personnel.
STEP 3
Meet and negotiate with the other project managers.
STEP 4
Individual project scores are totaled and posted.
STEP 5
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What was your initial strategy before starting the actual negotiations? How did you 
view the other groups?
2. Did your initial strategy change once negotiations began? If so, how and why?
3. What could top management at GE have done to make it easier to reach agreement 
with the other groups?
Appendix 12.1
Contract Management
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this appendix you should be able to:
LO A12-1 Describe the procurement management process.
LO A12-2  Describe the differences between Fixed-Price and Cost-Plus Contracts and their advantages and 
disadvantages.
www.ebook3000.com

452  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
Since most outsourced work on projects is contractual in nature, this appendix discusses 
the different kinds of contracts that are used, their strengths and weaknesses, and how 
contracts shape the motives and expectations of different participants. Contract manage-
ment is a key element of any project procurement management system. It is beyond the 
scope of this book to describe this system. However, the basic processes are listed here 
to put contract management and related topics like Request for Proposal (RFP) (see 
Appendix 12.1) in perspective. Six main steps comprise procurement management:
∙ Planning purchases and acquisitions involves determining what to procure, when, 
and how. This entails the classic build-versus-buy analysis as well as determination 
of the type of contract to use.
∙ Planning contracting involves describing the requirements for products or services 
desired from outsourcing and identifying potential suppliers or sellers. Outputs 
include procurement documents such as a RFP as well as selection criteria.
∙ Requesting seller responses involves obtaining information, quotes, bids, or pro-
posals from sellers and providers. The main outputs of this process include a quali-
fied sellers list and specific proposals.
∙ Selecting sellers involves choosing from potential suppliers through a process of 
evaluating potential providers and negotiating a contract.
∙ Administering the contract involves managing the relationship with the selected 
seller or provider.
∙ Closing the contract involves completion and settlement of the contract.
 
Most companies have purchasing departments that specialize in procurement. Often 
purchasing agents will be assigned to project teams and they work with other team 
members to come up with optimum solutions for the project. Even if project teams are 
not directly involved in contract negotiations and the decision to outsource project 
work, it is important that the team understand the procurement process and the nature 
of different kinds of contracts.
CONTRACTS
A contract is a formal agreement between two parties wherein one party (the contrac-
tor) obligates itself to perform a service and the other party (the client) obligates itself 
to do something in return, usually in the form of a payment to the contractor. For 
example, an insurance firm contracted with a consulting firm to reprogram segments 
of their information system to conform to Windows 10.
 
A contract is more than just an agreement between parties. A contract is a codification 
of the private law, which governs the relationship between the parties to it. It defines the 
responsibilities, spells out the conditions of its operations, defines the rights of the par-
ties in relationship to each other, and grants remedies to a party if the other party breaches 
its obligations. A contract attempts to spell out in specific terms the transactional obliga-
tions of the parties involved as well as contingencies associated with the execution of the 
contract. An ambiguous or inconsistent contract is difficult to understand and enforce.
 
There are essentially two different kinds of contracts. The first is the “fixed-price” con-
tract in which a price is agreed upon in advance and remains fixed as long as there are no 
changes to scope or provisions of the agreement. The second is a “cost-plus” contract in 
which the contractor is reimbursed for all or some of the expenses incurred during the per-
formance of the contract. Unlike the fixed-price contract, the final price is not known until 
the project is completed. Within these two types of contracts, several variations exist.
Describe the procurement 
management process.
A12-1
LO
Describe the differences 
between Fixed-Price and 
Cost-Plus Contracts and 
their advantages and 
disadvantages.
A12-2
LO

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  453
FIXED-PRICE CONTRACTS
Under a fixed-price (FP) or lump-sum agreement, the contractor agrees to perform all 
work specified in the contract at a fixed price. Clients are able to get a minimum price 
by putting out the contract to competitive bid. Advertising an invitation for bid (IFB) 
that lists customer requirements usually results in low bids. Prospective contractors 
can obtain IFB notices through various channels. In the case of large business organi-
zations and government agencies, potential contractors can request to be included on 
the bidder’s list in the area of interest. In other cases, IFBs can be found by scanning 
appropriate industry media such as newspapers, trade journals, and websites. In many 
cases, the owner can put restrictions on potential bidders, such as requiring that they 
be ISO 9000 certified.
 
With fixed-price contract bids, the contractor has to be very careful in estimating 
target cost and completion schedule because once agreed upon, the price cannot be 
adjusted. If contractors overestimate the target cost in the bidding stage, they may lose 
the contract to a lower-priced competitor; if the estimate is too low, they may win the 
job but make little or no profit.
 
Fixed-price contracts are preferred by both owners and contractors when the scope 
of the project is well defined with predictable costs and low implementation risks. 
Such might be the case for producing parts or components to specifications, executing 
training programs, or orchestrating a banquet. With fixed-price contracts, clients do 
not have to be concerned with project costs and can focus on monitoring work progress 
and performance specifications. Likewise, contractors prefer fixed-price contracts 
because the client is less likely to request changes or additions to the contract. Fewer 
potential changes reduce project uncertainty and allow the contractors to more effi-
ciently manage their resources across multiple projects.
 
The disadvantage of a fixed-price contract for owners is that it is more difficult and 
more costly to prepare. To be effective, design specifications need to be spelled out in 
sufficient detail to leave little doubt as to what is to be achieved. Because the contrac-
tor’s profit is determined by the difference between the bid and the actual costs, there 
is some incentive for contractors to use cheaper quality materials, perform marginal 
workmanship, or extend the completion date to reduce costs. The client can counteract 
these by stipulating rigid end-item specifications and completion date and by supervis-
ing work. In many cases, the client will hire a consultant who is an expert in the field 
to oversee the contractor’s work and protect the client’s interest.
 
The primary disadvantage of a fixed-price contract for contractors is that they run 
the risk of underestimating. If the project gets into serious trouble, cost overruns may 
make the project unprofitable, and, in some cases, may lead to bankruptcy. To avoid 
this, contractors have to invest significant time and money to ensure that their esti-
mates are accurate.
 
Contracts with long lead times such as construction and production projects may 
include escalation provisions that protect the contractor against external cost increases in 
materials, labor rates, or overhead expenses. For example, the price may be tied to an 
inflation index, so it can be adjusted to sudden increases in labor and material prices, or 
it may be redetermined as costs become known. A variety of redetermination contracts 
are used. Some establish a ceiling price for a contract and permit only downward adjust-
ments, others permit upward and downward adjustments; some establish one readjust-
ment period at the end of the project, others use more than one period. Redetermination 
contracts are appropriate where engineering and design efforts are difficult to estimate or 
when final price cannot be estimated for lack of accurate cost data.
www.ebook3000.com

454  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
 
While, in principle, redetermination contracts are used to make appropriate adjust-
ments in cost uncertainties, they are prone to abuse. A contractor may win an initial 
low bid contract, initiate the contracted work, and then “discover” that the costs are 
much higher than expected. The contractor can take advantage of redetermination pro-
visions and a client’s ignorance to justify increasing the actual cost of the contract. The 
contract evolves into a cost-plus contract.
 
To alleviate some of the disadvantages of a fixed-price contract while maintaining 
some certainty as to final cost, many fixed-price contracts contain incentive clauses 
designed to motivate contractors to reduce costs and improve efficiency. For example, 
a contractor negotiates to perform the work for a target price based on a target cost and 
a target profit. A maximum price and maximum profit are also established. If the total 
cost ends up being less than the target cost, the contractor makes a higher profit up to 
the profit maximum. If there is a cost overrun, the contractor absorbs some of the over-
run until a profit floor is reached.
 
Profit is determined according to a formula based on a cost-sharing ratio (CSR). 
A CSR of 75/25, for example, indicates that for every dollar spent above target costs, 
the client pays 75 cents and the contractor pays 25 cents. This provision motivates 
contractors to keep costs low since they pay 25 cents on every dollar spent above the 
expected cost and earn 25 cents more on every dollar saved below the expected cost. 
Fixed-price incentive contracts tend to be used for long-duration projects with fairly 
predictable cost estimates. The key is being able to negotiate a reasonable target cost 
estimate. Unscrupulous contractors have been known to take advantage of the igno-
rance of the client to negotiate an unrealistically high target cost and use performance 
incentives to achieve excessive profits.
COST-PLUS CONTRACTS
Under a cost-plus contract the contractor is reimbursed for all direct allowable costs 
(materials, labor, travel) plus an additional fee to cover overhead and profit. This fee 
is negotiated in advance and usually involves a percentage of the total costs. On 
small projects this kind of contract comes under the rubric “time and materials con-
tract” in which the client agrees to reimburse the contractor for labor cost and mate-
rials. Labor costs are based on an hourly or daily rate, which includes direct and 
indirect costs as well as profit. The contractor is responsible for documenting labor 
and materials costs.
 
Unlike fixed-price contracts, cost-plus contracts put the burden of risk on the 
client. The contract does not indicate what the project is going to cost until the end 
of the project. Contractors are supposed to make the best effort to fulfill the spe-
cific technical requirements of the contract but cannot be held liable, in spite of 
their best efforts, if the work is not produced within the estimated cost and time 
frame. These contracts are often criticized because there is little formal incentive 
for the contractors to control costs or finish on time because they get paid regard-
less of the final cost. The major factor motivating contractors to control costs and 
schedule is the effect overruns have on their reputation and their ability to secure 
future business.
 
The inherent weakness of cost-plus contracts has been compensated for by a variety 
of incentive clauses directed at providing incentives to contractors to control costs, 
maintain performance, and avoid schedule overruns. Contractors are reimbursed for 
costs, but instead of the fee being fixed, it is based on an incentive formula and subject 

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  455
to additional provisions. This is very similar to fixed-price incentive contracts, but 
instead of being based on a target cost, the fee is based on actual cost, using a cost-
sharing formula.
 
Most contracts are concerned with the negotiated cost of the project. However, 
given the importance of speed and timing in today’s business world, more and more 
contracts involve clauses concerning completion dates. To some extent schedule 
incentives provide some cost-control measures because schedule slippage typically 
but not always involves cost overruns. Schedule incentives/penalties are stipulated 
depending on the significance of time to completion for the owner. For example, the 
contract involving the construction of a new baseball stadium is likely to contain 
stiff penalties if the stadium is not ready for opening day of the season. Conversely, 
time-constrained projects in which the number one priority is getting the project 
completed as soon as possible are likely to include attractive incentives for complet-
ing the project early.
 
A good example of this can be seen in Snapshot from Practice 9.2: Responding to 
the Northridge Earthquake in which the construction firm pulled out all the stops to 
restore the damaged highway system 74 days ahead of schedule. The firm received a 
$14.8 million bonus for these efforts!
 
Figure A12.1 summarizes the spectrum of risk to the buyer and supplier for differ-
ent kinds of contracts. Buyers have the lowest risk with firm fixed-price contracts 
because they know exactly what they will need to pay the supplier. Buyers have the 
most risk with cost-plus percentage of cost contracts because they do not know in 
advance what the suppliers’ costs will be and suppliers may be motivated to increase 
costs. From the suppliers’ perspective, the cost-plus contract offers the least risk and 
the firm fixed-price contract entails the most risk.
CONTRACT CHANGE CONTROL SYSTEM
A contract change control system defines the process by which the contract may be 
modified. It includes the paperwork, tracking systems, dispute resolution proce-
dures, and approval levels necessary for authorizing changes. There are a number 
of reasons a contract may need to be changed. Clients may wish to alter the origi-
nal design or scope of the project once the project is initiated. This is quite 
High
High
Low
Low
CPPC
Cost-plus percentage
of cost
CPIF
Cost-plus incentive
fee
FFP
Firm ﬁxed-price
FPI
Fixed-price incentive
BUYER RISK
SELLER RISK
FIGURE A12.1 
Contract Type versus 
Risk 
www.ebook3000.com

456  Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations
common as the project moves from concept to reality. For example, an owner may 
wish to add windows after inspecting the partially completed homesite. Market 
changes may dictate adding new features or increasing the performance require-
ments of equipment. Declining financial resources may dictate that the owner cut 
back on the scope of the project. The contractor may initiate changes in the con-
tract in response to unforeseen legitimate problems. A building contractor may 
need to renegotiate the contract in the face of excessive groundwater or the lack of 
availability of specified materials. In some cases, external forces may dictate con-
tract changes, such as a need to comply with new safety standards mandated by the 
federal government.
 
There need to be formal, agreed-upon procedures for initiating changes in the 
original contract. Contract change orders are subject to abuse. Contractors some-
times take advantage of owners’ ignorance to inflate the costs of changes to recoup 
profit lost from a low bid. Conversely, owners have been known to “get back” at 
contractors by delaying approval of contract changes, thus delaying project work 
and increasing the costs to the contractor. All parties need to agree upon the rules 
and procedures for initiating and making changes in the original terms of the con-
tract in advance.
CONTRACT MANAGEMENT IN PERSPECTIVE
Contract management is not an exact science. For decades, the federal govern-
ment has been trying to develop a more effective contract administration system. 
Despite their best efforts, abuses are repeatedly exposed in the news media. The 
situation is similar to trying to take a wrinkle out of an Oriental rug. Efforts to 
eliminate a wrinkle in one part of the rug invariably create a wrinkle in another 
part. Likewise, each new revision in government procurement procedures appears 
to generate a new loophole that can be exploited. There is no perfect contract 
management system. Given the inherent uncertainty involved in most project 
work, no contract can handle all the issues that emerge. Formal contracts cannot 
replace or eliminate the need to develop effective working relationships between 
the parties involved that are based on mutual goals, trust, and cooperation. For 
this reason, the earlier discussion of best practices in outsourcing and effective 
negotiating is very important.
APPENDIX REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the fundamental differences between fixed-price and cost-plus 
contracts?
2. For what kinds of projects would you recommend that a fixed-price contract be 
used? For what kinds of projects would you recommend that a cost-plus contract be 
used?
APPENDIX REFERENCES
Angus, R. B., N. A. Gundersen, and T. P. Cullinane, Planning, Performing, and Con-
trolling Projects (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003).
Cavendish, J., and M. Martin, Negotiating and Contracting for Project Management 
(Upper Darby, PA: Project Management Institute, 1982).

Chapter 12  Outsourcing: Managing Interorganizational Relations  457
Fleming, Q. W., Project Procurement Management: Contracting, Subcontracting, 
Teaming (Tustin, CA: FMC Press, 2003).
Fraser, J., Professional Project Proposals (Aldershot, U.K.: Gower/Ashgate, 1995).
Lowe, D., “Contract Management” in The Wiley Guide to Managing Projects, P. W. 
G. Morris and J. K. Pinto, eds. (New York: Wiley, 2004), pp. 678–707.
Schwalbe, K., Information Technology Project Management, 4th ed. (Boston: Thomson 
Course Technology, 2006).
Worthington, M. M., and L. P. Goldsman, Contracting with the Federal Government, 
4th ed. (New York: Wiley, 1998).
www.ebook3000.com

Progress and Performance 
Measurement and Evaluation
13
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
13-1 Identify the four steps for controlling a project.
13-2 Utilize a tracking Gantt to monitor time 
performance.
13-3 Understand and appreciate the significance of 
earned value.
13-4 Calculate and interpret cost and schedule 
variance.
13-5 Calculate and interpret performance and percent 
indexes.
13-6 Forecast final project cost.
13-7 Identify and manage scope creep.
OUTLINE
13.1 Structure of a Project Monitoring Information 
System
13.2 The Project Control Process
13.3 Monitoring Time Performance
13.4 Development of an Earned Value Cost/Schedule 
System
13.5 Developing a Status Report: A Hypothetical 
Example
13.6 Indexes to Monitor Progress
13.7 Forecasting Final Project Cost
13.8 Other Control Issues
Summary
Appendix 13.1:  The Application of Additional Earned 
Value Rules
Appendix 13.2:  Obtaining Project Performance 
 Information from MS Project
C H A P T E R  T H I R T E E N
458

How does a project get one year late? 
 . . . One day at a time. 
—Frederick P. Brooks, The Mythical Man Month, p. 153
Evaluation and control are part of every project manager’s job. Control by “wander-
ing around” and “involvement” can overcome most problems in small projects. But 
large projects need some form of formal control. Control holds people accountable, 
prevents small problems from mushrooming into large problems, and keeps focus. 
Except for accounting controls, project control is not performed well in most organi-
zations. Control is one of the most neglected areas of project management. 
 Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to find resistance to control processes. In essence, 
those who minimize the importance of control are passing up a great opportunity to 
be effective managers and, perhaps, allow the organization to gain a competitive 
edge. Neglecting control in organizations with multiple projects is even more serious. 
For effective control, the project manager needs a single information system to collect 
data and report progress on cost, schedule, and specifications. The general structure 
of such a system is discussed next.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
459 
www.ebook3000.com

460  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
13.1 Structure of a Project Monitoring Information System
A project monitoring system involves determining what data to collect; how, when, 
and who will collect the data; analysis of the data; and reporting current progress.
What Data Are Collected?
Data collected are determined by which metrics will be used for project control. 
 Typical key data collected are actual activity duration times, resource usage and rates, 
and actual costs, which are compared against planned times, resources, and budgets. 
Since a major portion of the monitoring system focuses on cost/schedule concerns, it 
is crucial to provide the project manager and stakeholders with data to answer 
 questions such as:
∙ What is the current status of the project in terms of schedule and cost?
∙ How much will it cost to complete the project?
∙ When will the project be completed?
∙ Are there potential problems that need to be addressed now?
∙ What, who, and where are the causes for cost or schedule overruns?
∙ If there is a cost overrun midway in the project, can we forecast the overrun at 
completion?
 
The performance metrics you need to collect should support answering these ques-
tions. Examples of specific metrics and tools for collecting data will be discussed in 
detail later in this chapter.
Collecting Data and Analysis
With the determination of what data are collected, the next step is to establish who, 
when, and how the data will be assembled. Will the data be collected by the project 
team, contractor, independent cost engineers, project manager? Or will the data  
be derived electronically from some form of surrogate data such as cash flow, machine 
hours, labor hours, or materials in place? Should the reporting period be one hour, one 
day, one week, or what? Is there a central repository for the data collected and is some-
one responsible for its dissemination?
 
Electronic means of collecting data have vastly improved data assembly, analysis, 
and dissemination. Numerous software vendors have programs and tools to analyze 
your customized collected data and present it in a form that facilitates monitoring the 
project, identifying sources of problems, and updating your plan.
Reports and Reporting   
First, who gets the progress reports? We have already suggested that different stake-
holders and levels of management need different kinds of project information. Senior 
management’s major interests are usually, “Are we on time and within budget? If not, 
what corrective action is taking place?” Likewise, an IT manager working on the proj-
ect is concerned primarily about her deliverable and specific work packages. The 
reports should be designed for the right audience.

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  461
 
Typically, project progress reports are designed and communicated in written or 
oral form. A common topic format for progress reports follows:
∙ Progress since last report
∙ Current status of project
 
1. Schedule
 
2. Cost
 
3. Scope
∙ Cumulative trends
∙ Problems and issues since last report
 
1. Actions and resolution of earlier problems
 
2. New variances and problems identified
∙ Corrective action planned
 
Given the structure of your information system and the nature of its outputs, we can 
use the system to interface and facilitate the project control process. These interfaces 
need to be relevant and seamless if control is to be effective.
13.2 The Project Control Process
Control is the process of comparing actual performance against plan to identify devia-
tions, evaluate possible alternative courses of actions, and take appropriate corrective 
action. The project control steps for measuring and evaluating project performance are 
presented below.
1. Setting a baseline plan.
2. Measuring progress and performance.
3. Comparing plan against actual.
4. Taking action.
Each of the control steps is described in the following paragraphs.
Step 1: Setting a Baseline Plan
The baseline plan provides us with the elements for measuring performance. The base-
line is derived from the cost and duration information found in the work breakdown 
structure (WBS) database and time-sequence data from the network and resource 
scheduling decisions. From the WBS the project resource schedule is used to time-
phase all work, resources, and budgets into a baseline plan. See Chapter 8.
Step 2: Measuring Progress and Performance
Time and budgets are quantitative measures of performance that readily fit into the 
integrated information system. Qualitative measures such as meeting customer techni-
cal specifications and product function are most frequently determined by on-site 
inspection or actual use. This chapter is limited to quantitative measures of time and 
budget. Measurement of time performance is relatively easy and obvious. That is, is 
the critical path early, on schedule, or late; is the slack of near-critical paths decreasing 
to cause new critical activities? Measuring performance against budget (e.g., money, 
units in place, labor hours) is more difficult and is not simply a case of comparing 
Identify the four steps for 
controlling a project.
13-1
LO
www.ebook3000.com

462  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
actual versus budget. Earned value is necessary to provide a realistic estimate of per-
formance against a time-phased budget. Earned value (EV) is defined as the budgeted 
cost of the work performed.
Step 3: Comparing Plan against Actual
Because plans seldom materialize as expected, it becomes imperative to measure devi-
ations from plan to determine if action is necessary. Periodic monitoring and measur-
ing the status of the project allow for comparisons of actual versus expected plans. It is 
crucial that the timing of status reports be frequent enough to allow for early detection 
of variations from plan and early correction of causes. Usually status reports should 
take place every one to four weeks to be useful and allow for proactive correction.
Step 4: Taking Action
If deviations from plans are significant, corrective action will be needed to bring the 
project back in line with the original or revised plan. In some cases, conditions or 
scope can change, which, in turn, will require a change in the baseline plan to recog-
nize new information.
 
The remainder of this chapter describes and illustrates monitoring systems, tools, 
and components to support managing and controlling projects. Several of the tools you 
developed in the planning and scheduling chapters now serve as input to your informa-
tion system for monitoring performance. Monitoring time performance is discussed 
first, followed by cost performance.
13.3 Monitoring Time Performance
A major goal of progress reporting is to catch any negative variances from plan as 
early as possible to determine if corrective action is necessary. Fortunately, monitoring 
schedule performance is relatively easy. The project network schedule, derived from 
the WBS/OBS, serves as the baseline to compare against actual performance.
 
Gantt charts (bar charts), control charts, and milestone schedules are the typical 
tools used for communicating project schedule status. As suggested in Chapter 6, the 
Gantt chart is the most favored, used, and understandable. This kind of chart is com-
monly referred to as a tracking Gantt chart. Adding actual and revised time estimates 
to the Gantt chart gives a quick overview of project status on the report date.
Tracking Gantt Chart
Figure 13.1 presents a baseline Gantt chart and a tracking Gantt chart for a project at 
the end of period 6. The solid bar below the original schedule bar represents the actual 
start and finish times for completed activities or any portion of an activity completed 
(see activities A, B, C, D, and E). For example, the actual start time for activity C is 
period 2; the actual finish time is period 5; the actual duration is three time units, rather 
than four scheduled time periods. Activities in process show the actual start time; the 
extended bar represents the expected remaining duration (see activities D and E). The 
remaining duration for activities D and E are shown with the hatched bar. Activity F, 
which has not started, shows a revised estimated actual start (9) and finish time (13).
 
Note how activities can have durations that differ from the original schedule, as in 
activities C, D, and E. Either the activity is complete and the actual is known, or new 
information suggests the estimate of time be revised and reflected in the status report. 
Utilize a tracking Gantt 
to monitor time 
performance.
13-2
LO

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  463
Activity D’s revised duration results in an expected delay in the start of activity F. The 
project is now estimated to be completed one period later than planned. Although 
sometimes the Gantt chart does not show dependencies, when it is used with a net-
work, the dependencies are easily identified if tracing is needed.
Control Chart
This chart is another tool used to monitor past project schedule performance and cur-
rent performance and to estimate future schedule trends. Figure 13.2 depicts a project 
control chart. The chart is used to plot the difference between the scheduled time on 
the critical path at the report date with the actual point on the critical path. Although 
Figure 13.2 shows the project was behind early in the project, the plot suggests correc-
tive action brought the project back on track. If the trend is sustained, the project will 
come in ahead of schedule. Because the activity scheduled times represent average 
durations, four observations trending in one direction indicate there is a very high 
probability that there is an identifiable cause. The cause should be located and action 
taken if necessary. Control chart trends are very useful for giving warning of potential 
problems so appropriate action can be taken if necessary.
Milestone Schedules
Milestone schedules are often used to keep more distal stakeholders informed on the 
progress of a project. Such stakeholders, whether it is senior management, the owner, 
or regulatory agencies often neither need or desire a detailed accounting of project 
progress. Instead, their interests can be satisfied by reporting progress towards major 
project milestones. Remember from Chapter 4, milestones are significant project 
Legend
Baseline
duration
Actual
completed
Slack
A
Tracking Gantt Chart Showing Status—through Period 6
Baseline Gantt Chart
Today
Remaining
duration
F
E
D
C
B
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
A
F
E
D
C
B
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
FIGURE 13.1
Baseline and 
Tracking Gantt 
Charts
www.ebook3000.com

464  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
events that mark major accomplishments. Below is the milestone schedule used to 
keep the president of a university and her cabinet informed on the construction of a 
new College of Business building.
∙ Programming: 
June–August 31, 2014
∙ Schematic Design: 
September–January 15, 2012
∙ Design Development: 
January–August 31, 2012
∙ Historic Review: 
June–October 31, 2012
∙ Construction Documents: Sept. 2012–January 15, 2013
∙ 1% For Art Selection: 
November 2012–May 31, 2013
∙ Bid and Permit: 
January–March 31, 2013
∙ Construction: 
April 2013–August 31, 2014
∙ Furnishing Selections: 
September–November 30, 2013
∙ Occupancy: 
September 7, 2014
 
Project managers recognize the need to use a more macro schedule of significant deliv-
erables to keep external stakeholders informed and a more detailed milestone driven 
schedule to manage and motivate the project team to achieve those deliverables. For more 
on the latter, see the Snapshot from Practice 13.1 Guidelines for Setting Milestones.
13.4 Development of an Earned Value Cost/Schedule System
Earned value is not new; the original earned value cost/schedule system was pioneered 
by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) in the 1960s. It is probably safe to say proj-
ect managers in every major country are using some form of the system. The system is 
being used on internal projects in the manufacturing, pharmaceutical, and high-tech 
industries. For example, organizations such as EDS, NCR, Levi Strauss, Tektronics, 
and Disney have used earned value systems to track projects. The basic framework of 
the earned value system is withstanding the test of time. Most project management 
Understand and appreci-
ate the significance of 
earned value.
13-3
LO
FIGURE 13.2 
Project Schedule 
Control Chart 
Time
periods
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Reporting period
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
20
15
10
5
0
–5
–10
–15
–20
Today
Ahead of
schedule
Behind
schedule
Schedule outlook

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  465
software includes the original framework; many systems have added industry-specific 
variations to more precisely track progress and costs. This chapter presents the 
“generic” core of an integrated cost/schedule information system.1
 
The earned value system starts with the time-phased costs that provide the project 
budget baseline, which is called the planned budgeted value of the work scheduled 
(PV). Given this time-phased baseline, comparisons are made with actual and planned 
schedule and costs using earned value. The earned value approach provides the miss-
ing links not found in conventional cost-budget systems. At any point in time, a status 
report can be developed for the project.
 
The earned value cost/schedule system uses several acronyms and equations for 
analysis. Table 13.1 presents a glossary of these acronyms. You will need this glossary 
as a reference. In recent years acronyms have been shortened to be more phonetically 
friendly. This movement is reflected in material from the Project Management Insti-
tute, in project management software, and by most practitioners. This text edition fol-
lows the recent trend. The acronyms found in brackets represent the older acronyms, 
which are often found in software programs. To the uninitiated, the terms used in 
practice appear horrendous and intimidating. However, once a few basic terms are 
understood, the intimidation index will evaporate.
In medieval times mounds of stones 
were used to mark distance traveled 
along a path or road. Travelers would 
use these rock formations to gauge their 
progress and adjust their plans. In mod-
ern times, milestones are distinct events along the project 
timeline that are used to gauge progress and adjust plans. 
Milestones are building blocks for the project’s schedule 
and often create positive momentum to propel the project 
along to completion. To be effective milestones need to be 
concrete, specific, measurable events.
 
Here are some guidelines for setting milestones 
gleaned from conversations with veteran project 
managers:
 
Avoid the temptation to overuse milestones as a 
motivational tool by labeling every task a mile-
stone. Only important deliverables or achievements 
should be used as milestones.
 
Timing of milestones is important. Milestones that are 
placed too far apart will not generate momentum. 
Conversely, milestones placed too close together 
quickly lose their distinctiveness. As a rule of thumb, 
space milestones at intervals no longer than every 
two weeks for projects of several months in duration.
 
Critical merge and burst activities are often useful 
milestones since they indicate significant work has 
been or is about to be accomplished. Here it is im-
portant to remember that milestones are events 
not tasks, and the start of a merge activity (i.e., pat-
ent application submitted) or the completion of a 
burst activity (i.e., building permit approved) should 
be used.
 
Rates of completion can be used on projects involv-
ing repetition and not sequential advancement. For 
example, on a training project, milestones could be 
set as percentages of employees fully trained and 
certified, e.g., 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%.
 
Completing a high anxiety, high risk task is always 
worthy of milestone consideration.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 3 .1
Guidelines for Setting Milestones
© Erik Larson
1 See Fleming and Koppelman (2010) for a more complete earned value description.
www.ebook3000.com

466  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
 
Following five careful steps ensures that the cost/schedule system is integrated. 
These steps are outlined here. Steps 1, 2, and 3 are accomplished in the planning stage. 
Steps 4 and 5 are sequentially accomplished during the execution stage of the project.
1. Define the work using a WBS. This step involves developing documents that 
include the following information (see Chapters 4 and 5):
a. Scope.
b. Work packages.
c. Deliverables.
d. Organization units.
e. Resources.
f. Budgets for each work package.
2. Develop work and resource schedule.
a. Schedule resources to activities (see Chapter 8).
b. Time-phase work packages into a network.
3. Develop a time-phase budget using work packages included in an activity. The 
cumulative values of these budgets will become the baseline and will be called the 
planned budgeted cost of the work scheduled (PV). The sum should equal the bud-
geted amounts for all the work packages in the cost accounts (see Chapter 8).
4. At the work package level, collect the actual costs for the work performed. These 
costs will be called the actual cost of the work completed (AC). Collect percent 
complete and multiply this times the original budget amount for the value of the 
work actually completed. These values will be called earned value (EV).
5. Compute the schedule variance (SV = EV − PV) and cost variance (CV = EV − 
AC). Prepare hierarchical status reports for each level of management—from work 
package manager to customer or project manager. The reports should also include 
project rollups by organization unit and deliverables. In addition, actual time perfor-
mance should be checked against the project network schedule.
 
Figure 13.3 presents a schematic overview of the integrated information system, 
which includes the techniques and systems presented in earlier chapters. Those who 
have tenaciously labored through the early chapters can smile! Steps 1 and 2 are 
TABLE 13.1 
Glossary of Terms
EV 
 Earned value for a task is simply the percent complete times its original budget. Stated 
 differently, EV is the percent of the original budget that has been earned by actual work 
 completed. [The older acronym for this value was BCWP—budgeted cost of the work performed.]
PV 
 The planned time-phased baseline of the value of the work scheduled. An approved cost 
 estimate of the resources scheduled in a time-phased cumulative baseline [BCWS—budgeted 
cost of the work scheduled].
AC 
 Actual cost of the work completed. The sum of the costs incurred in accomplishing work 
[ACWP—actual cost of the work performed].
CV 
 Cost variance is the difference between the earned value and the actual costs for the work 
completed to date where CV = EV − AC.
SV 
 Schedule variance is the difference between the earned value and the baseline line to date 
where SV = EV − PV.
BAC 
 Budgeted cost at completion. The total budgeted cost of the baseline or project cost accounts.
EAC 
Estimated cost at completion.
ETC 
Estimated cost to complete remaining work.
VAC 
 Cost variance at completion. VAC indicates expected actual over- or underrun cost at completion.

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  467
already carefully developed. Observe that control data can be traced backward to spe-
cific deliverables and organization unit responsible.
 
The major reasons for creating a baseline are to monitor and report progress and to 
estimate cash flow. Therefore, it is crucial to integrate the baseline with the perfor-
mance measurement system. Costs are placed (time-phased) in the baseline exactly as 
managers expect them to be “earned.” This approach facilitates tracking costs to their 
point of origin. In practice, the integration is accomplished by using the same rules in 
assigning costs to the baseline as those used to measure progress using earned value. 
You may find several rules in practice, but percent complete is the workhorse most 
commonly used. Someone familiar with each task estimates what percent of the task 
has been completed or how much of the task remains.
Percent Complete Rule
This rule is the heart of any earned value system. The best method for assigning 
costs to the baseline under this rule is to establish frequent checkpoints over the 
duration of the work package and assign completion percentages in dollar terms. For 
example, units completed could be used to assign baseline costs and later to measure 
progress. Units might be lines of code, hours, drawings completed, cubic yards of 
concrete in place, workdays, prototypes complete, etc. This approach to percent 
complete adds “objectivity” to the subjective observation approaches often used. 
When measuring percent complete in the monitoring phase of the project, it is com-
mon to limit the amount earned to 80 or 90 percent until the work package is  
100 percent complete.
What Costs Are Included in Baselines?
The baseline (PV) is the sum of the cost accounts, and each cost account is the sum of 
the work packages in the cost account. Three direct costs are typically included in  
baselines—labor, equipment, and materials. The reason: these are direct costs the 
Scope
Deliverables
WBS
Organization
OBS
Database
Work packages
Time
Resources
    Labor
    Materials
    Support effort
Budgets
Responsibilities
Performance standards
Plan,
schedule
baseline
Control
Time, cost, and
speciﬁcations
by
Deliverables
and
Organization
FIGURE 13.3 
Project Management 
Information System 
Overview
www.ebook3000.com

468  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
project manager can control. Overhead costs and profit are typically added later by 
accounting processes. Most work packages should be discrete, of short time span, and 
have measurable outputs. If materials and/or equipment are a significant portion of the 
cost of work packages, they can be budgeted in separate work packages and cost accounts.
Methods of Variance Analysis
Generally the method for measuring accomplishments centers on two key 
computations:
1. Comparing earned value with the expected schedule value.
2. Comparing earned value with the actual costs.
 
These comparisons can be made at the project level or down to the cost account 
level. Project status can be determined for the latest period, all periods to date, and 
estimated to the end of the project.
 
Assessing the current status of a project using the earned value cost/schedule sys-
tem requires three data elements—planned cost of the work scheduled (PV), budgeted 
cost of the work completed (EV), and actual cost of the work completed (AC). From 
these data the schedule variance (SV) and cost variance (CV) are computed each 
reporting period. A positive variance indicates a desirable condition, while a negative 
variance suggests problems or changes that have taken place.
 
Cost variance tells us if the work accomplished costs more or less than was planned 
at any point over the life of the project. If labor and materials have not been separated, 
cost variance should be reviewed carefully to isolate the cause to either labor or 
 materials—or to both.
 
Schedule variance presents an overall assessment of all work packages in the proj-
ect scheduled to date. It is important to note schedule variance contains no critical path 
information. Critical and non-critical activities are combined in the calculation. Sched-
ule variance measures progress in dollars rather than time units. Therefore, it is 
unlikely that any translation of dollars to time will yield accurate information telling if 
any milestone or critical path is early, on time, or late (even if the project occurs exactly 
as planned). The only accurate method for determining the true time progress of the 
project is to compare the project network schedule against the actual network schedule 
to measure if the project is on time (refer to Figure 13.1). However, SV is very useful 
in assessing the direction all the work in the project is taking—after 20 or more per-
cent of the project has been completed.
 
Figure 13.4 presents a sample cost/schedule graph with variances identified for a proj-
ect at the current status report date. Note the graph also focuses on what remains to be 
accomplished and any favorable or unfavorable trends. The “today” label marks the 
report date (time period 25) of where the project has been and where it is going. Because 
our system is hierarchical, graphs of the same form can be developed for different levels 
of management. In Figure 13.4 the top line represents the actual costs (AC) incurred for 
the project work to date. The middle line is the baseline (PV) and ends at the scheduled 
project duration (45). The bottom line is the budgeted value of the work actually com-
pleted to date (EV) or the earned value. The dotted line extending the actual costs from 
the report date to the new estimated completion date represents revised estimates of 
expected actual costs; that is, additional information suggests the costs at completion of 
the project will differ from what was planned. Note that the project duration has been 
extended and the variance at completion (VAC) is negative (BAC − EAC).
 
Another interpretation of the graph uses percentages. At the end of period 25, 
75 percent of the work was scheduled to be accomplished. At the end of period 25, the 
Calculate and interpret 
cost and schedule 
variance.
13-4
LO

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  469
value of the work accomplished is 50 percent. The actual cost of the work completed 
to date is $340, or 85 percent of the total project budget. The graph suggests the proj-
ect will have about an 18 percent cost overrun and be five time units late. The current 
status of the project shows the cost variance (CV) to be over budget by $140 (EV − 
AC = 200 − 340 = −140). The schedule variance (SV) is negative $100 (EV − PV = 
200 − 300 = −100), which suggests the project is behind schedule. Before moving to 
an example, consult Figure 13.5 to practice interpreting the outcomes of cost/schedule 
graphs. Remember, PV is your baseline and anchor point.
10
20
30
Today
Scheduled end
Project duration
40
50
125%
100%
85%
75%
50%
25%
$500
AC
actual cost
PV
baseline
EV
earned value
BAC
EAC
CV
SV
$400
$340
$300
$200
$100
FIGURE 13.4 
Cost/Schedule Graph 
$
Time
AC
PV
EV
SV = negative
CV = negative
$
Time
AC
PV
EV
SV = positive
CV = positive
$
Time
AC
PV
EV
SV = positive
CV = negative
$
Time
AC
PV
EV
SV = negative
CV = positive
FIGURE 13.5 
Earned-Value Review 
Exercise 
www.ebook3000.com

470  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
13.5 Developing a Status Report: A Hypothetical Example
Working through an example demonstrates how the baseline serves as the anchor from 
which the project can be monitored using earned value techniques.
Assumptions
Because the process becomes geometrically complex with the addition of project 
detail, some simplifying assumptions are made in the example to more easily demon-
strate the process:
1. Assume each cost account has only one work package, and each cost account will 
be represented as an activity on the network.
2. The project network early start times will serve as the basis for assigning the base-
line values.
3. From the moment work on an activity task begins, some actual costs will be 
incurred each period until the activity is completed.
Baseline Development
Figure 13.6 (Work Breakdown Structure with Cost Accounts) depicts a simple work 
breakdown structure (WBS/OBS) for the Digital Camera example. There are six deliv-
erables (Design Specifications, Shell & Power, Memory/Software, Zoom System, 
Assemble, and Test), and five responsible departments (Design, Shell, Storage, Zoom, 
and Assembly). The total for all the cost accounts (CA) is $320,000, which represents 
$320
Digital Camera Prototype:
Design/Build Project
$320 (000)
Design
Speciﬁcations
$20
Shell
& Power
$15
Memory/
Software
$100
Zoom
System
$35
Assemble
$120
Test
$30
Zoom
$35
Shell
$15
Storage
$100
OBS
Design
$20
Assembly
$150
CA 1–1
$20
CA 2–2
$15
CA 3–3
$100
CA 4–4
$35
CA 5–5
$120
CA 6–5
$30
FIGURE 13.6 Work Breakdown Structure with Cost Accounts 

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  471
the total project cost. Figure 13.7, derived from the WBS, presents a planning Gantt 
chart for the Digital Camera project. The planned project duration is 11 time units. 
This project information is used to time-phase the project budget baseline. Figure 13.8 
(Project Baseline Budget) presents a worksheet with an early start baseline developed 
with costs assigned. They are assigned “exactly” as managers plan to monitor and 
measure schedule and cost performance.
Development of the Status Report
A status report is analogous to a camera snapshot of a project at a specific point in 
time. The status report uses earned value to measure schedule and cost performance. 
Measuring earned value begins at the work package level. Work packages are in one of 
three conditions on a report date:
1. Not yet started.
2. Finished.
3. In-process or partially complete.
 
Earned values for the first two conditions present no difficulties. Work packages 
that are not yet started earn zero percent of the PV (budget). Packages that are com-
pleted earn 100 percent of their PV. In-process packages apply the percent complete 
rule to the PV baseline to measure earned value (EV). In our camera example we will 
only use the percent complete rule to measure progress.
 
Table 13.2 presents the completed, separate status reports of the Digital Camera 
Prototype project for periods 1 through 7. Each period percent complete and actual 
Legend
Baseline
duration
Slack
A
F
E
D
C
B
Design Spec's
Test
Assemble
Zoom System
Memory/Software
Shell & Power
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
FIGURE 13.7 
Digital Camera 
Prototype Project 
Baseline Gantt Chart 
ES
LF
SL
Time period
Baseline budget needs
Schedule information
Total
PV
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
ACT/
WP
DUR
0
0
A
2
2
2
B
2
2
0
C
4
2
1
D
3
6
0
E
3
9
2
6
6
6
9
11
0
20
15
100
35
120
30
F
2
10
Total PV by period
Cumulative PV by period
20
60
110 150 170 200 240 290 300 320
10
10
40
50
40
20
30
40
50
10
20
10
10
5
10
20
30
30
20
15
10
10
30
40
50
10
20
0
11
FIGURE 13.8
Digital Camera 
Prototype Project 
Baseline Budget 
($000) 
www.ebook3000.com

472  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
TABLE 13.2 
Digital Camera 
Prototype Status 
Reports: Periods 1–7
Cost Variance 
CV = EV − AC
Schedule Variance 
SV = EV − PV 
 
 
 
 
Status Report: Ending Period 1
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
50% 
  10 
  10 
  10 
    0 
    0
Cumulative Totals 
 
  10 
  10 
  10 
    0 
    0
Status Report: Ending Period 2
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
Cumulative Totals 
 
  20 
 30 
  20 
−10 
    0
Status Report: Ending Period 3
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
B 
33% 
    5 
  10 
    5 
  −5 
    0
C 
20% 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
D 
60% 
  21 
  20 
  15 
  +1 
  +6
Cumulative Totals 
 
  66 
 90 
  60 
−24 
  +6
Status Report: Ending Period 4
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
B 
Finished 
  15 
  20 
  15 
  −5 
    0
C 
50% 
  50 
  70 
  50 
−20 
    0
D 
80% 
  28 
  30 
  25 
  −2 
  +3
Comulative Totals 
 
113 
150 
110 
−37 
  +3
Status Report: Ending Period 5
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
B 
Finished 
  15 
  20 
  15 
  −5 
    0
C 
60% 
  60 
100 
  80 
−40 
−20
D 
80% 
  28 
  50 
  35 
−22 
  −7
Cumulative Totals 
 
123 
200 
150 
−77 
−27
Status Report: Ending Period 6
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
B 
Finished 
  15 
  20 
  15 
  −5 
    0
C 
80% 
  80 
110 
100 
−30 
−20
D 
Finished 
  35 
  60 
  35 
−25 
    0
Cumulative Totals 
 
150 
220 
170 
−70 
−20
Status Report: Ending Period 7
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
  20 
  30 
  20 
−10 
    0
B 
Finished 
  15 
  20 
  15 
  −5 
    0
C 
90% 
  90 
120 
100 
−30 
−10
D 
Finished 
  35 
  60 
  35 
−25 
    0
E 
0% 
   0 
    0 
  30 
    0 
−30
F 
0% 
   0 
    0 
    0 
    0 
    0
Cumulative Totals 
 
160 
230 
200 
−70 
−40

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  473
cost were gathered for each task from staff in the field. The schedule and cost variance 
are computed for each task and the project to date. For example, the status in period 1 
shows only Task A (Design Specifications) is in process and it is 50 percent complete 
and actual cost for the task is 10. The planned value at the end of period 1 for Task A 
is 10 (see Figure 13.8). The cost and schedule variance are both zero, which indicates 
the project is on budget and schedule. By the end of period 3, Task A is finished. Task B 
(Shell & Power) is 33 percent complete and AC is 10; Task C is 20 percent complete 
and AC is 30; and D is 60 percent complete and AC is 20. Again, from Figure 13.8 at 
the end of period 3, we can see that the PV for Task A is 20 (10 + 10 = 20), for Task B 
is 5, for Task C is 20, and for Task D is 15. At the end of period 3 it is becoming clear 
the actual cost (AC) is exceeding the value of the work completed (EV). The cost 
variance (see Table 13.2) for the project at the end of period 3 is negative 24. Schedule 
variance is positive 6, which suggests the project may be ahead of schedule.
 
It is important to note that since earned values are computed from costs (or some-
times labor hours or other metrics), the relationship of costs to time is not one-for-one. 
For example, it is possible to have a negative SV variance when the project is actually 
ahead on the critical path. This would occur when delays in noncritical activities out-
weigh progress on the critical path. Therefore, it is important to remember, SV is in 
dollars and is not an accurate measure of time; however, it is a fairly good indicator of 
the status of the whole project in terms of being ahead or behind schedule after the 
project is over 20 percent complete. Only the project network, or tracking Gantt chart, 
and actual work completed can give an accurate assessment of schedule performance 
down to the work package level.
 
By studying the separate status reports for periods 5 through 7, you can see the 
project will be over budget and behind schedule. By period 7 Tasks A, B, and D are 
finished, but all are over budget—negative 10, 5, and 25. Task C (Memory/Software) 
is 90 percent complete. Task E is late and hasn’t started because Task C is not yet com-
pleted. The result is that, at the end of period 7, the digital camera project is over bud-
get $70,000, with a schedule budget over $40,000.
 
Figure 13.9 shows the graphed results of all the status reports through period 7. 
This graph represents the data from Table 13.2. The cumulative actual costs (AC) to 
40
360
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
1
0
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
PV
EV
AC
Today
SV = −40
CV = −70
Time periods
Dollars
FIGURE 13.9
Digital Camera 
Prototype Summary 
Graph ($000) 
www.ebook3000.com

474  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
date and the earned value budgeted costs to date (EV) are plotted against the original 
project baseline (PV). The cumulative AC to date is $230; the cumulative EV to date 
is $160. Given these cumulative values, the cost variance (CV = EV − AC) is negative 
$70 (160 − 230 = −70). The schedule variance (SV = EV − PV) is negative $40 (160 − 
200 = −40). Again, recall that only the project network or tracking Gantt chart can 
give an accurate assessment of schedule performance down to the work package level.
 
A tracking Gantt bar chart for the Digital Camera Prototype is shown in Figure 13.10. 
From this figure you can see Task C (Memory/Software), which had an original 
duration of 4 time units, now is expected to require 6 time units. This delay of 2 time 
units for Task C will also delay Tasks E and F two time units and result in the project 
being late 2 time periods.
 
Figure 13.11 shows an oversimplified project rollup at the end of period 7. The rol-
lup is by deliverables and organization units. For example, the Memory/Software 
deliverable has an SV of $ −10 and a CV of −30. The responsible “Storage” depart-
ment should have an explanation for these variances. Similarly, the assembly depart-
ment, which is responsible for the Assemble and Test deliverables, has an SV of $ −30 
due to the delay of Task C (see Figure 13.10). Most deliverables look unfavorable on 
schedule and cost variance.
 
In more complex projects, the crosstabs of cost accounts by deliverables and orga-
nization units can be very revealing and more profound. This example contains the 
basics for developing a status report, baseline development, and measuring schedule 
and cost variance. In our example, performance analysis had only one level above the 
cost account level. Because all data are derived from the detailed database, it is rela-
tively easy to determine progress status at all levels of the work and organization 
breakdown structures. Fortunately, this same current database can provide additional 
views of the current status of the project and forecast costs at the completion of the 
project. Approaches for deriving additional information from the database are pre-
sented next.
 
To the uninitiated, a caveat is in order. In practice budgets may not be expressed in 
total dollars for an activity. Frequently, budgets are time-phased for materials and labor 
separately for more effective control over costs. Another common approach used in 
practice is to use labor hours in place of dollars in the earned value system. Later, 
A
F
E
D
C
B
Design Spec's
Test
Assemble
Zoom System
Memory/Software
Shell & Power
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
14
13
12
11
Today
Legend
Baseline
duration
Actual
completed
Slack
Remaining
duration
FIGURE 13.10 
Digital Camera 
Project-Tracking 
Gantt Chart Showing 
Status—Through 
Period 7 

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  475
labor hours are converted to dollars. The use of labor hours in the earned value system 
is the modus operandi for most construction work. Labor hours are easy to understand 
and are often the way many time and cost estimates are developed. Most earned value 
software easily accommodates the use of labor hours for development of cost 
estimates.
13.6 Indexes to Monitor Progress
Practitioners sometimes prefer to use schedule and cost indexes over the absolute val-
ues of SV and CV, because indexes can be considered efficiency ratios. Graphed 
indexes over the project life cycle can be very illuminating and useful. The trends are 
easily identified for deliverables and the whole project.
 
Indexes are typically used at the cost account level and above. In practice, the data-
base is also used to develop indexes that allow the project manager and customer to 
view progress from several angles. An index of 1.00 (100 percent) indicates progress 
is as planned. An index greater than 1.00 shows progress is better than expected. An 
Calculate and interpret 
performance and 
 percent indexes.
13-5
LO
SV = –40
CV = –70
OBS
SV = –40
CV = –70
Digital Camera Prototype:
Design/Build Project
CA 1–1
SV = 20 – 20 =     0
CV = 20 – 30 = –10
CA 2–2
SV = 15 – 15 =   0
CV = 15 – 20 = –5
CA 3–3
SV = 90 – 100 = –10
CV = 90 – 120 = –30
CA 4–4
SV = 35 – 35 =     0
CV = 35 – 60 = –25
CA 5–5
SV = 0 – 30 = –30
CV = 0 – 0   =     0
CA 6–5
SV = 0 – 0 = 0
CV = 0 – 0 = 0
Design
Speciﬁcations
SV =     0
CV = –10
Shell
& Power
SV =   0
CV = –5
Memory/
Software
SV = –10
CV = –30
Zoom
System
SV =     0
CV = –25
Assemble
SV = –30
CV =     0
Test
SV = 0
CV = 0
Design
SV =     0
CV = –10
Assembly
SV = –30
CV =     0
Zoom
SV =     0
CV = –25
Storage
SV = –10
CV = –30
Shell
SV =   0
CV = –5
FIGURE 13.11 Project Rollup End Period 7 ($000) 
www.ebook3000.com

476  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
index less than 1.00 suggests progress is poorer than planned and deserves attention. 
Table 13.3 presents the interpretation of the indexes.
Performance Indexes
There are two indexes of performance efficiency. The first index measures cost effi-
ciency of the work accomplished to date: (Data from Table 13.2)
Cost performance index (CPI) = EV/AC = 160/230 = .696 or .70
The CPI of .696 shows that $.70 worth of work planned to date has been completed for 
each $1.00 actually spent—an unfavorable situation indeed. The CPI is the most 
accepted and used index. It has been tested over time and found to be the most accu-
rate, reliable, and stable. For example, U.S. government studies have shown that the 
CPI is stable from the 20 percent completion point regardless of contract type, pro-
gram, or service. The CPI can provide an “early warning signal” as to cost overruns so 
that adjustments can be made to the budget or scope of a project.2
 
The second index is a measure of scheduling efficiency to date:
Scheduling performance index (SPI) = EV/PV = 160/200 = .80
The schedule index indicates $.80 worth of work has been accomplished for each $1.00 
worth of scheduled work to date. Figure 13.12 shows the indexes plotted for our exam-
ple project through period 7. This figure is another example of graphs used in practice.
00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
.10
.20
.30
.40
.50
.60
.70
.80
SPI = .80
CPI = .70
PCIB = .50
.90
1.00
1.20
1.10
Time periods
Index
FIGURE 13.12
Indexes Periods 1–7
2 Cited by Q. W. Fleming and J. M. Koppleman, Earned Value Project Management (Newton Square, PA: Project Manage-
ment Institute, 2010), pp. 39–42.
Index 
Cost (CPI) 
Schedule (SPI)
>1.00 
Under cost 
Ahead of schedule
=1.00 
On cost 
On schedule
<1.00 
Over cost 
Behind schedule
TABLE 13.3
Interpretation of 
Indexes

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  477
Project Percent Complete Indexes
Two project percent complete indexes are used, depending on your judgment of which 
one is most representative of your project. The first index assumes the original budget 
of work complete is the most reliable information to measure project percent complete. 
The second index assumes the actual costs-to-date and expected cost at completion are 
the most reliable for measuring project percent complete. These indexes compare the 
to-date progress to the end of the project. The implications underlying use of these 
indexes are that conditions will not change, no improvement or action will be taken, 
and the information in the database is accurate. The first index looks at percent com-
plete in terms of budget amounts:
Percent complete index budgeted costs
 PCIB = EV/BAC = 160/320 = .50 (50%)
This PCIB indicates the work accomplished represents 50 percent of the total budgeted 
(BAC) dollars to date. Observe that this calculation does not include actual costs 
incurred. Because actual dollars spent do not guarantee project progress, this index is 
favored by many project managers when there is a high level of confidence in the 
original budget estimates.
 
The second index views percent complete in terms of actual dollars spent to accom-
plish the work to date and the actual expected dollars for the completed project (EAC). 
For example, at the end of period 7 the staff re-estimates that the EAC will be 575 
instead of 320. The application of this view is written as
Percent complete index actual costs 
PCIC = AC/EAC = 230/575 = .40 (40%)
Some managers favor this index because it contains actual and revised estimates that 
include newer, more complete information.
 
These two views of percent complete present alternative views of the “real” percent 
complete. These percents may be quite different as shown above. (Note: The PCIC 
index was not plotted in Figure 13.12. The new figures for EAC would be derived each 
period by estimators in the field.)
 
A third percent index that is popular in the construction industry reflects the amount 
of Management Reserve that has been absorbed by cost over-runs. Remember Man-
agement Reserve are funds set aside to cover unforeseen events (see Chapter 7). Let’s 
assume that $40 was reserved for Digital Camera Project:
Management Reserve index MRI = CV/MR = The percentage of 140/40 = 3.50 (350%!)
Clearly this project is in trouble when it comes to cost and changes in either the scope 
and/or budget are required. Many managers assess cost overruns in terms of Manage-
ment Reserve rather than simply cost variance since it reflects how much one can 
afford to spend on the project.
Software for Project Cost/Schedule Systems
Software developers have created sophisticated schedule/cost systems for projects that 
track and report budget, actual, earned, committed, and index values. These values can 
be labor hours, materials, and/or dollars. This information supports cost and schedule 
progress, performance measurements, and cash flow management. Recall from Chap-
ter 5 that budget, actual, and committed dollars usually run in different time frames 
www.ebook3000.com

478  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
(see Figure 5.6). A typical computer-generated status report includes the following 
information outputs:
1. Schedule variance (EV − PV) by cost account and WBS and OBS.
2. Cost variance (EV − AC) by cost account and WBS and OBS.
3. Indexes—total percent complete and performance index.
4. Cumulative actual total cost to date (AC).
5. Expected costs at completion (EAC).
6. Paid and unpaid commitments.
 
The variety of software packages, with their features and constant updating, is too 
extensive for inclusion in this text. Software developers and vendors have done a superb 
job of providing software to meet the information needs of most project managers. Dif-
ferences among software in the last decade have centered on improving “friendliness” 
and output that is clear and easy to understand. Anyone who understands the concepts 
and tools presented in Chapters 4, 5, 6, 8, and 13 should have little trouble understanding 
the output of any of the popular project management software packages. Appendix 13.2 
details how to obtain earned value information from Microsoft Project software.
Additional Earned Value Rules
Although the percent complete rule is the most-used method of assigning budgets to 
baselines and for cost control, there are additional rules that are very useful for reduc-
ing the overhead costs of collecting detailed data on percent complete of individual 
work packages. (An additional advantage of these rules, of course, is that they remove 
the often subjective judgments of the contractors or estimators as to how much work 
has actually been completed.) The first two rules are typically used for short-duration 
activities and/or small-cost activities. The third rule uses gates before the total bud-
geted value of an activity can be claimed.
∙ 0/100 rule. This rule assumes credit is earned for having performed the work once 
it is completed. Hence, 100 percent of the budget is earned when the work package 
is completed. This rule is used for work packages having very short durations.
∙ 50/50 rule. This approach allows 50 percent of the value of the work package bud-
get to be earned when it is started and 50 percent to be earned when the package is 
completed. This rule is popular for work packages of short duration and small total 
costs.
∙ Percent complete with weighted monitoring gates. This more recent rule uses 
subjective estimated percent complete in combination with hard, tangible monitor-
ing points. This method works well on long-duration activities that can be broken 
into short, discrete work packages of no more than one or two report periods. These 
discrete packages limit the subjective estimated values. For example, assume a 
long-duration activity with a total budget of $500. The activity is cut into three 
sequentially discrete packages with monitoring gates representing 30, 50, and  
100 percent of the total budget. The earned amount at each monitoring gate cannot 
exceed $150, $250, and $500. These hard monitoring points serve as a check on 
overly optimistic estimates.
 
Notice the only information needed for the first two rules is that the work package 
has started and the package has been completed. For those who wish to explore the 
application of these two rules, or who are studying for certification, Appendix 13.1 
presents two exercises that apply these rules along with the percent complete rule.

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  479
 
The third rule is frequently used to authorize progress payments to contractors. This 
rule supports careful tracking and control of payments; it discourages payment to con-
tractors for work not yet completed.
13.7 Forecasting Final Project Cost
There are basically two methods used to revise estimates of future project costs. In 
many cases both methods are used on specific segments of the project. The result is 
confusion of terms in texts, in software, and among practitioners in the field. We have 
chosen to note the differences between the methods.
 
The first method allows experts in the field to change original baseline durations 
and costs because new information tells them the original estimates are not accurate. 
We have used EACre to represent revisions made by experts and practitioners associ-
ated with the project. The revisions from project experts are almost always used on 
smaller projects.
 
The equation for calculating revised estimated cost at completion (EACre) is as follows:
EACre = AC + ETCre
where 
EACre = revised estimated cost at completion.
AC = cumulative actual cost of work completed to date.
ETCre = revised estimated cost to complete remaining work.
A second method is used in large projects where the original budget is reliable. This 
method uses the actual costs to date plus an efficiency index (CPI = EV/AC) applied 
to the remaining project work. When the estimate for completion uses the CPI as the 
basis for forecasting cost at completion, we use the acronym EACf. The equation is 
presented here.
 
The equation for this forecasting model (EACf) is as follows:
EACf = ETC + AC
ETC = Work remaining
CPI
 = BAC −EV
EV/AC
where 
EACf = forecasted total cost at completion.
 
ETC = estimated cost to complete remaining work.
 
AC = cumulative actual cost of work completed to date.
 
CPI = cumulative cost index to date.
 
BAC = total budget of the baseline.
 
EV = cumulative budgeted cost of work completed to date.
The following information is available from our earlier example; the estimate cost at 
completion (EACf) is computed as follows:
Total baseline budget (BAC) for the project 
$320
Cumulative earned value (EV) to date 
$160
Cumulative actual cost (AC) to date 
$230
EACf
 = 320 −160
160/230
+ 230 = 160
.7 + 230 = 229 + 230
 
EACf = 459
Forecast final project 
cost.
13-6
LO
www.ebook3000.com

480  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
The final project projected cost forecast is $459,000 versus $320,000 originally planned.
 
Another popular index is the To Complete Performance Index (TCPI), which is 
useful as a supplement to the estimate at complete (EACf) computation. This ratio mea-
sures the amount of value each remaining dollar in the budget must earn to stay within 
the budget. The index is computed for the Digital Camera project at the end of period 7.
TCPI = BAC −EV
BAC −AC
 = 320 −160
320 −230 = 160
90 = 1.78
The index of 1.78 indicates that each remaining dollar in the budget must earn $1.78 in 
value. There is more work to be done than there is budget left. Clearly, it would be 
tough to increase productivity that much to make budget. The work to be done will 
have to be reduced or you will have to accept running over budget. If the TCPI is less 
than 1.00, you should be able to complete the project without using all of the remain-
ing budget. A ratio of less than 1.00 opens the possibility of other opportunities such 
as improving quality, increasing profit, or expanding scope.
 
Research data indicate that on large projects that are more than 15 percent complete, 
the model performs well with an error of less than 10 percent (Fleming and Koppleman, 
2010; Christensen, 1998). This model can also be used for WBS and OBS cost accounts 
that have been used to forecast remaining and total costs. It is important to note that this 
model assumes conditions will not change, the cost database is reliable, EV and AC are 
cumulative, and past project progress is representative of future progress. This objective 
forecast represents a good starting point or benchmark that management can use to com-
pare other forecasts that include other conditions and subjective judgments.
 
Exhibit 13.1 presents an abridged monthly status report similar to one used by a 
project organization. The form is used for all projects in their project portfolio. (Note 
that the schedule variance of −$22,176 does not translate directly to days. The 25 days 
were derived from the network schedule.)
 
Another summary report is shown in the Snapshot from Practice 13.2: Trojan 
Decommissioning Project. Compare the differences in format.
Portland General Electric Company 
has been charged with decommission-
ing the Trojan Nuclear Plant. This is a 
long and complex project extending 
over two decades. The first segment 
of the project of moving the used reactors to a storage 
location is complete and was awarded the Project of 
the Year, 2000, by the Project Management Institute 
(PMI). The remainder of the project—decontamination 
of the remaining structures and waste—is ongoing.
 
Exhibit 13.2 shows their earned value status report. 
This report measures schedule and cost performance 
for monitoring the project. The report also serves as a 
basis for funding for rate filings with the Public Utilities 
Commission.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 3 . 2
Trojan Decommissioning Project
© Don Ryan/AP Photo

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  481
EXHIBIT 13.1
Monthly Status 
Report
Project number: 163
Project manager: Connor Gage
Project priority now: 4
Status as of: April 1 
Earned value figures:
PV
EV
AC
SV
CV
BAC
588,240
566,064
596,800
−22,176
−30,736
1,051,200
EAC
VAC
EACf
CPI
PCIB
PCIC
1,090,640
−39,440
1,107,469
.95
.538
.547
Project description: A computer-controlled conveyor belt that will move and position items on the 
belt with accuracy of less than one millimeter.
Status summary: The project is approximately 25 days behind schedule. The project has a cost vari-
ance of ($30,736).
Explanations: The schedule variance has moved from noncritical activities to those on the critical 
path. Integration first phase, scheduled to start 3/26, is now expected to start 4/19, which means it is 
approximately 25 days behind schedule. This delay is traced to the loss of the second design team 
which made it impossible to start utilities documentation on 2/27 as planned. This loss illustrates the 
effect of losing valuable resources on the project. The cost variance to date is largely due to a design 
change that cost $21,000.
Major changes since last report: The major change was loss of one design team to the project.
Total cost of approved design changes: $21,000. Most of this amount is attributed to the improved 
design of the serial I/O drivers.
Projected cost at completion: EACf is estimated to be $1,107,469. This represents an overrun of 
$56,269, given a CPI of .95. The CPI of .95 causes the forecast to be greater than the VAC −$39,440.
Risk watch: Nothing suggests the risk level of any segments has changed.
13.8 Other Control Issues
Technical Performance Measurement
Measuring technical performance is as important as measuring schedule and cost per-
formance. Although technical performance is often assumed, the opposite can be true. 
The ramifications of poor technical performance frequently are more profound—
something works or it doesn’t if technical specifications are not adhered to.
 
Assessing technical performance of a system, facility, or product is often accom-
plished by examining the documents found in the scope statement and/or work pack-
age documentation. These documents should specify criteria and tolerance limits 
against which performance can be measured. For example, the technical performance 
of a software project suffered because the feature of “drag and drop” was deleted in the 
final product. Conversely, the prototype of an experimental car exceeded the miles per 
gallon technical specification and, thus, its technical performance. Frequently tests are 
conducted on different performance dimensions. These tests become an integral part 
of the project schedule.
 
It is very difficult to specify how to measure technical performance because it 
depends on the nature of the project. Suffice it to say, measuring technical perfor-
mance must be done. Technical performance is frequently where quality control pro-
cesses are needed and used. Project managers must be creative in finding ways to 
control this very important area.
Identify and manage 
scope creep.
13-7
LO
www.ebook3000.com

482  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Cost/Budget Performance 
Decommissioning Cumulative Costs 
Nominal Year Dollars
Portland General Electric Co.-Trojan Nuclear Plant 
Report Run: 23-Jan-01 
Report Number: DECT005 
Page: 
1 of 1
 
 
Year-to-Date 
YTD 
Description 
PV 
EV 
AC 
PV 
EV 
AC 
EV-AC 
PV 
EV/AC 
EV/PV 
ISFSI 
193,014 
182,573 
162,579 
3,655,677 
3,586,411 
3,263,995 
322,416 
3,655,677 
1.10 
0.98
RVAIR 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
399 
(399) 
0 
0.00 
0.00
Equip removal—AB/FB 
79,083 
79,649 
73,899 
497,197 
504,975 
308,461 
196,514 
497,197 
1.64 
1.02
Equip removal—other 
0 
0 
0 
0 
(36,822) 
519 
(37,341) 
0 
0.00 
0.00
Embed piping—AB/FB 
3,884 
0 
2,118 
532,275 
540,232 
515,235 
24,997 
532,275 
1.05 
1.01
Embed piping—other 
0 
0 
3,439 
175,401 
210,875 
79,235 
131,640 
175,401 
2.66 
1.20
Surface decon—AB/FB 
29,935 
23,274 
21,456 
1,266,685 
1,293,315 
1,171,712 
121,603 
1,266,665 
1.10 
1.02
Surface decon—other 
2,875 
2 
11,005 
308,085 
199,853 
251,265 
(51,412) 
308,085 
0.80 
0.65
Surface decon—containment 
680,502 
435,657 
474,427 
5,271,889 
4,950,528 
4,823,338 
127,190 
5,271,889 
1.03 
0.94
Radwaste disposal 
884,873 
453,032 
(28,675) 
10,680,118 
8,276,616 
10,807,916 
(2,531,300) 
10,880,118 
0.77 
0.77
Final survey 
58,238 
57,985 
27,091 
780,990 
780,990 
700,942 
80,048 
780,990 
1.11 
1.00
Nonradiological areas 
92,837 
91,956 
58,538 
2,471,281 
2,376,123 
834,643 
1,541,480 
2,471,281 
2.85 
0.96
Staffing 
714,806 
714,509 
468,858 
9,947,775 
9,947,775 
8,241,383 
1,706,392 
9,947,775 
1.21 
1.00
ISFSI—Long-term ops 
85,026 
85,028 
19,173 
2,004,398 
2,004,398 
337,206 
1,667,192 
2,004,398 
5.94 
1.00
Labor loadings 
258,289 
258,289 
240,229 
3,216,194 
3,216,194 
2,755,604 
460,590 
3,216,194 
1.17 
1.00
Material loadings 
17,910 
17,910 
(95,128) 
211,454 
211,454 
136,973 
74,481 
211,454 
1.54 
1.00
Corporate governance 
153,689 
228,499 
228,521 
1,814,523 
1,814,523 
1,814,520 
3 
1,814,523 
1.00 
1.00
Undistributable costs 
431,840 
401,720 
242,724 
5,541,679 
5,575,879 
4,007,732 
1,567,947 
5,541,679 
1.39 
1.01
Total decommissioning 
3,688,481 
3,008,081 
1,905,084 
48,375,399 
45,453,119 
40,051,079 
5,402,040 
48,375,399 
1.13 
0.94 
Total (less ISFSI and RVAIR) 
3,493,467 
2,845,508 
1,743,485 
44,719,720 
41,886,710 
36,788,680 
5,080,024 
44,719,720 
1.14 
0.94
Variance 
 
CPI 
SPI
The SPI (0.94) suggests the project schedule is falling behind. Resolving issues with a major vendor and solutions for technical problems should solve these delay problems. The CPI (1.14) for the project is positive. Some of this 
good cost performance is attributed to partnering and incentive arrangements with vendors and labor unions.
Interview with Michael B. Lackey, general manager, Trojan, PGE.
EXHIBIT 13.2

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  483
Scope Creep
Large changes in scope are easily identified. It is the “minor refinements” that eventu-
ally build to be major scope changes that can cause problems. These small refinements 
are known in the field as scope creep. For example, the customer of a software devel-
oper requested small changes in the development of a custom accounting software 
package. After several minor refinements, it became apparent the changes represented 
a significant enlargement of the original project scope. The result was an unhappy 
customer and a development firm that lost money and reputation.
 
Although scope changes are usually viewed negatively, there are situations when 
scope changes result in positive rewards. Scope changes can represent significant 
opportunities.3 In product development environments, adding a small feature to a prod-
uct can result in a huge competitive advantage. A small change in the production pro-
cess may get the product to market one month early or reduce product cost.
 
Scope creep is common early in projects—especially in new-product development 
projects. Customer requirements for additional features, new technology, poor design 
assumptions, etc., all manifest pressures for scope changes. Frequently these changes 
are small and go unnoticed until time delays or cost overruns are observed. Scope 
creep affects the organization, project team, and project suppliers. Scope changes alter 
the organization’s cash flow requirements in the form of fewer or additional resources, 
which may also affect other projects. Frequent changes eventually wear down team 
motivation and cohesiveness. Clear team goals are altered, become less focused, and 
cease being the focal point for team action. Starting over again is annoying and demor-
alizing to the project team because it disrupts project rhythm and lowers productivity. 
Project suppliers resent frequent changes because they represent higher costs and have 
the same effect on their team as on the project team.
 
The key to managing scope creep is change management. One project manager of 
an architectural firm related that scope creep was the biggest risk his firm faced in 
projects. The best defense against scope creep is a well-defined scope statement. Poor 
scope statements are one of the major causes of scope creep.
 
A second defense against scope creep is stating what the project is not, which can 
avoid misinterpretations later. (Chapter 7 discusses the process. See Figure 7.9 to 
review key variables to document in project changes.) First, the original baseline must 
be well defined and agreed upon with the project customer. Before the project begins, 
it is imperative that clear procedures be in place for authorizing and documenting 
scope changes by the customer or project team. If a scope change is necessary, the 
impact on the baseline should be clearly documented—for example, cost, time, depen-
dencies, specifications, responsibilities, etc. Finally, the scope change must be quickly 
added to the original baseline to reflect the change in budget and schedule; these 
changes and their impacts need to be communicated to all project stakeholders.
Baseline Changes
Changes during the life cycle of projects are inevitable and will occur. Some changes 
can be very beneficial to project outcomes; changes having a negative impact are the 
ones we wish to avoid. Careful project definition can minimize the need for changes. 
The price for poor project definition can be changes that result in cost overruns, late 
schedules, low morale, and loss of control. Change comes from external sources or 
from within. Externally, for example, the customer may request changes that were not 
3 See S. Keifer, “Scope Creep … Not Necessarily a Bad Thing,” PM Network, vol. 10, no. 5 (1996), pp. 33–35.
www.ebook3000.com

484  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
included in the original scope statement and that will require significant changes to 
the project and thus to the baseline. Or the government may render requirements that 
were not a part of the original plan and that require a revision of the project scope. 
Internally, stakeholders may identify unforeseen problems or improvements that 
change the scope of the project. In rare cases scope changes can come from several 
sources. For example, the Denver International Airport automatic baggage handling 
system was an afterthought supported by several project stakeholders that included 
the Denver city government, consultants, and at least one airline customer. The addi-
tional $2 billion in costs were staggering, and the airport opening was delayed  
16 months. If this automatic baggage scope change had been in the original plan, costs 
would have been only a fraction of the overrun costs, and delays would have been 
reduced significantly. Any changes in scope or the baseline should be recorded by the 
change management system that was set in place during risk control planning. (See 
Chapter 7.)
 
Generally, project managers monitor scope changes very carefully. They should 
allow scope changes only if it is clear that the project will fail without the change, the 
project will be improved significantly with the change, or the customer wants it and will 
pay for it. This statement is an exaggeration, but it sets the tone for approaching baseline 
changes. The effect of the change on the scope and baseline should be accepted and 
signed off by the project customer. Figure 13.13 depicts the cost impact of a scope 
change on the baseline at a point in time—“today.” Line A represents a scope change 
that results in an increase in cost. Line B represents a scope change that decreases cost. 
Quickly recording scope changes to the baseline keeps the computed earned values 
valid. Failure to do so results in misleading cost and schedule variances.
 
Care should be taken to not use baseline changes to disguise poor performance on 
past or current work. A common signal of this type of baseline change is a constantly 
revised baseline that seems to match results. Practitioners call this a “rubber baseline” 
because it stretches to match results. Most changes will not result in serious scope 
changes and should be absorbed as positive or negative variances. Retroactive changes 
for work already accomplished should not be allowed. Transfer of money among cost 
FIGURE 13.13
Scope Changes to a 
Baseline
Cost
Time
Today
Original
baseline
New
baseline B
cost
decrease
New
baseline A
cost
increase

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  485
A consultant for the U.S. Forest Ser-
vice suggested the use of earned 
value to monitor the 50-plus timber 
sale projects taking place concurrently 
in the district. As projects were com-
pleted, new ones were started. Earned value was tried 
for approximately nine months. After a nine-month trial, 
the process was to be reviewed by a task force. The 
task force concluded the earned value system provided 
good information for monitoring and forecasting proj-
ect progress; however, the costs and problems of col-
lecting timely percent complete data were 
unacceptable because there were no funds available to 
collect such data.
 
The level of detail dilemma was discussed, but no 
suggestions satisfied the problem. The discussion rec-
ognized that too little data fail to offer good control, 
while excessive reporting requires paperwork and 
people, which are costly. The task force concluded 
progress and performance could be measured using a 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 3 . 3
A Pseudo-Earned Value Percent 
Complete Approach
pseudo-version of percent complete while not giving 
up much accuracy for the total project. This modified 
approach to percent complete required that very large 
work packages (about 3 to 5 percent of all work pack-
ages in a project) be divided into smaller work pack-
ages for closer control and identification of problems 
sooner. It was decided work packages of about a 
week’s duration would be ideal. The pseudo-version 
required only a telephone call and “yes/no” answers to 
one of the following questions to assign percent 
complete: 
Has work on the work package started? No = 0%
Working on the package? 
Yes = 50%
Is the work package completed? 
Yes = 100%
Data for the pseudo-earned value percent complete 
system was collected for all 50-plus projects by an 
intern working fewer than eight hours each week.
accounts should not be allowed after the work is complete. Unforeseen changes can be 
handled through the contingency reserve. The project manager typically makes this 
decision. In some large projects, a partnering “change review team,” made up of mem-
bers of the project and customer teams, makes all decisions on project changes.
The Costs and Problems of Data Acquisition
Data acquisition is time consuming and costly. The Snapshot from Practice 13.3: A 
Pseudo-Earned Value Percent Complete Approach captures some of the frequent 
issues surrounding resistance to data collection of percent complete for earned value 
systems. Similar pseudo-percent complete systems have been used by others. Such 
pseudo-percent complete approaches appear to work well in multiproject environments 
that include several small and medium-sized projects. Assuming a one-week reporting 
period, care needs to be taken to develop work packages with a duration of about one 
week long so problems are identified quickly. For large projects, there is no substitute 
for using a percent complete system that depends on data collected through observa-
tion at clearly defined monitoring points.
 
In some cases data exist but are not sent to the stakeholders who need information 
relating to project progress. Clearly, if the information does not reach the right people 
in a timely manner, you can expect serious problems. Your communication plan devel-
oped in the project planning stage can greatly mitigate this problem by mapping out 
the flow of information and keeping stakeholders informed on all aspects of project 
progress and issues. See Figure 13.14 for an internal communication plan for a WiFi 
Project. The information developed in this chapter contributes significant data to sup-
port your communication plan and ensures correct dissemination of the data.
www.ebook3000.com

486  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
FIGURE 13.14
Conference Center 
WiFi Project 
Communication Plan
What Information 
When? 
Mode? 
Responsible? 
Recipient?
Milestone report 
Bimonthly 
E-mail 
Project office 
Senior management
Time/cost report 
Weekly 
E-mail 
Project office 
Staff and customer
Risk report 
Weekly 
E-mail 
Project office 
Staff and customer
Issues 
Weekly 
E-mail 
Anyone 
Staff and customer
Team meeting times 
Weekly 
Meeting 
Project manager 
Staff and customer
Outsourcing performance 
Bimonthly 
Meeting 
Project manager 
Project office, staff, 
 
 
 
 
and customer
Change requests 
Anytime 
Document 
Project manager,  
Project office, staff, 
 
 
 
customer, design 
and customer
Stage gate decisions  
Monthly 
Meeting 
Project office 
Senior management
Summary
The best information system does not result in good control. Control requires the proj-
ect manager to use information to steer the project through rough waters. Control and 
Gantt charts are useful vehicles for monitoring time performance. The cost/schedule 
system allows the manager to have a positive influence on cost and schedule in a 
timely manner. The ability to influence cost decreases with time; therefore, timely 
reports identifying adverse cost trends can greatly assist the project manager in getting 
back on budget and schedule. The integrated cost/schedule model provides the project 
manager and other stakeholders with a snapshot of the current and future status of the 
project. The benefits of the cost/schedule model are as follows:
1. Measures accomplishments against plan and deliverables.
2. Provides a method for tracking directly to a problem work package and organization 
unit responsible.
3. Alerts all stakeholders to early identification of problems, and allows for quick, 
proactive corrective action.
4. Improves communication because all stakeholders are using the same database.
5. Keeps customer informed of progress, and encourages customer confidence that the 
money spent is resulting in the expected progress.
6. Provides for accountability over individual portions of the overall budget for each 
organizational unit.
 
With your information system in place, you need to use your communication plan 
to keep stakeholders informed so timely decisions can be made to ensure the project is 
managed effectively.
Key Terms
Control chart, 463
Cost performance index 
(CPI), 476
Cost variance (CV), 466
Earned value (EV), 462
Forecasted total  
cost at completion  
(EACf), 479
Management Reserve 
Index (MRI), 477
Percent complete index 
actual costs (PCIC), 477
Percent complete index 
budgeted costs  
(PCIB), 477

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  487
Revised estimated  
cost at completion 
(EACre), 479
Schedule variance  
(SV), 466
Scheduling performance 
index (SPI), 476
Scope creep, 483
To complete performance 
index (TCPI), 480
Tracking Gantt, 462
Variance at completion 
(VAC), 468
1. How does a tracking Gantt chart help communicate project progress?
2. How does earned value give a clearer picture of project schedule and cost status 
than a simple plan versus actual system?
3. Schedule variance (SV) is in dollars and does not directly represent time. Why is it 
still useful?
4. How would a project manager use the CPI?
5. What are the differences between BAC and EAC?
6. Why is it important for project managers to resist changes to the project baseline? 
Under what conditions would a project manager make changes to a baseline? When 
would a project manager not allow changes to a baseline?
1. In month 9 the following project information is available: actual cost is $2,000, 
earned value is $2,100, and planned cost is $2,400. Compute the SV and CV for the 
project.
2. On day 51 a project has an earned value of $600, an actual cost of $650, and a 
planned cost of $560. Compute the SV, CV, and CPI for the project. What is your 
assessment of the project on day 51?
3. Given the project network and baseline information below, complete the form to 
develop a status report for the project at the end of period 4 and the end of period 8. 
From the data you have collected and computed for periods 4 and 8, what informa-
tion are you prepared to tell the customer about the status of the project at the end 
of period 8?
F
12
0
15
0
12
15
3
A
0
0
2
0
2
2
2
D
8
0
12
0
8
12
4
E
7
2
10
2
9
12
3
C
2
2
7
2
4
9
5
B
2
0
8
0
2
8
6
LEGEND
ES
ID
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
Review 
Questions
Exercises
www.ebook3000.com

488  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
ES
LF
SL
Project baseline (PV)
(in $)
Budget
(PV)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
12
9
11
13
14
Task
DUR
0
0
2
2
0
6
2
2
200 400
600
500
100
400 400 400 400
300
5
8
0
4
7
2
3
12
2
8
9
12
12
15
0
400
200
200
2400
200
200
200
600
600
1500
1600
900
300
200
400
600
200 200 400 1000 700
700 500 900 800 600 400 400 200
100
200 400 800 1800 2500 3200 3700 4600 5400 6000 6400 6800 7000 7100
300
200
100
300
7400
3
Period PV total
Cumulative PV total
A
B
C
D
E
F
0
15
End of Period 8
Task 
Actual % Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
—— 
  300 
 400 
—— 
——
B 
Finished 
—— 
2200 
2400 
—— 
——
C 
Finished 
—— 
1500 
1500 
—— 
——
D 
25% 
—— 
  300 
     0 
—— 
——
E 
33% 
—— 
  300 
—— 
—— 
——
F 
0% 
—— 
     0 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
End of Period 4
Task 
Actual % Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
Finished 
—— 
  300 
400 
—— 
——
B 
50% 
—— 
1000 
800 
—— 
——
C 
33% 
—— 
  500 
600 
—— 
——
D 
  0% 
—— 
    0 
—— 
—— 
——
E 
  0% 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  489
4. Given the following project network, baseline, and status information, develop sta-
tus reports for periods 2, 4, 6, 8 and complete the performance indexes table. Cal-
culate the EACf and the VACf. Based on your data, what is your assessment of the 
current status of the project? At completion?
LEGEND
ES
ID
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
F
10
0
0
12
10
12
2
A
0
1
4
1
1
5
4
C
4
2
8
2
6
10
4
E
5
2
8
2
7
10
3
D
5
0
10
0
5
10
5
B
0
0
5
0
0
5
5
Budget
($000)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
9
11
ID
40
10
10
32
48
18
28
40
18
14
18
14
20
26
22
26
2
6
20
20
20
20
18
32
50
64
84
110
132
158
160
166
186
206
Total
Cumulative
A
B
C
D
E
F
0
206
10
10
4
8
4
8
12
12
12
12
6
2
2
8
8
12
2
6
8
12
www.ebook3000.com

490  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Status Report: Ending Period 2 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
75% 
—— 
25 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
50% 
—— 
12 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
37 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 4 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
35 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
100% 
—— 
24 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
59 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 6 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
35 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
100% 
—— 
24 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
  75% 
—— 
24 
—— 
—— 
——
D 
    0% 
—— 
  0 
—— 
—— 
——
E 
  50% 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
93 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 8 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
35 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
100% 
—— 
24 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
100% 
—— 
32 
—— 
—— 
——
D 
  33% 
—— 
20 
—— 
—— 
——
E 
100% 
—— 
20 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
131 
—— 
—— 
——
Performance Indexes Summary
Period 
EV 
AC 
PV 
SPI 
CPI 
PCI-B
2 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
8 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
EACf = ____________ 
 
VACf = ____________

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  491
5. Given the following project network, baseline, and status information, develop sta-
tus reports for periods 1–4 and complete the project summary graph (or a similar 
one). Report the final SV, CV, CPI, and PCIB. Based on your data, what is your 
assessment of the current status of the project? At completion?
ES
ID
LEGEND
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
7
5
0
0
6
5
6
1
6
2
0
5
0
2
5
3
4
2
1
4
1
3
5
2
3
0
0
2
0
0
2
2
1
0
1
2
1
1
3
2
2
0
0
3
0
0
3
3
5
3
0
5
0
3
5
2
ES
LF
SL
Time period
Baseline budget needs
($ 000)
Schedule information
Total
PV
1
2
3
4
5
6
ACT/
WP
DUR
0
1
1
2
0
0
2
3
0
0
3
2
2
1
4
2
3
0
5
2
2
5
3
3
2
5
5
5
6
0
0
12
15
8
6
10
9
5
6
7
3
1
11
Total PV by period
Cumulative PV by period
30
41
53
60
65
11
19
11
12
7
5
4
3
4
8
7
3
3
4
3
6
3
3
5
4
5
0
www.ebook3000.com

492  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Status Report: Ending Period 1 
($000)
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
50%    
—— 
  6 
4 
—— 
——
2 
40%    
—— 
  8 
3 
—— 
——
3 
25%    
—— 
  3 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
17 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 2 
($000)
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
13 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
80%    
—— 
14 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
75%    
—— 
  8 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
35 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 3 
($000)
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
12 
13 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
80%    
—— 
15 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
50%    
—— 
  4 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
0%   
—— 
  0 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
33.3% 
—— 
  4 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 4 
($000)
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
12 
13 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
15 
18 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
Finished 
—— 
  8 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
30%    
—— 
  3 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
66.7% 
—— 
  8 
—— 
—— 
——
7 
0%  
—— 
  0 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
1
0
0
10
70
60
40
50
20
30
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
PV
Summary Graph
Time periods
Index

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  493
6. The following labor hours data have been collected for a nanotechnology project for 
periods 1 through 6. Compute the SV, CV, SPI, and CPI for each period. Plot the 
EV and the AC on the summary graph provided (or a similar one). Plot the SPI, 
CPI, and PCIB on the index graph provided (or a similar one). What is your assess-
ment of the project at the end of period 6?
ES
ID
Legend
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
7
2
6
4
5
4
4
5
2
2
3
6
1
2
ACT/
WP
DUR
ES
Schedule information
LF
SL
Total
PV
1
2
0
2
0
20
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Baseline budget needs–labor hours (00)
Time period
8
9
10
11
12
13
2
2
2
7
3
24
3
6
2
11
3
30
4
5
2
7
0
25
5
4
4
11
3
16
6
4
7
11
0
20
7
2
11
13
0
10
0
10
10
8
16
5
5
10
3
2
5
10
10
2
2
1
4
4
4
4
5
5
6
4
5
5
10
31
23
16
9
7
14
5
6
10
5
5
4
20
51
74
90
99
106 120 125
131
135
140
145
10
Total PV by period
Cumulative PV by period
14
www.ebook3000.com

494  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Status Report: Ending Period 1
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
50% 
—— 
  500 
1000 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
  500 
1000 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 2
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
1500 
2000 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
1500 
2000 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 3
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
2000 
1500 
2000 
—— 
——
2 
  0% 
—— 
     0 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
10% 
—— 
  200 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
20% 
—— 
  500 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
2200 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 4
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
2000 
1500 
2000 
—— 
——
2 
50% 
—— 
1000 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
30% 
—— 
  800 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
40% 
—— 
1500 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
4800 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 5
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
2000 
1500 
2000 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
2000 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
50% 
—— 
  800 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
60% 
—— 
1500 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
25% 
—— 
  400 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
6200 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 6
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
2000 
1500 
2000 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
2000 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
80% 
—— 
2100 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
80% 
—— 
1800 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
50% 
—— 
  600 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
8000 
—— 
—— 
——

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  495
Period 
SPI 
CPI 
PCIB
1 
—— 
—— 
—— 
SPI = EV/PV
2 
—— 
—— 
—— 
CPI = EV/AC
3 
—— 
—— 
—— 
PCIB = EV/BAC
4 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
—— 
—— 
——
Labor hours
1
0
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
4000
2000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
Time periods
PV
Summary Graph
0
1
0
2
3
4
Time periods
5
6
7
.20
.40
.60
.80
Index
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
1.80
2.00
2.20
Indexes Periods 1–6
www.ebook3000.com

496  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
ES
ID
Legend
EF
SL
SL
LS DUR LF
6
8
2
16
2
10
18
8
8
18
0
22
0
18
22
4
2
4
2
12
2
6
14
8
7
14
0
18
0
14
18
4
1
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
3
4
0
10
0
4
10
6
5
10
0
14
0
10
14
4
4
4
2
8
2
6
10
4
Baseline (PV)
($00)
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
20
18
20
20
4
4
4
4
30
35
35
50
30
10
10
20
20
20
10
10
10
15
10
10
5
10
10
10
10
10
20
10
20
10
4
8
38
73
108 158 188 208 218 238 248
Period PV total
Cumulative PV total
ES
0
4
4
4
10
8
14
18
LF
4
14
10
10
14
18
18
22
SL
0
2
0
2
0
2
0
0
PV
($00)
8
40
30
20
40
60
20
30
DUR
4
8
6
4
4
8
4
4
Task
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
22
Status Report: Ending Period 2 
($00)
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
   AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
50% 
—— 
    4 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
    4 
—— 
—— 
——
7. The following data have been collected for a British health care IT project for two-
week reporting periods 2 through 12. Compute the SV, CV, SPI, and CPI for each 
period. Plot the EV and the AC on the summary graph provided. Plot the SPI, CPI, 
and PCIB on the index graph provided. (You may use your own graphs.) What is 
your assessment of the project at the end of period 12?

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  497
Status Report: Ending Period 4 
($00) 
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
  AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
  10 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
  10 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 6 
($00) 
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
  AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
  10 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
25% 
—— 
  15 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
33% 
—— 
  12 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
0% 
—— 
    0 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
 37 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 8 
($00) 
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
  AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
  10 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
30% 
—— 
  20 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
60% 
—— 
  25 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
0% 
—— 
    0 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
  55 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 10 
($00) 
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
  AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
  10 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
60% 
—— 
  30 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
  40 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
50% 
—— 
  20 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
0% 
—— 
    0 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
30% 
—— 
  24 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
124 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 12 
($00)
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
  AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
 10 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
  50 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
  40 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
Finished 
—— 
  40 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
50% 
—— 
  30 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
50% 
 
  40 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
210 
—— 
—— 
——
Period 
SPI 
CPI 
PCIB
 2 
—— 
—— 
—— 
SPI = EV/PV
 4 
—— 
—— 
—— 
CPI = EV/AC
 6 
—— 
—— 
—— 
PCIB = EV/BAC
 8 
—— 
—— 
——
10 
—— 
—— 
——
12 
—— 
—— 
——
www.ebook3000.com

498  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
2
0
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
40
20
60
80
120
160
100
140
180
200
220
240
260
PV
Summary Graph
Time periods
Dollars
0
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
14
.20
.40
.60
.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
Indexes Periods 2–12
Time periods
Index
8. * Part A. You are in charge of the Aurora Project. Given the following project net-
work, baseline, and status information, develop status reports for periods 1–8 and 
complete the performance indexes table. Calculate the EACf and VACf. Based on 
your data, what is the current status of the project? At completion?
A
0
0
2
0
0
2
2
B
2
0
5
0
2
5
3
C
2
0
5
0
2
5
3
ES
ID
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
H
11
0
13
0
11
13
2
D
5
0
7
0
5
7
2
F
7
1
10
1
8
11
3
E
7
0
9
0
7
9
2
G
9
0
11
0
9
11
2
Legend
* The solution to this exercise can be found in Appendix 1.

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  499
Budget
($000)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
9
11
ID
100
50
50
250
450
200
300
300
50
50
250 200 250
100
100
300
150
300
50
100
50
100
350 550 800 900 1000 1300 1450 1750 1800 1900
Total
Cumulative
2000
100
100
A
B
C
D
E
F
200
100
G
200
H
0
2000
50
100
100
100
200
100
100
50
150
150
50
100
150
150
150
13
12
Status Report: Ending Period 1 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
  25% 
—— 
  50 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
  50 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 2 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
  50% 
—— 
100 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 3 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
     0% 
—— 
    0 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
    0% 
—— 
    0 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 4 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
  60% 
—— 
100 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
  50% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
500 
—— 
—— 
——
www.ebook3000.com

500  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Status Report: Ending Period 5 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
100% 
—— 
400 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
800 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 6 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
—— 
B 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
100% 
—— 
400 
—— 
—— 
——
D 
  75% 
—— 
100 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
900 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 7 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
100% 
—— 
400 
—— 
—— 
——
D 
100% 
—— 
150 
—— 
—— 
——
E 
  20% 
—— 
100 
—— 
—— 
——
F 
    5% 
—— 
  50 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
1100   
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 8 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
B 
100% 
—— 
200 
—— 
—— 
——
C 
100% 
—— 
400 
—— 
—— 
——
D 
100% 
—— 
150 
—— 
—— 
——
E 
100% 
—— 
350 
—— 
—— 
——
F 
  10% 
—— 
100 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
1400   
—— 
—— 
——
Performance Indexes Summary
Period 
EV 
AC 
PV 
SPI 
CPI 
PCI-B
1 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
7 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
8 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
——
EACf = ____________ 
 
VACf = ____________ 

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  501
 
 Part B. You have met with your Aurora project team and they have provided you 
with the following revised estimates for the remainder of the project:
∙ Activity F will be completed at the end of period 12 at a total cost of 500.
∙ Activity G will be completed at the end of period 10 at a total cost of 150.
∙ Activity H will be completed at the end of period 14 at a total cost of 200.
 
 Calculate the EACre and VACre. Based on the revised estimates, what is the expected 
status of the project in terms of cost and schedule? Between the VACf and the VACre, 
which one would you have the greatest confidence in?
 
EACre = _________________ 
 
VACre = _________________
Abramovici, A., “Controlling Scope Creep,” PM Network, vol. 14, no. 1 (January 
2000), pp. 44–48.
Anbari, F. T., “Earned Value Project Management Method and Extensions,” Project 
Management Journal, vol. 34, no. 4 (December 2003), pp. 12–22.
Bowles, M. “Keeping Score,” PMNetwork, May 2011, pp. 50–59.
Brandon, D. M., Jr., “Implementing Earned Value Easily and Effectively,” Project 
Management Journal, vol. 29, no. 3 (June 1998), pp. 11–17.
Christensen, D. S., “The Cost and Benefits of the Earned Value Management  
Process,” Acquisition Review Quarterly, vol. 5 (1998), pp. 373–86.
Christensen, D. S., and S. Heise, “Cost Performance Index Stability,” National  
Contract Management Association Journal, vol. 25 (1993), pp. 7–15.
Fleming, Q., and Joel M. Koppelman, Earned Value Project Management, 4th ed. 
(Newton Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2010).
Kerzner, H., “Strategic Planning for a Project Office,” Project Management Jour-
nal, vol. 34, no. 2 (June 2003), pp. 13–25.
Kim, E. H., W. G. Wells, and M. R. Duffey, “A Model for Effective Implementation 
of Earned Value Methodology,” International Journal of Project Management,  
vol. 21, no. 5 (2003), pp. 375–82.
Naeni, L., S. Shadrokh, and A. Salehipour, “A Fuzzy Approach to the Earned Value 
Management,” International Journal of Project Management, vol. 9, no. 6 (2011), 
pp. 764–72.
Webb, A., Using Earned Value: A Project Manager’s Guide (Aldershot, UK: Gower 
Publishing Co., 2003).
References
www.ebook3000.com

502  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Case 13.1
Tree Trimming Project
Wil Fence is a large timber and Christmas tree farmer who is attending a project man-
agement class in the spring, his off season. When the class topic came to earned value, 
he was perplexed. Isn’t he using EV?
 
Each summer Wil hires crews to shear fields of Christmas trees for the coming 
Holiday season. Shearing entails having a worker use a large machete to shear the 
branches of the tree into a nice, cone-shaped tree.
 
Wil describes his business as follows:
A. I count the number of Douglas Fir Christmas trees in the field (24,000).
B. Next, I agree on a contract lump sum for shearing with a crew boss for the whole 
field ($30,000).
C. When partial payment for work completed arrives (5 days later), I count or estimate 
the actual number sheared (6,000 trees). I take the actual as a percent of the total to 
be sheared, multiply the percent complete by total contract amount for the partial 
payment [(6,000/$30,000 = 25%), (.25 × $30,000 = $7500)].
1. Is Wil over, on, or below cost and schedule? Is Wil using earned value?
2. How can Wil set up a scheduling variance?
Case 13.2
Shoreline Stadium Status Report Case
You are an assistant to Percival Young, president of G&L Construction. He has asked 
you to prepare a brief report on the status of the Shoreline Stadium project.
 
Shoreline stadium is a 47,000-seat professional baseball stadium. Construction 
started on April 3, 2018, and the stadium is schedule to be completed on March 25, 
2020. The project is estimated to cost $310,000,000. There is a $35 million manage-
ment reserve to deal with unexpected problems and delays.
 
The stadium must be ready for the 2020 major league season. G&L would accrue a 
$250,000 per day penalty for not meeting the April 3, 2020 deadline.
 
G&L expects to make more than $3 million on the project. The stadium is one of 
several major projects G&L has under way in North America, including a professional 
soccer stadium and another baseball stadium, which broke ground last month.
 
It is 8/8/2019 the day after the key milestone “Start Installing Seats” was to occur.
 
Tables C13.1 and C13.2 contain information submitted by your counterpart at the 
Shoreline site from which you are to prepare your report. Use the appropriate indexes/
information to prepare a report informing Mr. Young on the overall status of the 
 Shoreline project in terms of costs and schedule. Note: Mr. Young is not interested in 
specifics, but just how well the overall project is doing and if there is a need to take 
corrective action.

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  503
 
   PV 
   EV 
   AC 
   CV 
   SV
Baseball Stadium 
209,000,000 
200,600,000 
210,500,000 
−9,900,000 
−8,400,000
Clear stadium site 
  --10,000,000 
  10,000,000 
     9,000,000 
  1,000,000 
                  0
Demolish building 
     2,000,000 
    2,000,000 
     2,000,000 
                  0 
                  0
Set up construction site 
     2,000,000 
    2,000,000 
     1,500,000 
      500,000 
                  0
Drive support piling 
   40,000,000 
  40,000,000 
   41,000,000 
−1,000,000 
                  0
Pour lower concrete bowl 
  50,000,000 
  50,000,000 
  55,000,000 
−5,000,000 
                  0
Pour main concourse 
  15,000,000 
  15,000,000 
   18,000,000 
−3,000,000 
                  0
Install playing field 
     5,000,000 
    5,000,000 
    5,000,000 
                  0 
                  0
Construct upper steel bowl 
  60,000,000 
  51,600,000 
   55,000,000 
−3,400,000 
−8,400,000
Install seats 
  10,000,000 
Build luxury boxes 
  25,000,000 
Install jumbotron 
     2,000,000 
Stadium infrastructure 
   22,000,000 
Construct steel canopy 
   20,000,000 
Light installation 
     5,000,000 
Build roof supports 
  10,000,000 
  10,000,000 
   10,000,000 
                  0 
                  0
Construct roof 
  15,000,000 
  15,000,000 
   14,000,000 
  1,000,000 
                  0
Install roof tracks 
  10,000,000
Install roof 
     5,000,000
Inspection 
 
     2,000,000
 
BAC 
EACf 
VAC
Shoreline Stadium 
310,000,000 
325,299,103 
−15,299,103
TABLE C13.1 Shoreline Project Earned Value Table as of 8/7/2019
Task Name 
Start 
Finish 
Baseline Start 
Baseline Finish Start Var. Finish Var.
Greendale Stadium Project 
     Mon 7/3/17 
      Thu 4/8/21 
    Mon 7/3/17 
    Thu 3/25/21 
  0 days 
10 days
Clear Stadium Site 
     Mon 7/3/17 
  Tue 10/10/17 
    Mon 7/3/17 
  Tue 10/10/17 
  0 days 
  0 days
Demolish Building 
Wed 10/11/17 
  Tue 11/21/17 
Wed 10/11/17 
  Tue 11/21/17 
  0 days 
  0 days
Set up Construction Site 
Wed 11/22/17 
      Fri 2/23/18 
Wed 11/22/17 
      Tue 3/6/18 
  0 days 
−7 days
Drive Support Pilings 
  Mon 2/26/18 
  Wed 8/22/18 
    Wed 3/7/18 
    Thu 8/23/18 
−7 days 
  −1 day
Pour Lower Concrete Bowl 
   Thu 8/23/18 
   Thu 2/21/19 
     Fri 8/24/18 
      Fri 2/15/19 
  −1 day 
  4 days
Pour Main Concourse 
     Fri 2/22/19 
        Fri 8/2/19 
    Mon 2/18/19 
      Tue 8/6/19 
   4 days 
−2 days
Install Playing Field 
     Fri 2/22/19 
      Fri 6/28/19 
    Mon 2/18/19 
  Mon 6/24/19 
   4 days 
  4 days
Construct Upper Steel Bowl 
     Fri 2/22/19 
    Tue 8/20/19 
    Mon 2/18/19 
      Tue 8/6/19 
   4 days 
10 days
Install Seats 
  Wed 8/21/19 
  Wed 3/11/20 
    Wed 8/7/19 
  Wed 2/26/20 
10 days 
10 days
Build Luxury Boxes 
  Wed 8/21/19 
Mon 12/30/19 
    Wed 8/7/19 
 Thu 12/12/19 
10 days 
10 days
Install Jumbotron 
  Wed 8/21/19 
  Wed 10/2/19 
    Wed 8/7/19 
  Wed 9/18/19 
10 days 
10 days
Stadium Infrastructure 
  Wed 8/21/19 
  Wed 2/12/20 
    Wed 8/7/19 
  Wed 1/29/20 
10 days 
10 days
Construct Steel Canopy 
    Thu 3/12/20 
   Thu 6/25/20 
    Thu 2/27/20 
    Thu 6/11/20 
10 days 
10 days
Light Installation 
   Thu 3/12/20 
  Wed 4/22/20 
    Thu 2/27/20 
     Wed 4/8/20 
10 days 
10 days
Build Roof Supports 
  Mon 2/26/18 
     Mon 7/2/18 
    Wed 3/7/18 
    Thu 7/12/18 
−7 days 
−7 days
Construct Roof 
      Tue 7/3/18 
    Tue 4/14/20 
      Fri 7/13/18 
   Thu 4/23/20 
−7 days 
−7 days
Install Roof Tracks 
     Fri 6/26/20 
   Mon 11/2/20 
      Fri 6/12/20 
 Mon 10/19/20 
10 days 
10 days
Install Roof 
    Tue 11/3/20 
    Thu 3/11/21 
  Tue 10/20/20 
    Thu 2/25/21 
10 days 
10 days
Inspection 
      Fri 3/12/21 
      Thu 4/8/21 
      Fri 2/26/21 
    Thu 3/25/21 
10 days 
10 days
TABLE C13.2 Variance Table for Shoreline Project as of 8/7/2019
www.ebook3000.com

504  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Case 13.3
Scanner Project
You have been serving as Electroscan’s project manager and are now well along in 
the project. Develop a narrative status report for the board of directors of the chain 
store that discusses the status of the project to date (see Table C13.3) and at com-
pletion. Be as specific as you can using numbers given and those you might develop. 
Remember, your audience is not familiar with the jargon used by project managers 
and computer software personnel; therefore, some explanation may be necessary. 
Your report will be evaluated on your detailed use of the data, your total perspec-
tive of the current status and future status of the project, and your recommended 
changes (if any).
Electroscan, Inc.
555 Acorn Street, Suite 5
Boston, Massachusetts
Scanner project
H 1.0
Hardware
H 1.1
H 1.2
H 1.3
H 1.4
H 1.5
H 1.6
H 1.7
Hardware speciﬁcations (DS)
Hardware design (DS)
Hardware documentation (DOC)
Prototypes (PD)
Test prototypes (T)
Order circuit boards (PD)
Preproduction models (PD)
OP 1.0
Operating system
OP 1.2
Drivers
OP 1.3
Code software
OP 1.2.1
Disk drivers (DEV)
OP 1.2.2
I/O drivers (DEV)
OP 1.3.1
Code software (C)
OP 1.3.2
Document software (DOC)
OP 1.3.3
Code interfaces (C)
OP 1.3.4
Beta test software (T)
OP 1.1
Kernel speciﬁcations (DS)
U 1.0
Utilities
U 1.1
U 1.2
U 1.3
U 1.4
U 1.5
Utilities speciﬁcations (DS)
Routine utilities (DEV)
Complex utilities (DEV)
Utilities documentation (DOC)
Beta test utilities (T)
S 1.0
System integration
S 1.1
S 1.2
S 1.3
S 1.4
S 1.5
Architecture decisions (DS)
Integration hard/soft (DEV)
System hard/software test (T)
Project documentation (DOC)
Integration acceptance testing (T)
1103
213
15
25
8
40
30
25
100
431
97
336
60
37
200
42
96
30
15
274
15
35
150
20
40
153
8
75
20
12
30
915
260
20
30
10
40
30
30
100
330
70
240
40
30
100
50
60
30
20
200
20
20
100
20
40
125
10
50
20
15
30
–81
16
5
5
1
0
0
5
0
–46
–21
–30
–15
–6
–20
5
–15
0
5
–40
5
–15
–30
0
0
–11
2
–15
0
2
0
–25
–4
0
0
–4
0
0
0
0
–45
10
–55
5
5
–10
–15
–30
0
0
21
0
0
30
–9
0
3
0
5
0
–2
0
476
72
15
25
5
2
0
25
0
196
76
105
45
31
40
25
40
0
15
148
15
35
90
8
0
60
7
45
0
8
0
395
88
20
30
6
2
0
30
0
150
55
75
30
25
20
30
25
0
20
108
20
20
60
8
0
49
9
30
0
10
0
420
92
20
30
10
2
0
30
0
195
45
130
25
20
30
45
55
0
20
87
20
20
30
17
0
46
9
25
0
12
0
Name
PV
EV
AC
SV
CV
BAC
EACf
29 In-store Scanner Project
(thousands of dollars)
Actual Progress as of January 1
TABLE C13.3

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  505
Appendix 13.1
The Application of Additional Earned Value Rules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this appendix you should be able to:
LO A13.1-1 Apply pseudo earned value rules to measure progress on a project.
The following example and exercises are designed to provide practice in applying the 
following three earned value rules:
∙ Percent complete rule
∙ 50/50 rule
∙ 0/100 rule
See the chapter for an explanation of each of these rules.
Simplifying Assumptions
The same simplifying assumptions used for the chapter example and exercises will 
also be used here.
1. Assume each cost account has only one work package, and each cost account will 
be represented as an activity on the network.
2. The project network early start times will serve as the basis for assigning the base-
line values.
3. Except when the 0/100 rule or 50/50 rule is used, baseline values will be assigned 
linearly, unless stated differently. (Note: In practice estimated costs should be 
applied “exactly” as they are expected to occur so measures of schedule and cost 
performance are useful and reliable.)
4. For purposes of demonstrating the examples, from the moment work on an activity 
begins, some actual costs will be incurred each period until the activity is 
completed.
5. When the 0/100 rule is used, the total cost for the activity is placed in the baseline 
on the early finish date.
6. When the 50/50 rule is used, 50 percent of the total cost is placed in the baseline on 
the early start date and 50 percent on the early finish date.
Appendix Exercises
1. Given the information provided for development of a product warranty project for 
periods 1 through 7, compute the SV, CV, SPI, and CPI for each period. Plot the EV 
and the AC on the PV graph provided. Explain to the owner your assessment of the 
project at the end of period 7 and the future expected status of the project at com-
pletion. Figure A13.1A presents the project network. Figure A13.1B presents the 
project baseline noting those activities using the 0/100 (rule 3) and 50/50 (rule 2) 
rules. For example, activity 1 uses rule 3, the 0/100 rule. Although the early start 
Apply pseudo earned 
value rules to measure 
progress on a project.
A13.1-1
LO
www.ebook3000.com

506  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
time is period 0, the budget is not placed in the time-phased baseline until period 2 
when the activity is planned to be finished (EF). This same procedure has been used 
to assign costs for activities 2 and 7. Activities 2 and 7 use the 50/50 rule. Thus,  
50 percent of the budget for each activity is assigned on its respective early start date 
(time period 2 for activity 2 and period 11 for activity 7) and 50 percent for their 
respective finish dates. Remember, when assigning earned value as the project is 
being implemented, if an activity actually starts early or late, the earned values must 
shift with the actual times. For example, if activity 7 actually starts in period 12 
rather than 11, the 50 percent is not earned until period 12.
DUR
SL
Time period
Baseline budget needs
Schedule information
Total
PV
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
12
9
11
13
EV
Rule
ACT/
WP
2
0
1
3
6
2
5
0
9
6
6
6
8
2
5
5
3
3
4
1
4
4
0
5
2
3
9
9
6
6
20
10
10
30
20
16
4
4
4
4
18
3
ES
0
2
2
2
7
6
11
LF
2
11
7
7
11
11
14
0
8
0
6
27
8
21
11
12
13
4
4
4
4
0
4
0
6
33
41
62
73
85
98
102 106 110
114
114
118
4
4
6
7
Total PV by period
Cumulative PV by period
3
2
1
1
1
1
2
0
14
Rule
1  = %complete
2 = 50 ⁄ 50
3 = 0 ⁄ 100
FIGURE A13.1-1B 
ES
ID
Legend
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
7
11
0
14
0
11
14
3
6
6
3
8
3
9
11
2
5
7
0
11
0
7
11
4
4
2
1
6
1
3
7
4
2
2
6
5
6
8
11
3
3
2
0
7
0
2
7
5
1
0
0
2
0
0
2
2
FIGURE A13.1-1A 

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  507
Status Report: Ending Period 1
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
  0% 
—— 
  3 
0 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
  3 
0 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 2
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 3
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
  0% 
—— 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
30% 
—— 
  7 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
25% 
—— 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
22 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 4
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
  0% 
—— 
  7 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
50% 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
50% 
—— 
  8 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
30 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 5
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
50% 
—— 
  8 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
60% 
—— 
12 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
70% 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
35 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 6
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
50% 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
80% 
—— 
16 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
Finished 
—— 
15 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
46 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 7
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
6 
  5 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
14 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
20 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
Finished 
—— 
15 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
  0% 
—— 
  0 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
50% 
—— 
  9 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
63 
—— 
—— 
——
www.ebook3000.com

508  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
2. Given the information provided for development of a catalog product return process 
for periods 1 through 5, assign the PV values (using the rules) to develop a baseline 
for the project. Compute the SV, CV, SPI, and CPI for each period. Explain to the 
owner your assessment of the project at the end of period 5 and the future expected 
status of the project at the completion.
Period 
SPI 
CPI 
PCIB
1 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
—— 
—— 
—— 
SPI = EV/PV
4 
—— 
—— 
—— 
CPI = EV/AC
5 
—— 
—— 
—— 
PCIB = EV/BAC
6 
—— 
—— 
——
7 
—— 
—— 
——
1
0
0
10
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
PV
Time periods
Dollars
FIGURE A13.1-2C 
0
1
0
2
3
4
Time periods
5
6
7
.20
.40
.60
.80
Index
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
CPI =
SPI =
PCIB =
1.80
2.00
2.20
FIGURE A13.1-2D

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  509
ES
ID
Legend
EF
SL
SL
LS
DUR
LF
7
7
0
10
0
7
10
3
6
4
0
7
0
4
7
3
4
3
2
5
2
5
7
2
3
0
0
4
0
0
4
4
1
0
2
3
2
2
5
3
2
0
1
2
1
1
3
2
5
2
1
6
1
3
7
4
FIGURE A13.1-2A 
DUR
Time period
Baseline budget needs
Schedule information
Total
PV
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
9
EV
Rule
ACT/
WP
3
1
2
2
4
3
2
4
4
5
3
30
20
30
10
40
30
3
ES
0
0
0
3
2
4
7
SL
2
1
0
2
1
0
0
LF
5
3
4
7
7
7
10
60
6
7
Total PV by period
Cumulative PV by period
2
3
2
3
2
1
1
0
Rule
1 = %complete
2 = 50 ⁄ 50
3 = 0 ⁄ 100
FIGURE A13.1-2B 
Status Report: Ending Period 1
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
40% 
—— 
8 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
0% 
—— 
12 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
30% 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
30 
—— 
—— 
——
www.ebook3000.com

510  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
Status Report: Ending Period 2
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
80% 
—— 
20 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
18 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
50% 
—— 
12 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
50 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 3
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
27 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
18 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
70% 
—— 
15 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
0% 
—— 
5 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
30% 
—— 
8 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
73 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 4
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
27 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
18 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
22 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
0% 
—— 
7 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
60% 
—— 
22 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
96 
—— 
—— 
——
Status Report: Ending Period 5
Task 
%Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
1 
Finished 
—— 
27 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
Finished 
—— 
18 
—— 
—— 
——
3 
Finished 
—— 
22 
—— 
—— 
——
4 
Finished 
—— 
8 
—— 
—— 
——
5 
70% 
—— 
24 
—— 
—— 
——
6 
30% 
—— 
10 
—— 
—— 
——
Cumulative Totals 
 
—— 
109 
—— 
—— 
——
1
0
0
30
240
210
180
150
120
Dollars
90
60
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
PV
Time periods
FIGURE A13.1-2C 

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  511
Period 
SPI 
CPI 
PCIB
1 
—— 
—— 
——
2 
—— 
—— 
—— 
SPI = EV/AC
3 
—— 
—— 
—— 
CPI = EV/AC
4 
—— 
—— 
—— 
PCIB = EV/BAC
5 
—— 
—— 
——
Appendix 13.2
Obtaining Project Performance Information  
from MS Project 2010 or 2015
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this appendix you should be able to:
LO A13.2-1 Obtain project performance information from MS Project 2010 or 2015.
The objective of this appendix is to illustrate how one can obtain the performance 
information discussed in Chapter 13 from MS Project 2010 or 2015. One of the great 
strengths of MS Project is its flexibility. The software provides numerous options for 
entering, calculating, and presenting project information. Flexibility is also the soft-
ware’s greatest weakness in that there are so many options that working with the soft-
ware can be frustrating and confusing. The intent here is to keep it simple and present 
basic steps for obtaining performance information. Students with more ambitious 
agendas are advised to work with the software tutorial or consult one of many instruc-
tional books on the market.
 
For purposes of this exercise we will use the Digital Camera project, which was 
introduced in Chapter 13. In this scenario the project started as planned on March 1 
and today’s date is March 7. We have received the following information on the work 
completed to date:
Design Specs took 2 days to complete at a total cost of $20.
Shell & Power took 3 days to complete at a total cost of $25.
Memory/Software is in progress with 4 days completed and two days remaining.
Cost to date is $100.
Zoom System took 2 days to complete at a cost of $25.
All tasks started on time.
Obtain project perfor-
mance information from 
MS Project 2010 or 2015.
A13.2-1
LO
www.ebook3000.com

512  Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation
STEP 1 ENTERING PROGRESS INFORMATION
We enter this progress information in the TRACKING TABLE from the GANTT 
CHART VIEW ▸ VIEW ▸ TABLES ▸ TRACKING:
TABLE A13.2-1A 
Tracking Table
ID 
Task Name 
Act. Start 
Act. Finish 
% Comp. 
Act. Dur. 
Rem. Dur. 
Act. Cost 
Act. Work
1 
Digital Camera Prototype 
3/1 
NA 
61% 
6.72 days 
4.28 days 
$170.00 
272 hrs
2 
Design Spec.s 
3/1 
3/2 
100% 
2 days 
0 days 
$20.00 
32 hrs
3 
Shell & Power 
3/3 
3/7 
100% 
3 days 
0 days 
$25.00 
40 hrs
4 
Memory/Software 
3/3 
NA 
67% 
4 days 
2 days 
$100.00 
160 hrs
5 
Zoom System 
3/3 
3/4 
100% 
2 days 
0 days 
$25.00 
40 hrs
6 
Assemble 
NA 
NA 
0% 
0 days 
3 days 
$0.00 
0 hrs
7 
Test 
NA 
NA 
0% 
0 days 
2 days 
$0.00 
0 hrs
 
Note that the software automatically calculates the percent complete and actual fin-
ish, cost, and work. In some cases you will have to override these calculations if they 
are inconsistent with what actually happened. Be sure to check to make sure the infor-
mation in this table is displayed the way you want it to be.
 
The final step is to enter the current status date (March 7). You do so by clicking 
PROJECT ▸ PROJECT INFORMATION and inserting the date into the status date 
window.
STEP 2 ACCESSING PROGRESS INFORMATION
MS Project provides a number of different options for obtaining progress information. 
The most basic information can be obtained from PROJECT ▸ REPORTS ▸ COSTS ▸ 
EARNED VALUE. You can also obtain this information from GANTT CHART view. 
Click VIEW ▸ TABLE ▸ MORE TABLES ▸ EARNED VALUE.
TABLE A13.2-1B 
Earned Value Table
ID 
Task Name 
PV 
EV 
AC 
SV 
CV 
EAC 
BAC 
VAC
2 
Design Spec.s 
$20.00 
$20.00 
$20.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$20.00 
$20.00 
$0.00
3 
Shell & Power 
$15.00 
$15.00 
$25.00 
$0.00 
($10.00) 
$25.00 
$15.00 
($10.00)
4 
Memory/Software 
$100.00 
$70.00 
$100.00 
($30.00) 
($30.00) 
$153.85 
$100.00 
($53.85)
5 
Zoom System 
$35.00 
$35.00 
$25.00 
$0.00 
$10.00 
$25.00 
$35.00 
$10.00
6 
Assemble 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$120.00 
$120.00 
$0.00
7 
Test 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$30.00 
$30.00 
$0.00
 
 
$170.00 
$140.00 
$170.00 
($30.00) 
($30.00) 
$373.85 
$320.00 
($53.85)
When you scale this table to 80 percent you can obtain all the basic CV, SV and VAC 
information on one convenient page.
 
Note: Some versions of MS Project use the old acronyms:
BCWS = PV
BCWP = EV
ACWP = AC
and the EAC is calculated using the CPI and is what the text refers to as EACf.

Chapter 13  Progress and Performance Measurement and Evaluation  513
STEP 3 ACCESSING CPI INFORMATION
To obtain additional cost information such as CPI and TCPI from the GANTT CHART 
view, click VIEW ▸ TABLE ▸ MORE TABLES ▸ EARNED VALUE COST 
 INDICATORS, which will display the following information:
TABLE A13.2-1C 
Earned Value Cost Indicators Table
ID 
Task Name 
PV 
EV 
CV 
CV% 
CPI 
BAC 
EAC 
VAC 
TCPI
1 
Digital Camera Prototype 
$170.00 
$140.00 
($30.00) 
−21% 
0.82 
$320.00 $373.85 ($53.85) 
1.2
2 
Design Spec.s 
$20.00 
$20.00 
$0.00 
0% 
1 
$20.00 
$20.00 
$0.00 
3 
Shell & Power 
$15.00 
$15.00 
($10.00) 
−66% 
0.6 
$15.00 
$25.00 
($10.00) 
4 
Memory/Software 
$100.00 
$70.00 
($30.00) 
−42% 
0.7 
$100.00 
$153.85 
($53.85) 
5 
Zoom System 
$35.00 
$35.00 
$10.00 
28% 
1.4 
$35.00 
$25.00 
$10.00 
6 
Assemble 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
0% 
0 
$120.00 
$120.00 
$0.00 
7 
Test 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
0% 
0 
$30.00 
$30.00 
$0.00
Note: For MS Project 2007 users the instructions are very similar except you can 
access the Tables option directly from Gantt View.
STEP 4 ACCESSING SPI INFORMATION
To obtain additional schedule information such as SPI from the GANTT CHART 
view, click VIEW ▸ TABLE ▸ MORE TABLES ▸ EARNED VALUE SCHEDULE 
INDICATORS, which will display the following information:
TABLE A13.2-1D
Earned Value 
Schedule Indicators 
Table
ID 
Task Name 
PV 
EV 
SV 
SV% 
SPI
1 
Digital Camera Prototype 
$170.00 
$140.00 
($30.00) 
−18% 
0.82
2 
Design Spec.s 
$20.00 
$20.00 
$0.00 
0% 
1
3 
Shell & Power 
$15.00 
$15.00 
$0.00 
0% 
1
4 
Memory/Software 
$100.00 
$70.00 
($30.00) 
−30% 
0.7
5 
Zoom System 
$35.00 
$35.00 
$0.00 
0% 
1
6 
Assemble 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
0% 
0
7 
Test 
$0.00 
$0.00 
$0.00 
0% 
0
STEP 5 CREATING A TRACKING GANTT CHART
You can create a tracking Gantt chart like the one presented in Figure 13.1 by simply 
clicking TASK ▸ GANTT CHART (upper left hand corner) ▸ TRACKING GANTT 
▸ TRACKING GANTT.
Tracking Gantt Chart
Digital Camera Project
ID
Task Name
March 6
March 13
1
Digital Camera Prototype
Design Spec.s
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
W
T
0%
0%
Shell & Power
Memory/Software
Zoom System
Assemble
Test
2
3
4
5
6
7
100%
67%
61%
100%
100%
FIGURE A13.2-1 
Tracking Gantt Chart
www.ebook3000.com

514
Project Closure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
14-1 Identify different types of project closure.
14-2 Understand the challenges of closing out  
a project.
14-3 Explain the importance of a project audit.
14-4 Know how to use project retrospectives to obtain 
lessons learned.
14-5 Assess level of project management maturity.
14-6 Provide useful advice for conducting team  
performance reviews.
14-7 Provide useful advice for conducting performance 
reviews of project members.
OUTLINE
14.1 Types of Project Closure
14.2 Wrap-up Closure Activities
14.3 Project Audits
14.4 Post-Implementation Evaluation
Summary
Appendix 14.1: Project Closeout Checklist
Appendix 14.2: Euro Conversion
C H A P T E R  F O U R T E E N
14

515
Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to relive it.
—George Santayana, 1863–1952
Every project comes to an end eventually. But how many project participants get excited 
about closing out a project? The deliverables are complete. Ownership is ready to be 
transferred. Everyone’s focus is what’s next—hopefully a new, exciting project. Carefully 
managing the closure phase is as important as any other phase of the project. Observation 
tells us that organizations that manage closure and review well prosper. Those who don’t 
tend to have projects that drag on forever and repeat the same mistakes over and over.
Closing out a project includes a daunting number of tasks. In the past and on small 
projects the project manager was responsible for seeing all tasks and loose ends were 
completed and signed off. This is no longer true. In today’s project-driven organiza-
tions that have many projects occurring simultaneously, the responsibility for complet-
ing closure tasks has been parsed among the project manager, project teams, project 
office, an oversight “review committee,” and an independent retrospective facilitator. 
Many tasks overlap, occur simultaneously, and require coordination and cooperation 
among these stakeholders.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

516  Chapter 14  Project Closure
The three major deliverables for project closure are described below (see Figure 14.1):
1. Wrapping up the project. The major wrap-up task is to ensure the project is approved 
and accepted by the customer. Other wrap-up activities include closing accounts, 
paying bills, reassigning equipment and personnel, finding new opportunities for 
project staff, closing facilities, and the final report. Checklists are used extensively 
to ensure tasks are not overlooked. In many organizations, the lion’s share of closure 
tasks is largely done by the project office in coordination with the project manager. 
The final report writing is usually assigned to one project office staff member, who 
assembles input from all stakeholders. In smaller organizations and projects, these 
closure activities are left to the project manager and team.
2. Project audit. Audits are post-project reviews of how successful the project was. 
They include causal analysis and thorough retrospectives which identify lessons 
learned. These post-project reviews should be held with the team and key stakehold-
ers to catch any missing issues or gaps.
3. Evaluation of performance and management of the project. Evaluation includes 
team, individual team members, and project manager performance. Vendors and the 
customer may provide external input. Evaluation of the major players provides 
important information for the future.
This chapter begins with the recognition that projects are shut down for many rea-
sons. Not all projects end with a clear “Finished” and are turned over to a customer. 
Regardless of the conditions for ending a project, the general process of closure is 
similar, though the endings may differ significantly. Wrap-up closure tasks are noted 
first. These tasks represent all the tasks that must be “cleaned up” before the project is 
terminated. Project audits are examined next. Finally, evaluation of individual and 
team performance is examined.
14.1 Types of Project Closure
On some projects the end may not be as clear as would be hoped. Although the scope 
statement may define a clear ending for a project, the actual ending may or may not 
correspond. Fortunately, a majority of projects are blessed with a well-defined ending. 
Regular project reviews will identify projects having endings different from plans. The 
different types of closure are identified here:
Normal The most common circumstance for project closure is simply a completed 
project. For many development projects, the end involves handing off the final design 
to production and the creation of a new product or service line. For other internal IT 
14-1
LO
Identify different types of 
project closure.
FIGURE 14.1
Project Closure and 
Review Deliverables 
Project archives/database
Facilities
Customer
Vendors
Report
Wrap-up closure activities
Project closure
deliverables
Team evaluation
Individual evaluations
Performance evaluation
Report
Retrospective
Lessons Learned
Project audit

Chapter 14  Project Closure  517
projects, such as system upgrades or creation of new inventory control systems, the end 
occurs when the output is incorporated into ongoing operations. Some modifications 
in scope, cost, and schedule probably occurred during implementation.
Premature For a few projects, the project may be completed early with some parts of 
the project eliminated. For example, in a new product development project, a market-
ing manager may insist on production models before testing:
Give the new product to me now, the way it is. Early entry into the market will mean big 
profits! I know we can sell a bazillion of these. If we don’t do it now, the opportunity is lost!
The pressure is on to finish the project and send it to production. Before succumbing 
to this form of pressure, the implications and risks associated with this decision should 
be carefully reviewed and assessed by senior management and all stakeholders. Too 
frequently, the benefits are illusory, dangerous, and carry large risks.
Perpetual Some projects never seem to end. The major characteristic of this kind of 
project is constant “add-ons,” suggesting a poorly conceived project scope. At some 
point the review group should recommend methods for bringing final closure to this 
type of project or the initiation of another project. For example, adding a new feature 
to an old project could replace a segment of a project that appears to be perpetual.
Failed Project Failed projects are usually easy to identify and easy for a review group 
to close down. However, every effort should be made to communicate the technical (or 
other) reasons for termination of the project; in any event project participants should not 
be left with an embarrassing stigma of working on a project that failed. Many projects 
will fail because of circumstances beyond the control of the project team. See Snapshot 
from Practice 14.1: The Wake, for a novel response to a canceled project.
Sally worked as a project manager for 
a high-tech electronics ﬁrm in the late 
eighties. The company had patented 
the use of “bubble ink” technology for 
color printing. She was in charge of a 
team tasked with cutting the prohibitive cost of print-
ers in half. If successful signiﬁcant bonuses would be 
earned and several team members would be given 
key positions when the product went into production. 
The team had overcome several difficult technical 
challenges and was well on its way to accomplishing 
their objective when the project was canceled. Top 
management discovered at a trade show that several 
competitors were about to introduce ink jet printers at 
a cost one-ﬁfth the price of the printers Sally’s team 
was developing.
 
What could Sally say to her team? Sally knew they 
would be devastated. She knew she had to do 
something to help them deal with this bitter disap-
pointment. So she decided to hold a traditional Irish 
“wake” for the project. She persuaded management 
to hire a backhoe to dig a grave in the back yard of 
their office and purchase an actual coffin. After she 
and other members gave a brief eulogy about the proj-
ect, each member dropped something from the proj-
ect into the coffin. For some members it was a piece of 
a printer prototype, for others it was a memo or a plan. 
One by one each member put something personal in 
the coffin. After the coffin was buried, the team 
retreated to a local brew pub to imbibe and share fond 
memories of the work they had accomplished. The 
“wake” became part of the company’s folklore and 
team members still laugh about the experience.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 .1
The Wake1
1A wake is a party in honor of deceased that usually involves 
the consumption of alcohol.
www.ebook3000.com

518  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Changed Priority Organizations’ priorities often change and strategy shifts direc-
tions. For example, during the 2008–10 financial crisis organizations shifted their focus 
from money-making projects to cost savings projects. The oversight group continually 
revises project selection priorities to reflect changes in organizational direction. Proj-
ects in process may need to be altered or canceled. Thus, a project may start with a high 
priority but see its rank erode or crash during its project life cycle as conditions change. 
When priorities change, projects in process may need to be altered or canceled.
Different types of project termination present unique issues. Some adjustments to 
generic closure processes may be necessary to accommodate the type of project termi-
nation you face.
14.2 Wrap-up Closure Activities
The major challenges for the project manager and team members are over. Getting the 
project manager and project participants to wrap up the odds and ends necessary to 
fully complete a project is often difficult. It’s like the party is over—now who wants to 
help clean up? Much of the work is mundane and tedious. Motivation can be the chief 
challenge. For example, accounting for equipment and completing final reports are 
perceived as dull administrative tasks by project professionals who are action-oriented 
individuals. The project manager’s challenge is to keep the project team focused on the 
remaining project activities and delivery to the customer until the project is complete. 
Communicating a closure and review plan and schedule early allows the project team 
to (1) accept the psychological fact the project will end and (2) prepare to move on. The 
ideal scenario is to have the team member’s next assignment ready when project com-
pletion is announced. Project managers need to be careful to maintain their enthusiasm 
for completing the project and hold people accountable to deadlines, which are prone 
to slip during the waning stages of the project.
Implementing the closure process includes several wrap-up activities. Many organi-
zations develop lengthy lists for closing projects as they gain experience. These are 
very helpful and ensure nothing is overlooked. Implementing closedown includes the 
following six major activities:
1. Getting delivery acceptance from the customer.
2. Shutting down resources and releasing to new uses.
3. Reassigning project team members.
4. Closing accounts and seeing all bills are paid.
5. Delivering the project to the customer.
6. Creating a final report.
Administering the details of closing out a project can be intimidating. Some organiza-
tions have checklists of over 100 wrap-up tasks! These checklists deal with closure 
details such as facilities, teams, staff, customer, vendors, and the project itself. A par-
tial administrative closure checklist is shown in Table 14.1.
Getting delivery acceptance by the customer is a major and critical closure activity. 
Delivery of some projects to the customer is straightforward. Others are more complex 
and difficult. Ideally there should be no surprises. This requires a well-defined scope 
and an effective change management system with active customer involvement. User 
involvement is critical to acceptance (see Snapshot from Practice 14.2: New Ball Goes 
Flat in the NBA).
14-2
LO
Understand the challenges 
of closing out a project.

Chapter 14  Project Closure  519
TABLE 14.1 
Wrap-up Closure 
Checklist
 
 
Completed? 
 
Task 
Yes/No
Team
 1 
 Has a schedule for reducing project staff been developed and accepted?
 2 Has staff been released or notiﬁed of new assignments?
 3 Have performance reviews for team members been conducted?
 4  Has staff been offered outplacement services and career  
counseling activities?
Vendors/contractors
 5 Have performance reviews for all vendors been conducted?
 6 Have project accounts been ﬁnalized and all billing closed?
Customer/Users
 7 Has the customer signed-off on the delivered product?
 8  Has an in-depth project review and evaluation interview with the  
customer been conducted?
 9  Have the users been interviewed to assess their satisfaction with  
the deliverables? With the project team? With vendors? With training?  
With support? With maintenance?
Equipment and facilities
10 Have project resources been transferred to other projects?
11 
Have rental or lease equipment agreements been closed out?
12 
Has the date for the closure review been set and stakeholders notiﬁed?
Attach comments or links on any tasks you feel need explanation. 
The conditions for completing and transferring the project should be set before the 
project begins. A completed software program is a good example of the need to work 
out the details in advance. If the user has problems using the software, will the cus-
tomer withhold final payments? Who is responsible for supporting and training the 
user? If these conditions are not clearly defined up front, getting delivery acceptance 
can be troublesome.
Another delivery tactic (briefly mentioned in Chapter 7) for a project that has been 
outsourced is known as build, own, operate, and transfer (BOOT). In this type of proj-
ect the contractor builds, owns, and operates the project deliverable for a set period of 
time. For example, Haliburton will operate a hydro-electric plant for six months before 
turning over operations to their Indian counterparts. During this time all the bugs are 
worked out and conditions for delivery are satisfied. Again, note the delivery condi-
tions need to be carefully set up before the project begins; if not, wrap-up activities can 
develop a life of their own.
Releasing the project team typically occurs gradually during the closure phase. For 
some people, termination of their responsible activities ends before the project is deliv-
ered to the customer or user. Reassignment for these participants needs to take place 
well before the final finish date. For the remaining team members (full or part time), 
termination may result in a new project or returning to their functional job. Sometimes, 
on product development efforts, team members will be assigned to operations positions 
and play an active role in the production of the new product. For contract people it may 
mean the end of their assignment to this project; in some cases there may be follow-up 
work or user support possibilities. A small number of part-time participants may be 
recommended to the user organization to train or operate new equipment or systems.
www.ebook3000.com

520  Chapter 14  Project Closure
On October 31, 2006, the National 
Basketball Association (NBA) opened 
its 57th season with new official game 
balls. The new ball, manufactured by 
Spalding, featured a new design and a 
new material that together were believed to offer bet-
ter grip, feel, and consistency than the previous leather 
ball. The material is microﬁber composite with moisture 
management that provides superior grip and feel 
throughout the course of a game. Additionally, the new 
composite material eliminates the need for a break-in 
period, which is necessary for the current leather ball, 
and achieves consistency from ball to ball.
 
The NBA and Spalding subjected the ball to a rigor-
ous evaluation process that included laboratory and 
on-court testing process. Every NBA team received the 
new ball and had the opportunity to use it in practice. 
The ball was also tested in the NBA summer develop-
ment league.
 
At the press conference announcing the shift from 
leather to microﬁber balls, NBA commissioner David 
Stern pronounced, “The advancement that Spalding 
has made to the new game ball ensures that the best 
basketball players in the world will be playing with the 
best basketball in the world.”
 
Animal rights advocates applauded the shift from 
leather to microﬁber. Such was not the case for the play-
ers who would actually use the new ball. Grumblings 
emerged immediately when training camps opened in 
October. Washington Wizards guard Gilbert Arenas said 
the new basketball “gets slippery” when it comes in 
contact even with small amounts of sweat. Then Miami 
Heat center Shaquille O’Neil said, “It feels like one of 
those cheap balls that you buy at a toy store.”
 
Some players, including league MVP Steve Nash, 
began complaining that the new ball was producing small 
cuts on their hands. “It’s awful [the friction burns], its like 
an irritant . . . sometimes I even have to tape my ﬁngers in 
practice.” Perhaps LeBron James from the Cleveland 
Cavaliers best summed up the players’ attitudes toward 
the NBA’s introduction of the new ball when he said, “You 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 . 2
New Ball Goes Flat in the NBA*
can change the dress code, you can make our shorts 
shorter, but when you take our basketball away from us, 
that’s not a transition we can handle.”
 
On December 1, 2006, four weeks into the season, 
the NBA players union ﬁled an unfair labor practice suit 
because the league management switched to the new 
ball without consulting the players. Ten days later, the 
NBA announced that they would revert back to the old 
leather ball beginning January 1, 2007. In a terse state-
ment, Commissioner David Stern said, “Our players’ 
response to this particular composite ball has been over-
whelmingly negative and we are acting accordingly.”
 
The failure to check with the players (the end-users) 
and get buy-in for the new basketball was loudly criti-
cized by the press. “How they could actually even get it 
that far and not have run it by the players is just an amaz-
ing, amazing exercise in ineptitude,” Rob Frankel, a Los 
Angeles–based branding expert told Bloomberg News.
© Ingram Publishing/Alamy
* “NBA Introduces New Game Ball,” www.nba.com/news, 
posted 6-28-2006; Howard Bloom, “The NBA--Uneventful 
2006 II,” Sports Business News, www.sportsbixnews 
.blogspot.com, 12-30-2006.
Since many work invoices are not submitted until after the project is officially over, 
closing out contracts is often messy and filled with untied ends. For example, it is 
improbable all invoices have been finalized, billed, and paid. Further, when contractors 
are used, there is a need to verify that all the contracted work has been done. Keeping 
contract records, such as progress reports, invoices, change records, and payment 
records, is important should a compliance or lawsuit occur. Too often in the haste to 

Chapter 14  Project Closure  521
meet deadlines, paperwork and record keeping gets short-changed, only to create major 
headaches when it comes time for final documentation.
There are many more wrap-up activities; it is important to complete all of them. 
Experience has proved time and again that not doing all the little cleanup tasks well 
will create problems later. Two other examples of closure checklists are shown in this 
chapter: Appendix 14.1 presents an example used by the state of Virginia; and Appen-
dix 14.2 presents an abridged closure checklist for the Euro Conversion project.
A final wrap-up activity is some form of celebration. For successful projects, an 
upbeat, festive celebration brings closure to the enjoyable experiences everyone has had 
and the need to say good-bye. Celebration is an opportunity to recognize the effort proj-
ect stakeholders contributed. Even if the project did not reach its objectives, recognize 
the effort involved and goals that were achieved. If the project was a success, invite 
everyone who in some way contributed to project success. Thank the team and each  
one individually. The spirit of the celebration should be one in which the stakeholders 
are thanked for a job well done and leave with a good feeling of accomplishment.
14.3 Project Audits
Project audits are more than the status reports suggested in Chapter 13, which report 
on project performance. Project audits do use performance measures and forecast data. 
But project audits are more inclusive. Project audits not only examine project success 
but also review why the project was selected. Project audits include a reassessment of 
the project’s role in the organization’s priorities. Project audits include a check on the 
organizational culture to ensure it facilitates the type of project being implemented. 
Project audits assess if the project team is functioning well and is appropriately staffed. 
Audits of projects in process should include a check on external factors that might 
change where the project is heading or its importance—for example, technology, gov-
ernment laws, competitive products. Project audits include a review of all factors  
relevant to the project and to managing future projects.
Project audits can be performed while a project is in process and after a project is 
completed. There are only a few minor differences between these audits.
∙ In-process project audits. Project audits early in projects allow for corrective 
changes, if they are needed, on the audited project or others in progress. In-process 
project audits concentrate on project progress and performance and check if condi-
tions have changed. For example, have priorities changed? Is the project mission 
still relevant? In rare cases, the audit report may recommend closure of a project 
that is in process.
∙ Postproject audits. These audits tend to include more detail and depth than in-
process project audits. Project audits of completed projects emphasize improving 
the management of future projects. These audits are more long-term oriented than 
in-process audits. Postproject audits do check on project performance, but the audit 
represents a broader view of the project’s role in the organization; for example, were 
the strategic benefits claimed actually delivered?
The depth and detail of the project audit depend on many factors. Some are listed in 
Table 14.1. Because audits cost time and money, they should include no more time or 
resources than are necessary and sufficient. Early in-process project audits tend to  
be perfunctory unless serious problems or concerns are identified. Then, of course, the 
audit would be carried out in more detail. Because in-process project audits can be 
14-3
LO
Explain the importance  
of a project audit.
www.ebook3000.com

522  Chapter 14  Project Closure
worrisome and destructive to the project team, care needs to be taken to protect project 
team morale. The audit should be carried out quickly, and the report should be as posi-
tive and constructive as possible. Postproject audits are more detailed and inclusive 
and contain more project team input.
In summary, plan the audit, and limit the time for the audit. For example, in post-
project audits, for all but very large projects, a one-week limit is a good benchmark. 
Beyond this time, the marginal return of additional information diminishes quickly. Small 
projects may require only one or two days and one or two people to conduct an audit.
The priority team functions well in selecting projects and monitoring perfor-
mance—cost and time. However, reviewing and evaluating projects and the process of 
managing projects is usually delegated to independent audit groups. Each audit group 
is charged with evaluating and reviewing all factors relevant to the project and to man-
aging future projects. The outcome of the project audit is a report.
The Project Audit Process
Below are guidelines that should be noted before you conduct a project audit. The 
guidelines below will improve your chances for a successful audit.
Guidelines for Conducting a Project Audit
1. First and foremost, the philosophy must be that the project audit is not a witch hunt.
2. Comments about individuals or groups participating in the project should be mini-
mized. Keep to project issues, not what happened or by whom.
3. Audit activities should be intensely sensitive to human emotions and reactions. The 
inherent threat to those being evaluated should be reduced as much as possible.
4. Accuracy of data should be verifiable or noted as subjective, judgmental, or 
hearsay.
5. Senior management should announce support for the project audit and see that the 
audit group has access to all information, project participants, and (in most cases) 
project customers.
6. The attitude toward a project audit and its aftermath depends on the modus operandi of 
the audit leadership and group. The objective is not to prosecute. The objective is to 
learn and conserve valuable organization resources where mistakes have been made. 
Friendliness, empathy, and objectivity encourage cooperation and reduce anxiety.
7. The audit should be completed as quickly as is reasonable.
With these guidelines in mind, the process of the project audit is conveniently divided 
into three steps: initiation and staffing, data collection and analysis, and reporting. 
Each step is briefly discussed next.
Step 1: Initiation and Staffing
Initiation of the audit process depends primarily on organization size and project size 
along with other factors. In small organizations and projects where face-to-face contact 
at all levels is prevalent, an audit may be informal and only represent another staff meet-
ing. But even in these environments the content of a formal project audit should be 
examined and covered with notes made of the lessons learned. In medium-sized organi-
zations with few projects the audit is likely to be conducted by someone from manage-
ment with project management experience. In large companies or organizations with 
many projects the audit is under the purview of the project office (see Snapshot from 
Practice 14.3: The Project Office).

Chapter 14  Project Closure  523
As more and more companies embrace 
project management as a critical vehi-
cle for realizing corporate objectives, 
they are creating centralized project 
offices (POs) to oversee and improve 
the management of projects. PO functions vary widely 
by organization and need. In some cases, they serve as 
a simple clearinghouse for project management infor-
mation. In other cases, they recruit, train, and assign 
managers to specific projects. As POs mature and 
evolve over time, they become full-service providers of 
project management expertise within a ﬁrm. The differ-
ent services POs may provide include the following:
΄
4aRMcW]UM]Q\MW]cMW]W]UcVRW]cRa]MZ_a^XRPc\M]-
agement information system.
΄
DRPadWcW]U M]Q bRZRPcW]U _a^XRPc \M]MURab O^cV
within and outside the organization.
΄
6bcMOZWbVW]U bcM]QMaQWjRQ _a^XRPc _ZM]]W]U M]Q
reporting methodologies.
΄
FaMW]W]U _Rab^]]RZ W] _a^XRPc \M]MUR\R]c cRPV-
niques and tools.
΄
2dQWcW]U^]U^W]UM]QaRPR]cZhP^\_ZRcRQ_a^XRPcb͙
΄
5ReRZ^_W]U P^\_aRVR]bWeR aWbY \M]MUR\R]c
programs.
΄
Ba^eWQW]UW]͹V^dbR_a^XRPc\M]MUR\R]cP^]bdZcW]U
and mentoring services.
΄
?MW]cMW]W]UM]W]cRa]MZ_a^XRPc\M]MUR\R]cZWOaMah
containing critical documents, including project 
plans, funding papers, test plans, audit reports, and 
so forth.
΄
6bcMOZWbVW]U M]Q OR]PV\MaYW]U ORbc _aMPcWPRb W]
project management.
΄
?MW]cMW]W]UM]QcaMPYW]UcVR_^acS^ZW^^S_a^XRPcb
within an organization.
A good example of how project offices evolve is the 
global project office (GPO) at Citibank’s Global Corpo-
rate Bank. GPO originated at the grassroots level 
within the small world of Operations and Technology 
for Global Cash Management. Committed to bringing 
order to the chaos of managing projects, GPO insti-
tuted training programs and professional project 
management practices on a very small scale. Soon 
the success of GPO-supported projects caught the 
eye of upper management. Within three years the 
department was expanded to offer a full range of PO 
services across Citibank’s entire banking operation. 
GPO’s mission is to establish project management as 
a core competency throughout the entire Citibank 
organization.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 . 3
The Project Office*
© Xavier Arnau/Getty Images
*T. R. Block and J. D. Frame, “Today’s Project Office: Gauging 
Attitudes,” PM Network, August 2001; W. Gradante and D. 
Gardner, “Managing Projects from the Future, Not from the 
Past,” Proceedings of the 29th Annual Project Management 
Institute 1998 Seminars and Symposium (Newtown Square, 
PA: Project Management Institute, 1998), pp. 289–94.
A major tenet of the project audit is that the outcome must represent an indepen-
dent, outside view of the project. Maintaining independence and an objective view 
is difficult, given that audits are frequently viewed as negative by project stakehold-
ers. Careers and reputations can be tarnished even in organizations that tolerate 
mistakes. In less forgiving organizations, mistakes can lead to termination or exile 
to less significant regions of an organization. Of course, if the result of an audit is 
favorable, careers and reputations can be enhanced. Given that project audits are 
susceptible to internal politics, some organizations rely on outside consulting firms 
to conduct the audits.
www.ebook3000.com

524  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Step 2: Data Collection and Analysis
Each organization and project is unique. Therefore, the specific kinds of information 
that will be collected will depend upon the industry, project size, newness of technol-
ogy, and project experience. These factors can influence the nature of the audit. 
However, information and data are gathered to answer questions similar to those 
suggested next.
Organization View
1. Was the organizational culture supportive and correct for this type of project? Why? 
Why not?
2. Was senior management’s support adequate?
3. Did the project accomplish its intended purpose?
4. Were the risks for the project appropriately identified and assessed? Were contin-
gency plans used? Were they realistic? Have risk events occurred that have an 
impact greater than anticipated?
5. Were the right people and talents assigned to this project?
6. What does evaluation from outside contractors suggest?
7. Were the project start-up and hand-off successful? Why? Is the customer satisfied?
Project Team View
1. Were the project planning and control systems appropriate for this type of project? 
Should all similar size and type of projects use these systems? Why/why not?
2. Did the project conform to plan? Is the project over or under budget and schedule? 
Why?
3. Were interfaces and communications with project stakeholders adequate and 
effective?
4. Did the team have adequate access to organizational resources—people, budget, 
support groups, equipment? Were there resource conflicts with other ongoing 
projects?
5. Was the team managed well? Were problems confronted not avoided?
The audit group should not be limited to these questions. The audit group should 
include other questions related to their organization and project type—e.g., research 
and development, marketing, information systems, construction, facilities. The generic 
questions above, although overlapping, represent a good starting point and will go a 
long way toward identifying project problem and success patterns.
Step 3: Reporting
The major goal of the audit report is to improve the way future projects are managed. 
Succinctly, the report attempts to capture needed changes and lessons learned from a 
current or finished project. The report serves as a training instrument for project man-
agers of future projects.
Audit reports need to be tailored to the specific project and organizational environ-
ment. Nevertheless, a generic format for all audits facilitates development of an audit 
database and a common outline for those who prepare audit reports and the managers 
who read and act on their content. A very general outline common to those found in 
practice is as follows:

Chapter 14  Project Closure  525
1. Classification The classification of projects by characteristics allows prospective 
readers and project managers to be selective in the use of the report content. Typical 
classification categories include the following:
∙ Project type—e.g., development, marketing, systems, construction.
∙ Size—monetary.
∙ Number of staff.
∙ Technology level—low, medium, high, new.
∙ Strategic or support.
Other classifications relevant to the organization should be included.
2. Analysis The analysis section includes succinct, factual review statements of the 
project. For example,
∙ Project mission and objectives.
∙ Procedures and systems used.
∙ Organization resources used.
∙ Outcomes achieved
3. Recommendations Usually audit recommendations represent major corrective 
actions that should take place. See, for example, Snapshot from Practice 14.4: Lessons 
Learned from Katrina. Audit recommendations are often technical in nature and focus 
on solutions to problems that surfaced. For example, to avoid rework, the report of a 
construction project recommended shifting to a more resilient building material. In 
other cases, recommendations may include terminating or sustaining vendor or con-
tractor relationships.
4. Lessons Learned These do not have to be in the form of recommendations.  Lessons 
learned serve as reminders of mistakes easily avoided and actions easily taken to 
ensure success. In practice, new project teams reviewing audits of past projects similar 
to the one they are about to start have found audit reports very useful. Team members 
will frequently remark later, “The recommendations were good, but the ‘lessons 
learned’ section really helped us avoid many pitfalls and made our project implementa-
tion smoother.” It is precisely this reason that lessons learned in the form of project 
retrospectives have taken on greater prominence and warrant further discussion. See 
Snapshot from Practice 14.5: Operation Eagle Claw.
5. Appendix The appendix may include backup data or details of analysis that would 
allow others to follow up if they wish. It should not be a dumping ground used for 
filler; only critical pertinent information should be attached.
Project Retrospectives
The term retrospective has emerged in recent years to denote specific efforts at iden-
tifying lessons learned on projects. Proponents believe that the traditional audit pro-
cess focuses too much on project success and evaluation which interferes with the 
surfacing and transferal of important lessons learned. They advocate a separate effort 
toward capturing lessons learned. In many ways this effort mirrors the auditing process. 
Typically, an independent, trained facilitator acts as a guide who leads the project 
team through an analysis of project activities that went well, what needs improve-
ments, and development of follow-up action plan with goals and accountability. This 
14-4
LO
Know how to use project 
retrospectives to obtain 
lessons learned.
www.ebook3000.com

526  Chapter 14  Project Closure
On August 25, 2005, winds of  
145 miles per hour and rains covered 
80 percent of New Orleans with some 
areas under 20 feet of water. Hurri-
cane Katrina dispersed havoc on 
every corner of New Orleans. In its trail it left over  
1,300 people dead in Louisiana and Mississippi. Katrina 
will long be remembered as the costliest and most 
deadly hurricane ever recorded in the United States.
 
Response came from many different groups 
within the country and from other countries. Katrina 
also drew the largest response of The National Guard 
to a national emergency in history. Governors from 
every state sent National Guard troops to support 
and assist the state of Mississippi. By September 8, 
51,000 troops were responding to the emergency. 
Many other nonproﬁt groups offered help in a variety 
of ways—food, shelter, ﬁnancial, health care, and 
transportation. Groups that contributed support have 
reviewed their efforts to see what lessons learned 
can be used to improve future emergency efforts. 
The results of the review of The National Guard 
efforts follow here:
 
Three of the key lessons from The National Guard 
retrospective are described.
΄
Lack of equipment was one of the biggest prob-
lems—especially communication equipment. Ability 
to communicate among the many different support 
groups (e.g., civilian and military) was thwarted by 
incompatible systems or simple lack of availability.
Action Item: $1.3 billion has been authorized for 
new equipment that is compatible across major 
emergency groups.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 . 4
Lessons Learned from Katrina*
΄
Lack of protocols and standardization of reports, 
graphics, and communication caused delays and 
poor coordination among the many support groups.
Action Item: A single standard protocol for all 
states is now being applied.
΄
The National Guard is under state control. Guard 
troops integrated quickly into the host-state com-
mand structures and cooperation ensued.
Action Item: Maintain status quo.
Because Guard soldiers are controlled by the states, 
they were empowered to enforce civil laws, something 
federal troops are prohibited from doing, except under 
the provisions of the insurrection laws. Fortunately, 
coordination and cooperation among state and federal 
troop command work reasonably well. However, the 
federal agencies (e.g., Homeland Security) need to 
incorporate the Guard into planning and preparation 
for the federal response to catastrophic disasters.
 
Lessons learned from the Katrina disaster are not 
limited to the military. Almost every agency and sup-
port group, such as individuals, communities, churches, 
and other groups, has developed lessons learned from 
their project response experience. For example, the 
Red Cross and state guard have better plans for han-
dling thousands of people problems involving shelter, 
evacuation, and medical assistance. These lessons 
learned from Katrina are ready to go and should be 
enormously helpful in future hurricane situations.
*Les A. Melnyk, “Katrina Lessons Learned,” Soldiers Magazine, 
June 20, 2006 and “Lessons Learned from Katrina: Preparing 
Your Institution for a Catastrophic Event.” Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation is the source of this information. 1/20/08
facilitator may come from the project office or be an external consultant. Wherever 
this individual comes from, it is critical that she or he be perceived as being indepen-
dent and unbiased.
In retrospecitive methodology, the facilitator uses several questionnaires to conduct 
post-project audits. These surveys focus not only on project operations, but also on 
how the organization’s culture impacted project success and failures. Table 14.2  
provides a sampling of the former while Table 14.3 provides a sample of the latter.
With survey information in hand, the facilitator visits one-on-one with project team 
members, project manager, and other stakeholders to dive deeper into cause-effect 
impacts. For example, the facilitator may discover that one of the primary reasons for 
lack of timely decision making and poor coordination between groups was that team 
members were bombarded with too much information and had a difficult time sorting 
through what was critical and what could be ignored.

Chapter 14  Project Closure  527
Armed with the information gleaned from one-on-one sessions and other sources, 
the facilitator leads a team retrospective session. The session first reviews the facilita-
tor’s report and attempts to add key information. So with regard to the information 
overload problem, team members not only identify failure to flag critical information, 
but also a tendency to “cc” everyone just in case. The facilitator works with the team 
to develop a system that not only prioritizes information, but also does it according to 
who needs to receive it.
On November 4, 1979, a mob in Iran 
stormed the U.S. Embassy and took 52 
Americans hostage. After six months 
of failed negotiation, the green light 
was given to execute Operation Eagle 
Claw, a joint military effort to free the hostages.
 
The plan called for eight Navy RH-53D helicopters 
to ﬂy 600 miles to a remote site in Iran, code named 
Desert One. Under the cover of darkness, the helicop-
ters would be refueled by KC-130 tankers. The helicop-
ters would then ﬂy the assault force to a spot near the 
outskirts of Teheran where they would meet up with 
special agents already in the country. The agents 
would lead them to a safe house to await the assault 
on the embassy the next night. Upon rescuing the hos-
tages, the assault team would escort them to a nearby 
airﬁeld that had already been secured by a second 
assault team where they would be ﬂown to safety.
 
What actually happened was far different from 
what was planned.
 
The helicopter pilots were ordered to ﬂy at or 
below 200 feet to avoid radar. This caused them to run 
into “haboobs” or dust storms. Two helicopters mal-
functioned and turned back. The remainder battled the 
dust storms and arrived at Desert One one hour late. 
The rescue attempt was dealt its ﬁnal blow when it was 
discovered that a third helicopter had a hydraulic leak 
and was inoperable. Only ﬁve aircraft were serviceable 
and six were needed, so the mission had to be aborted. 
Things got worse when one of the helicopters moved 
into position to refuel and collided with a KC-130 plane. 
Both aircraft burst into ﬂames. All told, eight soldiers 
died and dozens were injured. The Iranians scattered 
the hostages around the country afterward, making 
any further rescue attempts impossible.
 
Given the gravity of the situation, a special six- 
member commission was appointed by the Joint Chiefs 
of Staff to conduct a review of the project. They identiﬁed 
a number of issues that contributed to the failure. One 
issue was the selection of the air crews. Given the sig-
niﬁcance of the mission, each military service wanted to 
be involved. Navy and Marine pilots with little experi-
ence in long-range overland navigation or refueling 
were chosen though more than one hundred experi-
enced Air Force pilots were available. Another issue 
was the lack of a comprehensive mission rehearsal pro-
gram. From the beginning, training was not conducted 
in a truly joint manner; it was compartmentalized by 
service and held in different locations across the United 
States. The limited rehearsals that were conducted 
assessed only segments of the total mission.
 
The commission concluded that 10 and perhaps 12 
helicopters should have been launched to guarantee the 
minimum six required for mission completion. Finally, the 
hopscotch method for ground refueling was criticized. If 
planners had chosen en-route fueling, the entire Desert 
One scenario could have been avoided. The ﬁnal report 
contained several important lessons learned that have 
contributed to successful subsequent missions, includ-
ing the one against Osama bin Laden in 2011.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 . 5
Operation Eagle Claw*
© Michael OchsArschives/Stringer/Getty 
* D. M. Giangreco and T. A. Griswold, Delta: America’s Elite 
Counter-terrorist Force (New York: Motorbooks International, 
1992).
www.ebook3000.com

528  Chapter 14  Project Closure
TABLE 14.2
Project Process 
Review Questionnaire
 
Item 
Comments
 1.  Were the project objectives and strategic intent of the  
project clearly and explicitly communicated?
 2.  Were the objectives and strategy in alignment?
 3.  Were the stakeholders identiﬁed and included in  
the planning?
 4.  Were project resources adequate for this project? 
 5.  Were people with the right skill sets assigned to this project?
 6.  Were time estimates reasonable and achievable? 
 7.  Were the risks for the project appropriately identiﬁed and  
assessed before the project started?
 8.  Were the processes and practices appropriate for this type  
of project? Should projects of similar size and type use  
these systems? Why/why not?
 9.  Did outside contractors perform as expected? Explain. 
 10.  Were communication methods appropriate and adequate  
among all stakeholders? Explain. 
 11.  Is the customer satisﬁed with the project product?
 12.  Are the customers using the project deliverables as  
intended? Are they satisﬁed?
 13. Were the project objectives met?
 14.  Are the stakeholders satisﬁed their strategic intents  
have been met?
 15.  Has the customer or sponsor accepted a formal  
statement that the terms of the project charter and  
scope have been met?
 16. Were schedule, budget, and scope standards met?
 17.  Is there any one important area that needs to be reviewed  
and improved upon? Can you identify the cause?
TABLE 14.3 
Organizational 
Culture Review 
Questionnaire
 
Item 
 Comments
 1.  Was the organizational culture supportive for this type  
of project?
 2.  Was senior management support adequate?
 3.  Were people with the right skills assigned to this project?
 4.  Did the project office help or hinder management of  
the project? Explain. 
 5.  Did the team have access to organizational resources  
(people, funds, equipment)?
 6.  Was training for this project adequate? Explain. 
 7.  Were lessons learned from earlier projects useful?  
Why? Where?
 8.  Did the project have a clear link to organizational  
objectives? Explain.
 9.  Was project staff properly reassigned? 
10.  Was the Human Resources Office helpful in ﬁnding  
new assignments? Comment.

Chapter 14  Project Closure  529
Each lesson is assigned an owner, typically a team member who is very interested 
and familiar with the lesson. This team member/owner will serve as a contact point for 
anyone needing information (expertise, contacts, templates, etc.) relating to the lesson. 
This person often reports lessons learned to larger audiences within their organization 
that would benefit from the collective wisdom.
Not only is there a contact person, but lessons learned need to be documented 
and archived in a manner that makes them accessible and usable by others. Here the 
facilitator works with the Project Office to create repository that uses a sophisti-
cated search engine that permits others to quickly sort through and access lessons 
specific to their needs. Failure to do so will produce a system that is undervalued 
and underutilized.
Project Audits: The Bigger Picture
Individual audits or postproject retrospectives can yield valuable lessons and recom-
mendations that team members can apply to future project work. When done on a 
consistent basis, they can lead to significant improvements in the processes and tech-
niques that organizations use to complete projects. A more encompassing look from an 
organizationwide point of view is to use a project maturity model. The purposes of all 
maturity models (and there are many available) are to enable organizations to assess 
their progress in implementing the best practices in their industry and move to improve-
ment. It is important to understand that the model does not ensure success; it only 
serves as a measuring stick and an indicator of progress.
The term maturity model was coined in the late 1980s from a research study by the 
United States government and the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie-
Mellon University. The government wanted a tool to predict successful software devel-
opment by contractors. The outcome of this research was the Capability Maturity 
Model (CMM). The model focuses on guiding and assessing organizations in imple-
menting concrete best practices of managing software development projects. Since its 
development, the model is now used across all industries. Currently, over 2,400 orga-
nizations around the world report their maturity progress to the Software Engineering 
Institute. (See website at http://www.sei.cmu.edu/activities/sema/profile.html.)
One newer model has received a great deal of publicity. In January 2004, after eight 
years of development, the Project Management Institute rolled out its second version 
of the “Organizational Project Maturity Model.” The latest version is called OPM3TM. 
(See www.pmi.org/opm3.) Typically, these models are divided into a continuum of 
growth levels: Initial, Repeatable, Defined, Managed, and Optimized. Figure 14.2 
presents our version, which borrows liberally from other models. What we have tried 
to do is focus less on a process and more on the state an organization has evolved to in 
managing projects.
Level 1: Ad Hoc Project Management No consistent project management process is 
in place. How a project is managed depends upon the individuals involved. Character-
istics of this level include
∙ No formal project selection system exists—projects are done because people decide 
to do them or because a high-ranking manager orders it done.
∙ How any one project is managed varies by individual—unpredictability.
∙ No investment in project management training is made.
∙ Working on projects is a struggle because it goes against the grain of established 
policies and procedures.
14-5
LO
Assess level of project 
management maturity.
www.ebook3000.com

530  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Level 2: Formal Application of Project Management The organization applies 
established project management procedures and techniques. This level is often marked 
by tension between project managers and line managers, who need to redefine their 
roles. Features of this level include
∙ Standard approaches to managing projects including scope statements, WBS, activ-
ity lists are used.
∙ Quality emphasis is on the product or outcome of the project and is inspected 
instead of built in.
∙ The organization is moving in the direction of stronger matrix with project manag-
ers and line managers working out their respective roles.
∙ Growing recognition of need for cost control, not just scope and time management, exists.
∙ There is no formal project priority system established.
∙ Limited training in project management is provided.
Level 3: Institutionalization of Project Management An organizationwide project 
management system, tailored to specific needs of the organization with the flexibility 
to adapt the process to unique characteristics of the project, is established. Character-
istics of this level include
∙ An established process for managing projects is evident by planning templates, 
status report systems, and checklists for each stage of project life cycle.
∙ Formal criteria are used to select projects.
∙ Project management is integrated with quality management and concurrent 
engineering.
∙ Project teams try to build in quality not simply inspect it.
∙ The organization is moving toward a team-based reward system to recognize project 
execution.
∙ Risk assessment derived from WBS and technical analyses and customer input is  
in place.
∙ The organization offers expanded training in project management.
FIGURE 14.2
Project Management 
Maturity Model
Time
Ad hoc 
project mgmt.
Formal 
application of
project mgmt.
Institutionalization
of project mgmt.
Management
of project
mgmt. system
Optimization
of project
mgmt. system
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5

Chapter 14  Project Closure  531
∙ Time-phased budgets are used to measure and monitor performance based on earned 
value analysis.
∙ A specific change control system for requirements, cost, and schedule is developed 
for each project, and a work authorization system is in place.
∙ Project audits tend to be performed only when a project fails.
Level 4: Management of Project Management System The organization develops a 
system for managing multiple projects that are aligned with strategic goals of the orga-
nization. Characteristics of this level include  
∙ Portfolio project management is practiced; projects are selected based on resource 
capacity and contribution to strategic goals.
∙ A project priority system is established.
∙ Project work is integrated with ongoing operations.
∙ Quality improvement initiatives are designed to improve both the quality of the 
project management process and the quality of specific products and services.
∙ Benchmarking is used to identify opportunities for improvement.
∙ The organization has established a Project Management Office or Center for 
Excellence.
∙ Project audits are performed on all significant projects; lessons learned are recorded 
and used on subsequent projects.
∙ An integrative information system is established for tracking resource usage and 
performance of all significant projects. 
Level 5: Optimization of Project Management System The focus is on continuous 
improvement through incremental advancements of existing practices and by innova-
tions using new technologies and methods. Features include
∙ A project management information system is fine-tuned; specific and aggregate 
information is provided to different stakeholders.
∙ An informal culture that values improvement drives the organization, not policies 
and procedures.
∙ There is greater flexibility in adapting the project management process to demands 
of a specific project.
A major theme of this book is that the culture of the organization has a profound 
impact on how project management methodology operates. Audits and performance 
evaluation require informed judgment. Good decision making depends not only on 
the accuracy of the information, but also on the right information. For example, 
imagine how much different your response might be if you made an honest mistake 
but did not trust management and felt insecure versus if you had confidence and trust 
in management. Or think how different the quality of information that would surface 
from a team would be where trust was divided versus a team that works in a Level 5 
environment.
Progress from one level to the next will not occur overnight. The Software Engineering 
Institute estimates the following median times for movement:
Maturity level 1 to 2 is 22 months.
Maturity level 2 to 3 is 19 months.
Maturity level 3 to 4 is 25 months.
Maturity level 4 to 5 is 13 months.
www.ebook3000.com

532  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Why does it take so long? One reason is simply organizational inertia. It is difficult 
for complex social organizations to institute significant changes while at the same time 
maintaining business efficacy. “How do we find time to change when we are so busy 
just keeping our heads above water?”
A second significant reason is that one cannot leapfrog past any one level. Just as a 
child cannot avoid the trials and tribulations of being a teenager by adopting all the 
lessons learned by his or her parents, people within the organization have to work 
through the unique challenges and problems of each level to get to the next level. 
Learning of this magnitude naturally takes time and cannot be avoided by using quick 
fixes or simple remedies. See Snapshot from Practice 14.6: 2015 PMO of the Year: 
Navy Federal Credit Union for how a PMO improved the maturity of project manage-
ment operations at a large credit union.
14.4 Post-Implementation Evaluation
The purpose of project evaluation is to assess how well the project team, team mem-
bers, and project manager performed.
Team Evaluation
Evaluation of performance is essential to encourage changes in behavior and to support 
individual career development and continuous improvement through organizational 
learning. Evaluation implies measurement against specific criteria. Experience  
corroborates that before commencement of a project, the stage must be set so 
Provide useful advice  
for conducting team  
performance reviews.
14-6
LO
Like many ﬁnancial institutions, the 
Navy Federal Credit Union struggled 
with adapting IT technologies to bet-
ter serve their over 5 million members. 
Navy Federal had no clear method of 
prioritizing projects. Project execution processes were 
ad hoc. Delivery metrics weren’t being tracked. 
Doomed projects lingered, with no one willing to hit the 
kill button.
 
In 2010 things began to change. Navy Federal 
began developing a team of project professionals who 
could advocate a standardized project delivery system 
as well as strategic alignment practices. In 2014 the IT 
department opened its project management office 
(PMO). The office was not greeted with open arms. The 
team had to work hard to avoid the perception that it 
was a document engine or needless bureaucracy.
 
“Throughout our journey, we’ve certainly faced 
challenges in terms of buy-in and acceptance of proj-
ect management,” says Kristin Earley, PMP, assistant 
vice president of the PMO. “We started with small 
wins. We had to highlight the demonstrated value that 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 . 6
2015 PMO of the Year: Navy 
Federal Credit Union*
we brought in terms of consistent, repeatable delivery 
of projects.”
 
The impact has been signiﬁcant. The percentages of 
projects that closed according to plan jumped from 55 per-
cent in 2014 to 88 percent in 2015. The PMO is now consid-
ered an integral part of how Navy Federal does business 
and was recognized by the Project Management Institute 
as 2015 PMO of the year.
 
While the initial push was to standardize project 
management processes, the PMO realized that not all 
projects are alike and some may beneﬁt from less tra-
ditional methods.
 
“The PMO started with a one-size-ﬁts-all approach 
to project delivery. We realized this really wasn’t the 
most effective way to work with our business partners 
to deliver value frequently throughout the project life 
cycle,” Ms. Earley says. “We’ve tailored our delivery 
practices to introduce both agile and incremental deliv-
ery practices, and that’s helped us improve our delivery 
within the portfolio.”
*Gantz, J., “Mission Accomplished,” PM Network 29 (12) 
(December 2015), pp. 30–37.

If team evaluation is not done well in 
practice, how bad is it? Joseph Fusco 
surveyed 1,667 project managers 
representing 134 different projects. 
Fifty-two percent of the respondents 
indicated their team received no collective evaluation 
of their team performance. Of the 22 percent who 
indicated their team was evaluated, further probing 
found their evaluation was informal, lasting little more 
than 20 minutes. This apparent lack of team evalua-
tion practices may be sending the wrong signal. 
Individual team members can slough off poor team 
performance by relying on the old saying, “I did my 
job.” Strong team evaluation practices need to empha-
size team members are “in this together,” while  
minimizing individual performance. Nearly every com-
pany in Fusco’s survey lacked an effective project 
management reward system.
Research Highlight 14.1
Measures of Team Performance*
* Joseph Fusco, “Better Policies Provide the Key to  
Implementing Project Management,” Project Management 
Journal, Vol. 28, No. 3, September 1997, p. 38.
533
expectations, standards, supportive organizational culture, and constraints are in place; 
if not, the effectiveness of the evaluation process will suffer.
In a macro sense, the evidence today suggests that performance evaluation is not 
done well. See Research Highlight 14.1: Measures of Team Performance. The major 
reasons cited by practitioners are twofold:
1. Evaluations of individuals are still left to supervisors of the team member’s home 
department.
2. Typical measures of team performance center on time, cost, and specifications.
Most organizations do not go beyond these measures, although they are important 
and critical. Organizations should consider evaluating the team-building process, 
effectiveness of group decision and problem-solving processes, group cohesion, trust 
among team members, and quality of information exchanged. Measurement of cus-
tomer and user satisfaction with project deliverables (i.e., the project results) is often 
missed completely. Yet, project success depends significantly on satisfying these two 
very important groups. The quality of the deliverables is the responsibility of the team.
Before an evaluation of the project team can be effective and useful, a minimum 
core of conditions needs to be in place before the project begins (see Chapter 11). 
Some typical conditions are listed here in the form of questions:
1. Do standards for measuring performance exist? (You can’t manage what you can’t 
measure.) Are the goals clear for the team and individuals? Challenging? Attain-
able? Lead to positive consequences?
2. Are individual and team responsibilities and performance standards known by all 
team members?
3. Are team rewards adequate? Do they send a clear signal that senior management 
believes that the synergy of teams is important?
4. Is a clear career path for successful project managers in place?
5. Is the team empowered to manage short-term difficulties?
6. Is there a relatively high level of trust emanating from the organizational culture?
7. Team evaluation should go beyond time, cost, and specifications. Are there criteria 
beyond the constraint criteria? Creation of project deliverables would be a good 
place to start. The “characteristics of highly effective teams” from Chapter 11 can 
easily be adapted as measurements of team performance.
The “in-place conditions” will support any evaluation approach for teams and their 
members.
www.ebook3000.com

534  Chapter 14  Project Closure
In practice, the actual team evaluation process takes many forms—especially when 
evaluation goes beyond time, budget, and specifications. The typical mechanism for 
evaluation of teams is a survey administered by a consultant, a staff member from the 
human resources department, or through computer e-mail. The survey is normally 
restricted to team members, but in some cases, other project stakeholders interacting 
with the team may be included in the survey. An example of a partial survey is found 
in Table 14.4. After the results are tabulated, the team meets with the facilitator and/or 
senior management, and the results are reviewed.
This session is comparable to the team-building sessions described in Chapter 11, 
except that the focus is on using the survey results to assess the development of the 
team, its strengths and weaknesses, and the lessons that can be applied to future project 
work. The results of team evaluation surveys are helpful in changing behavior to better 
support team communication, the team approach, and continuous improvement of 
team performance.
Individual, Team Member, and Project Manager Performance Reviews
Organizations vary in the extent to which their project managers are actively involved 
in the appraisal process of team members. In organizations where projects are man-
aged within a functional organization, the team member’s area manager, not the project 
manager, is responsible for assessing performance. The area manager may solicit the 
project manager’s opinion of the individual’s performance on a specific project; this 
will be factored into the individual’s overall performance. In a balanced matrix, the 
project manager and the area manager jointly evaluate an individual’s performance. In 
project matrix and project organizations in which the lion’s share of the individual’s 
work is project related, the project manager is responsible for appraising individual 
performance. One process that appears to be gaining wider acceptance is the multi-
rater appraisal or “360-degree feedback,” which involves soliciting feedback concern-
ing team members’ performance from all the people their work affects. This would 
include not only project and area managers, but also peers, subordinates, and even 
customers. See Snapshot from Practice 14.7: The 360-Degree Feedback.
Performance appraisals generally fulfill two important functions. The first is devel-
opmental in nature: the focus is on identifying individual strengths and weaknesses 
and developing action plans for improving performance. The second is evaluative and 
involves assessing how well the person has performed in order to determine salary or 
merit adjustments. These two functions are not compatible. Employees, in their eager-
ness to find out how much pay they will receive, tend to tune out constructive feedback 
on how they can improve their performance. Likewise, managers tend to be more con-
cerned with justifying their decision than engaging in a meaningful discussion on how 
Provide useful advice  
for conducting  
performance reviews  
of project members.
14-7
LO
 
Disagree  
 
 
Agree
Using the scale below, assess each statement.
1.  The team shared a sense of common purpose,  
and each member was willing to work toward  
achieving project objectives. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
2.  Respect was shown for other points of view.  
Differences of opinion were encouraged and  
freely expressed. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
3.  All interaction among team members occurred  
in a comfortable, supportive atmosphere. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5
TABLE 14.4
Sample Team 
Evaluation and 
Feedback Survey

Chapter 14  Project Closure  535
the employee can improve his or her performance. It is difficult to be both a coach and 
a judge. As a result, several experts on performance appraisal systems recommend that 
organizations separate performance reviews, which focus on individual improve-
ment, and pay reviews, which allocate the distribution of rewards (cf., Romanoff, 
1989; Latham and Wexley, 1993).
In some matrix organizations, project managers conduct the performance reviews, 
while area managers are responsible for pay reviews. In other cases, performance 
reviews are part of the project closure process, and pay reviews are the primary objec-
tive of the annual performance appraisal. Other organizations avoid this dilemma by 
allocating only group rewards for project work and providing annual awards for indi-
vidual performance. The remaining discussion is directed at reviews designed to 
improve performance because pay reviews are often outside the jurisdiction of the 
project manager.
Individual Reviews
Organizations employ a wide range of methods to review individual performance on 
a project. In general, review methods of individual performance center on the techni-
cal and social skills brought to the project and team. Some organizations rely simply 
on an informal discussion between the project manager and the project member. Other 
organizations require project managers to submit written evaluations that describe 
and assess an individual’s performance on a project. Many organizations use rating 
More and more companies are discarding 
the traditional superior-subordinate 
performance feedback process and 
replacing it with 360-degree feedback 
systems. The 360-degree feedback 
approach gathers behavioral observations from many 
sources within the organization and includes employee 
self-assessment. The individual completes the same 
structured evaluation process that superiors, project 
team members, peers and, in many cases, external 
customers use to evaluate a performance. Survey 
questionnaires, augmented by a few open-ended 
questions, are typically used to gather information.
 
Summary results are compared against organiza-
tional strategies, values, and business objectives. The 
feedback is communicated to the individual with the 
assistance of the company’s human resource depart-
ment or an outside consultant. The technique is used 
by a growing number of ﬁrms including General Elec-
tric, AT&T, Mobil Oil, Nabisco, Hewlett-Packard, and 
Warner-Lambert.
 
The objective of the 360-degree process is to 
identify areas for individual improvement. When anon-
ymous feedback solicited from others is compared 
with the individual’s self-evaluations, the individual 
may form a more realistic picture of her or his 
strengths and weaknesses. This may prompt behav-
ioral change if the weaknesses identiﬁed were previ-
ously unknown to the individual. So, for example, a 
project manager who thinks he delegates work effec-
tively ﬁnds out that subordinates disagree. This causes 
him to rethink how he delegates and to decide to del-
egate more and sooner.
 
Many firms obtain feedback from internal and 
external project customers. For example, a client may 
evaluate a project manager or member of the project 
team according to “How effectively does the individual 
get things done without creating unnecessary adver-
sarial relationships?” Incorporating customer feedback 
in the evaluation process underscores collaboration 
and the importance of client expectations in determin-
ing project success.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 4 . 7
The 360-Degree Feedback*
* Brian O’Reilly, “360 Feedback Can Change Your Life,”  
Fortune, October, 17, 1994, pp. 93–100; Robert Hoffman, “Ten 
Reasons You Should Be Using 360 Degree Feedback,” HR 
Magazine, April 1995, pp. 82–85; Dick Cochran, “Finally, a 
Way to Completely Measure Project Manager Performance,” 
PM Network, September 2000, pp. 75–80.
www.ebook3000.com

536  Chapter 14  Project Closure
scales similar to the team evaluation survey in which the project manager rates the 
individual according to a certain scale (i.e., from 1 to 5) on a number of relevant per-
formance dimensions (i.e., teamwork, customer relations). Some organizations  
augment these rating schemes with behaviorally anchored descriptions of what consti-
tutes a 1 rating, a 2 rating, and so forth. Each method has its strengths and weak-
nesses, and, unfortunately, in many organizations the appraisal systems were designed 
to support mainstream operations and not unique project work. The bottom line is that 
project managers have to use as best they can the performance review system man-
dated by their organization.
Regardless of the method, the project manager needs to sit down with each team 
member and discuss his or her performance. Here are some general tips for conducting 
performance reviews:
∙ Always begin the process by asking the individual to evaluate his or her contribu-
tions to the project. First, this approach may yield valuable information that you 
were not aware of. Second, the approach may provide an early warning for situations 
in which there is disparity in assessments. Finally, this method reduces the judg-
mental nature of the discussion.
∙ Avoid, when possible, drawing comparisons with other team members; rather, 
assess the individual in terms of established standards and expectations. Compari-
sons tend to undermine cohesion and divert attention away from what the individual 
needs to do to improve performance.
∙ When you have to be critical, focus the criticism on specific examples of behavior 
rather than on the individual personally. Describe in specific terms how the behav-
ior affected the project.
∙ Be consistent and fair in your treatment of all team members. Nothing breeds resent-
ment more than if, through the grapevine, individuals feel they are being held to a 
different standard than are other project members.
∙ Treat the review as only one point in an ongoing process. Use it to reach an agree-
ment as to how the individual can improve his or her performance.
Both managers and subordinates may dread a formal performance review. Neither 
side feels comfortable with the evaluative nature of the discussion and the potential for 
misunderstanding and hurt feelings. Much of this anxiety can be alleviated if the proj-
ect manager is doing her job well. Project managers should be constantly giving team 
members feedback throughout the project so that individual team members can have a 
pretty good idea how well they have performed and how the manager feels before the 
formal meeting. Post-project angst can be avoided if pre-project expectations are dis-
cussed before the project and regularly reinforced during project performance.
While in many cases the same process that is applied to reviewing the performance 
of team members is applied to evaluating the project manager, many organizations 
augment this process, given the importance of the position to their organization. This 
is where conducting the 360-degree review is becoming more popular. In project-
driven organizations, the project office typically will be responsible for collecting 
information on a specific project manager from customers, vendors, team members, 
peers, and other managers. This approach has tremendous promise for developing 
more effective project managers (Cochran, 2000).
In addition to performance reviews, data are collected for project retrospectives, 
which can present situations that may influence performance. In these situations per-
formance evaluations should recognize and note the unusual situation.

Chapter 14  Project Closure  537
The goals of project closure are to complete the project and to improve performance 
of future projects. Implementing closure and review has three major closure deliver-
ables: wrap-up, audit, and performance evaluation. Wrap-up activities put the proj-
ect “to bed” and include completing the final project deliverable, closing accounts, 
finding new opportunities for project staff, closing facilities, and creating the final 
report. Project audits assess the overall success of the project. Retrospectives are 
used to identify lessons learned and improve future performance. Individual and 
team evaluations assess performance and opportunities for improvement. A project 
should not be considered closed until all three activities have been completed. The 
culture of the organization and the project team will play a major factor in the effi-
cacy of these activities.
Summary
Key Terms
Lessons learned, 525
Performance review, 535
Project closure, 516
Project evaluation, 532
Retrospective, 525
360-degree review, 536
1. How does the project closure review differ from the performance measurement con-
trol system discussed in Chapter 13?
2. What major information would you expect to find in a project review?
3. Why is it difficult to perform a truly independent, objective review?
4. Comment on the following statement: “We cannot afford to terminate the project 
now. We have already spent more than 50 percent of the project budget.”
5. Why should you separate performance reviews from pay reviews? How do you do 
this?
6. Advocates of retrospective methodology claim there are distinguishing characteris-
tics that increase its value over past lessons learned methods. What are they? How 
does each characteristic enhance project closure and review?
1. Consider a course that you recently completed. Perform a review of the course (the 
course represents a project and the course syllabus represents the project plan).
2. Imagine you are conducting a review of the International Space Station project. 
Research press coverage and the Internet to collect information on the current status 
of the project. What are the successes and failures to date? What forecasts would 
you make about the completion of the project, and why? What recommendations 
would you make to top management of the program, and why?
3. Interview a project manager who works for an organization that implements multi-
ple projects. Ask the manager what kind of closure procedures are used to complete 
a project and whether lessons learned are used.
4. What are some of the lessons learned from a recent project in your organization? 
Was a retrospective done? What action plans were generated to improve processes 
as a result of the project?
Exercises
Review 
Questions
www.ebook3000.com

538  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Anonymous, “Annual Survey of Business Improvement Architects,” Toronto, Canada, 
in PM Network, “Deliverables,” vol. 21, no. 4 (April 2007), p. 18.
Cochran, D., “Finally, a Way to Completely Measure Project Manager Performance,” 
PM Network, September 2000, pp. 75–80.
Cooke-Davies, T., “Project Management Closeout Management: More than Simply 
Saying Good Bye and Moving On,” in J. Knutson (Ed.), Project Management for 
Business Processionals (Indianapolis, IN: John Wiley and Sons, 2001), pp. 200–14.
Fretty, P., “Why Do Projects Really Fail?” PM Network, March 2006, pp. 45–48.
Gobeli, D., and E. W. Larson, “Barriers Affecting Project Success,” in 1986 Proceed-
ings Project Management Institute: Measuring Success (Upper Darby, PA: Project 
Management Institute, 1986), pp. 22–29.
Hoffman, R., “Ten Reasons You Should Be Using 360 Degree Feedback,” HR Maga-
zine, April 1995, pp. 82–85.
Jedd, Marcia, “Standing Guard,” PM Network, vol. 21, no. 1 (January 2007), pp. 73–77.
Kendrick, Tom, Identifying and Managing Project Risk, 2nd ed. (New York: ANA-
COM, 2009).
Kerth, Norman L., Project Retrospectives: A Handbook for Team Reviews (New York: 
Dorset House, 2001).
Kwak, Y. H., and C. W. Ibbs, “Calculating Project Management’s Return on Invest-
ment,” Project Management Journal, vol. 31, no. 2 (March 2000), pp. 38–47.
Ladika, S., “By Focusing on Lessons Learned, Project Managers Can Avoid Repeating 
the Same Old Mistakes,” PM Network, Vol. 22, No. 2 (February 2008), pp. 75–77.
Latham, G. P., and K. N. Wexley, Increasing Productivity through Performance 
Appraisal, 2nd ed. (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1993).
Lavell, Debra, and Russ Martinelli, “Program and Project Retrospectives: An  
Introduction,” PM World Today, vol. 10, no. 1 (January 2008), p. 1.
Marlin, Mark, “Implementing an Effective Lessons Learned Process in a Global  
Project Environment,” PM World Today, vol. 10, no. 11 (November 2008), pp. 1–6.
Nelson, Ryan R., “Project Retrospectives: Evaluating Project Success, Failure, and Every-
thing in Between,” MIS Quarterly Executive, vol. 4, no. 3 (September 2005), p. 372.
Pippett, D. D., and J. F. Peters, “Team Building and Project Management: How Are We 
Doing?” Project Management Journal, vol. 26, no. 4 (December 1995), pp. 29–37.
Romanoff, T. K., “The Ten Commandments of Performance Management,” Personnel, 
vol. 66, no. 1 (1989), pp. 24–26.
Royer, I., “Why Bad Projects Are So Hard to Kill,” Harvard Business Review, February 
2003, pp. 49–56.
Senge, P., The Fifth Discipline: The Art and Practice of the Learning Organization 
(New York: Doubleday, 1990).
Sheperd, D. A., H. Patzelt, and M. Wolfe, “Moving Forward from Project Failure: 
Negative Emotions, Affective Commitment, and Learning from the Experience,” 
Academy of Management Journal, vol. 54, no. 6 (2011), pp. 1229–60.
References

Chapter 14  Project Closure  539
Staw, Berry M., and Jerry Ross, “Knowing When to Pull the Plug,” Harvard Business 
Review, March-April 1987, pp. 68–74.
Wheatly, M., “Over the Bar,” PM Network, vol. 17, no. 1 (January 2003), pp. 40–45.
Yates, J. K., and S. Aniftos, “ISO 9000 Series of Quality Standards and the E/C 
Industry,” Project Management Journal, vol. 28, no. 2 (June 1997), pp. 21–31.
Zaitz, Les, “Rail Car Deal Snags Tri Met for Millions,” Oregonian, December 14, 
2008, p. 1, and January 7, 2009, p. D4.
Appendix 14.1
Project Closeout Checklist
Project Closeout Transition Checklist
Provide basic information about the project including: Project Title—The proper name used to identify this 
project; Project Working Title—The working name or acronym that will be used for the project; Proponent 
Secretary—The Secretary to whom the proponent agency is assigned or the Secretary that is sponsoring 
an enterprise project; Proponent Agency—The agency that will be responsible for the management of the 
project; Prepared by—The person(s) preparing this document; Date/Control Number—The date the check-
list is ﬁnalized and the change or conﬁguration item control number assigned.
Project Title: 
 
Project Working Title: 
Proponent Secretary: 
 
Proponent Agency: 
Prepared by: 
 
Date/Control Number: 
Complete the Status and Comments columns. In the Status column indicate: Yes, if the item has been 
addressed and completed; No, if the item has not been addressed, or is incomplete; N/A, if the item is not 
applicable to this project. Provide comments or describe the plan to resolve the item in the last column.
Item
Status
Comments/Plan 
to Resolve
1
Have all the product or service deliverables been 
accepted by the customer?
1.1
Are there contingencies or conditions related to 
the acceptance? If so, describe in the Comments.
2
Has the project been evaluated against each 
performance goal established in the project 
performance plan?
3
Has the actual cost of the project been tallied 
and compared to the approved cost baseline?
3.1
Have all approved changes to the cost baseline 
been identiﬁed and their impact on the project 
documented?
(Continued)
Chapter 14  Project Closure  539
www.ebook3000.com

540  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Item
Status
Comments/Plan 
to Resolve
4
Have the actual milestone completion dates 
been compared to the approved schedule?
4.1
Have all approved changes to the schedule 
baseline been identiﬁed and their impact on 
the project documented?
5
Have all approved changes to the project scope 
been identiﬁed and their impact on the perfor-
mance, cost, and schedule baselines 
documented?
6
Has operations management formally accepted 
responsibility for operating and maintaining the 
product(s) or service(s) delivered by the project?
6.1
Has the documentation relating to operation and 
maintenance of the product(s) or service(s) 
been delivered to, and accepted by, operations 
management?
6.2
Has training and knowledge transfer of the oper-
ations organization been completed?
6.3
Does the projected annual cost to operate and 
maintain the product(s) or service(s) differ from 
the estimate provided in the project proposal? 
If so, note and explain the difference in the 
Comments column.
7
Have the resources used by the project been 
transferred to other units within the organization?
8
Has the project documentation been archived or 
otherwise disposed of as described in the project 
plan?
9
Have the lessons learned been documented in 
accordance with the Commonwealth Project 
Management guideline?
10
Has the date for the post-implementation review 
been set?
10.1
Has the person or unit responsible for conduct-
ing the post-implementation review been 
identiﬁed?
Signatures
The signatures of the people below relay an understanding that the key elements within 
the Closeout Phase section are complete and the project has been formally closed.
Position/Title
Name
Date
Phone Number
 
 
Source: http://www.vita.virginia.gov/projects/cpm/cpmDocs/CPMG-SEC5-Final.pdf

Chapter 14  Project Closure  541
Appendix 14.2
Euro Conversion—Project Closure Checklist
Document ﬁnance department acceptance
Customer training in Euro software
Archive all
    Schedules/actuals
    Budgets/actual costs
    Changes
Close out all accounts with vendors
Close out all work orders
Close out partner accounts
Reassign project staff
Evaluation of
    Vendors
    Staff members
Final report and lessons learned meeting
Lessons learned archive to database
tribute awards
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
16/12
28/12
31/12
31/12
31/12
31/12
31/12
31/12
16/12
31/12
31/12
4/1
10/1
Due
date
Project
Euro Conversion
Hans Kramer
Finance Department
12 December XX
Project manager
Person
responsible
Notes
Hans
Joan
Maeyke
Maeyke
Maeyke
Guido
Mayo
Guido
Sophie
Mayo
Sophie
Hans
Maeyke
Sophie
Train all departments
before conversion
Use standard
questionnaire for vendors
Have HR department
develop and administer
Send notice to all
stakeholders
Contact IS department
Notify all
stakeholders
Customer
Completion date
www.ebook3000.com

542  Chapter 14  Project Closure
Case A14.1
Maximum Megahertz Project
Olaf Gundersen, the CEO of Wireless Telecom Company, is in a quandary. Last year he 
accepted the Maximum Megahertz Project suggested by six up-and-coming young R&D 
corporate stars. Although Olaf did not truly understand the technical importance of the 
project, the creators of the project needed only $600,000, so it seemed like a good risk. 
Now the group is asking for $800,000 more and a six-month extension on a project that 
is already four months behind. However, the team feels confident they can turn things 
around. The project manager and project team feel that if they hang in there a little longer 
they will be able to overcome the roadblocks they are encountering—especially those 
that reduce power, increase speed, and use a new technology battery. Other managers 
familiar with the project hint that the power pack problem might be solved, but “the bat-
tery problem will never be solved.” Olaf believes he is locked into this project; his gut 
feeling tells him the project will never materialize, and he should get out. John, his 
human resource manager, suggested bringing in a consultant to axe the project.
Olaf decided to call his friend Dawn O’Connor, the CEO of an accounting software 
company. He asked her, “What do you do when project costs and deadlines escalate 
drastically? How do you handle doubtful projects?” Her response was, “Let another 
project manager look at the project. Ask: ‘If you took over this project tomorrow, 
could you achieve the required results, given the extended time and additional money?’ 
If the answer is no, I call my top management team together and have them review the 
doubtful project in relation to other projects in our project portfolio.” Olaf feels this is 
good advice.
Unfortunately, the Maximum Megahertz Project is not an isolated example. Over 
the last five years there have been three projects that were never completed. “We just 
seemed to pour more money into them, even though we had a pretty good idea the 
projects were dying. The cost of those projects was high; those resources could have 
been better used on other projects.” Olaf wonders, “Do we ever learn from our  
mistakes? How can we develop a process that catches errant projects early? More 
importantly, how do we ease a project manager and team off an errant project without 
embarrassment?” Olaf certainly does not want to lose the six bright stars on the 
Maximum Megahertz Project.
Olaf is contemplating how his growing telecommunications company should deal 
with the problem of identifying projects that should be terminated early, how to allow 
good managers to make mistakes without public embarrassment, and how they all can 
learn from their mistakes.
Give Olaf a plan of action for the future that attacks the problem. Be specific and 
provide examples that relate to Wireless Telecom Company.

E P I L O G U E
With Chapter 14 the project life cycle is complete. You have been exposed to the core 
elements of project management. We have consciously tried to incorporate a blend of 
sociocultural and process practices required to successfully manage any project. These 
best practices are transferable across industries. Your understanding of these chapters 
should enhance your ability to make a positive contribution in any project 
environment.
The supplemental chapters that follow expand on the core by covering international 
project management, and Agile methods.
∙ Chapter 15. Explores different international environments in which you may have to 
manage a project. In large high technology firms we estimate that 60–90 percent of 
their projects are virtual and across many cultures. If you find yourself new in this 
environment, the international chapter is an excellent primer on the types of condi-
tions and issues you may encounter in an international project.
∙ Chapter 16. Agile methodology is used in complex projects (e.g., software and new 
innovation products) where the final design requirements are not known and evolve 
as the project is implemented. The methodology breaks requirements into small 
functional pieces that allow rapid response to change. Agile embraces flexibility, 
change, small teams, and owner involvement.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
543
www.ebook3000.com

544
International Projects
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
15-1 Describe environmental factors that affect project 
management in different countries.
15-2 Identify factors that typically are considered in 
selecting a foreign location for a project.
15-3 Understand cross-cultural issues that impact 
working on international projects.
15-4 Describe culture shock and strategies for  
coping with it.
15-5 Understand how organizations select and prepare 
people to work on international projects.
OUTLINE
15.1 Environmental Factors
15.2 Project Site Selection
15.3 Cross-Cultural Considerations: A Closer Look
15.4 Selection and Training for International Projects
Summary
C H A P T E R  F I F T E E N
15

545
The principal benefit of living abroad is that it enables us to get glimpses 
of ourselves as others see us and to realize that others’ views are more 
accurate than ours. Progress begins with grasping the truth about our-
selves, however unpleasant it may be.
—Russel Ackoff, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Thanks to technology we live in a “flat world” in which more and more projects have 
an international element. It could be being sent to Zimbabwe for 9 months as a lead 
contractor on a bridge construction project or flying back and forth across the Atlantic 
to work on a joint product venture with German engineers. Or it could be relying on a 
Korean computer supplier on a business expansion project or Skyping with an Indian 
counterpart on a software project. This chapter targets the international project man-
ager who must resettle in a foreign land to manage a project. The chapter also provides 
useful information for professionals whose project work requires interacting either 
directly or virtually with foreign counterparts from around the world.
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
www.ebook3000.com

546  Chapter 15  International Projects
There is no generally accepted framework or road map for project managers given 
international assignments. These project managers typically face a difficult set of 
problems—for example, absence from home, friends, and sometimes family; personal 
risks; missed career opportunities; foreign language, culture, and laws; adverse condi-
tions. Of course there are positives—for example, increased income, increased responsi-
bilities, career opportunities, foreign travel, new lifetime friends. How the international 
project manager adapts and approaches challenges encountered in the host country often 
determines the success or failure of a project.
This chapter focuses on four major issues surrounding the management of interna-
tional projects. First, major environmental factors that impact project selection and 
implementation are briefly highlighted. Second, an example of how organizations 
decide where to expand globally is provided. Third, the challenge of working in a 
strange and foreign culture is addressed. Finally, how companies select and train profes-
sionals for international projects is discussed. Although by no means comprehensive, 
this chapter provides an understanding of the major issues and challenges confronting 
the international project manager.
15.1 Environmental Factors
The major challenge international project managers face is the reality that what works 
at home may not work in a foreign environment. Too often project managers impose 
practices, assumed to be superior, from their home country on host-country nationals 
without questioning their applicability to the new environment. Although there are 
similarities between domestic and international projects, it is a fact that good manage-
ment practices vary across nations and cultures. It is these differences that can turn an 
international project into a nightmare. If potential international project managers have 
a keen awareness of differences in the host country’s environment from their own 
domestic environment, dangers and obstacles of the global project can be reduced or 
avoided. There are several basic factors in the host country’s environment that may 
alter how projects will be implemented: legal/political, security, geographical, eco-
nomic, infrastructure, and culture (see Figure 15.1).
Legal/Political
Expatriate project managers should operate within the laws and regulations of the host 
country. Political stability and local laws strongly influence how projects will be 
15-1
LO
Describe environmental 
factors that affect project 
management in different 
countries.
FIGURE 15.1
Environmental 
Factors Affecting 
International 
Projects 
Culture
Geography
Security
Infrastructure
Legal/political
Economic

Chapter 15  International Projects  547
implemented. Typically, these laws favor protection of local workers, suppliers, and 
environment. For example, how much control will be imposed from government agen-
cies? What is the attitude of federal and state bureaucracies toward regulations and 
approval policies that can cause project delays? How much government interference or 
support can one expect? For example, some governments interpret regulations arbi-
trarily, depending upon personal interests.
The constraints imposed by national and local laws need to be identified and adhered 
to. Are local ecological laws restrictive? Will manufacturing a new product in a computer 
chip plant require exporting toxic waste materials? What are the pollution standards? 
How will labor laws affect the use of indigenous workers to complete the project? Given 
that laws that affect business vary widely across countries, qualified legal assistance is 
essential.
Government corruption is a very real part of international business. In China vari-
ous forms of obligatory “profit sharing” with city officials in the Hainan province have 
been reported. Employment of relatives, donations, and other “favors” are an expected 
cost of doing business in that region. Likewise, Bloomberg BusinessWeek reported that 
in Russia the threat of being targeted for abuse by government officials—sometimes 
operating in league with Russian businesses—is the primary reason that country has 
attracted less than one-fifth of the foreign investment in Brazil (Cahill, 2010).
Political stability is another key factor in deciding to implement a project in a for-
eign country. What are the chances that there will be a change in the party in power 
during the project? Are the tax provisions and government regulations stable or subject 
to change with the winds of political change? How are laws made, and what is the past 
record of fairness? How are labor unions treated in the political realm? Does labor 
unrest exist? Is there a chance for a coup d’état? Contingency plans need to be estab-
lished to respond to emergencies.
Security
International terrorism is a fact of life in today’s world. Tim Daniel, chief operating 
officer of International SOS Assistance, Inc., reported that the number of his firm’s 
clients doubled after September 11th. SOS is a security firm that specializes in evacu-
ating expatriates from dangerous situations around the world. The company cites 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, Nortel Networks Corp., and Citigroup among its clients 
(Scown, 1993).
While the 9/11 attacks magnified the fact that Americans are vulnerable to terror-
ism at home, they also heightened security concerns for working abroad. For example, 
after September 11th, several American firms canceled or scaled back projects in 
potential hotspots such as Somalia and the Philippines. Others reported increased pres-
sures from expatriates who wanted to return home with their families. On May 7, 2009, 
the Nobel Peace Prize-winning relief agency Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors With-
out Borders) reduced emergency projects in northwest Pakistan due to clashes between 
government forces and Taliban fighters.1
Crime is another factor. The growing presence of the Russian Mafia has discour-
aged many foreign firms from setting up operations in the former Soviet Union. Kid-
napping of American professionals is also a very real threat in many parts of the world.
Security nationally involves the capacity of a country’s military and police forces to 
prevent and respond to attacks. In many foreign countries, American firms will have to 
1 www.doctorswithoutborders.org/press/release, June 2009.
www.ebook3000.com

548  Chapter 15  International Projects
augment the countries’ security system. For example, it is common practice to hire 
tribal bodyguards in such places as Angola and Uzbekistan.
Another real cost associated with international terrorism is the ease of commerce 
across borders. Heightened security measures have created border congestions that 
have expanded the time and cost of moving personnel, materials, and equipment 
across countries. These constraints need to be factored into the budget and schedule 
of projects.
Risk management is always a vital part of project management. It plays an even big-
ger role in managing projects overseas. For example, Strohl Systems Group, a global 
leader in recovery-planning software and services, includes the following among the 
questions it uses to evaluate vulnerability to terrorism: Have you included possible ter-
rorist targets (facilities and personnel) in your hazard and vulnerability analysis? Have 
you conducted a counterterrorism exercise complete with law enforcement, fire, medi-
cal, and emergency management participation? What should your organization’s pol-
icy be on negotiating with a person threatening a terrorist act?2
Managing projects in a dangerous world is a tough assignment. Security precautions 
are major cost considerations not only in dollars and cents, but also in the psychologi-
cal well-being of personnel sent abroad. Effective risk management is critical.
Geography
One factor that is often underestimated until project personnel actually arrive at a for-
eign destination is the geography of the country. Imagine what it is like to deplane from 
a modern aircraft and encounter the 105-degree heat and 90 percent humidity of 
Jakarta, Indonesia, or three feet of fresh snow and −22 degree temperatures in Kokkla, 
Finland. Whether it is the wind, the rain, the heat, the jungle, or the desert, more than 
one project manager has asserted that the greatest challenge was overcoming the 
 “elements.” Mother Nature cannot be ignored.
The planning and implementation of a project must take into account the impact the 
country’s geography will have on the project. For example, a salvage operation off the 
coast of Greenland can only be scheduled one month out of the year because the water-
way is frozen over during the remainder of the year. Construction projects in Southeast 
Asia have to accommodate the monsoon season when rainfall can be as high as 
50 inches per month.
Geography does not just affect outdoor projects. It can have an indirect effect on 
“indoor” projects. For example, one information systems specialist reported that his 
performance on a project in northern Sweden declined due to sleep deprivation. He 
attributed his problems to the 20 hours of daylight this part of the world experiences 
during summer months. Finally, extreme weather conditions can make extraordinary 
demands on equipment. Projects can grind to a halt because of equipment breakdown 
under the brunt of the wind and sand. Working under extreme conditions typically 
requires special equipment, which increases the costs and complexity of the project.
Before beginning a project in a foreign land, project planners and managers need to 
study carefully the unique characteristics of the geography of that country. They need 
to factor into project plans and schedules such items as climate, seasons, altitude, and 
natural geographical obstacles. See the Snapshot from Practice 15.1: The Filming of 
Apocalypse Now for an example of a poorly planned endeavor in the Philippines.
2 Contingency Planning and Management.com, “Strohl Systems Offers Terrorism Readiness Questionnaire,”  
September 24, 2001.

Chapter 15  International Projects  549
Economic
Basic economic factors in foreign countries and regions influence choices of site selec-
tion and project success. The gross domestic product (GDP) of a country suggests the 
level of development of a country. A faltering economy may indicate fewer sources of 
capital funding. Changes in protectionist strategies of a host country, such as import 
quotas and tariffs, can quickly alter the viability of projects. Other factors such as bal-
ance of payments, taxation, labor laws, safety regulations, and market size can influ-
ence project choices and operations.
Skills, educational level, and labor supply prevalent in a host country can deter-
mine the choice of a project site. Is project selection driven by low wage levels or 
availability of technically skilled talent? For example, you can hire three computer 
programmers in Ukraine for the price of one programmer in the United States. Con-
versely, many high-tech companies are willing to endure the additional expense of 
setting up joint projects in Switzerland and Germany to take advantage of their engi-
neering prowess.
Financial exposure is a significant risk for many international projects. Let’s look 
first at the potential impact of currency fluctuations on project success. For example, a 
U.S. contractor agrees to build a customized product for a German client. The product 
will be built in the United States. The contractor estimates that the project will cost 
$925,000, and, in order to earn a nice profit, prices the project at $1,000,000. To 
In February 1976, Francis Ford Coppola 
took his Hollywood ﬁlm crew to the 
Philippines to shoot Apocalypse Now, a 
film adaptation of Joseph Conrad’s 
Heart of Darkness within the context of 
the Vietnam conflict. The Philippines was chosen 
because the terrain was similar to Vietnam’s, and the 
government was willing to rent out its helicopter force 
for the movie. At the time, the U.S. military was unwilling 
to cooperate on a ﬁlm about Vietnam. An additional 
advantage was cheap labor. Coppola was able to hire 
more than 300 laborers at $1 to $3 per day to construct 
elaborate production sets, including an impressive 
Cambodian temple. Apocalypse Now was scheduled for 
16 weeks of shooting at a budget of $12 to $14 million.
 
Months earlier, George Lucas, of Star Wars fame, 
warned Coppola against ﬁlming the movie in the Philip-
pines. He said, “It’s one thing to go over there for three 
weeks with ﬁve people and scrounge some footage 
with the Filipino Army, but if you go over there with a 
big Hollywood production, the longer you stay the 
more in danger you are of getting sucked into the 
swamp.” His words turned out to be prophetic.
 
A civil war was going on between government 
forces and communist rebels. Shooting was repeatedly 
interrupted because the Philippine military ordered 
their helicopter pilots to leave the set and ﬂy to the 
mountains to ﬁght the rebels.
 
In May 1976, a typhoon struck the Philippine 
Islands, destroying most of the movie sets. The ﬁlm 
team was forced to shut down production and returned 
to the United States for two months.
 
The lead character was played by Martin Sheen, 
who suffered a serious heart attack under the stress 
and heat of the ﬁlming and had to return to the United 
States. Coppola scrambled to ﬁlm the scenes that did 
not require Sheen, but eventually production came to a 
standstill until Sheen’s return nine weeks later.
 
The entire project proved to be a traumatic experi-
ence for Coppola, who had enjoyed Academy Award 
success with his previous Godfather movies. “There 
were times when I thought I was going to die, literally, 
from the inability to move the problems I had. I would 
go to bed at four in the morning in a cold sweat.”
 
Film production ended in May 1977 after more  
than 200 days of shooting. The ﬁnal cost was about 
$30 million.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 5 .1
The Filming of Apocalypse Now*
* Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker’s Apocalypse  
(Paramount Pictures, 1991).
www.ebook3000.com

550  Chapter 15  International Projects
accommodate the German buyer the price is converted to euros. Suppose at the time of 
the contract, the exchange rate is $1.15 per euro, and the price specified in the contract 
is €869,566.
Ten months later the project is completed as expected, with work costing the esti-
mated $925,000 and the customer pays the agreed upon price of €869,566. However 
the exchange rate has changed; it is now $1.05 per Euro. That being the case, the pay-
ment equates to €869,566 × 1.05 = $913,044. Instead of reaping a nice profit the 
contractor suffers a $(913,044 − 925,000) = $−11,956 loss!
A company can protect against adverse currency fluctuations in a number of related 
ways. First, they can hedge against this risk by having all parties agree to finalize the 
deal and make payments at a specified future date. Finance people call this a forward 
exchange or contract. Second, they can stipulate in the contract certain conditions 
based on exchange rates to insure their profit margin. Finally, many multinational com-
panies who do business in the client country avoid currency exchange and simply use 
local currency to manage operations in that country. Financiers refer to this as a natural 
hedge (Moffet et al., 2012).
Inflation is another significant risk. One of the greatest strengths of the U.S. econ-
omy is its relatively low inflation rate (below 3 percent from 1990–2012). Other coun-
tries, especially underdeveloped countries, do not enjoy such stability. Rapid inflation 
can strike at any time and have profound impact on project costs and profits. For 
example, a European contractor successfully wins the bid to build a bridge for the 
Tanzanian government in East Africa. Work started in 2010 and will be completed by 
the end of 2011. In 2010 the Tanzanian inflation ratio was less than 6 percent with an 
average inflation rate of 6.7 over the past decade. The contractor used what she consid-
ered a conservative inflation rate of 9 percent when estimating the costs of the project 
at 1,800,000 schillings (Tanzanian currency). In order to win the bid and enjoy a solid 
profit the agreed upon price is 2,000,000 schillings.
Early in 2011 Tanzania experiences a sporadic rainfall which, coupled with increased 
oil prices, causes the inflation rate to jump to over 20 percent! Suddenly costs of cer-
tain elements of the project increase dramatically and instead of garnering a nice profit 
the contractor barely breaks even. Companies can protect against inflation by tying 
costs to a strong currency such as the U.S. dollar, British pound, or euro and/or nego-
tiating cost-plus contracts (see Chapter 12 Appendix) with the client.
Bartering is a form of compensation that is still used by some countries and organi-
zations. For example, one project in Africa was paid in goat skins. The goat skins were 
eventually sold to an Italian manufacturer of gloves. Another project along the Caspian 
Sea was paid for in oil. There is a small group of firms that specialize in bartering for 
project contractors. These intermediaries charge a commission to sell the bartered 
goods (e.g., oil, diamonds, wheat) for the contractor. However, dealing with commodi-
ties can be a risky enterprise.
Infrastructure
Infrastructure refers to a country or community’s ability to provide the services 
required for a project. Infrastructure needs for a project could be communication, 
transportation, power, technology, and education systems. Power outages are common 
in many parts of the world. For example, India’s burgeoning economy came to a halt 
during the 2012 summer when over 670 million people were without power for more 
than two days. If reliable power is not sufficient, other alternatives need to be consid-
ered. For example, construction firms often rely on heavy diesel generators as backups 
on their projects. Software projects across borders are common today; however, they 

Chapter 15  International Projects  551
depend on reliable telecommunication networks. If the project depends on a high ratio 
of vendor suppliers, good roads, and other transportation modes such as air and sea-
ports, a good infrastructure will be imperative.
An example of a project that failed to take into account the needs and infrastructure 
of the host nation involved a U.S. company that was awarded the contract for building 
a hospital in an African nation. The local African officials wanted a “low-tech” health 
care facility that would take local traditions into consideration. Because their relatives 
generally accompanied patients, space had to be provided for them, too. Electricity was 
not reliably supplied, and it was doubtful whether well-educated doctors would want to 
spend careers away from the city. Therefore, the locals wanted a hospital for basic care 
with minimum technology. The construction company doing the building, on the other 
hand, had a preconceived notion of what a hospital should be and was not going to be 
accused of building a second-rate facility. It built a modern hospital that could have 
stood in any U.S. city. The building was completed; however, even after several years 
it was not used because the electricity was not sufficient, the air-conditioning could not 
be used, and doctors refused to live in the rural area (Adler and Gunderson, 2007).
Organizations need to consider the needs of the families of personnel they send 
overseas. Will the facilities and living conditions for the expatriate families place an 
undue hardship on families? Will schooling for children be available? The welfare and 
comfort of expatriate families play an important role in retaining good project manag-
ers and promoting their peak performance.
Culture
Visiting project managers must respect the customs, values, philosophies, and social 
standards of their host country. Global managers recognize that if the customs and 
social cultural dimensions of the host country are not accommodated, projects will 
rarely succeed. Too many project audits and final reports of international projects 
reflect challenges and problems linked to cultural differences.
For most project managers, the biggest difference in managing an international 
project is operating in a national culture where things are done differently. For exam-
ple, most developed nations use the same project management techniques (CPM, risk 
analysis, trade-off analysis). However, how activity work is performed can be very 
different in the host country. For example, a backhoe is used to dig a trench in France, 
while 20 laborers are used to dig a similar trench in Ethiopia.
Will English be the operating language, or will the project manager need to be 
 fluent in the foreign language? Will translation services be available and sufficient? 
Communication problems—because of language differences—often become a major 
problem in carrying out even simple tasks. Although the use of translators can help 
tremendously, their use does not solve the communication problem completely because 
something is lost in translation. For example, consider the disastrous consequences of 
differences in interpretations and expectations between the Brazilians and Americans 
highlighted in Snapshot from Practice 15.2: River of Doubt.
Will religious factors influence the project? For example, religious factors touched the 
spouse of a Scandinavian project manager responsible for building a water desalination 
plant from sea water in a Middle East country. She was restricted to the living compound 
for families of foreign guest workers. Going outside the compound to a nearby city meant 
covering her head, arms, and legs and being accompanied by another woman or, prefera-
bly, a man. A physical altercation in the city concerning her clothing was traumatic for her. 
She left the country and returned home. Her husband requested a transfer back home three 
months later. The loss of the original project manager set the project back three months.
www.ebook3000.com

552  Chapter 15  International Projects
After his crushing election defeat in 
1912 as a third-party candidate, for-
mer president Theodore (“Teddy”) 
Roosevelt set his sights on a grand 
adventure, the first descent of an 
unmapped rapids-choked tributary of the Amazon 
aptly titled the “River of Doubt.” Together with Brazil’s 
most famous explorer, Candido Mariano da Silva 
 Rondon, Roosevelt accomplished a feat that belongs 
in the annals of great expeditions.
 
Along the way, Roosevelt and his men faced an 
unbelievable series of hardships, losing their canoes 
and supplies to crushing whitewater rapids, and endur-
ing starvation, Indian attacks, disease, drowning, and 
even murder within their ranks. Candice Millard brings 
alive these extraordinary events in her nonfiction 
thriller The River of Doubt. While her account details 
the ill-fated journey it also reveals insights into interna-
tional project management as it describes the collabo-
ration between the American and Brazilian cohorts. 
While each party ultimately earned the respect and 
admiration of the other, friction between the two par-
ties simmered from the outset.
 
One source of consternation was the amount of 
supplies and luggage that the Americans required for 
the journey. Warned that the luggage requirements of 
the former president and his party would be extensive, 
the Brazilian commodore Rondon ordered 110 mules 
and 17 pack oxen to be used for the expedition’s over-
land journey across the Brazilian highland to the great 
river. Surely, he felt, this would be more than necessary 
for such a trip.
 
The Brazilians were astounded by the sheer vol-
ume of baggage that was unloaded from Roosevelt’s 
ship, the Vandycks. There were mountains of crates: 
guns and ammunition, chairs and tables, tents and 
cots, equipment for collecting and preserving speci-
mens, surveying the river, and cooking meals. An 
exhausted stevedore elicited a roar of laughter from 
the onlooking crowd when he announced, “Nothing 
lacking but the piano!”
 
Rather than risk embarrassment by telling Roos-
evelt that they were not prepared to take so much lug-
gage, Rondon scrambled to ﬁnd additional animals. 
Extra oxen and mules were located, but they were far 
from tame. Loaded with supplies, the oxen would buck 
and throw off the packs. The expedition was delayed 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 5 . 2
River of Doubt*
as gauchos (South American cowboys) endeavored to 
“break” the animals as quickly as possible.
 
Within days of ﬁnally setting off across the vast 
highlands, Roosevelt and his men began to experi-
ence the harsh realities that were to plague the expe-
dition. After crossing a bone-strewn graveyard of 
oxen and mules that had starved to death or been 
eaten during previous expeditions, they were stunned 
by the sight of unopened supply crates, all clearly 
marked “Roosevelt South American Expedition.” The 
pack animals, still making their weary away across 
the plateau ahead of the them, had begun bucking off 
their heavy loads!
 
As the officers rode slowly past the boxes, they 
wondered what they were leaving behind and how pre-
cious it might become in the months ahead. Little did 
they know how true those fears would be.
© Fotomas/Topham/TheImageWorks
* Candice Millard, The River of Doubt (New York: Doubleday), 
2005.

Chapter 15  International Projects  553
Not only do project managers have to adapt to the culture of the host country, but 
often overseas projects require working with people from other different countries. For 
example, on a light rail project in the Philippines, an American firm was hired to over-
see the interests of local real estate companies who were funding the project. The 
American project manager had to work with Czech representatives who were provid-
ing the rail equipment, Japanese engineers responsible for building the rail, Australian 
bankers who were providing additional financing, an Indian firm that were the princi-
pal architects, as well as the native Filipinos.
Of all the factors, working within a multicultural environment is most often the greatest 
challenge for project managers. It will be dealt with in detail later in this chapter.
15.2 Project Site Selection
As the project manager studies the factors contributing to site selection, he will see that 
inherent in all of these factors is the risk level senior management and directors are 
willing to accept for the potential rewards of a successful international project. One 
approach for the project manager to digest, clarify, and understand the factors leading 
to the selection of a specific project is to use a risk matrix similar to those found in 
Chapter 7. The major difference lies in the selection of the risk factors for different 
project sites.
Figure 15.2 presents a truncated matrix for project site selection of the construc-
tion of a laser printer factory in Singapore, India, or Ireland. In this example, political 
stability, worker skill and supply, culture compatibility, infrastructure, government 
support, and product-to-market advantage were the major assessment factors. Each 
project site is compared against each factor. Figure 15.3 depicts a further breakdown 
of the infrastructure evaluation factor. In this example, transportation, educated 
workforce, utilities, telecommunications, and vendor suppliers are considered impor-
tant to evaluating the infrastructure for each site. The scores given in Figure 15.3 are 
used to assign values to the infrastructure factor of the assessment matrix, Figure 
15.2. In this project, Ireland was the choice. Clearly, Singapore and Ireland were 
very close in terms of infrastructure and several other factors. However, the major 
assessment factor of using Ireland to access the EEC (product-to-market advantage) 
turned the decision.
15-2
LO
Identify factors that  
typically are considered  
in selecting a foreign 
location for a project.
FIGURE 15.2
Assessment Matrix 
Project Site Selection 
Singapore
India
Ireland
5
3
5
4
4
4
4
3
5
4
3
5
4
3
5
3
Political stability
Worker skill, supply
Culture compatibility
Infrastructure
Government support
Product-to-market
advantage
3
5
Score legend
5 = excellent
3 = acceptable
1 = poor
www.ebook3000.com

554  Chapter 15  International Projects
Given the macro economic factors, the firm’s strategic posture toward global proj-
ects, and the major considerations for selecting this project, it is imperative the project 
manager quickly become sensitized to the foreign cultural factors that can spell project 
success or failure.
15.3 Cross-Cultural Considerations: A Closer Look
The concept of culture was introduced in Chapter 3 as referring to the unique personal-
ity of a particular firm. More specifically, culture was defined as a system of shared 
norms, beliefs, values, and customs that bind people together, creating shared meaning 
and a unique identity. Culture is a concept created for descriptive purposes and depends 
on the group that is the focus of attention. For example, within a global context culture 
can refer to certain regions (i.e., Europeans, Arabs), to specific nations (i.e., French, 
Thai), or to certain ethnic or religious groups (i.e., Kurds, African Americans). This 
chapter looks at national cultures; we freely recognize that many cultural characteris-
tics are borderless and that there is considerable variation within any one country. Still, 
national cultures provide a useful anchor for understanding different habits, customs, 
and values around the world.
Right or wrong, Americans have a reputation for not being able to work effectively 
in foreign cultures. (When we use the term “American,” we are referring to people 
from the United States; we apologize to our friends in Canada and Central and South 
America.) In the 1960s, the term “Ugly American” encapsulated the apparent indiffer-
ence of Americans to native cultures when working or traveling abroad. Americans are 
often criticized for being parochial; that is, they view the world solely through their 
own eyes and perspectives. People with a parochial perspective do not recognize that 
other people have different ways of living and working effectively. American parochial 
attitudes probably reflect the huge domestic market of the United States, the geo-
graphic isolation of the United States, and the reality that English is becoming the 
international business language in many parts of the world.
It is important that Americans working on international projects anticipate cultural 
differences. Take, for example, a project manager from a large North American construction 
company who was given responsibility to select a site for the design and construction of 
a large fish-processing plant in a West African country. The manager assessed potential 
15-3
LO
Understand cross-cultural 
issues that impact work-
ing on international 
projects.
FIGURE 15.3
Evaluation Matrix 
Breakdown for 
Infrastructure
Singapore
India
Ireland
5
3
5
4
4
4
5
4
5
5
4
5
4
2
5
Transportation
Educated workforce
Utilities
Telecommunications
Vendor suppliers
Score legend
5 = excellent
3 = acceptable
1 = poor

Chapter 15  International Projects  555
sites according to the availability of reliable power, closeness to transportation, nearness 
to the river for access of fishing boats from the Atlantic Ocean, proximity to main mar-
kets, and availability of housing and people for employment. After evaluating alternative 
sites, the project manager chose the optimum location. Just prior to requesting bids from 
local contractors for some of the site preparation, the manager discovered, in talking to 
the contractors, that the site was located on ground considered sacred by the local people, 
who believed this site was the place where their gods resided. None of the local people 
upon whom the project manager was depending for staff would ever consider working 
there! The project manager quickly revised his choice and relocated the site. In this case, 
he was lucky that the cultural gaffe was discovered prior to construction. Too often these 
errors are realized only after a project is completed.3
Some argue that Americans have become less parochial. International travel, immi-
gration, movies, and the popularity of such international events as the Olympics have 
made more Americans sensitive to cultural differences. While Americans may be more 
worldly, there is still a tendency for them to believe that American cultural values and 
ways of doing things are superior to all others. This ethnocentric perspective is reflected 
in wanting to conduct business only on their terms and stereotyping other countries as 
lazy, corrupt, or inefficient. Americans need to make a serious effort to appreciate 
other ways of approaching work and problems in other countries.
Finally, American project managers have earned a reputation abroad for being very 
good at understanding technology but not good at understanding people. As one 
I ndonesian engineer put it, “Americans are great at solving technical problems, but 
they tend to ignore the people factor.” For example, Americans tend to underestimate 
the importance that relationship building plays in conducting business in other coun-
tries. Americans have a tendency to want to get down to work and let friendships 
evolve in the course of their work. In most other cultures just the opposite is true. 
Before a foreigner works with you, he wants to get to know you as a person. Trust is 
not established by credentials but rather evolves from personal interaction. Business 
deals often require a lengthy and elaborate courtship (Arms and Lucas, 1978; Chen 
and Miller, 2010). For example, it may take five to eight meetings before Arab manag-
ers are even willing to discuss business details.
Adjustments
Two of the biggest adjustments Americans typically have to make in working abroad 
are adapting to the general pace of life and the punctuality of people. In America “time 
is money,” and a premium is placed on working quickly. Other cultures do not share 
Americans’ sense of urgency and are accustomed to a much slower pace of life. They 
can’t understand why Americans are always in such a hurry. Punctuality varies across 
cultures. For example, Americans will generally tolerate someone being 5 to 10 min-
utes late. In contrast, among Peruvians, the period before an apology or explanation for 
being late is expected might be 45 minutes to an hour!
While working on multicultural projects, managers sometimes encounter ethical 
dilemmas that are culturally bound. For example, the 1999 Olympic site selection 
scandal featured the sordid details of committee members peddling their votes for a 
wide range of gifts (i.e., university scholarships for their children, extravagant trips). In 
many societies such “bribes” or “tributes” are expected and the only way to conduct 
meaningful business. Moreover, many cultures will not grant a female project manager 
3 This incident was cited in H. W. Lane and J. J. DiStefano, International Project Management, 2nd ed. (Boston: PWS-Kent, 
1992), p. 27.
www.ebook3000.com

556  Chapter 15  International Projects
the same respect they will a male project manager. Should U.S. management increase 
project risk or violate its own sex-discrimination policy?
These cultural differences are just the tip of the iceberg. There are numerous “How 
to Do Business in . . .” books written by people who have traveled and worked abroad. 
Although these books may lack rigor, they typically do a good job of identifying local 
customs and common mistakes made by outsiders. On the other hand, anthropologists 
have made significant contributions to our understanding of why and how the cultures 
of societies are different (see Research Highlights 15.1 and 15.2). Students of interna-
tional project management are encouraged to study these works to gain a deeper under-
standing of the root causes of cultural diversity.
So what can be said to prepare people to work on international projects? The world 
is too diverse to do justice in one chapter to all the cultural variations managers are 
likely to encounter when working on international projects. Instead, a sample of some 
of these differences will be highlighted by discussing working on projects in four dif-
ferent countries: Mexico, France, Saudi Arabia, and China. We apologize to our read-
ers outside the United States because briefings are presented from the viewpoint of a 
U.S. project manager working in these countries. Still, in an effort not to be too ethno-
centric, we present a fifth scenario for foreign project managers assigned to working in 
the United States. Although by no means exhaustive, these briefings provide a taste of 
what it is like to work in and with people from these countries.
Working in Mexico
America developed historically in an environment where it was important for strangers 
to be able to get along, interact, and do business. On the American frontier almost 
everyone was a stranger, and people had to both cooperate and keep their distance. The 
New England Yankee sentiment that “Good fences make good neighbors” expresses 
this American cultural value well. Conversely, Mexico developed historically in an 
environment where the only people to trust were family and close friends—and by 
extension, people who were known to those whom you knew well. As a consequence, 
personal relationships dominate all aspects of Mexican business. While Americans are 
generally taught not to do business with friends, Mexicans and other Latin Americans 
are taught to do business with no one but friends.
The significance of personal relationships has created a compadre system in which 
Mexicans are obligated to give preference to relatives and friends when hiring, con-
tracting, procuring, and sharing business opportunities. North Americans often com-
plain that such practices contribute to inefficiency in Mexican firms. While this may 
or may not be the case, efficiency is prized by Americans, while Mexicans place a 
higher value on friendship.
Mexicans tend to perceive Americans as being “cold.” They also believe that 
most Americans look down on them. Among the most effective things an American 
can do to prevent being seen as a typical Gringo is to take the time and effort in the 
beginning of a working relationship to really get to know Mexican counterparts. 
Because family is all-important to Mexicans, a good way for developing a personal 
relationship is exchanging information about each other’s family. Mexicans will 
often gauge people’s trustworthiness by the loyalty and attention they devote to 
their family.
The mañana syndrome reflects another cultural difference between Americans and 
Mexicans. Mexicans have a different concept of time than Americans do. Mexicans 
feel confined and pressured when given deadlines; they prefer open-ended schedules. 

Anthropologists Kluckhohn and 
Strodtbeck assert that cultural varia-
tions reﬂect how different societies 
have responded to common issues  
or problems throughout time (see 
Figure 15.4). Five of the issues featured in their com-
parative framework are discussed here.
΄ Relationship to nature—This issue reﬂects how 
people relate to the natural world around them 
and to the supernatural. Should people domi-
nate their environment, live in harmony with it, or 
be subjugated to it? North Americans generally 
strive to harness nature’s forces and change 
them as they need. Other societies, as in India, 
strive to live in harmony with nature. Still other 
societies see themselves at the mercy of physi-
cal forces and/or subject to the will of a supreme 
being. Life in this context is viewed as predeter-
mined, preordained, or an exercise in chance.
΄ Time orientation—Does the culture focus on the 
past, present, or future? For example, many Euro-
pean countries focus on the past and emphasize 
maintaining tradition. North Americans, on the 
other hand, are less concerned with tradition and 
tend to focus on the present and near future. 
Paradoxically, Japanese society, while rich with 
tradition, has a much longer time horizon.
΄ Activity orientation—This issue refers to a desir-
able focus of behavior. Some cultures emphasize 
“being” or living in the moment. This orientation 
stresses experiencing life and seeking immedi-
ate gratiﬁcation. Other cultures emphasize 
“doing” and emphasize postponing immediate 
gratiﬁcation for greater accomplishment. A third 
alternative is the “control” orientation, where 
people restrain their desires by detaching them-
selves from objects. The activity dimension 
affects how people approach work and leisure 
and the extent to which work-related concerns 
pervade their lives. It is reﬂected in the age-old 
question, “Do we live to work or work to live?”
΄ Basic nature of people—Does a culture view peo-
ple as good, evil, or some mix of these two? In 
many Third World countries, people see them-
selves as basically honest and trustworthy. Con-
versely, some Mediterranean cultures have been 
characterized as taking a rather evil view of 
human nature. North Americans are somewhere 
in between. They see people as basically good but 
stay on guard so as not to be taken advantage of.
΄ Relationships among people—This issue con-
cerns the responsibility one has for others. 
Americans, for instance, tend to be highly indi-
vidualistic and believe everyone should take 
care of him- or herself. In contrast, many Asian 
societies emphasize concern for the group or 
community he or she is a member of. A third 
variation is hierarchical, which is similar to the 
group except that in these societies groups are 
hierarchically ranked, and membership is 
essentially stable over time. This is a character-
istic of aristocratic societies and caste systems.
The Kluckhohn and Strodtbeck framework provides a 
basis for a deeper understanding of cultural differ-
ences. At the same time, they warn that not all mem-
bers of a culture practice the same behavior all the 
time, and, as in the United States, there is likely to be 
considerable variation within a given culture.
Research Highlight 15.1
Cross-Cultural Orientations*
* F. Kluckhohn and F. L. Strodtbeck, Variations in Value  
Orientations (Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson, 1961).
FIGURE 15.4
Kluckhohn- 
Strodtbeck’s Cross-
Cultural Framework 
Note: The line indicates where the 
United States tends to fall along  
these issues. 
Cultural issue
Relationship to
nature
Time orientation
Activity orientation
Nature of people
Relationships
among people
Variations
Domination
Past
Being
Good
Individualist
Harmony
Present
Doing
Evil
Group
Subjugation
Future
Controlling
Mixed
Hierarchical
557
www.ebook3000.com

The Hofstede framework grew from a 
study of 88,000 people working in 
IBM subsidiaries in 50 countries and 
3 multicountry regions. Based on 
responses to a 32-item question-
naire, Dutch social scientist Geert Hofstede developed 
different dimensions for examining cultures:
1. Individualism versus collectivism. Identiﬁes 
whether a culture holds individuals or the group 
responsible for each member’s welfare.
2. Power distance. Describes the degree to which 
a culture accepts status and power differences 
among its members.
3. Uncertainty avoidance. Identiﬁes a culture’s 
willingness to accept uncertainty and ambiguity 
about the future.
4. Masculinity-femininity. Describes the degree to 
which the culture emphasizes competitive and 
achievement-oriented behavior or displays 
concerns for relationships.
 
Figure 15.5 shows how he ranked selected coun-
tries according to collectivism-individualism and 
power distance. Wealth appears to inﬂuence both 
factors. Power distance is correlated with income 
inequality in a country while individualism is corre-
lated with national wealth (Per Capita Gross National 
Product). As a result high power distance and collec-
tivism are often found together, as are low power 
distance and individualism. This can affect decision 
making on project teams. For example, while the high 
collectivism may lead a project team in Thailand to 
operate consensually, the high power distance may 
cause decisions to be heavily influenced by the 
desires of the project manager. Conversely, a similar 
team operating in a more individualistic and low 
power distance context such as Great Britain or 
America might make decisions with more open 
debate including challenging the preferences of the 
project manager.
Research Highlight 15.2
Hofstede Framework*
* G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences: Comparing Values, 
Behaviors, Institutions and Organizations Across Nations, 
2nd Edition (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2001). 
http://www.geerthofstede.nl
FIGURE 15.5
Sample Country Clusters on 
Hofstede’s Dimensions of 
Individualism-Collectivism 
and Power Distance 
Collectivism
Individualism
Israel, Finland, 
Germany, Ireland, 
New Zealand,
Canada, 
Great Britain,
United States
Low power distance
Colombia, Peru,
Thailand,
Singapore, Mexico,
Turkey, Indonesia
Spain, South Africa,
France, Italy,
Belgium
High power distance
They generally consider individuals to be more important than sticking to a schedule. 
If a friend drops in at work, most Mexicans will stop and talk, regardless of how long 
it takes, and even if chatting makes their work late. This sometimes contributes to the 
erroneous perception that Mexicans lack a work ethic. Quite the contrary; given a 
minimal incentive, Mexicans can be quite industrious and ambitious.
Finally, as in many other cultures, Mexicans do not share Americans’ confidence 
that they control their own destiny. While Americans are taught, “When the going gets 
tough, the tough get going,” Mexicans are taught, “Taking action without knowing 
what is expected or wanted can have dangerous consequences.” Mexicans tend to be 
more cautious and want to spend more time discussing risks and potential problems 
that Americans might dismiss as improbable or irrelevant.
558

Chapter 15  International Projects  559
Other useful guidelines for working with Mexicans on projects include the 
following:
1. Americans tend to be impersonal and practical when making arguments; Mexicans 
can be very passionate and emotional when arguing. They enjoy a lively debate.
2. Where Americans tend to use meetings as the place to work things out publicly, 
Mexicans tend to see meetings as the place where persons with authority ratify what 
has been decided during informal private discussions.
3. While Mexicans can be emotional, they tend to shy away from any sort of direct 
confrontation or criticism. A long silence often indicates displeasure or 
disagreement.
4. Speech in Mexico is often indirect. People rarely say no directly but are more likely 
to respond by saying maybe (quizas), or by saying “I will think about it” or changing 
the subject. Yes (si) is more likely to mean “I understand you” than “yes.”
5. Titles are extremely important in Mexico and are always used when a person is 
introducing him- or herself or being introduced. Pay as much attention to remem-
bering a person’s title as to remembering his or her name.
Today, with NAFTA and increased international business activity in Mexico, old tradi-
tions are disappearing. American managers report that cultural differences are less 
evident in northern Mexico where many multinational firms operate. Here hora ameri-
cana (American time) rather than hora mexicana tends to be used when dealing with 
foreigners. Project managers should devote up-front effort to understanding how much 
older mores of Mexican culture apply to their project.4
Working in France
Some Americans consider the French the most difficult to work with among Europe-
ans. This feeling probably stems from a reflection of the French culture, which is quite 
different from that in the United States.
In France, one’s social class is very important. Social interactions are constrained 
by class standing, and during their lifetimes most French people do not encounter 
much change in social status. Unlike an American, who through hard work and success 
can move from the lowest economic stratum to the highest, a successful French person 
might, at best, climb one or two rungs up the social ladder. Additionally, the French are 
very status conscious and like to provide signs of this status, such as knowledge of 
literature and arts; a well-designed, tastefully decorated house; and a high level of 
education.
The French tend to admire or be fascinated with people who disagree with them; in 
contrast, Americans are more attracted to those who agree with them. As a result, the 
French are accustomed to conflict and, during negotiations, accept the fact that some 
positions are irreconcilable and must be accepted as such. Americans, on the other 
hand, tend to believe that conflicts can be resolved if both parties make an extra effort 
and are willing to compromise. Also, the French often determine a person’s trustwor-
thiness based on their first-hand, personal evaluation of the individual’s character. 
Americans, in contrast, tend to evaluate a person’s trustworthiness on the basis of past 
achievements and other people’s evaluations.
4 Adapted from E. Kras, Management in Two Cultures: Bridging the Gap between U.S. and Mexican Managers, rev. ed.  
(Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1995); L. W. Tuller, An American’s Guide to Doing Business in Latin America (Avon, MA: 
Adams Business, 2008).
www.ebook3000.com

560  Chapter 15  International Projects
The French are often accused of lacking an intense work ethic. For example, 
many French workers frown on overtime and on average they have one of the lon-
gest vacations in the world (four to five weeks annually). On the other hand, the 
French enjoy a reputation for productive work, a result of the French tradition of 
craftsmanship. This tradition places a greater premium on quality than on getting 
things accomplished quickly.
Most French organizations tend to be highly centralized with rigid structures. As a 
result, it usually takes longer to carry out decisions. Because this arrangement is quite 
different from the more decentralized organizations in the United States, many U.S. 
project managers find the bureaucratic red tape a source of considerable frustration.
In countries like the United States, a great deal of motivation is derived from profes-
sional accomplishments. The French do not tend to share this same view of work. 
While they admire American industriousness, they believe that quality of life is what 
really matters. As a result they attach much greater importance to leisure time, and 
many are unwilling to sacrifice the enjoyment of life for a dedication to project work.
Cautions to remember with the French include these:
1. The French value punctuality. It is very important to be on time for meetings and 
social occasions.
2. Great importance is placed on neatness and taste. When interacting with French 
businesspeople, pay close attention to your own professional appearance and appear 
cultured and sophisticated.
3. The French can be very difficult to negotiate with. Often, they ignore facts, no mat-
ter how convincing they may be. They can be quite secretive about their position. It 
is difficult to obtain information from them, even in support for their position. 
Patience is essential for negotiating with them.
4. French managers tend to see their work as an intellectual exercise. They do not share 
the American view of management as an interpersonally demanding exercise, where 
plans have to be constantly “sold” upward and downward using personal skills.
5. The French generally consider managers to be experts. They expect managers to give 
precise answers to work-related questions. To preserve their reputation, some French 
managers act as if they know the answers to questions even when they don’t.5
Working in Saudi Arabia
Project management has a long tradition in Saudi Arabia and other Arab countries. 
Financed by oil money, European and American firms have contributed greatly to the 
modernization of Arab countries. Despite this tradition, foreigners often find it very 
hard to work on projects in Saudi Arabia. A number of cultural differences can be cited 
for this difficulty.
One is the Arabian view of time. In North America, it is common to use the cliché, 
“The early bird gets the worm.” In Saudi Arabia, a favorite expression is, “Bukra insha 
Allah,” which means, “Tomorrow if God wills,” an expression that reflects the Saudis’ 
approach to time. Unlike Westerners, who believe they control their own time, Arabs 
believe that Allah controls time. As a result, when Saudis commit themselves to a date in 
the future and fail to show up, there is no guilt or concern on their part because they have 
5 Adapted from R. Hallowell, D. Bowen, and C. I. Knoop, “Four Seasons Goes to Paris,” Academy of Management Executive, 
16 (4) November 2002, pp. 7–24; J. Hooker, Working across Cultures (Stanford, CA: Stanford Business Books, 2003); T. 
 Morrison and W. A. Conaway, Kiss, Bow, or Shake Hands (The Bestselling Guide to Doing Business in More than 60 Coun-
tries), 2nd ed. (New York: Adams Media, 2006).

Chapter 15  International Projects  561
no control over time in the first place. In planning future events with Arabs, it pays to hold 
lead time to a week or less, because other factors may intervene or take precedence.
An associated cultural belief is that destiny depends more on the will of a supreme 
being than on the behavior of individuals. A higher power dictates the outcome of impor-
tant events, so individual action is of little consequence. As a result, progress or the lack 
of progress on a project is considered more a question of fate than effort. This leads Saudis 
to rely less on detailed plans and schedules to complete projects than Americans do.
Another important cultural contrast between Saudi Arabians and Americans is emo-
tion and logic. Saudis often act on the basis of emotion; in contrast, those in an Anglo 
culture are taught to act on logic. During negotiations, it is important not only to share 
the facts but also to make emotional appeals that demonstrate your suggestion is the 
right thing to do.
Saudis also make use of elaborate and ritualized forms of greetings and leave- 
takings. A businessperson may wait far past the assigned meeting time before being 
admitted to a Saudi office. Once there, the individual may find a host of others present; 
one-on-one meetings are rare. Moreover, during the meeting there may be continuous 
interruptions. Visitors arrive and begin talking to the host, and messengers may come 
in and go out on a regular basis. The businessperson is expected to take all this activity 
as perfectly normal and to remain composed and ready to continue discussions as soon 
as the host is prepared to do so.
Initial meetings are typically used to get to know the other party. Business-related 
discussions may not occur until the third or fourth meeting. Business meetings typi-
cally conclude with an offer of coffee or tea. This is a sign that the meeting is over and 
that future meetings, if there are to be any, should now be arranged.
Saudis attach a great deal of importance to status and rank. When meeting with 
them, defer to the senior person. It is also important never to criticize or berate anyone 
publicly. This causes the individual to lose face; the same is true for the person who 
makes these comments. Mutual respect is expected at all times.
Other useful guidelines for working in an Arab culture such as Saudi Arabia include 
the following:
1. It is important never to display feelings of superiority because this makes the other 
party feel inferior. No matter how well someone does something, the individual 
should let the action speak for itself and not brag or draw attention to himself.
2. A lot of what gets done is a result of going through administrative channels in the 
country. It is often difficult to sidestep a lot of this red tape, and efforts to do so can 
be regarded as disrespect for legal and governmental institutions.
3. Connections are extremely important in conducting business. More important peo-
ple get fast service from less important people. Close relatives take absolute prior-
ity; non-relatives are kept waiting.
4. Patience is critical to the success of business negotiations. Time for deliberations 
should be built into all negotiations to prevent a person from giving away too much 
in an effort to reach a quick settlement.
5. Important decisions are usually made in person and not by correspondence or tele-
phone. While Saudis seek counsel from many people, the ultimate power to make a 
decision rests with the person at the top, and this individual relies heavily on  
personal impressions, trust, and rapport.6
6 Adapted from R. T. Moran, P. R. Harris, and S. V. Moran, Managing Cultural Differences, 5th ed. (Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing, 
2010); and J. Hooker, Working across Cultures (Stanford, CA: Stanford Business Books, 2003).
www.ebook3000.com

562  Chapter 15  International Projects
Working in China
In recent years the People’s Republic of China (PRC, or China, for short) has moved 
away from isolation to encourage more business with the rest of the world. While 
China holds tremendous promise, many Western firms have found working on projects 
in China to be a long, grueling process that often results in failure. One of the primary 
reasons for problems is the failure to appreciate Chinese culture.
Chinese society, like those of Japan and Korea, is influenced by the teachings of 
 Confucius (551–478 B.C.). Unlike America, which relies on legal institutions to regulate 
behavior, in Confucian societies the primary deterrent against improper or illegal behavior 
is shame or loss of face. Face is more than simply reputation. There is a Chinese saying: 
“Face is like the bark of a tree; without its bark, the tree dies.” Loss of face not only brings 
shame to individuals but also to family members. A member’s actions can cause shame for 
the entire family, hampering that family from working effectively in Chinese society.
In China, “whom you know is more important than what you know.” The term 
guanxi refers to personal connections with appropriate authorities or individuals. 
China observers argue that guanxi is critical for working with the Chinese. Chinese are 
raised to distrust strangers, especially foreigners. Trust is transmitted via guanxi. That 
is, a trusted business associate of yours must pass you along to his trusted business 
associates. Many outsiders criticize guanxi, considering it to be like nepotism where 
decisions are made regarding contracts or problems based on family ties or connec-
tions instead of an objective assessment of ability.
Many believe that the quickest way to build guanxi relationships is through tender-
ing favors. Gift-giving, entertainment at lavish banquets, questionable payments, and 
overseas trips are common. While Westerners see this as nothing short of bribery, the 
Chinese consider it essential for good business. Another common method for outsiders 
to acquire guanxi is by hiring local intermediaries, who use their connections to create 
contacts with Chinese officials and businesspeople.
In dealing with the Chinese, you must realize they are a collective society in which 
people pride themselves on being a member of a group. For this reason, you should 
never single out a Chinese for specific praise because this is likely to embarrass the 
individual in front of his peers. At the same time, you should avoid the use of “I” 
because it conveys that the speaker is drawing attention to himself or herself.
Chinese do not appreciate loud, boisterous behavior, and when speaking to each 
other they maintain a greater physical distance than is typical in America. Other cau-
tions include the following:
1. Once the Chinese decide who and what is best, they tend to stick to their decisions. 
So while they may be slow in formulating a plan, once they get started they make 
good progress.
2. Reciprocity is important in negotiations. If Chinese give concessions, they expect 
some in return.
3. The Chinese tend to be less animated than Americans. They avoid open displays of 
affection and physical contact; they are more reticent and reserved than Americans.
4. The Chinese place less value on the significance of time and often get Americans to 
concede concessions by stalling.
5. In Confucian societies those in position of power and authority are obligated to 
assist the disadvantaged. In return they gain face and a good reputation.7
7 Adapted from J. L. Graham and N. M. Lam, “The Chinese Negotiation,” Harvard Business Review, October 1, 2003, pp. 82–91; 
I. Yeung and R. L. Tung, “Achieving Business Success in Confucian Societies: The Importance of Guanxi (Connections),”  
Organizational Dynamics, 25 (2) Autumn 1996, pp. 54–65; and Hooker, Working across Cultures.

Chapter 15  International Projects  563
For more insights on Chinese culture see the Snapshot from Practice 15.3: Project 
Management X-Files.
Working in the United States
In the world of international projects, professionals from other countries will come to the 
United States to manage projects. To them, the United States is a foreign assignment. They 
will have to adapt their management style to the new environment they find in the States.
Immigration has made the United States a melting pot of diverse cultures. While 
many are quick to point out the differences between North and South, Silicon Valley 
and Wall Street, social anthropologists have identified certain cultural characteristics 
that shape how many Americans conduct business and manage projects.
Mainstream Americans are motivated by achievement and accomplishment. Their 
identity and, to a certain extent, their self-worth are measured by what they have 
achieved. Foreigners are often astounded by the material wealth accumulated by 
Americans and the modern conveniences most Americans enjoy. They are also quick 
to point out that Americans appear too busy to truly enjoy what they have achieved.
Americans tend to idolize the self-made person who rises from poverty and adversity to 
become rich and successful. Most Americans have a strong belief that they can influence 
and create their future, that with hard work and initiative, they can achieve whatever they 
set out to do. Self-determination and pragmatism dominate their approach to business.
Americans tend to discount the signiﬁ-
cance of luck and believe that good 
fortune is generally a result of hard 
work. In other cultures, luck takes on 
greater signiﬁcance and has supernat-
ural ramiﬁcations. For example, in many Asian cultures 
certain numbers are considered lucky, while others are 
unlucky. In Hong Kong the numbers 7, 3, and especially 
8 (which sounds like the word for prosperity) are consid-
ered lucky, while the number 4 is considered unlucky 
(because it is pronounced like the word “death”). Hong 
Kong businesspeople go to great lengths to avoid the 
number 4. For example, there is no fourth ﬂoor in office 
and hotel buildings. Business executives have been 
known to reject ideal sites in heavily congested Hong 
Kong because the address would contain the number 4. 
They pay premium prices for suitable sites containing 
addresses with the lucky numbers. Likewise, Hong 
Kong business managers avoid scheduling important 
events on the fourth day of each month and prefer to 
arrange critical meetings on the eighth day.
 
Hong Kong is also a place where the ancient art of 
Feng shui (literally “wind water”) is practiced. This 
involves making sure a site and buildings are aligned in 
harmony with the earth’s energy forces so that the 
location will be propitious. Feng shui practitioners are 
often called in on construction projects to make sure 
that the building is aligned correctly on the site. In 
some cases, the technical design of the building is 
changed to conform to the recommendations of such 
experts. Similarly, Feng shui experts have been known 
to be called in when projects are experiencing prob-
lems. Their recommendations may include reposition-
ing the project manager’s desk or hanging up mirrors 
to deﬂect the ﬂow of unharmonious inﬂuences away 
from the building or site of the project.
 
In cultures where luck is believed to play a role in 
business, people who discount luck may not only insult 
the luck seekers, but risk being thought negligent in 
not paying enough attention to what is viewed as a 
legitimate business concern.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 5 . 3
Project Management X-Files
© bikeriderlondon/Shutterstock
www.ebook3000.com

564  Chapter 15  International Projects
Although Americans like to set precise objectives, they view planning as a means 
and not an end. They value flexibility and are willing to deviate from plans and impro-
vise if they believe change will lead to accomplishment. Obstacles on a project are to 
be overcome, not worked around. Americans think they can accomplish just about 
anything, given time, money, and technology.
Americans fought a revolution and subsequent wars to preserve their concept of 
democracy, so they resent too much control or interference, especially by governments. 
While more an ideal than practice, there is deep-rooted belief in American management 
philosophy that those people who will be affected by decisions should be involved in 
making decisions. Many foreign businesspeople are surprised at the amount of autonomy 
and decision-making authority granted to subordinates. Foreign personnel have to learn 
to interact with American professionals below their rank in their own organizations.
Businesspeople from different African, Asian, and Latin American countries are 
amazed and often somewhat distressed at the rapid pace of America. “Getting things 
done” is an American characteristic. Americans are very time-conscious and efficient. 
They expect meetings to start on time. They tinker with gadgets and technological 
systems, always searching for easier, better, more efficient ways of accomplishing 
things. American professionals are often relentless in pursuing project objectives and 
expect that behavior of others also.
Americans in play or business generally are quite competitive, reflecting their desire 
to achieve and succeed. Although the American culture contains contradictory mes-
sages about the importance of success (i.e., “It’s not whether you win or lose but how 
you play the game” versus “nice guys finish last”), winning and being number one are 
clearly valued in American society. Foreigners are often surprised at how aggressively 
Americans approach business with adversarial attitudes toward competitors and a 
desire to not just meet but to exceed project goals and objectives.
Other guidelines and cautions for working with Americans on projects include:
1. More than half of U.S. women work outside the home; females have considerable 
opportunity for personal and professional growth, guaranteed by law. It is not 
uncommon to find women in key project positions. Female professionals expect to 
be treated as equals. Behavior tolerated in other countries would be subject to 
harassment laws in the States.
2. In the United States, gifts are rarely brought by visitors in a business situation.
3. Americans tend to be quite friendly and open when first meeting someone. Foreign-
ers often mistake this strong “come-on” for the beginning of a strong reciprocal 
friendship. This is in contrast to many other cultures where there is more initial 
reserve in interpersonal relations, especially with strangers. For many foreigners, 
the American comes on too strong, too soon, and then fails to follow up with the 
implicitly promised friendship.
4. Although in comparison to the rest of the world Americans tend to be informal in 
greeting and dress, they are a noncontact culture (e.g., they avoid embracing in pub-
lic usually) and Americans maintain certain physical/psychological distance with 
others (e.g., about two feet) in conversations.
5. American decision making is results oriented. Decisions tend to be based on facts 
and expected outcomes, not social impact.8
8 Adapted from Moran et al., Managing Cultural Differences; and D. Z. Milosevic, “Echoes of the Silent Language of 
 Project Management,” Project Management Journal, 30 (1) March 1999, pp. 27–39.

Chapter 15  International Projects  565
Summary Comments about Working in Different Cultures
These briefings underscore the complexity of working on international projects. It is 
common practice to rely on intermediaries—often natives who are foreign educated—
to bridge the gap between cultures. These intermediaries perform a variety of func-
tions. They act as translators. They use their social connections to expedite transactions 
and protect the project against undue interference. They are used to sidestep the touchy 
bribery/gift dilemma (see Snapshot from Practice 15.4: Dealing with Customs). They 
serve as cultural guides, helping outsiders understand and interpret the foreign culture. 
In today’s world, there are a growing number of consulting firms that perform these 
functions by helping foreign clients work on projects in their country.
The international briefings also highlight the importance of project managers doing 
their homework and becoming familiar with the customs and habits of the host country 
they are going to be working in. As far as possible, the project should be managed in 
such a way that local-country norms and customs are honored. However, there are 
limits to the extent to which you should accommodate foreign cultures. Going native is 
generally not an alternative. After all, it took a Russian his entire life to learn how to be 
a Russian. It would be foolish to think an outsider could learn to be one in six months, 
two years, or perhaps ever.
The remainder of this chapter focuses on the selection and training of project per-
sonnel for international projects. But before these issues are discussed, this section 
concludes with a discussion of the phenomenon of culture shock, which can have a 
profound effect on a foreigner’s performance on a project in a strange culture.
Culture Shock
My first few weeks in Chiang Mai [Thailand] were filled with excitement. I was excited 
about the challenge of building a waste treatment plant in a foreign country. I was fascinated 
with Thai customs and traditions, the smells and sights of the night market. Soon I noticed a 
distinct change in my attitude and behavior. I started having problems sleeping and lacked 
energy. I became irritable at work, frustrated by how long things took to accomplish, and 
how I couldn’t seem to get anything accomplished. I started staying up late at night drinking 
Thai whiskey and watching CNN in my hotel room.
Will corruption influence the project? 
Bribes are illegal in the United 
States, but in some countries they 
are the usual way to do business. For 
example, one American project man-
ager in a foreign country requested 
that a shipment of critical project equipment be sent 
“overnight rush.” Two days later, inquiries to the 
sender confirmed the materials had been delivered 
to the nearby airport. Further inquiries to the port 
found the shipment “waiting to pass customs.” 
Locals quickly informed the American that money 
paid to the chief customs inspector would expedite 
clearance. The American project manager’s response 
was, “I will not be held hostage. Bribes are illegal!” 
Two more days of calling government officials did 
not move the shipment from customs. The manager 
related his problem to a friendly businessman of the 
host nation at a social affair. The local businessman 
said he would see if he could help. The shipment 
arrived the next morning at 10:00 A.M. The American 
called his local business friend and thanked him pro-
fusely. “I owe you one.” “No,” replied the local. “You 
owe me a $50 dinner when I visit you in the States.” 
The use of an intermediary in such situations may be 
the only avenue available to a manager to reduce 
the stress and personal conflict with the U.S. value 
system.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 5 . 4
Dealing with Customs
www.ebook3000.com

566  Chapter 15  International Projects
This engineer is experiencing what many would call “culture shock.” Culture shock is 
a natural psychological disorientation that most people suffer when they move into a cul-
ture different from their own. The culture shock cycle has four stages (see Figure 15.6):
1. Honeymoon—You start your overseas assignment with a sense of excitement. The 
new and the unusual are welcomed. At first it is amusing not to understand or be 
understood. Soon a sense of frustration begins to set in.
2. Irritability and hostility—Your initial enthusiasm is exhausted, and you begin to 
notice that differences are greater than you first imagined. You become frustrated 
by your inability to get things done as you are accustomed to. You begin to lose 
confidence in your abilities to communicate and work effectively in the different 
culture.
3. Gradual adjustment—You begin to overcome your sense of isolation and figure out 
how to get things done in the new culture. You acquire a new perspective of what is 
possible and regain confidence in your ability to work in the culture.
4. Adaptation—You recover from your sense of psychological disorientation and 
begin to function and communicate in the new culture.
Culture shock is not a disease but a natural response to immersing yourself in a new 
environment. Culture shock results from a breakdown in your selective perception and 
effective interpretation system. At a subliminal level, your senses are being bombarded 
by a wide variety of strange sounds, sights, and smells. At the same time, the normal 
assumptions you are accustomed to using in your home culture to interpret perceptions 
and to communicate intentions no longer apply. When this happens, whether in a busi-
ness context or in normal attempts to socialize, confusion and frustration set in. The 
natives’ behavior does not seem to make sense, and, even more importantly, your behav-
ior does not produce expected results. Frustration occurs because you are used to being 
competent in such situations and now find you are unable to operate effectively.
Culture shock is generally considered a positive sign that the professional is becom-
ing involved in the new culture instead of remaining isolated in an expatriate ghetto. 
The significant question is how best to manage culture shock, not how to avoid it. The 
key appears to be managing the stress associated with culture shock.
Stress-related culture shock takes many forms: disappointment, frustration, with-
drawal, anxiety, and physiological responses such as fatigue, sleeplessness, and head-
aches. Stress is induced by the senses being overwhelmed by foreign stimuli and the 
FIGURE 15.6
Culture Shock Cycle 
Mood
High
Honeymoon
Irritability and
hostility
Gradual
adjustment
Adaptation
Months in foreign culture
Low
15-4
LO
Describe culture shock 
and strategies for coping 
with it.

Chapter 15  International Projects  567
inability to function effectively in a strange land. Stress is exacerbated when one 
encounters disturbing situations that, as a foreigner, are neither understood nor con-
doned. For example, many North Americans are appalled by the poverty and hunger in 
many underdeveloped countries.
Coping with Culture Shock
There are a wide range of stress management techniques for coping with culture shock. 
One method does not necessarily work any better than another; success depends on the 
particular individual and situation involved. Some people engage in regular physical 
exercise programs, some practice meditation and relaxation exercises, and others find 
it healthy to keep a journal.
Many effective international managers create “stability zones.” They spend most of 
their time immersed in the foreign culture but then briefly retreat into an environment—
a stability zone—that closely re-creates home. For example, when one of the authors 
was living in Kraków, Poland, with his family, they would routinely go to the Polish 
movie houses to see American movies with Polish subtitles. The two hours spent hear-
ing English and seeing a familiar environment on the screen had a soothing effect on 
everyone.
On the project, managers can reduce the stress caused by culture shock by recognizing 
it and modifying their expectations and behavior accordingly. They can redefine priori-
ties and develop more realistic expectations as to what is possible. They can focus their 
limited energy on only the most important tasks and relish small accomplishments.
After three to six months, depending on the individual and assignment, most people 
come up from their culture shock “low” and begin living a more normal life in the 
foreign country. They talk to acquaintances from the host country and experienced 
outsiders from their own culture to find out how to behave and what to expect. Little 
by little they learn how to make sense of the new environment. They figure out when 
“yes” means “yes” and when it means “maybe” and when it means “no.” They begin 
to master the language so that they can make themselves understood in day-to-day 
conversations. See the Snapshot from Practice 15.5: Project X—Namibia, Africa, for 
further insights on coping with culture shock.
The vast majority of people eventually make the adjustment, although for some 
people it can take much longer than three to six months. A smaller number never 
recover, and their international experience turns into a nightmare. Some exhibit severe 
stress symptoms (e.g., alcoholism, drug abuse, nervous breakdown) and must return 
home before finishing their assignment.
Professionals can use project work as a bridge until they adjust to their new environ-
ment. Unfortunately, spouses who do not work do not have this advantage. When 
spouses are left to cope with the strange environment on their own, they often have a 
much more difficult time overcoming culture shock. The effect on spouses cannot be 
underestimated. The number one reason expatriate managers return home is that their 
spouses failed to adjust to the new environment (Tung, 1987).
Project professionals working overseas accept that they are in a difficult situation 
and that they will not act as effectively as they did at home, especially in the initial 
stages. They recognize the need for good stress management techniques, including 
stability zones. They also recognize that it is not an individual problem and invest extra 
time and energy to help their spouses and families manage the transition. At the same 
time, they appreciate that their colleagues are experiencing similar problems and are 
sensitive to their needs. They work together to manage the stress and pull out of a cul-
ture shock low as quickly as possible.
www.ebook3000.com

568  Chapter 15  International Projects
It is somewhat ironic, but people who work on projects overseas experience culture 
shock twice. Many professionals experience the same kind of disorientation and stress 
when they return home, although it is usually less severe. For some, their current job 
has less responsibility and is boring compared with the challenge of their overseas 
assignment. For others, they have problems adjusting to changes made in the home 
organization while they were gone. This can be compounded by financial shock when 
the salary and fringe benefits they became accustomed to in the foreign assignment are 
now lost, and adjusting to a lower standard of living is difficult. It typically takes six 
months to a year before managers operate again at full effectiveness after a lengthy 
foreign assignment (Adler and Gunderson, 2007).
15.4 Selection and Training for International Projects
When professionals are selected for overseas projects and they do not work out, the 
overall costs can be staggering. Not only does the project experience a serious setback, 
but the reputation of the firm is damaged in the region. This is why many firms have 
developed formal screening procedures to help ensure the careful selection of person-
nel for international projects. Organizations examine a number of characteristics to 
determine whether an individual is suitable for overseas work. They may look for work 
experience with cultures other than one’s own, previous overseas travel, good physical 
While U.S. reality TV shows focus on 
ﬁnding love, outwitting opponents, 
and garnering audience support, a 
Norwegian TV show shone a light on 
project management under extreme 
conditions. The plot was deceptively simple: send 10 
Scandinavian volunteers 6,000 miles away from home 
to the dry sub-tropics of southern Africa and charge 
them with building a school for orphans and poor chil-
dren in less than 30 days. Not only would they be 
forced to adjust to vastly different language, climate, 
and cuisines, but only one of the 10 had previous con-
struction experience. The team’s trials and tribulations 
were aired over Norwegian TV in 2009. The marketing 
blitz for the show, titled Project X, played up the drama 
with the tagline: “Can they achieve the mission?”
 
The team was enthusiastic at the outset, but discon-
tent began as soon as they arrived at the small mining 
town of Tsumeb in Namibia. The team immediately 
experienced culture shock—all the while the TV crew 
followed them, sticking cameras in their faces and ask-
ing how they felt.
 
The sweltering heat, slumlike conditions, and lim-
ited cuisine immediately elicited complaints: “I can’t 
sleep.” “The food is awful.” “Where are the toilets?”
S N A P S H OT  F R O M  P R AC T I C E  1 5 . 5
Project X—Namibia, Africa*
 
One of the biggest mistakes the volunteers made 
was applying a Eurocentric sense of time and planning. 
“I brought my Danish mindset that ‘On Friday we will do 
this and on Saturday we will do that,’” reported Merete 
Lange, one of the volunteers. “Then I came to under-
stand African time, and that was the biggest surprise.”
 
Hoping to secure local buy-in, Ms. Lange arranged 
for a local carpenter to build desks and tables. A few 
days before the furniture was needed, she discovered 
work hadn’t even begun.
 
“I got pretty stressed and tried to be my best at 
being diplomatic,” Ms. Lange recalls. “I asked, ‘When 
do you think you will be ready with the furniture?’” The 
carpenter responded, “Time is unpredictable. I will call 
you.”
 
Over time, Ms. Lange and her teammates were able 
to adapt to the elements and ﬁgure out ways to work 
with the locals to successfully build the school within 
30 days. “The trick is reﬂecting upon ‘where people 
were coming from, how to meet them there, and how to 
create a win-win situation that would satisfy both 
parties.’”
* B. G. Yovovich, “Worlds Apart,” PMNetwork, October 2010, 
pp. 24–29.
15-5
LO
Understand how  
organizations select 
and prepare people to 
work on international 
projects.

Chapter 15  International Projects  569
and emotional health, a knowledge of a host nation’s language, and even recent immi-
gration background or heritage. Prospective candidates and their family members are 
often interviewed by trained psychologists, who assess their ability to adapt and func-
tion in the new culture.
While there is growing appreciation for screening people for foreign assignments, 
the number one reason for selection is that the personnel assigned are the best people 
available for the technical challenges of the project (Mendenhall et al., 1987). Techni-
cal know-how takes precedence over cross-cultural sensitivity or experience. As a 
consequence, training is critical to fill in the cultural gaps and prepare individuals to 
work in a foreign land.
Training varies widely, depending on the individual, company, nature of the project, 
and cultures to work with. Project professionals assigned to foreign countries should 
have a minimal understanding of the following areas:
∙ Religion.
∙ Dress codes.
∙ Education system.
∙ Holidays—national and religious.
∙ Daily eating patterns.
∙ Family life.
∙ Business protocols.
∙ Social etiquette.
∙ Equal opportunity.
An example of a short-term training program is the one developed by Underwriter 
Laboratories, Inc., to train staff who travel to Japan to work with clients on projects. 
The program is designed around a series of mini-lectures that cover topics ranging 
from how to handle introductions to the proper way to exchange gifts to the correct way 
of interpreting Japanese social and business behavior. The two-day program consists of 
lectures, case studies, role plays, language practice, and a short test on cultural termi-
nology; it concludes with a 90-minute question-and-answer period. At the end of the 
program, participants have a fundamental understanding of how to communicate with 
the Japanese. More importantly, they know the types of information they lack and how 
to go about learning more to become effective intercultural communicators.
Other training programs are more extensive. For example, Peace Corps volunteers 
undergo an intense two- to four-month training program in their country of service. 
The training includes classes on the history and traditions of the country, intensive 
language instruction, and cross-cultural training as well as home-stays with local fami-
lies. Many companies outsource training to one of the many firms specializing in 
overseas and intercultural training.
Figure 15.7 attempts to link the length and type of training with the cultural fluency 
required to successfully complete the project. Three different learning approaches are 
highlighted (Mendenhall et al., 1987):
1. The “information-giving” approach—the learning of information or skills from a 
lecture-type orientation.
2. The “affective” approach—the learning of information/skills that raise the affective 
responses on the part of the trainee and result in cultural insights.
3. The “behavioral/experiential” approach—variant of the affective approach tech-
nique that provides the trainee with realistic simulations or scenarios.
www.ebook3000.com

570  Chapter 15  International Projects
According to this framework, the length and level of training would depend on the 
degree of cultural fluency required to be successful. In general, the longer the person 
is expected to work in the foreign country, the more intensive the training should be. 
Length of stay should not be the only consideration; high levels of cultural fluency, and 
therefore more extensive training, may be required to perform short-term, intense proj-
ects. In addition, location is important. Working in Australia will likely require less 
cultural fluency than working on a project in Pakistan.
While English is rapidly becoming the international language for business in many 
parts of the world, you should not underestimate the value of being able to speak the 
language of the host country. At a minimum you should be able to exchange basic 
pleasantries in the native tongue. Most foreigners consider this a sign of respect, and 
even if you stumble they appreciate the effort.
In many situations translators are used to facilitate communication. While time-
consuming, this is the only way to communicate with non-English-speaking personnel. 
Be careful in the selection of translators, and do not just assume they are competent. 
For example, one of the authors enlisted the help of a Polish translator to conduct a 
meeting with some Polish managers. After the meeting the translator, who taught 
 English at a local university, asked if the author “had good time.” I responded that I felt 
things went well. The translator repeated her question. Puzzled, I reaffirmed that I 
felt things went well. After the interchange was repeated several times, the translator 
finally grabbed my wrist, pointed at my watch, and asked again if I “had good time?” 
Doubts arose concerning the accuracy of the meeting translation!
FIGURE 15.7 Relationship between Length and Rigor of Training and Cultural Fluency Required 
LENGTH
OF
TRAINING
1–4 weeks
Less
than a
week
Cross-cultural training approach
Experiential Approach
Assessment center
Field experiences
Simulations
Extensive language training
Affective Approach
Culture assimilator training
Role-playing
Cases
Culture shock: Stress reduction training
Moderate language training
Information-giving Approach
Area brieﬁngs
Cultural brieﬁngs
Films/books
Use of interpreters
“Survival-level” language training
High
Moderate
Degree of cultural ﬂuency
Low
1–3 years
2–12 months
1 month or less
High
Level
of
Rigor
Low
Length
of stay
1–2
months+

Chapter 15  International Projects  571
The number of international projects continues to increase, and nothing on the horizon 
suggests things will change in the new millennium. More and more project managers 
will be needed to implement international projects. There are few guidelines for the 
fledgling international project manager. Preparing for international projects can be 
enhanced through training. As a general background, potential international project 
managers can benefit from a basic international business course that sensitizes them to 
the forces of change in the global economy and to cultural differences. Learning a for-
eign language is also strongly recommended.
 
Further training specific to the host country is a very useful preproject endeavor. 
The length and type of training usually depend on the duration of the project manager’s 
assignment. Review Figure 15.7. Still, self-learning, on-the-job training, and experi-
ence are the best teachers for international project managers.
 
Preparing for a specific international project requires serious preproject homework. 
Understanding the motivation of the firm in selecting the project and its site provides 
important insights. What basic political, geographic, economic, and infrastructure fac-
tors were key considerations? How will they impact the implementation of the project?
 
Finally, preparation and understanding the cultural differences of the host country go 
a long way toward making positive first impressions with the nationals and managing 
the project. International projects have distinct personalities. All people are not the 
same. Differences within and among countries and cultures are numerous and complex. 
Project managers need to accept these differences and treat them as real—or live with 
the consequences. What works at home may not work in the foreign country. Americans 
are regarded as friendly by our neighbors in the global village, but Americans are also 
noted to be insensitive to differences in local cultures and customs and awkward in our 
use of languages other than English. Although most attention in foreign projects is 
focused on technical efforts and their cost, the project must be carried out within the 
environment of the country’s social customs, work practices, government controls, and 
religious beliefs. In most cultures, sincerity and flexibility will pay off.
Summary
Key Terms
Cross-cultural  
 orientations, 557 
Culture, 551
Culture shock, 566
Infrastructure, 550
Review 
Questions
Exercises
1. How do environmental factors affect project implementation?
2. What role do local intermediaries play in helping an outsider complete a project?
3. Why is it important to honor the customs and traditions of a country when working 
on an international project?
4. What is culture shock? What can you do to reduce the negative effects of culture shock?
5. How should you go about preparing yourself for an international project?
1. Interview someone who has worked or lived in a foreign country for more than six 
months.
 
a.  What was his experience with culture shock?
 
b.  What did he learn about the culture of the country he lived in?
 
c.  What advice would he give to someone who would be working on a project in 
that country?
www.ebook3000.com

572  Chapter 15  International Projects
2. Try as best you can to apply the Kluckhohn-Strodtbeck cross-cultural framework to 
the four countries discussed in this chapter: Mexico, France, Saudi Arabia, and 
China. Where do you think these countries lie on each of the cultural issues?
3. Place in order the following countries in terms of what you would think would be 
the least to most corrupt:
 
United States, Denmark, Saudi Arabia, Russia, Australia, Hong Kong, 
Nepal, China, Kenya, Indonesia, Botswana, Greece, Chile.
 
Use an Internet search engine to find the most recent International Corruptions 
Perceptions Index (CPI) released by the Berlin-based organization Transparency 
International.
 
a.  Check your predictions with the Index.
 
b.  How well did you do? What countries surprised you? Why?
4. Safety is a major concern when working on projects abroad. Select a country that 
you would consider dangerous to work in and look up the travel advisory provided 
for that country by the U.S. State Department (http://travel.state.gov/). How safe is 
it to work in that country?
References
Ackoff, R. L., Ackoff’s Fables: Irreverent Reflections on Business and Bureaucracy 
(New York: Wiley, 1991), p. 221.
Adler, N., and A. Gunderson, International Dimensions of Organizational Behavior, 
5th ed. (Mason, OH: Thomson Publishing, 2007).
Arms, P. B. and E. Lucas, “How do Foreign Clients Really See American Project 
Managers?” Proceedings of the 1978 Annual Seminar/Symposium on Project Man-
agement (Newtown, PA: Project Management Institute, 1978), pp. 11K 1–7.
Borsuk, R., “In Indonesia, a Twist on Spreading the Wealth: Decentralization of 
Power Multiplies Opportunities for Bribery, Corruption,” The Wall Street Journal, 
January 29, 2003, p. A16.
Cahill, T., “Deadly Business in Moscow,” Bloomberg Businessweek, March 1, 2010, 
pp. 22–23.
Chen, M., and D. Miller, “West Meets East: Toward an Ambicultural Approach to 
Management,” The Academy of Management Perspectives, vol. 24, no. 4  
(November 2010), pp. 17–24.
Contingency Planning and Management.com, “Strohl Systems Offers Terrorism 
Readiness Questionnaire,” September 24, 2001.
Deneire, M., and M. Segalla, “Mr. Christian Pierret, Secretary of State for Industry 
(1997–2002), on French Perspectives on Organizational Leadership and Manage-
ment,” Academy of Management Executive, vol. 16, no. 4 (November 2002), 
pp. 25–30.
Doh, J. P., P. Rodriguez, K. Uhlenbruck, J. Collins, and L. Eden, “Coping with Cor-
ruption in Foreign Markets,” Academy of Management Executive, vol. 17, no. 3 
(August 2003), pp. 114–27.
Graham, J. L., and N. M. Lam, “The Chinese Negotiation,” Harvard Business 
Review, October 1, 2003, pp. 82–91.

Chapter 15  International Projects  573
Hallowell, R., D. Bowen, and C. I. Knoop, “Four Seasons Goes to Paris,” Academy of 
Management Executive, vol. 16, no. 4 (November 2002), pp. 7–24.
Hodgetts, R. M., and F. Luthans, International Management: Culture, Strategy, and 
Behavior, 5th ed. (Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2003).
Hofstede, G., Cultures Consequences: International Difference in Work-Related Val-
ues (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publishing, 1980).
Hooker, J., Working across Cultures (Stanford, CA: Stanford Business Books, 2003).
Kluckhohn, F., and F. L. Strodtbeck, Variations in Value Orientations (Evanston, IL: 
Row, Peterson, 1961).
Krane, J., “Intelligence Companies Help Overseas Business Travelers,” The Cincin-
nati Enquirer, April 2, 2002, website.
Kras, E., Management in Two Cultures: Bridging the Gap between U.S. and Mexican 
Managers, rev. ed. (Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press, 1995).
Lane, H. W., and J. J. DiStefano, International Project Management, 2nd ed. (Boston: 
PWS-Kent, 1992).
Lieberthal, K., and G. Lieberthal, “The Great Transition,” Harvard Business Review, 
October 1, 2003, pp. 71–81.
Mendenhall, M. E., E. Dunbar, and G. R. Oddou, “Expatriate Selection, Training, 
and Career-Pathing: A Review and Critique,” Human Resource Management, vol. 26, 
no. 3 (Fall 1987), pp. 331–45.
Meyer, E., The Culture Map: Breaking through the Invisible Boundaries of Global 
Business, (New York: Public Affair, 2014).
Milosevic, D. Z., “Echoes of the Silent Language of Project Management,” Project 
Management Journal, vol. 30, no. 1 (March 1999), pp. 27–39.
Moffett, M. H., I. Stonehill, and D. K. Eiteman, Fundamentals of Multinational 
Finance (Boston: Pearson, 2012).
Moran, R. T., P. R. Harris, and S. V. Moran, Managing Cultural Differences, 5th ed. 
(Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing, 2010).
Morrison, T., and W. A. Conaway, Kiss, Bow, or Shake Hands (The Bestselling Guide to 
Doing Business in More than 60 Countries), 2nd ed. (New York: Adams Media, 2006).
Ricks, D. A., Blunders in International Business (London: Blackwell, 2000).
Saunders, C., C. Van Slyke, and D. R. Vogel, “My Time or Yours? Managing Time 
Visions in Global Virtual Teams,” Academy of Management Executive, vol. 18, no. 1 
(2004), pp. 19–31.
Scown, M. J., “Managers Journal: Barstool Advice for the Vietnam Investor,” Asian 
Wall Street Journal, July 15, 1993.
Tung, R. L., “Expatriate Assignments: Enhancing Success and Minimizing Failure,” 
Academy of Management Executive, vol. 1, no. 2 (1987), pp. 117–26.
Yeung, I., and R. L. Tung, “Achieving Business Success in Confucian Societies: The 
Importance of Guanxi (Connections),” Organizational Dynamics, vol. 25, no. 2 
(Autumn 1996), pp. 54–65.
www.ebook3000.com

574  Chapter 15  International Projects
Case 15.1
AMEX, Hungary
Michael Thomas shouted, “Sasha, Tor-Tor, we’ve got to go! Our driver is waiting for 
us.” Thomas’s two daughters were fighting over who would get the last orange for 
lunch that day. Victoria (“Tor-Tor”) prevailed as she grabbed the orange and ran out the 
door to the Mercedes Benz waiting for them. The fighting continued in the back seat 
as they drove toward the city of Budapest, Hungary. Thomas finally turned around and 
grabbed the orange and proclaimed that he would have it for lunch. The back seat 
became deadly silent as they made their way to the American International School of 
Budapest.
 
After dropping the girls off at the school, Thomas was driven to his office in the 
Belvéros area of Budapest. Thomas worked for AMEX Petroleum and had been sent to 
Budapest four months earlier to set up business operations in central Hungary. His job 
was to establish 10 to 14 gas stations in the region by purchasing existing stations, 
building new ones, or negotiating franchise arrangements with existing owners of sta-
tions. Thomas jumped at this project. He realized that his career at AMEX was going 
nowhere in the United States, and if he were going to realize his ambitions, it would be 
in the “wild, wild east” of the former Soviet empire. Besides, Thomas’s mother was 
Hungarian, and he could speak the language. At least he thought he could until he 
arrived in Budapest and realized that he had greatly exaggerated his competence.
 
As he entered the partially refurbished offices of AMEX, he noticed that only three 
of his staff were present. No one knew where Miklos was, while Margit reported that 
she would not be at work today because she had to stay at home to take care of her sick 
mother. Thomas asked Béla why the workmen weren’t present to work on finishing the 
office. Béla informed him that the work had to be halted until they received approval 
from the city historian. Budapest, anxious to preserve its historical heritage, required 
that all building renovations be approved by the city historian. When Thomas asked 
Béla how long it would take, Béla responded, “Who knows—days, weeks, maybe even 
months.” Thomas muttered “great” to himself and turned his attention to the morning 
business. He was scheduled to interview prospective employees who would act as sta-
tion managers and staff personnel.
 
The interview with Ferenc Erkel was typical of the many interviews he held that 
morning. Erkel was a neatly dressed, 42-year-old, unemployed professional who could 
speak limited English. He had a masters degree in international economics and had 
worked for 12 years in the state-owned Institute for Foreign Trade. Since being laid off 
two years ago, he had been working as a taxicab driver. When asked about his work at 
the Institute, Erkel smiled sheepishly and said that he pushed paper and spent most of 
the time playing cards with his colleagues.
 
To date Thomas had hired 16 employees. Four quit within three days on the job, and 
six were let go after a trial period for being absent from work, failing to perform duties, 
or showing a lack of initiative. Thomas thought that at this rate it would take him over 
a year just to hire his staff.
 
Thomas took a break from the interview schedule to scan the Budapest Business 
Journal, an English newspaper that covered business news in Hungary. Two items 
caught his eye. One article was on the growing threat of the Ukrainian Mafia in 
 Hungary, which detailed extortion attempts in Budapest. The second story was that 
inflation had risen to 32 percent. This last item disturbed Thomas because at the time 

Chapter 15  International Projects  575
only one out of every five Hungarian families owned a car. AMEX’s strategy in 
 Hungary depended on a boom in first-time car owners.
 
Thomas collected his things and popped a few aspirin for the headache he was 
developing. He walked several blocks to the Kispipa restaurant where he had a supper 
meeting with Hungarian businessman Zoltán Kodaly. He had met Kodaly briefly at a 
reception sponsored by the U.S. consulate for American and Hungarian businesspeo-
ple. Kodaly reportedly owned three gas stations that Thomas was interested in.
 
Thomas waited, sipping bottled water for 25 minutes. Kodaly appeared with a young 
lady who could not have been older than 19. As it turned out Kodaly had brought his 
daughter Annia, who was a university student, to act as translator. While Thomas made an 
attempt to speak in Hungarian at first, Kodaly insisted that they use Annia to translate.
 
After ordering the house specialty, szekelygulas, Thomas immediately got down to 
business. He told Kodaly that AMEX was willing to make two offers to him. They 
would like to either purchase two of his stations at a price of $150,000 each, or they 
could work out a franchise agreement. Thomas said AMEX was not interested in the 
third station located near Klinikak because it would be too expensive to modernize the 
equipment. Annia translated, and as far as Thomas could tell she was doing a pretty 
good job. At first Kodaly did not respond and simply engaged in side conversations 
with Annia and exchanged pleasantries with people who came by. Thomas became 
frustrated and reiterated his offer. Eventually Kodaly asked what he meant by franchis-
ing, and Thomas tried to use the local McDonald’s as an example of how it worked. He 
mentioned that Kodaly would still own the stations, but he would have to pay a fran-
chisee fee, share profits with AMEX, and adhere to AMEX procedures and practices. 
In exchange, AMEX would provide petroleum and funds to renovate the stations to 
meet AMEX standards.
 
Toward the end of the meal Kodaly asked what would happen to the people who 
worked at the stations. Thomas asserted that according to his calculation the stations 
were over-staffed by 70 percent and that to make a profit, at least 15 workers would 
have to be let go. This statement was greeted with silence. Kodaly then turned the con-
versation to soccer and asked Thomas if it was true that in America girls play “foot-
ball.” Thomas said that both of his daughters played AYSO soccer in America and 
hoped to play in Hungary. Kodaly said girls don’t play football in Hungary and that 
Annia was an accomplished volleyball player. Thomas pressed Kodaly for a response 
to his offer, but Kodaly rose and thanked Thomas for the meal. He said he would think 
about his offer and get back in touch with him.
 
Thomas left the Kispipa wondering if he would ever see Kodaly again. He returned 
to his office where an urgent message was waiting from Tibor. Tibor was responsible 
for retrofitting the first station Thomas had purchased for AMEX. The new tanks had 
not arrived from Vienna, and the construction crew had spent the day doing nothing. 
After several phone calls he found out that the tanks were being held at the border by 
customs. This irritated him because he had been assured by local officials that every-
thing had been taken care of. He asked his secretary to schedule an appointment with 
the Hungarian trade office as soon as possible.
 
At the end of the day he checked his e-mail from the States. There was a message 
from headquarters asking about the status of the project. By this time he had hoped to 
have his office staffed and up and running and at least three stations secured. So far he 
had only one-third of his staff, his office was in shambles, and only one station was 
being retrofitted. Thomas decided to wait until tomorrow to respond to the e-mail.
 
Before returning home Thomas stopped off at the English Pub, a favorite hangout 
for expats in Budapest. There he met Jan Krovert, who worked for a Dutch company 
www.ebook3000.com

576  Chapter 15  International Projects
that was building a large discount retail store on the outskirts of Budapest. Thomas and 
Krovert often talked about being “strangers in a strange land” at the pub. Thomas 
talked about the interviews and how he could just see in their eyes that they didn’t have 
the drive or initiative to be successful. Krovert responded that Hungary has high unem-
ployment but a shortage of motivated workers. Krovert confided that he no longer 
interviewed anyone over the age of 30, claiming that what fire they had in their bellies 
was burned out after years of working in state-run companies.
1. What are the issues confronting Thomas in this case?
2. How well is Thomas dealing with these issues?
3. What suggestions would you have for Thomas in managing this project?
Case 15.2
Phuket A
On December 26, 2004, an earthquake reaching 9.1 on the Richter scale triggered a 
series of devastating tsunamis off the coast of Indonesia. They spread throughout the 
Indian Ocean, killing large numbers of people and inundating coastal communities 
across South and Southeast Asia, including parts of Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, and 
Thailand. The 2004 Asian tsunami was one of the deadliest catastrophes in modern 
history, with more than 220,000 lives lost.
 
Nils Lofgrin, who had managed several construction projects in Australia and New 
Guinea, was sent by his construction firm to restore a five-star resort along the Anda-
man coast in southern Thailand that had been ravaged by this tsunami. Casualties at the 
resort included 12 staff and 37 guests. This was Nils’s first assignment in Thailand.
 
Nils flew down and toured the site. His assessment of the damage was that it was 
not as severe as feared. The basic infrastructure was intact but debris needed to be 
cleared and the resort refurbished. He reported back to headquarters that with a bit of 
luck he should have the resort up and running in a matter of months. Little did he real-
ize how soon he would regret making such a promise.
 
The problems began immediately when he was unable to recruit workers to help 
clean up the mess at the resort. Burmese migrant workers comprised a significant por-
tion of the workforce in the region. The heavy government presence caused them to 
flee into the hills out of growing fears of being arrested and deported. Even when he 
offered double wages he was not able to recruit many Thais.
1. Why do you think Nils is unable to recruit Thai workers for his project?

www.ebook3000.com

578
An Introduction to Agile 
Project Management
OUTLINE
16.1  Traditional versus Agile Methods
16.2  Agile PM
16.3  Agile PM in Action: Scrum
16.4  Applying Agile PM to Large Projects
16.5  Limitations and Concerns
Summary
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After reading this chapter you should be able to:
16-1  Recognize the conditions in which traditional 
project management versus agile project 
 management should be used.
16-2  Understand the value of incremental, iterative 
development for creating new products.
16-3 Identify core Agile principles.
16-4  Understand the basic methodology used in 
Scrum.
16-5  Recognize the limitations of Agile project 
management.
C H A P T E R  S I X T E E N
16

579
We know less about the project today than at any time in the future. 
—Chet Hendrickson
As project management entered the new millennium, many professionals recognized that 
one-size fits all project management methods did not meet their needs. This was especially 
true for those working on software and product development projects in which the end 
product is not well defined and evolves over time. This project environment requires flexi-
bility and the ability to manage changes as more information and learning take place. Enter 
Agile Project Management (Agile PM). Instead of attempting to plan the entire project up 
front, Agile PM relies on incremental, iterative development cycles to complete projects.
Ken Schwaber uses the analogy of building a house to explain the difference 
between incremental, iterative development and traditional project management.1 
The traditional approach would be that the buyers could not move into the house until the 
entire house is completed. The iterative approach would build the house room by room. 
The plumbing, electrical, and infrastructure would be built for the most important 
Project
networks
6
Managing
risk
7
Monitoring
progress
13
Teams
11
Outsourcing
12
Project
manager
10
Strategy
2
Introduction
1
Organization
3
Schedule
resources & costs
8
International
projects
15
Agile PM
16
Project
closure
14
Estimate
5
Reducing
duration
9
Deﬁne
project
4
1 Schwaber, K., Agile Project Management with Scrum (Seattle: Microsoft, 2004) p. xviii.
www.ebook3000.com

580  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
room (i.e., kitchen) first and then extended to each room as it was constructed. Each 
time a room is completed, the builders and the buyers would assess progress and make 
adjustments. In some cases, the buyers would realize that they didn’t need that extra 
room they felt they had to have. In other cases, they would add features they didn’t real-
ize they needed to have. Ultimately the house is built to fit the customer’s wishes.
Agile PM is ideal for exploratory projects in which requirements need to be discov-
ered and new technology tested. It focuses on active collaboration between the project 
team and customer representatives, breaking projects into small functional pieces, and 
adapting to changing requirements. While iterative development principles have been 
around for some time, it is only recently that agile methodologies have taken root 
within the project management profession.
In this chapter the core principles of Agile PM are discussed and compared with 
traditional project management methods. A specific agile methodology called Scrum 
is used to describe these principles in action. The chapter concludes with a discussion 
of limitations and concerns. The goal is not to provide a comprehensive account of all 
the methods associated with Agile PM but to provide a primer on how agile works.
16.1 Traditional versus Agile Methods
Traditional approaches to project management concentrate firmly on thorough plan-
ning up front. The rationale is that if you plan, execute your plan, and take corrective 
action on deviations from plan, you have a high probability of success. Once the proj-
ect scope has been firmly established, every detail of the project is defined through the 
WBS. Most problems and risks are identified and assessed before the project begins. 
Estimates are made, resources assigned, adjustments made, and ultimately a baseline 
schedule and budget are created. Control of the project is a comparison of plan versus 
actual and corrective action to get back on plan.
Traditional project management requires a fairly high degree of predictability to be 
effective. For plans to be useful managers have to have a firm idea on what is to be 
accomplished and how to do it. For example, when it comes to building a bridge across 
a river, engineers can draw upon proven technology and design principles to plan and 
execute the project. Not all projects enjoy such certainty. Figure 16.1 speaks to this 
issue and is often used to support the use of Agile PM.
Project uncertainty varies according to the extent the project scope is known and 
stable and the technology to be used is known and proven. Many projects, like the 
bridge example, as well as other construction projects, events, product extensions, 
marketing campaigns, and so forth have well-established scopes and use proven tech-
nology that provides a degree of predictability for effective planning. However, when 
the project scope and/or technology are not fully known, things become much less 
predictable and plan-driven methods suffer.
For example, before agile, software development projects relied on a “waterfall” 
approach to software development. The waterfall method features a series of logical 
phases in which progress flows from one phase to the next (see Figure 16.2). The key 
assumption is that essential requirements can be defined upfront so the software can be 
designed, built, and tested. Software projects typically involve many different customers 
with different needs. These needs frequently change and are often difficult to articulate. In 
many cases, customers only begin to understand what they actually desire when they are 
provided with someone’s impression of what they want. Under these conditions it would 
be difficult if not futile to develop a detailed list of scope requirements at project launch. 
This is one of the major reasons why software projects utilizing the waterfall approach 
have a history of coming in late and/or being canceled.
Recognize the conditions 
in which traditional proj-
ect management versus 
agile project manage-
ment should be used.
16-1
LO

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  581
Technology can be another source of unpredictability. For example, a development 
team charged with designing the next generation electric car may know they are to build 
a car that seats four adults comfortably and travels over 200 miles before being charged, 
but they may not know if the battery technology exists to power such a vehicle. Again it 
would be very difficult to develop a reliable schedule when such questions exist.
The key point is that traditional PM techniques were developed to operate in the 
predictable zone where the scope of the project is fairly well defined and technology to 
be used is established. Projects also operate in a very different zone in which how or 
what has yet to be fully discovered. Agile lives in this unpredictable zone. Agile PM 
Unknown
Unknown
Technology
(How)
Project
scope
(What)
Known &
stable
Predictable
Unpredictable
FIGURE 16.1 
Project Uncertainty 
Concept
phase
Requirements
phase
Design
phase
Construct
phase
Test
phase
Deploy
phase
FIGURE 16.2 
The Waterfall 
Approach to 
Software 
Development 
www.ebook3000.com

582  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
represents a fundamental shift away from the traditional plan-driven project manage-
ment approach by adopting a more experimental and adaptive approach to managing 
projects. Projects evolve rather than are executed. Solutions are discovered not imple-
mented. Some of the differences between Agile PM and traditional project manage-
ment are displayed in Table 16.1.
16.2 Agile PM
Fundamentally, Agile PM is related to the rolling wave planning and scheduling 
project methodology (see Chapter 5). That is, the final project design is not known 
in great detail and is continuously developed through a series of incremental itera-
tions over time. Iterations are short time frames (“time boxes”) that typically last 
from one to four weeks. The goal of each iteration is to develop a workable product 
that satisfies one or more desired product features to demonstrate to the customer 
and other key stakeholders. At the end of each iteration, stakeholders and customers 
review progress and re-evaluate priorities to ensure alignment with customer needs 
and company goals. Adjustments are made and a different iterative cycle begins. 
Each new iteration subsumes the work of the previous iterations and adds new capa-
bilities to the evolving product (see Figure 16.3) to produce a next, expanded version 
of the product. See Snapshot from Practice 16.1: IDEO for an example of iterative 
development in action.
Understand the value 
of incremental, iterative 
development for 
 creating new products.
16-2
LO
Traditional
Agile
Design up front
Continuous design
Fixed scope
Flexible scope
Deliverables
Features/requirements
Freeze design as early as possible
Freeze design as late as possible
Low uncertainty
High uncertainty
Avoid change
Embrace change
Low customer interaction
High customer interaction
Conventional project teams
Self-organized project teams
Project
initiation
Iteration 1
Iteration 2
Iteration 3
Iteration 4
Iteration 5
Closeout
New product:
Customer
acceptance
FIGURE 16.3 Iterative, Incremental Product Development 
TABLE 16.1   
Traditional Project 
Management versus 
Agile Project 
Management

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  583
IDEO, headquartered in Palo Alto, 
California, is one of the premier 
design ﬁrms in the world. They are 
responsible for a wide range of prod-
uct innovations including the ﬁrst 
Apple mouse, Head’s Airﬂow Tennis Racket, Zyliss 
Salad Spinner, and Nokia N-Gage Smartphones. 
IDEO’s many clients include Pepsi-Cola, 3M, Logitech, 
Nike, and HBO. IDEO has won more of the Business-
Week/IDSA Industrial Design Excellence Awards than 
any other ﬁrm.
 
IDEO’s approach to product design relies heavily on 
an iterative development process in which product pro-
totypes are used to explore and further reﬁne product 
ideas. CEO Tim Brown states that the goal of prototyp-
ing “is to learn about the strengths and weaknesses of 
the idea and identify new directions that the prototype 
might take.”
 
For example, IDEO worked with Procter and Gam-
ble to develop a new Crest toothpaste tube. The chal-
lenge was to improve the traditional screw-on cap, 
which always gets gunked up with toothpaste. IDEO’s 
ﬁrst solution was a pop-on, pop-off cap. However, 
when designers created rough prototypes and 
watched people use them, they quickly noticed that 
users kept trying to unscrew the cap even though they 
were told how it worked. The designers concluded 
that the action was a well-ingrained habit that would 
probably be impossible to break. So they came up with 
a hybrid: a twist-off cap that had a short thread but 
would still be easy to clean.
 
Focused prototyping resolves critical problems one 
by one. Brown recommends that prototypes should 
only take as much time and effort needed to generate 
useful feedback and evolve an idea.
 
For example, IDEO was working on a chair for 
Vecta, a high-end office furniture manufacturer. The 
project had evolved to the point where the height 
adjustment lever that tilted with the chair became 
critical. The team didn’t build the whole chair or 
even the tilt mechanism. They just built the little 
lever and its interface with the tilt mechanism. It 
took only a couple of hours. When finished the pro-
totype quickly demonstrated that the principle 
would work.
 
“It doesn’t matter how clever you are, your ﬁrst 
idea about something is never right,” Brown says, “so 
the great value of prototyping—and prototyping quickly 
and inexpensively—is that you learn about the idea and 
make it better.”
* J. M. Pethokoukis, “The Deans of Design: From the Com-
puter Mouse to the Newest Swiffer, IDEO Is the Firm behind 
the Scenes,” U.S. News & World Report, posted 9-24-2008; T. 
Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harvard Business Review, June 
2008, pp. 84–95.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 6 .1
IDEO: Masters of Design*
© Cultura Creative/Alamy RF
Iterative development processes provide the following important advantages:
∙ Continuous integration, verification, and validation of the evolving product.
∙ Frequent demonstration of progress to increase the likelihood that the end product 
will satisfy customer needs.
∙ Early detection of defects and problems.
There is growing evidence that iterative and evolutionary development is superior 
to traditional plan-driven project management when it comes to creating new products. 
(See Research Highlight 16.1: Product Development Practices That Work.)
www.ebook3000.com

It should be noted that Agile PM is not one set method, but a family of methods 
designed to respond to the challenges of unpredictable projects. A few of the more 
popular ones are listed here:
Scrum 
RUP (Rational Unified Process)
Extreme Programming (XP) 
Crystal Clear
Agile Modeling 
Dynamic Systems Development  
 
 Method (DSDM)
Lean Development 
Rapid Product Development (RPD)
While each of these methods has unique elements and applications, most are based on 
the following Agile principles:
∙ Focus on customer value—Employ business-driven prioritizations of requirements 
and features.
∙ Iterative and incremental delivery—Create a flow of value to customers by “chunk-
ing” project delivery into small, functioning increments.
∙ Experimentation and adaptation—Test assumptions early and build working proto-
types to solicit customer feedback and refine product requirements.
∙ Self-organization—Team members decide among themselves what should be done 
and who should do it.
∙ Continuous improvement—Teams reflect, learn, and adapt to change; work informs 
the plan.
The Agile methodology known as “Scrum” will be used to illustrate how these core 
principles are put into action.
Identify core Agile 
principles.
16-3
LO
584
Alan MacCormack and his colleagues 
at Harvard Business School con-
ducted a two-year in-depth study of 
29 software projects to answer the 
question: “Does evolutionary devel-
opment, rather than the waterfall model, result in bet-
ter success?” The waterfall model is the name used in 
the software industry for the traditional approach to 
project management in which a process breakdown 
structure (PBS) is used to ﬁrst deﬁne all the require-
ments up front and then initiate a design, build, test, 
deploy sequence. Conversely, evolutionary develop-
ment is the term they use to describe an Agile 
approach in which customers test early versions of the 
software and requirements emerge and are reﬁned 
after each demonstration.
 
The results of the study overwhelmingly favored 
the iterative, Agile approach to software develop-
ment. Several key practices now associated with Agile 
Project Management were found to be statistically 
correlated with the most successful projects:
1. An iterative life cycle with early release of the 
evolving product to stakeholders for review and 
feedback.
2. Daily incorporation of new software and rapid 
feedback on design changes.
3. A ﬂexible product architecture that is both modu-
lar and scaleable.
MacCormack asserts that uncertainty on software 
projects dictates short “microprojects”—down to level 
of features. This is not limited to just software projects 
but to any new product endeavor where uncertainty is 
high and the need for customer feedback and reﬁne-
ment is critical to success.
Research Highlight 16.1
Product Development 
Practices That Work*
* A. MacCormack, “Product-Development Practices that 
Work: How Internet Companies Build Software,” MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 42(2), 2001, pp. 75–84.

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  585
16.3 Agile PM in Action: Scrum
Scrum can be traced back to the work of Hirotaka Takeuchi and Ikujiro Nonaka, who 
in 1986 described a new holistic approach in new commercial product development 
efforts. They compare this approach of a cross-functional team collaborating to develop 
a new product to rugby, where the whole team “tries to go the distance as a unit, pass-
ing the ball back and forth.” The scrum metaphor has been expanded and refined into 
a fairly prescriptive framework that has enjoyed success on high-tech and software 
development projects (see Snapshot from Practice 16.2: Soul Searching).
Scrum, like other Agile methods, begins with a high-level scope definition and 
ballpark time and cost estimates for the project. The scope and cost estimates should 
be complete enough that management is comfortable with the estimates. The theory is 
that since requirements evolve over time, detailed up-front planning will be wasted. In 
place of a product WBS, Scrum uses product features as deliverables. A feature is 
defined as a piece of a product that delivers some useful functionality to a customer. In 
the case of a software project, a feature may be a bank customer being able to change 
her PIN. In the case of a high-tech product, it may be 3G wireless access. Features are 
Understand the basic 
methodology used in 
Scrum.
16-4
LO
Over 2,792 lives were lost in the col-
lapse of the World Trade Center (WTC) 
on September 11, 2001. While rescuers 
labored night and day to recover the 
bodies, a small team of Michigan soft-
ware engineers set about salvaging their identities.
 
New York City hired Gene Codes, the Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, bioinformatics company, to reinvent the sci-
ence of DNA mass identiﬁcation by creating software 
that would inventory and match the victims’ remains 
and reunite them with their families. They were to do so 
as soon as possible with no errors. Experts predicted 
that the violence of the collapse and the intense heat of 
the ﬁres meant that at best 25 percent of the victims 
would be identiﬁed.
 
Gene Codes hired William Wake, an independent 
software coach, to work with their team of eight soft-
ware engineers on the project. Wake introduced the 
team to Agile PM. Under Wake’s guidance an environ-
ment of intense interaction and communication was 
created within the programming team by scheduling 
frequent releases, tempered by constant testing, and 
feedback from its users. Testing was done before, dur-
ing, and after the code was written to ensure the same 
bugs (errors) didn’t surface twice.
 
At the end of each week’s iteration, the staff held a 
retrospective. They listed things that worked well and 
what needed improvement on ﬂuorescent pink, green, 
and yellow Post-It notes, transforming the entire wall 
into a case of art imitating life. Under “Worked Well,” a 
note said, “Figured out how to use debug form on a 
wrapped test class.” One square under the “Needs 
Improvement” category merely read, “I’m tired.”
 
Whether out of patriotism or professionalism, the 
team routinely arrived each day at 7:00 a.m. and 
worked till midnight. Engineers like Dave Relyea just 
wanted to help. “We thought about the victims, the 
families, and the people at the Office of the Chief Medi-
cal Examiner working around the clock. What they were 
going through made us feel like we could never work 
hard enough.”
 
The product of their labor was the Mass Fatality 
Identiﬁcation System (M-FISys) that contained more 
than 164,000 lines of code. M-FISys linked all the infor-
mation in the identiﬁcation project: 11,641 swab sam-
ples from 7,166 family members; 7,681 personal effects 
(i.e., toothbrushes, hair brushes) and the results of the 
three types of DNA tests; and nearly 20,000 human 
remains. The chance of false match was less than 1 in 
3.58 million.
 
In the end, with the help of M-FISys, the New York 
Medical examiner was able to identify 1,521 of the 
2,792 people who perished in the WTC disaster.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 6 . 2
Soul Searching after 9/11*
* Melissa Krause, “Soul Searching” Bio-ITworld. 
Accessed on 3/10/2008 at www.bio-itworld.com 
/archive/091103/soul.html.
www.ebook3000.com

586  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
prioritized by their perceived highest value. The project team tackles the highest, fea-
sible priority features first. Priorities are re-evaluated after each iteration. Iterations are 
called sprints and should last no longer than four weeks. The goal of each sprint is to 
produce fully functional features. This forces the team to tackle tough decisions early 
in order to create a workable demo.
Specific features are created according to four distinct phases: analysis, design, 
build, and test (see Figure 16.4). Each feature can be thought of as a mini-project. The 
first phase is analysis and review of functional requirements that will be needed to 
complete the feature. The team commits to meet these requirements. The second phase 
is the development of a design that meets the requirements of the feature. The third 
phase is to build the feature so that it is functional. Finally, the feature is tested and 
documented. At the end of each sprint, features are demonstrated. Within this sprint 
framework, Scrum relies on specific roles, meetings, and documents/logs to manage 
the project.
Roles and Responsibilities
There are three key roles to the scrum process: Product owner, development team, and 
scrum master.
Product Owner The product owner acts on behalf of customers/end users to represent 
their interests. For commercial development projects the product owner may be the 
product manager. For internal projects, the product owner could be the manager of the 
business group that will benefit from the software. In other cases, the product owner 
could be a representative of the client organization. They are responsible for ensuring 
that the development team focuses their efforts on developing a product that will fulfill 
the business objective of the project.
The product owner in consultation with others establishes the initial list of product 
requirements and prioritizes them in the product backlog. Owners often work with the 
development team to refine features through stories and end user cases (e.g., when the 
user clicks the F2 key an option drop-down window appears). The product owners 
negotiate sprint goals and backlog items with the development team. Owners have the 
Build
Analysis
Selected
features
Prioritized
feature log
Test
Design
Demonstration
of functional
features
Iteration
Daily scrum
meeting
Sprint 3--4 weeks
FIGURE 16.4 Scrum Development Process 

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  587
option to change features and priorities at the end of each sprint if desired. However, 
no changes should be made once a sprint has started. Product owners are the final 
arbiter on requirements questions and are empowered to accept or reject each product 
increment. They ultimately decide whether the project is completed. Product owners 
are the keeper of the product vision and the watchdog on project cost.
Development Team The team is responsible for delivering the product. A team is 
typically made up of five to nine people with cross-functional skill sets. There are no 
designated roles or titles; people take on different responsibilities depending on the 
nature of the work. The team is self-organizing in the sense they decide both who does 
the work and how the work is to be accomplished. Team members should be co-located 
so that intense face-to-face collaboration occurs. They are responsible for the achiev-
ing commitments they make at the sprint planning and sprint review meetings.
Scrum Master (aka Project Manager) The Scrum master facilitates the scrum pro-
cess and resolves impediments at the team and organization level. The Scrum master is 
not the leader of the team (the team leads itself!) but acts as a buffer between the team 
and outside interference. They have no formal authority. Instead, they are responsible 
for making sure that the scrum process is adhered to. They help the product owner with 
planning and try to keep the team energized. The Scrum master serves more as a coach 
than a manager.
Scrum Meetings
Scrum uses a series of coordinated meetings to manage the development process (see 
Figure 16.5).
Release Planning The purpose of release planning is to establish the goals and gen-
eral plan for the project. The product owner works with the team, Scrum master, and 
others to address the question of how the project can meet or exceed the desired cus-
tomer expectations and return on investment. Outcomes of this meeting include estab-
lishing highest priority product backlog, the major risks, and the overall features and 
functionality that the released product will contain. The meeting also produces a prob-
able delivery date and initial cost estimates if nothing changes. Management can then 
monitor progress and make changes to the release plan on a sprint-by-sprint basis.
Sprint Planning At the start of each sprint, the product owner and development team 
negotiate which product backlog items the team will attempt this sprint. The product 
owner is responsible for identifying which features are most important, and the team is 
responsible for determining what is possible within the sprint. If it is impossible to 
FIGURE 16.5 Scrum Meetings 
Sprint planning
meeting
Sprint review
meetings
Daily scrum 
meeting
24 hour
Sprint retrospective
meetings
Release
Planning
www.ebook3000.com

588  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
complete a certain key item within four weeks, the team works with the product owner 
to break the feature down into doable pieces. All committed items are recorded in a 
product backlog. The team uses this backlog to prioritize specific work to be done and 
assign initial responsibilities. These tasks are recorded in the sprint backlog. Once the 
meeting has adjourned, the goals for the sprint cannot be changed.
Daily Scrum The heartbeat of an Agile project is the daily meetings which are com-
monly referred to as the “Scrum.” Each workday at the same time and place, team 
members stand in a circle and take turns answering the following key questions:
1. What have you done since the last Scrum?
2. What will you do between now and the next Scrum?
3. What is getting in the way of (blocks) your performing your work as effectively as 
possible?
The Scrum, which typically lasts 15 minutes, is held next to a whiteboard, after 
which time all tasks and blocks are recorded. The Scrum master erases blocks once 
they have been removed.
The meetings must start on time. A late fine (e.g., $1 to be collected and donated to 
charity by the Scrum master) is a popular rule. The meeting is limited to just those 
three core questions. Members stand to create a sense of urgency. Immediately after-
ward, specific members may meet to resolve issues that surfaced.
The value of the Scrum is that it creates a daily mechanism to quickly inform the team 
about the state of the project. It sustains a sense of team identity that encourages open-
ness and resolution of problems in real time. Having everyone report what they plan to 
do for that day generates a social promise to the group, thereby building accountability.
Notice again that the team is self-managed. The Scrum master does not assign daily 
tasks to team members; the team decides among themselves. The Scrum master role is 
to see that the scrum is running correctly. They are not “master” of the team but rather 
“master” of the process.
Sprint Review At the end of each sprint, the team demonstrates the actual work prod-
uct increments they have built to the product owner and other relevant stakeholders. 
Feedback is solicited from the product owner and other relevant stakeholders. The prod-
uct owner declares which items are “done” and which items need further work and are 
returned to the product backlog. The team can take this opportunity to suggest improve-
ments and new features for the product owner to accept or reject. The sprint review 
meeting is an opportunity to examine and adapt the product as it emerges and iteratively 
refine key requirements. Such refinements will be the subject of the next sprint planning 
meeting.
Sprint Retrospective The purpose of the retrospective meeting is to reflect on how 
well the previous sprint went and identify specific actions that can improve future 
sprints. The Scrum master typically facilitates this meeting and the team decides which 
changes will be made in how they work together for the next sprint. The retrospective 
reflects Scrum’s commitment to continuous improvement and the value it places on 
improving not only products but team interactions.
Product and Sprint Backlogs
Each project has a product backlog and a sprint backlog. The product owner controls 
the product backlog and the team controls the sprint backlog. The product backlog is 

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  589
the customer’s prioritized list of key features desired when the project is completed. 
The product backlog usually defines each feature and estimates of time, cost, and work 
remaining. See Figure 16.6 for a partial product backlog for a software project.
The sprint backlog is developed and controlled by the team. It represents the 
amount of work the team commits to complete during the next sprint. The sprint 
backlog lists the tasks (activities) that must be completed to deliver a functional 
feature or segment of a feature. The sprint backlog also serves as a status document 
by listing the person responsible for each task, remaining hours of work, and record-
ing the task as finished, in process, or not yet started. See Figure 16.7 for a partial 
example of a sprint backlog.
Scrum does not use any of the conventional project management tools like Gantt 
charts or network diagrams. Instead it relies on the daily scrums and the active involve-
ment of the product owner to manage work flow. Risk is mitigated by short develop-
mental cycles and rigorous testing. For an alternative approach to tracking work see 
Snapshot from Practice 16.3: Kanban.
Sprint and Release Burndown Charts
Scrum uses “burndown” charts, which focus on the work remaining and are used to 
track progress. Sprint burndown charts are used to track progress on a daily basis 
(see Figure 16.8). The axis on the left shows the remaining effort required to com-
plete the sprint backlog and the axis on the bottom contains the number of days until 
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1
2
3
4
5
2
1
3
5
4
100
160
80
40
120
Complete
Complete
Started
Not started
Started
90
180
12
B
C
D
E
F
G
Phone-In Prescription Software Project
Product Backlog
ID
Product
Customer Information
Insurance Information
Drug Information
Doctor Information
Inventory status
Priority
Status
Estimate
Hours
Actual
Hours
FIGURE 16.6 
Partial Product 
Backlog 
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Drug categories 
Generics
Branded
Design drug inventory system
Code inventory availability
Code manufacture order
Integrate all inventory systems
EL
CE
MC
LE
0
32
32
16
X
X
X
40
4
RT
CG
AL
0
0
8
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
16
32
24
12
13
14
15
16
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Phone-In Prescription Software Project
Sprint Backlog
Sprint Description
Responsible
Deﬁned
Tested
Accepted
Remaining
Hours
Actual
Hours
In
Progress
FIGURE 16.7 
Partial Sprint 
Backlog 
www.ebook3000.com

590  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
Kanban is a lean management meth-
odology ﬁrst developed by Toyota. It 
has been adapted by agile practitio-
ners to help manage project work 
ﬂow. In its simplest form, Kanban con-
sists of a white board divided into three columns titled: 
Next, WIP (Work in Progress), and Done. The team iden-
tiﬁes the distinct tasks, deliverables, or features associ-
ated with their projects. Each is labeled on post-it notes 
or special “Kanban” cards. The cards are prioritized in 
terms of what needs to be done ﬁrst and a queue is 
created in the Next column. The team works on the top 
priority items. Once a task or feature has been com-
pleted the card is moved to the Done column and the 
next task is started. Like Scrum, the project team starts 
each day with a stand-up meeting to update the board, 
decide what needs to be done, and discuss impedi-
ments to progress.
 
Kanban is based on the idea of pull. A completed 
Kanban card signals when the team is ready for more 
work, which is pulled from the Next list. Work isn’t 
pushed from start to ﬁnish. It’s only when a task is com-
pleted that another task can be started. Limits are set 
based on the capability of the project team on the num-
ber of WIP tasks. For example, no more than three 
tasks can be in progress at any one time. This reduces 
the inefficiencies of multi-tasking and prevents 
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 6 . 3
Kanban
 lingering bottlenecks from emerging. Another strength 
of Kanban is that it helps the team visualize the work 
ﬂow on the project and focus their attention on the 
most critical work. Finally, like Scrum, signiﬁcant time is 
devoted to problem solving and developing better 
ways of accomplishing the work.
 
Depending upon the project more elaborate map-
ping schemes can be used. For example, Tarne (2011) 
described a system for an IT Helpdesk that consisted of 
six columns: Opened ticket, In Queue, Root Cause Anal-
ysis, Develop Fix, Test, and Deploy. More sophisticated 
Kaban tools can also be found online. For example, 
AGILEZEN (agilezen.com) provides a user-friendly, vir-
tual Kanban board, customizable cards/tags and colors, 
and a performance metrics tracker.
© anathomy/Shutterstock
the sprint is completed. The remaining effort is calculated by summing the time 
estimates for incomplete tasks recorded in the sprint backlog. These estimates are 
updated on a daily basis. 
In Figure 16.8 the solid line shows the ideal scenario if the sprint progresses as 
predicted by the initial task estimates and the dotted line shows the actual performance. 
Ideally the dotted line should be very close to the solid line. When it is above the solid 
line the team is behind schedule and when it is below the solid line, the team is 
ahead of schedule. If the actual remaining line is above the ideal line for an extended 
period of time, then this signals that adjustments need to be made to the project. This 
could mean dropping a task, assigning additional resources, or working late. None of 
these are pleasant, but because of the burndown chart, the team can respond sooner 
than just before the sprint deadline. 
The release burndown chart is used to monitor progress toward completion of 
the project (see Figure 16.8). This chart displays the amount of work remaining 
across time. Before the start of each sprint completion estimates are revised in the 
product backlog and totaled in the release burndown chart. Over time the chart 
becomes an excellent method for visualizing the relationship between amount of 

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  591
work remaining and the rate at which team is reducing this work. Also the intersec-
tion of the trend line for work remaining and the horizontal time line can be used to 
estimate probable completion date. The product owner and team use this informa-
tion to “what if” the project by removing or adding functionality from the release 
to  achieve a specific completion date or extend the date to include more 
functionality. 
In Figure 16.9 work remaining is recorded for the first six sprints and a trend line is 
used to revise the expected completion date. Note that in this example the project is 
FIGURE 16.8 
Sprint Burndown 
Chart 
Sprint Timeline (days)
0
5
10
15
20
0
7
14
21
28
Remaining Effort (days)
Behind Schedule
Ahead of Schedule
Ideal  Remaining Effort
Actual Remaining Effort
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
9
8
10
Days of Work Remaining
Sprint
Original 
Completion Date
Revised 
Completion Date
FIGURE 16.9 
Release Burndown 
Chart after Six 
Sprints 
www.ebook3000.com

592  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
expected to be completed later than planned. Does this mean the team is underperform-
ing? No, not necessarily! Remember the product backlog is dynamic and at the end of 
each sprint the backlog is revised. Features are added, modified, or deleted. Work esti-
mates are increased or decreased. There is no established baseline in Agile PM. 
16.4 Applying Agile PM to Large Projects
Scrum and most other Agile methods are ideally suited for distinct projects that can be 
completed by a small, five-to-nine-person team. Agile methods can be used on larger 
scale projects in which several teams are working on different features at the same 
time. In practice this condition is called “scaling.” The chief challenge with scaling is 
integration—making sure that the different features being created work in harmony 
with each other.
There are no easy solutions to the integration challenge. Significant up-front 
 planning is required to manage the interdependences of different features that will be 
developed. This is called “staging” and often is the subject of the first development 
iteration. Here protocols and roles for coordinating efforts and assuring compatibility 
are established. This is supported by establishing a clear product vision so that  trade-off 
decisions are consistent at the local team level.
Agile advocates recommend creating a hub structure (see Figure 16.10) with over-
lapping roles and responsibilities to manage large projects. There are several feature 
development teams. A separate integration and build team is formed consisting of part-
time members of each feature team. This team tackles the sticky integration issue 
through testing and establishing requirements for the feature teams. To coordinate the 
multi-team structure a central project team is created consisting of a higher level proj-
ect manager, a product manager (who represents the interests of the customer), and the 
Project 
mgr
Central project
management team
Product 
mgr
Team
leads
Feature
development
teams A-Z
Team
leads
Integration &
build team
FIGURE 16.10 
Hub Project 
Management 
Structure 

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  593
leads (“project managers”) from the feature development teams. The project manage-
ment team provides coordination and facilitates project decision making. Their role is 
to steer rather than command the other teams. Teams may be real, virtual, or a combi-
nation. The entire system requires a spirit of collaboration to work.
16.5 Limitations and Concerns
Agile methods in the software industry grew at a grass roots level. Many engineers 
saw traditional plan-driven project management as stifling effective development 
with too much emphasis on processes and documentation and not enough on creativ-
ity and experimentation. Early on there was a rebellious tone to the Agile movement, 
so much so that several of the key founders published an Agile Manifesto (see Snap-
shot from Practice 16.4: Agile Alliance). The manifesto affirmed a different set of 
values than those currently being applied by management to projects they were 
working on.
On February 11–13, 2001, at The Lodge 
at Snowbird ski resort in the Wasatch 
mountains of Utah, 17 representatives 
of various new software methodolo-
gies (such as Extreme Programming, 
Scrum, Adaptive Software Development, and Crystal 
Clear) met to discuss the need for lighter alternatives 
to the traditional, documentation-driven project man-
agement methodology. They were united by a desire 
to free themselves of Dilbert manifestations of make-
work and arcane policies and spark a revolution in the 
software industry. By the end of two days they formed 
the Agile Alliance to champion change and published a 
manifesto that declared four core values:
We are uncovering better ways of developing software by 
doing it and helping others do it. Through this work we 
have come to value:
Individuals and interactions over processes and tools
Working software over comprehensive documentation
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation
Responding to change over following a plan
 
These four values were expanded upon by a set of 
12 guiding principles:
 1. Our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through 
early and continuous delivery of valuable software.
 2. Welcome changing requirements, even late in 
development.
 3. Deliver working software frequently, from a couple 
of weeks to a couple of months, with a preference 
to the shorter timescale.
 4. Businesspeople and developers must work 
together daily throughout the project.
 5. Build projects around motivated individuals. Give 
them the environment and support they need, and 
trust them to get the job done.
 6. The most efficient and effective method of convey-
ing information to and within a development team 
is face-to-face conversation.
 7. Working software is the primary measure of 
progress.
 8. Agile processes promote sustainable development.
 9. Continuous attention to technical excellence and 
good design enhances agility.
 10. Simplicity—the art of maximizing the amount of 
work not done—is essential.
 11. The best architectures, requirements, and designs 
emerge from self-organizing teams.
 12. At regular intervals, the team reﬂects on how to 
become more effective, then turns and adjusts its 
behavior accordingly.
 
To ﬁnd a wealth of information on Agile PM, log 
onto the Agile Alliance website at: www.agilealliance.org/.
S N A P S H O T  F R O M  P R A C T I C E  1 6 . 4
Agile Alliance
www.ebook3000.com

594  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
The revolutionary nature of Agile is reflected in the story one IT manager told the 
authors about her efforts several years ago at using Agile PM. She worked for a large, 
multinational high-tech firm that had spent five years institutionalizing a set of tradi-
tional project management policies and procedures. Despite their best efforts, her 
department consistently completed projects behind schedule with several cancella-
tions. Out of desperation she started secretly using Agile methods to complete software 
projects. By using Agile PM her project teams were able to not only meet but beat 
project schedules—a rarity within her company. When top management confronted 
her for not conforming to procedure, she pointed to her recent success rate to defend 
being left alone. Ultimately management couldn’t argue with success, and she was 
allowed to expand her efforts.
The repeated success and improvement in software development projects have led 
to key elements of Agile PM being incorporated in the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge (PMBOK). In 2011 the Project Management Institute began offering a 
certification in Agile PM along with the traditional Project Management Professional 
(PMP).
Agile PM does not satisfy top management’s need for budget, scope, and schedule 
control. Remember the new house analogy. The buyers got exactly what they wanted 
but did not know how much it would cost. Nor did they know how long it would take 
or even what it would look like when it was done. While ballpark estimates are pro-
vided, Agile methods by their very nature do not provide the detailed estimates of time 
and costs that management likes. No matter how realistic “it depends” is, management 
as well as customers are accustomed to working with a greater level of certainty than 
Agile provides. In response to the financial concerns, many organizations establish 
“ceilings,” which is the maximum budget that should not be exceeded in the develop-
ment of a given product or service.
Even if management totally buys into the value of Agile PM, one cannot simply 
install it into an organization overnight; it needs to evolve over time. Many of the Agile 
principles, including self-organizing teams and intense collaboration, are incompatible 
with corporate cultures. For example, the principle of self-organizing teams, in which 
members decide who should do what, regardless of rank or title, contradicts command 
and control structures. Likewise, intense collaboration is not for everyone. One Agile 
manager confessed that she had to let several of her top engineers go because their 
lone-wolf personalities were not compatible with collaboration. Most companies 
report gradual introduction of Agile project management. For example, Siemens Medi-
cal Systems started with one Scrum team in 2004, then 10 Scrum teams in 2005, 
70 teams in 2006, and over 97 teams in 2007.
A recent survey of over 3,900 respondents working in software/IT, financial and 
professional services provides a glimpse of the current state of Agile. Nine-four per-
cent report their firm uses Agile approaches. Still only 53 percent report that their agile 
projects have been successful. The biggest reasons for failure were: (1) lack of experi-
ence with agile methods, (2) company culture at odds with core agile values, and 
(3) lack of management support (Schur, 2015).
As noted earlier, Agile methods appear to work best on small projects that require 
only five to nine dedicated team members to complete the work. Here face-to-face 
communication replaces time-consuming documentation and informal coordination 
supplants top-down control.
Although some companies have successfully applied Agile PM to large projects, 
others have struggled with the scaling challenge. Too often coordination requirements 

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  595
Agile project management has emerged as a response to the challenges of managing 
projects with loosely defined scopes and high levels of uncertainty. Agile relies on an 
iterative development process in which the scope of the project evolves over time. 
Development teams create feature-driven working products at the end of each develop-
ment cycle. Active customer involvement is used to guide this process. Here are some 
of the key advantages of Agile methods:
∙ Work is divided into smaller and smaller chunks that are more easily scheduled and 
controlled.
∙ Collaboration between the customer and designers is increased leading to solid 
change control.
∙ Methods demand that features be tested and functional when completed.
Agile PM is still evolving. While much of the attention in this chapter has been 
devoted to software development, Agile PM is being successfully applied to a wide 
range of unpredictable projects. New methods and approaches will continue to be 
developed and adapted to meet the specific needs of projects. Stay tuned.
Summary
undermine the adaptability of small teams, which is a chief strength of Agile PM. This 
has led many companies to use hybrid models that combine Agile and waterfall meth-
ods. For example, IPC Media, a subsidiary of Time Inc., uses an iterative waterfall 
approach in which large projects are broken down into subprojects performed by dif-
ferent teams in parallel. Short sprints and additional check points are used within a 
structured planned process. A recent survey of more than 800 software engineers 
reported that 40 percent were using a hybrid approach on their projects.2
Companies that enjoy success on large projects tend to have had a strong history of 
using Agile on smaller projects, and Agile principles are part of their product develop-
ment culture.
Agile requires active customer involvement. Involvement comes in different 
shapes and forms. Designating an internal person to act as a product owner to repre-
sent the interests of customers is relatively easy. Soliciting the active participation of 
external customers can be more problematic. Even though there is consistent evi-
dence that customer participation enhances project success, not all customers want 
to be that actively involved. Many are simply too busy. Others believe that they hired 
the project team so they would not have to be involved. Securing the cooperation of 
customers to devote the requisite time to support Agile PM is a common source of 
frustration in the field.
Agile PM frameworks, like Scrum, are used exclusively to complete software 
development projects from beginning to end. Other companies are using Agile PM 
only during the early exploratory phase of a project. Agile PM is used to develop 
critical breakthrough technology or define essential features. Once the features and 
technology are known, then traditional project management is applied to complete 
the project.
2 http://www.jamasoftware.com/media/documents/State_of_Requirements_Management_2011.pdf.
www.ebook3000.com

596  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
1. Break into small groups and identify at least two real-life examples of projects in 
which:
 
a.  The scope and technology are well known.
 
b.  The scope is well known but the technology is less well known.
 
c.  The scope is not well known but the technology is known.
 
d.  Neither the scope nor the technology is well known.
2. Break into small groups and discuss the following question:
 
What organizational, group, individual, and project factors do you think would pro-
mote the successful adoption of Agile PM methodologies like Scrum? Why?
3. Use a project you are currently working on to hold a Scrum meeting according to 
the steps outlined in Figure 16.5. Designate one member to act as the Scrum master 
and hold a standing meeting that lasts no longer than 15 minutes. Assess the value 
of such meetings.
4. Below are four mini-cases from practice. Break into small groups and (1) analyze 
the case and (2) provide five recommendations for the IT department.
Project A
You’ve just taken over a project from another project manager and have come back 
from a very uncomfortable meeting with your business sponsor. In the meeting, the 
sponsor told you how dissatisfied he is with the project’s performance to date and that 
he’s getting ready to pull the plug on the project entirely. Deadlines keep slipping, the 
application isn’t complete, and the sponsor feels like he can’t get in touch with anyone 
to give him an update on the project’s status and progress.
From conversations with your project team, you learn that requirements still haven’t 
been finalized, and the team is waiting for input before being able to proceed on several 
key parts of the application. Despite that, they’ve been able to push forward in other 
areas, and are quite proud of the work they’ve done. However, they haven’t had a 
chance to show it to the sponsor.
Exercises
1. Why is the traditional project management approach less effective when project 
scope and technology are not well known?
2. What is iterative incremental development? Why is it useful for developing new 
products?
3. What are the advantages of Agile PM? What are the disadvantages of Agile PM?
4. What similarities and differences exist between a traditional project manager and a 
Scrum master?
5. What are the differences between a self-organizing team and a conventional project 
team?
6. Why is it difficult to apply Agile PM to large-scale projects?
Review 
Questions
Key Terms
Agile Project  
Management, 579
Feature, 585
Iterative, incremental 
development (IID), 572
Product backlog, 588
Product owner, 586
Release burndown  
chart, 590
Scaling, 592
Scrum master, 587
Self-organizing team, 587
Sprint backlog, 589
Sprint burndown  
chart, 589

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  597
To complicate matters further, your boss has made it clear that this project must be 
completed on schedule, because he needs the resources for another project.
What do you do? What impact do your decisions have on the project’s cost, sched-
ule, and performance?
Project B
Your project team has finished gathering the requirements and developing the solution 
design. Your team is broken into two main groups: The first group consists of the project 
manager, business analysts, and management and is located in the United States. The 
second group consists of the development and QA teams and they are located in India.
The WBS was developed based on estimates from the teams in India. The develop-
ment team agreed to provide daily updates to you about progress against the WBS to 
make sure that the project’s milestones are going to be met.
However, by the time the development team got close to the first milestone, it 
became obvious that they were behind even though their daily updates indicated that 
they are on track. In addition, the team adopted a different design approach than the 
one agreed upon at the beginning of the project.
The lack of meaningful updates from the development team along with a different 
design track has jeopardized the whole project by rendering the whole plan obsolete. 
Your team is now at risk of not delivering the project.
What do you do? What is the impact to cost, schedule, and performance?
Project C
You have just taken over as the program manager of a large program with multiple 
tracks and a go-live scheduled in three months. At the first meeting with the project 
sponsors and key stakeholders, you find out that the business requirements are not 
complete and in some cases not started, project scope is not realistic to meet the 
upcoming go-live, and overall the project teams are confused due to lack of communi-
cation and understanding of priorities.
What do you do? What impact do your decisions have on the project’s cost, sched-
ule, and performance?
Project D
You’ve just been assigned to take over a new project from an outgoing project manager. 
The project is a high-visibility project that is using a development methodology that is 
new to you and to your company. In your transition meetings with the outgoing project 
manager, he assures you that development is complete, and all you have to do is shep-
herd the project through acceptance testing and release. As a result, several project 
team members were released as scheduled.
The acceptance testing does not go as smoothly as planned. The application has 
more defects than anticipated, and some core functionality is not able to be tested. The 
project team doesn’t feel like they are getting the direction they need to continue mov-
ing forward, and the business sponsor has asked you when he can expect to test appli-
cation functionality that wasn't a part of the original scope. In addition, your project’s 
deadline is rapidly approaching, and interproject dependencies make it unlikely that 
you will be able to push your launch date.
What do you do? What impact do your decisions have on cost, schedule, and 
performance?
www.ebook3000.com

598  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
Boulter, M., Smart Client Architecture and Design Guide (Seattle: Microsoft Press, 
2004).
Decarlo, D., eXtreme Project Management (Jossey-Bass, 2004).
Faris, R., and I. Abdelshafi, “Project Management and Agile: Perfect Fit,” 2006 PMI 
Global Congress Proceedings, Seattle, Washington.
Gale, S. F., “The Evolution of Agile,” PM Network, January 2012.
Griffiths, M., Using Agile Principles Alongside: A Guide to the Project Management 
Body of Knowledge, PMI Global Proceedings, Anaheim, California, 2004.
Highsmith, J., Agile Project Management (Boston: Addison Wesley, 2004).
Hildebrand, C., Full Speed Ahead, PM Network, vol. 21, no. 10 (October 2007),  
pp. 36–41.
Jackson, M. B., “Step by Step,” PM Network, vol. 26, no. 6 (June 2012), pp. 57–61.
James, M., “Scrum,” 2009 (downloaded PDF @ http://refcardz.dzone.com/ on 
5/18/2009).
Jonasson, Hans, Determining Project Requirements (Boca Raton, FL: Auerback 
 Publications, 2008).
Kruchten, P., The Rational Unified Process: An Introduction, 3rd ed. (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2004).
Larman, C., Agile & Iterative Development: A Manager’s Guide (Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 2004).
McConnel, S., Rapid Development: Taming Wild Software Schedules (Redmond, 
WA: Microsoft Press, 1996).
Schur, M., “The State of Agile,” PM Network, September 2015, pp. 16–17.
Schwaber, K., Agile Project Management with Scrum (Redmond, WA: Microsoft 
Press, 2004).
Takeuchi, H., and I. Nonaka, “The New Product Development Game,” Harvard Busi-
ness Review, January–February 1986.
Tarne, R., “Taking Off the Agile Training Wheels, Advance Agile Project Manage-
ment using Kanban,” 2011 PMI Global Proceedings, Dallas, TX, 2011.
Vanderjack, B., “21 Methods to Engage and Retain Your Product Owner in an Agile 
Project,” www.pmworldjournal.net, vol. 1, no. 4 (November 2012), pp. 1–6.
Worthen, B., “Try Software on Workers First, Fix It Later,” The Wall Street Journal, 
September 25, 2007, pp. B1 and B4.
References

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  599
Case 16.1
Introducing Scrum at P2P
PART A
Kendra Hua had worked for six years as a software engineer in the IT department at 
Point 2 Point (P2P), a large freight moving company. She liked her job and the people 
she worked with. While she did some maintenance work, she worked primarily on 
projects, usually full time. Her work covered a wide range of projects including system 
upgrades, inventory control, GPS tracking, billing, and customer databases. These 
projects were typically able to meet project requirements but were consistently late. 
Within the IT department it was common practice for a betting pool to emerge regard-
ing completion dates. The rule of thumb was to take the original schedule and multiply 
it by 1.5 and start guessing from then on.
 
Management decided to try to turn things around by changing the way P2P 
 completed IT projects. Instead of the traditional waterfall approach in which all the 
requirements were defined upfront, the IT department was to start using Agile project 
management, and more specifically Scrum, to complete their projects.
 
Kendra had just been assigned to the Big Foot project, which involved develop-
ing a system for monitoring P2P’s carbon footprint. To prepare for this project, 
Kendra and her entire team of software engineers would attend a two-day Scrum 
workshop.
 
Everyone was given a book on Scrum to prepare themselves for the workshop. At 
first Kendra was overwhelmed by terminology—Scrum master, sprints, product man-
ager, sprint logs, and so forth. She questioned the rugby metaphor, since the only thing 
she knew about the sport was that one of her ex-boyfriends in college would come back 
to the dorm inebriated and bloodied after a match. And why was the project manager 
called a master? It seemed demeaning to her. Still, she had heard some good things 
about Scrum from a friend who was using it in another company. He claimed it gave 
programmers more freedom to do their work and work at a faster pace. So she 
approached the two-day workshop with an open mind.
 
The workshop was facilitated by a trainer who was well versed in the world of soft-
ware development. Participants included her other five team members as well as Prem 
Gupta, a veteran project manager who would now assume the role of Scrum master, and 
Isaac Smith, who would act as the product manager representing the interests of the 
customers. At first everyone gave Prem a hard time, by bowing to him, pleading “mas-
ter, master, master . . .” The facilitator quickly corrected them by saying he was not their 
master but rather master of the Scrum process. The facilitator went on to emphasize that 
they would work as a self-organizing team. Kendra wasn’t exactly sure what that meant, 
but she felt it had something to do with the team managing itself, not Prem.
 
The workshop covered all the basic Scrum tools, concepts, and roles. Everyone got 
to practice the process by completing a simulated project involving the creation of a 
new board game. Kendra liked the idea of the standing Scrum meeting, since most of 
her meetings at P2P took way too long. She also liked having the product manager, 
who was the ultimate decider on features and when work was completed. Everyone 
laughed at the “only one neck to wring” analogy that the facilitator used to describe 
this role. Overall she thought the process had promise and she was excited about trying 
it out on the Big Foot project. The Big Foot project was estimated to be completed after 
five sprints with each sprint lasting four weeks.
www.ebook3000.com

600  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
THE FIRST SPRINT
The first sprint planning meeting went pretty much by the book. Isaac had done his 
homework and came to the meeting with a comprehensive list of features the software 
needed to provide. There was healthy discussion, and Isaac amended the list to include 
some features that the team felt was necessary. The afternoon session featured Isaac, 
the product owner, prioritizing the features in the product backlog with feedback from 
the team. The final segment was devoted to the team deciding among themselves 
which high priority features they would commit to build within the four-week sprint. 
Prem did a good job of reminding the team that they were expected to build a fully 
functional feature. This tempered the team’s enthusiasm, and in the end a challenging 
but doable set of features was assigned to the sprint backlog for the first sprint.
 
The first couple of daily Scrum meetings were a bit awkward as members were care-
ful not to step on each other’s toes. One of the first impediments identified was not 
having a shared understanding of how a self-organizing team worked. Prem kept 
emphasizing that it was up to the team to decide who does what and when. Then one 
morning it just suddenly clicked and members came forward claiming work they felt 
needed to be done. After that the daily scrums took on a life of their own, interrupted 
only when a member had to do five push-ups for every minute late. The pace of work 
picked up, and there was a shared enthusiasm as tasks and ultimately functional fea-
tures were completed in rapid fashion. Kendra worked side by side with the other 
software engineers to solve problems and share what they had learned. Occasionally 
Isaac would be called into the project room to answer questions about specific features 
and be shown work in progress.
 
By the time of the first sprint review meeting, the team was able to demonstrate all 
but one of the designated features to Isaac and even three more that were not on the 
initial hit list. The team got some useful feedback not only from Isaac but also from a 
couple of the end users he brought with him. Eighty percent of the features were pro-
claimed done by Isaac while the others needed only slight modifications. Everyone 
agreed that the next Sprint review would even be more successful.
 
The sprint retrospective meeting was refreshing as members spoke candidly about 
both the good and the bad. Everyone agreed that the team needed to do a better job at 
documentation. Issues regarding fairness and spreading both the fun work and the 
tough work among the entire team were brought to the surface. Kendra was impressed 
by how everyone focused on what was best for the project not just themselves.
THE SECOND SPRINT
The second sprint meeting went well. The features that needed rework after the first 
sprint review meeting were at the top of the backlog and Isaac made appropriate 
adjustments in priorities, and a couple of new features that were discovered during the 
sprint review meeting were added. The meeting convened with the team confident that 
they would be able to complete the work they had committed to.
 
Project work progressed quickly over the next week. Kendra felt pressure to accom-
plish what she said she would at the daily Scrum. At the same time, she felt a tremen-
dous amount of satisfaction reporting work done. The entire team seemed energized. 
Then one day everything came to a standstill over a sticky integration problem. The 
team struggled over the next three days trying to solve the problem until, at the next 
Scrum, Prem stepped forward saying, “I think you should do this . . .” He then pro-
ceeded to outline a specific method for solving the problem, even assigning specific 

Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management  601
tasks to each team member. During the next two days Prem went back and forth 
between team members coordinating their work and solving problems. While there 
was some grumbling within the team, his solution worked, and Kendra was grateful to 
get back on track.
 
From then on Prem took a more active role in daily Scrum meetings, often having 
the final say as to the work agenda for that day. The meetings took on a different tone 
as members waited for Prem to speak first. Isaac was absent from the project room 
during this time as he was visiting sites that would be using the new software. Still, 
features were being completed and Kendra was happy with the progress. Then one day 
Isaac showed up at the morning Scrum meeting. He had just gotten back and had fresh 
information he wanted to introduce into the project. He had rewritten the product log 
and added several new, high priority features and eliminated a few of the features that 
the team had been working on. He wanted the team to shift their efforts and complete 
the new features by the end of the sprint.
 
The team was shocked because one of the principles they had been taught is that you 
don’t change course midway through a sprint. Prem did his best to explain this to Isaac, 
but he was insistent. He kept saying that these changes had to be made, otherwise much 
of the sprint output would be a waste of time. He kept repeating that the team needed 
to be flexible. “After all, isn’t that what the Agile approach is all about?” The meeting 
came to an impasse until Prem came forward with a compromise. The team would 
agree to do the new work, but the sprint needed to be extended by two weeks. Everyone 
agreed and Kendra went back to work.
 
Up till the end of the second sprint, Prem continued to direct project work. When it 
came for the sprint review meeting four of the five new features were completed as 
well as most of the original features. However, the feature demonstrations did not go 
well. Isaac and several of the end users that were present were critical of the user 
friendliness of several of the completed features. Kendra and other team members 
defended their work by saying, “Why didn’t you tell us you wanted it to perform that 
way?” Prem did his best to keep the meeting under control, but the team had little to 
say when an important feature simply did not work. In the end, only half of the features 
were accepted as being done.
 
Kendra walked out of the sprint review discouraged. Tomorrow morning was the 
sprint retrospective meeting. She had a lot on her mind, but wasn’t sure what she 
should say or how to say it at the meeting.
1. How well is Scrum working?
2. What are the issues confronting the Big Foot project?
3. Assume you are Kendra. What would you want to say at the retrospective? How 
would you say it?
4. What improvements or changes need to be made?
PART B
Prem opened the retrospective by saying he had gotten a call from his boss and she was 
not happy with the progress. Prem said that he and the team were under the gun to get 
back on track. The list of things that went well during the second sprint was short and 
when it came time to discuss improvements there was an awkward silence. Kendra 
spoke up and began by saying she had gone back and reviewed the Scrum book. She 
went on to say that she thought the whole idea behind Scrum was that the team was to 
work to solve their own problems and it wasn’t Prem’s role to play task master. A 
www.ebook3000.com

602  Chapter 16  An Introduction to Agile Project Management
couple of other team members murmured agreement. Prem became defensive and said 
if he had not intervened it would have taken days for the team to solve the problem.
 
Another member said he thought it was a mistake allowing Isaac to change the 
sprint commitments. Prem agreed that in principle that was true, but said sometimes 
you have to bend the rules to do what is right. He admonished the team by saying that 
they had to practice being more agile. The retrospective ended with few specific rec-
ommendations other than that in order to get back on track, Prem felt he would have to 
get even more involved in the execution of the project.
 
The subsequent sprint 3 planning meeting was more of a formality. Isaac updated 
the product backlog with revised priorities and Prem signed off for the team as to what 
they would commit to. There was little interaction between the team and Isaac except 
seeking clarification on performance requirements for specific features.
 
The team met under Prem’s leadership for their daily Scrums. Sometimes the 
Scrums went beyond the normal 15 minutes as Prem reviewed progress and described 
in detail what needed to be done that day. Isaac would occasionally show up, change 
priorities, review work and answer questions. Kendra worked hard on her assignments 
and often received praise from Prem for work well done.
 
One evening when the team got together for a few beers and sushi, one of the team 
members pulled out a spreadsheet and asked who wanted to make the first bet on when 
they thought the project would be done.
 
After several sprints, Isaac finally signed off on the last feature and declared the 
project completed. A collective “yahoo” sprang from the team. After the meeting 
 Kendra went around collecting money from each of her teammates—she had predicted 
that the project would take 12 weeks longer than planned.
1. How would you assess P2P’s effort at introducing Scrum?
2. What challenges does an organization face when adopting an Agile approach like 
Scrum?
3. What could P2P have done to enhance success?

603
A P P E N D I X  O N E
Solutions to Selected 
Exercises
Chapter 2
2.  
Payback =  
Investment
Annual savings
 
 
PaybackProject Alpha =  $150,000
$40,000  =  3.75 years
 
 
PaybackProject Beta =  $200,000
$50,000  =  4.00 years
 
A lower payback is better. Project Alpha has the lower payback and so has the better 
payback.
5.  
Project NPV = I0 + Σ
n
t=1 
Ft
(1 + k)t
 
For Dust Devils Project using the NPV equation:
 NPV = −$500,000 +
$50,000
(1 + .20)1 + $250,000
(1 + .20)2 + $350,000
(1 + .20)3
= −$500,000 + $41,667 + $173,611 + $202,546 = − $82,176
For Dust Devils Project using Excel:
A
B
C
D
E
F
 1
Expected ROI
20%
 2
 3
Dust Devils
 4
 5
Year
Inflows
Outflows
New flows
NPV
 6
0
$500,000
−$500,000
−$500,000
 7
1
  $50,000
     $50,000
     $41,667
=D7/((1+$C$1)^A7
 8
2
$250,000
   $250,000
   $173,611
 9
3
$350,000
   $350,000
  $202,546
10
  −$82,176
11
12
  −$82,176
=D6+NPV($C$1,D7:D9)
www.ebook3000.com

604 Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises
 
The expected ROI is entered in cell C1 and that will be referenced in the worksheets 
for the next two projects. Cells E6 to E10 repeat the calculations shown in the previ-
ous equations, only using Excel. Cells E7 to E9 perform the three discounting cal-
culations. The equation used is shown in cell F7. The dollar signs in “$C$1” keep 
that cell from changing when this formula is copied up or down. In Excel, this is 
called an absolute reference.
 
Cell E12 performs the NPV calculations as shown in the textbook. Excel gives the 
same answer either way. Cell F12 shows the formula for the direct NPV 
calculations.
 
For Osprey Project using the NPV equation:
NPV = −$250,000 +
$75,000
(1 + .20)1 +
$75,000
(1 + .20)2 +
$75,000
(1 + .20)3 +
$50,000
(1 + .20)4
 
= −$250,000 + $62,500 + $52,083 + $43,403 + $24,113 = −$67,901
For Osprey Project using Excel:
A
B
C
D
E
F
15
Osprey
16
17
Year
Inflows
Outflows
New flows
NPV
18
0
$250,000
−$250,000
−$250,000
19
1
$75,000
$75,000
$62,500
=D19/((1+$C$1)^A19)
20
2
$75,000
$75,000
$52,083
21
3
$75,000
$75,000
$43,403
22
4
$50,000
$50,000
$24,113
23
−$67,901
24
25
−$67,901
=D18+NPV($C$1,D19:D22)
For Voyagers Project using the NPV equation:
NPV = −$75,000 +
$15,000
(1 + .20)1 +
$25,000
(1 + .20)2 +
$50,000
(1 + .20)3 +
$50,000
(1 + .20)4 
 
+ $150,000
(1 + .20)5
 
= −$75,000 + $12,500 + $17,361 + $28,935 + $24,113 + $60,282
 
= $68,191

Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises 605
For Voyagers Project using Excel:
A
B
C
D
E
F
28
Voyagers
29
30
Year
Inflows
Outflows
New flows
NPV
31
0
$75,000
−$75,000
−$75,000
32
1
  $15,000
   $15,000
   $12,500
=D32/((1+$C$1)^A32)
33
2
  $25,000
   $25,000
   $17,361
34
3
  $50,000
   $50,000
   $28,935
35
4
  $50,000
   $50,000
   $24,113
36
5
$150,000
$150,000
   $60,282
37
    $68,191
38
39
$68,191
=D31+NPV($C$1,D32:D36)
The only project SIMSOX should consider is Voyagers. Each of the other two  
projects would not satisfy the high rate of return SIMSOX expects from its projects.
Chapter 6
3.  
A
Identify
topic
Group Term Paper
B
Research
topic
C
Draft
paper
D
Edit
paper
G
Proof
F
References
E
Create
graphics
H
Submit
paper
Activity C is a burst activity. Activity G is a merge activity.
www.ebook3000.com

606 Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises
11.
C
30
5
0
5
Traffic
design
35
35
F
15
115
15
130
Illumination
130
145
G
30
115
0
115
Drainage
145
145
H
25
115
5
120
Landscaping
140
145
D
5
5
25
30
Lot
layout
10
35
J
5
145
0
145
Bid 
proposal
150
150
A
5
0
0
5
Survey
5
5
E
80
35
0
35
Approve
design
115
115
B
20
5
10
15
Soils
report
25
35
I
15
115
10
130
Signing
130
145
ID
Legend
DUR
ES
SL
LS
Description
EF
LF
Early start, late start, early finish, late finish, and slack are shown on the diagram 
above. The completion time is 150 days. The critical path is A-C-E-G-J.
13.
A
1
1
0
B
6
1
D
11
9
0
2
11
9
5
6
1
0
0
0
1
Identify
topic
Research
topic
C
9
6
3
9
6
0
Draft
paper
E
10
11
9
1
10
1
Create
graphics
G
12
12
11
1
11
0
Final
draft
F
10
11
9
1
10
1
References
Edit
paper
ID
Legend
DUR
ES
SL
LS
Description
EF
LF
Group Term Paper
H
13
14
12
1
12
0
Submit
paper

Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises 607
Early start, late start, early finish, late finish, and slack are shown on the diagram 
above. The Gantt chart is shown below.
21.
Legend
Lag 10
Lag 3
Lag 4
Lag 5
Lag 3
A
15
Interview
B
5
Def. New
Features
C
2
Order
Comps
D
8
Prototype
E
5
TEST
F
10
Field Test
ES
LS
SL
EF
LF
SL
10
Duration
Description
0
0
0
15
0
15
10
3
13
18
0
18
18
0
18
20
0
20
25
0
25
33
0
33
24
1
25
29
1
30
33
0
33
43
0
43
The critical path is A-B (finish only)-C-D-F.
Chapter 8
4. Log of Parallel Method of Scheduling: Exercise 8-4
Period
Activity
Changes
0–1
B
Schedule Activity B (first by minimum slack rule)
A
Schedule Activity A
1–2
-
No changes
2–3
-
No changes
3–4
-
No changes
4–5
C
Delay ES of Activity C to 5. Reduce slack to 1
5–6
D
Schedule Activity D (minimum slack rule)
C
Schedule Activity C
E
Delay ES of Activity E to 6. Reduce slack to 1
6–7
E
Delay ES of Activity E to 7. Reduce slack to 0
7–8
E
Delay ES of Activity E to 8. Reduce slack to −1
F
Delay ES of Activity F to 11. Reduce slack to −1
8–9
E
Delay ES of Activity E to 9. Reduce slack to −2
F
Delay ES of Activity F to 12. Reduce slack to −2
9–10
E
Schedule Activity E
10–11
-
No changes
11–12
-
No changes
12–13
F
Schedule Activity F
www.ebook3000.com

608 Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises
7. You should not spend time planning how you are going to spend your bonus. The 
schedule will take 16 days.
A
2
0
2
0
0
0
2
2
B
1
2
3
2
2
4
5
2
C
3
2
5
0
0
2
5
2
D
RESOURCE SCHEDULE
PLAN
1
5
6
0
0
5
6
2
E
2
6
8
0
0
6
8
2
F
3
6
9
1
1
7
10
1
Use the following heuristics:
Minimum slack
Smallest duration
Lowest identiﬁcation number
G
2
8
10
0
0
8
10
2
H
2
10
12
0
0
10
12
2
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
Resource
DUR ES
LF
SL 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
RES
2
1
3
1
2
3
2
2
2
2
0
5
2
6
2
7
9
1
1
1
12
2
2
14
2
6
5
7
9
12
14
16
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Resources scheduled
2
Resources available
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises 609
10.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Budget
ID
A
B
C
D
E
F
Total
Cumulative
40
10
10
10
10
32
8
4
8
8
4
48
12
12
12
12
18
6
2
2
2
6
28
8
8
12
40
206
18
14
18
14
20
26
22
26
2
6
20
20
20
20
18
32
50
64
84
110
132
158
160
166
186
206
A
4
0
4
1
1
1
5
B
5
0
5
0
0
0
5
C
4
4
8
2
2
6
10
D
5
5
10
0
0
5
10
F
2
10
12
0
0
10
12
E
3
5
8
2
2
7
10
Cost by Week
A
B
C
D
E
F
10
8
12
6
8
20
10
4
12
2
8
20
10
8
12
2
12
10
4
12
2
8
6
ID
DUR
LS
SL
LF
ES
EF
Legend
SL
www.ebook3000.com

610 Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises
Chapter 9
2. Use the information contained below to compress one time unit per move using 
the least cost method. Reduce the schedule until you reach the crash point of 
the network. For each move identify what activity(ies) was crashed and the 
adjusted total cost.
 
 
Note: Choose B instead of C and E (equal costs) because it is usually smarter 
to crash early rather than late AND one activity instead of two activities.
Act.
Crash Cost  
(Slope)
Maximum 
Crash Time
Normal 
Time
Normal 
Cost
A
0
2
150
B
100
1
3
100
C
50
2
4
200
D
40
1
4
200
E
50
1
3
200
F
0
1
150
1x
F
3
B
2x
A
6
C
Initial
project duration 13
Total direct cost
3
E
4
D
1,000
 
Project duration is reduced from 13 time periods to ten. Total direct cost goes up 
from 1,000 to 1,240. The steps are shown below:
A
B
C
F
Duration:
13
2
3
6
1
12
Direct Cost:
$1,000
A
B
D
E
F
2
3
4
3
1
13
 
The project has two paths, A-B-C-F, which takes 12 time periods, and A-B-D-E-F, 
which takes 13 time periods. This gives the project a duration of 13 time periods. 
The total direct cost is $1,000.
A
B
C
F
Duration:
12
2
3
6
1
12
Direct Cost:
$1,040
A
B
D
E
F
2
3
3
3
1
12

Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises 611
 
The cheapest activity to reduce is D at a cost of $40 for one time period. That makes 
both paths critical. That means that further reductions will require either reducing 
the same time from an activity on both paths or finding an activity shared by both 
paths and reducing that activity. Total direct cost goes up from $1,000 to $1,040.
A
B
C
F
Duration:
11
2
2
6
1
11
Direct Cost:
$1,140
A
B
D
E
F
2
2
3
3
1
11
 
Activity B is on both paths and can be reduced by one time period at a cost of 
$100.1 That lowers the completion time to 11 time periods and raises total direct 
cost to $1,140.
A
B
C
F
Duration:
10
2
2
5
1
10
Direct Cost:
$1,240
A
B
D
E
F
2
2
3
2
1
10
 
Finally, we can reduce C on the first path at a cost of $50 and E on the second path 
at a cost of $50. That reduces the completion time to 10 time units and raises total 
direct cost to $1,240. No further reductions are possible.
Activity
Normal 
Time
Normal 
Cost
Maximum  
Crash Time
Crash  
Cost
A
3
150
0
    0
B
4
200
1
100
C
3
250
1
  60
D
4
200
1
  40
E
2
250
0
    0
F
3
200
2
  30
G
2
250
1
  20
H
4
300
2
  60
I
2
200
1
200
8.
1Activities C on the first path and E on the second path also have a combined cost of $100. We select B first since it is  
usually smarter to crash earlier activities first and it is usually smarter to crash one activity rather than two.
www.ebook3000.com

612 Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises
D
I
A
3X
A
3X
C
G
B
H
B
4
D
3X
F
3
E
2X
G
2
I
C
3
H
4
2
4
F
3
3
E
2X
4
2
4
2
Total direct cost: 2040
CP=A+B+D+H+I
Activities changed:
Normal time:
CP=A+B+D+H+I
17
Time:
D
16
Total direct cost: 2000
D
I
A
3X
A
3X
C
G
B
H
B
4
D
3X
F
3
E
2X
G
2
I
C
3
H
3X
2
4
F
3
3
E
2X
3
2
2X
2
Total direct cost: 2160
CP=A+B+D+H+I
Activities changed:
Time:
CP=A+B+D+H+I
15
Time:
H
14
Total direct cost: 2100
A+B+F+G+I
Activities changed:
H

Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises 613
D
I
3X
A
3X
C
H
B
3X
D
3X
F
3
E
2X
G
2
I
C
3
H
3X
F
3
3
E
2X
2X
2
2X
1X
Total direct costs: 2460
Time:
CP=A+B+D+H+I
13
Time:
12
Total direct costs: 2260
B
CP=A+B+D+H+I
I
G
2
A
B
3X
A+B+F+G+I
Activities changed:
A+B+F+G+I
Activities changed:
Duration
Direct Cost
Indirect Cost
Total Cost
17
2,000
1,500
3,500
16
2,040
1,450
3,490
15
2,100
1,400
3,500
14
2,160
1,350
3,560
13
2,260
1,300
3,660
12
2,460
1,250
3,860
 
The optimum time-cost schedule would be 16 weeks at a cost of $3,490.
Chapter 13
8.
Status Report: Ending Period 1 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
25% 
25 
50 
50 
−25 
−25
Cumulative Totals 
 
25 
50 
50 
−25 
−25
Status Report: Ending Period 2 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
50% 
50 
100 
100 
−50 
−50
Cumulative Totals 
 
50 
100 
100 
−50 
−50
www.ebook3000.com

614 Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises
Status Report: Ending Period 3 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
100 
200 
100 
−100 
0
B 
0% 
0 
0 
100 
0 
−100
C 
0% 
0 
0 
150 
0 
−150
Cumulative Totals 
 
100 
200 
350 
−100 
−250
Status Report: Ending Period 4 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
100 
200 
100 
−100 
0
B 
60% 
150 
100 
150 
50 
0
C 
50% 
225 
200 
300 
25 
−75
Cumulative Totals 
  
475 
500 
550 
−25 
−75
Status Report: Ending Period 5 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
100 
200 
100 
−100 
0
B 
100% 
250 
200 
250 
50 
0
C 
100% 
450 
400 
450 
50 
0
Cumulative Totals 
  
800 
800 
800 
0 
0
Status Report: Ending Period 6 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
100 
200 
100 
−100 
0
B 
100% 
250 
200 
250 
50 
0
C 
100% 
450 
400 
450 
50 
0
D 
75% 
150 
100 
100 
50 
50
Cumulative Totals 
 
950 
900 
900 
50 
50
Status Report: Ending Period 7 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
100 
200 
100 
−100 
0
B 
100% 
250 
200 
250 
50 
0
C 
100% 
450 
400 
450 
50 
0
D 
100% 
200 
150 
200 
50 
0
E 
 20% 
60 
100 
0 
−40 
60
F 
  5% 
15 
50 
0 
−35 
15
Cumulative Totals 
 
1075 
1100 
1000 
−25 
75

Appendix 1 Solutions to Selected Exercises 615
Status Report: Ending Period 8 
($000)
Task 
% Complete 
EV 
AC 
PV 
CV 
SV
A 
100% 
100 
200 
100 
−100 
0
B 
100% 
250 
200 
250 
50 
0
C 
100% 
450 
400 
450 
50 
0
D 
100% 
200 
150 
200 
50 
0
E 
100% 
300 
350 
200 
−50 
100
F 
10% 
30 
100 
100 
−70 
−70
Cumulative Totals 
 
1330 
1400 
1300 
−70 
30
Performance Indexes Summary 
Period 
EV 
AC 
PV 
SPI 
CPI 
PCIB
1 
25 
50 
50 
.50 
.50 
2%
2 
50 
100 
100 
.50 
.50 
3%
3 
100 
200 
350 
.29 
.50 
5%
4 
475 
500 
550 
.86 
.95 
24%
5 
800 
800 
800 
1.00 
1.00 
40%
6 
950 
900 
900 
1.06 
1.06 
48%
7 
1075 
1100 
1000 
1.08 
.98 
54%
8 
1330 
1400 
1300 
1.02 
.95 
67%
 
EACf = (BAC −EV)
(EV/AC)
+ AC = (2,000 −1,300)
(1,330/1,400)
+ 1,400 = 2,105
VACf = BAC − EACf  = 2,000 − 2,105 = −105
With two-thirds of the project completed the forecast is that the project will be 
$105,000 over budget at completion.
www.ebook3000.com

616 
A P P E N D I X  T W O
Computer Project 
Exercises
In developing the exercises, trade-offs had to be made to enrich the learning experi-
ence. One of the major problems students initially encounter is data and detail over-
load. This reduces their ability to identify project and data problems and to compare 
alternatives. Although the project found in the exercises is real, it has been reduced 
and detail has been eliminated many times to concentrate on applying project 
 management principles and understanding linkages. In addition, other simplifying 
assumptions have been made so that students and instructors can trace problems 
and discuss outcomes. These assumptions detract from reality, but they keep the 
focus on the objectives of the exercises and reduce student frustration with software 
intricacies. Moving from these exercises to real projects is primarily one of increas-
ing detail. 
The POM+ Project*
Big Kola Company has been concerned that specialized fruit drinks have been erod-
ing their cola market. The CEO mandates that “If you can’t beat them, join them.” 
Grape juice was the first product that was successful after an advertising blitz claim-
ing the antitoxin benefits. Lately, competition is compressing grape juice margins and 
profits. Months of additional market surveys and focus groups have resulted in three 
potential high-margin drinks: cranberry, blueberry, and pomegranate. All these 
choices represent antitoxins. The decision is to produce the pomegranate drink that 
has many health claims. For example, the relative ability of these juices to eliminate 
harmful free radicals (antitoxins) is 71 percent for pomegranate, 33 percent for blue-
berry, and 20 percent for cranberry (Technion Institute of Technology). The market 
potential appears very attractive and should have a higher profit margin than the other 
potential juice products. Another appeal for pomegranate juice is its familiarity in the 
Middle East and Asia.
 
The Priority Matrix for the POM+ Project is:
 
Time 
Scope 
Cost
Constrain 
 
 
X
Enhance 
 
X 
Accept 
X 
* Cliff Gray, Erik Larson, & Pinyarat Sirisomboonsuk, doctoral candidate at Rawls College of Business, Texas Tech 
University.

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 617
 
Connor Gage, the project manager, has formed his project team and the members 
have come up with the following work breakdown structure.
1.0 POM+Project
1.1 R&D product development
 
1.1.1 Need survey
 
1.1.2 Set product specs
 
1.1.3 Shelf life report
 
1.1.4 Nutrition report
1.2 Secure fruit suppliers
1.3 Initial Production
 
1.3.1 Equipment rehab
 
1.3.2 Production trials
 
1.3.3 Quality trials
 
1.3.4 Quality metrics
 
1.3.5 Quality training
1.4 Distribution
 
1.4.1 Market testing
 
1.4.2 Package design
 
1.4.3 Select distributors
1.5 Legal
 
1.5.1 Complete FDA certification
 
1.5.2 Register trademark
1.6 Prepare product launch
Part 1
1. Develop the WBS outline using the software available (save your file).
2. Use this file and the information provided below to create a project 
schedule.
3. The following holidays are observed: January 1, Martin Luther King Day (third 
Monday in January), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), July 4th, Labor Day 
(first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (4th Thursday in November), 
December 25 and 26.
4. If a holiday falls on a Saturday then Friday will be given as an extra day off, and if 
it falls on a Sunday then Monday will be given off.
5. The project team works eight-hour days, Monday through Friday.
6. The project will begin on January 3, 2012.
7. Based on this schedule, submit a memo that answers the following questions:
 
a.  When is the project estimated to be completed? How many working days will it 
take?
 
b. What is the critical path?
 
c. Which activity has the most total slack?
 
d. How sensitive is this network?
 
e. Identify two sensible milestones and explain your choice.
www.ebook3000.com

618 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
 
Include the following (one page) printouts:
∙ A Gantt chart.
∙ A network diagram highlighting the critical path.
∙ A schedule table reporting ES, LS, EF, LF, and slack for each activity.
 
Hints: Change the timescale to months and weeks. The estimated duration of the 
project is 135 days.
 
Remember: Save your files for future exercises!
 
The following information has been derived from the WBS. Note that the activity 
number is what appears in the software with the complete WBS entered.
#* 
Activity 
Duration 
Predecessor(s)
  3 
Need survey 
20 
None
  4 
Set product specs 
15 
  3
  5 
Shelf life report 
10 
  4
  6 
Nutrition report 
  5 
  4
  7 
Select fruit suppliers 
20 
  5, 6
  9 
Equipment rehab 
30 
  4
10 
Production trials 
15 
  7, 9
11 
Quality trials 
20 
10
12 
Quality metrics 
  5 
 11
13 
Quality training 
15 
12
15 
Market testing 
30 
  5, 6
16 
Package design 
15 
15
17 
Select distributors 
25 
  5, 6
19 
Complete FDA certification 
15 
  7, 15
20 
Register trademark 
  5 
  7, 15
21 
Prepare product launch 
15 
 13, 16, 17, 19FS + 25 
days, 20FS + 15 days
FS = Finish to Start lag
Part 2
Remember the old saying, “A project plan is not a schedule until resources are com-
mitted.” This exercise illustrates this sometime subtle, but important point.
 
Using your files from Part 1, input resources and their costs if you have not already 
done so. All information is found in Tables A2.1 and A2.2.
 
Prepare a memo that addresses the following questions:
1. Which if any of the resources are overallocated?
2.  Assume that the project is time constrained and try to resolve any overallocation 
problems by leveling within slack. What happens?
3. What is the impact of leveling within slack on the sensitivity of the network?
 
Include a Gantt chart with the schedule table after leveling within slack.
4.  Assume the project is resource constrained and resolve any overallocation problems 
by leveling outside of slack. What happens?

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 619
TABLE A2.1
Resource 
Assignments
Activity 
Resources
Need survey 
MRKT (500%)
Set product specs 
R&D (400%), MRKT (200%)
Shelf life report 
R&D (300%)
Nutrition report 
R&D (300%)
Select fruit suppliers 
PURCH (100%)
Equipment rehab 
ENG (1,000%), PROD (2,000%)
Production trials 
PROD (1,500%), PURCH (100%), ENG (1,000%)
Quality trials 
QUAL (300%), PROD (500%)
Quality metrics 
QUAL (300%), PROD (100%)
Quality training 
QUAL (300%), PROD (1,500%)
Market testing 
MRKT (500%)
Package design 
DESIGN (300%), MRKT (100%)
Select distributors 
MRKT (500%)
Complete FDA certification 
LEGAL (300%)
Register trademark 
LEGAL (300%)
Prepare product launch 
 QUAL (300%), PURCH (200%), PROD (1,500%), 
MRKT (500%), ENG (500%), R&D (100%)
TABLE A2.2
Resources 
Availability and Pay 
Rates
Resource 
Abbrev 
Available 
Hourly rate
Marketing staff 
MRKT 
  5 
$ 80/hr
R&D 
R&D 
  5 
$ 80/hr
Engineering 
ENG 
10 
$100/hr
Purchasing 
PURCH 
  2 
$ 60/hr
Quality engineers 
QUAL 
  3 
$ 80/hr
Designers 
DESIGN 
  3 
$ 60/hr
Legal staff 
LEGAL 
  3 
$120/hr
Production 
PROD 
20 
$ 60/hr
 
Include a Gantt chart with the schedule table after leveling outside of slack.
 
Note: No splitting of activities is allowed.
 
Note: No partial assignments (e.g., 50 percent). All resources must be assigned 
100 percent.
Part 3
Top management has accepted the July 19th completion schedule created at the end of 
Part 2. Prepare a brief memo that addresses the following questions:
1. How much will the project cost? What is the most expensive activity?
2. What does the cash flow statement tell you about how costs are distributed over the 
life span of the project?
Include a monthly cash flow for the project.
 
Once you are confident that you have the final schedule, save the file as a baseline. 
Hint: Save a backup file just in case without baseline!
www.ebook3000.com

620 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
Activity 
Actual Start 
Actual Finish 
Actual Duration 
Remaining Duration
Need survey 
1/3/12    
2/2/12   
22 
  0
Set product specs 
2/3/12    
2/28/12 
18 
  0
Shelf life report 
2/29/12 
3/13/12 
10 
  0
Nutrition report 
3/14/12 
3/19/12 
  4 
   0
Equipment rehab 
2/29/12 
 
23 
12
TABLE A2.3
Status Report  
March 31, 2012
Part 4 A
Assume that today is March 31, 2012, and Table A2.3 contains the tracking informa-
tion for the project up till now. Enter this information into your saved baseline file and 
prepare a status report for the first three months of the POM+ project.
Your status report should also address the following questions:
1. How is the project progressing in terms of cost and schedule?
2. What activities have gone well? What activities have not gone well?
3. What do the PCIB and PCIC indicate in terms of how much of the project has been 
accomplished to date?
4. What is the forecasted cost at completion (EACf)? What is the predicted VACf?
5. Report and interpret the TCPI for the project at this point in time.
6. What is the estimated date of completion?
7. How well is the project doing in terms of its priorities?
 
Try to present the above information in a form worthy of consideration by top 
management.
 
Include an Earned Value table and a Tracking Gantt Chart.
 
Note: Insert March 31, 2012, as the status date in the Project Information box.
Part 4 B
Assume that today is May 31, 2012, and Table A2.4 contains the tracking information 
for the project up till now. Enter this information into your saved baseline file and pre-
pare a status report for the POM+ project.
 
Your status report should address the following questions:
1. How is the project progressing in terms of cost and schedule?
2. What activities have gone well? What activities have not gone well?
3. What do the PCIB and PCIC indicate in terms of how much of the project has been 
accomplished to date?
4. What is the forecasted cost at completion (EACf)? What is the predicted VACf?
5. Report and interpret the TCPI for the project at this point in time.
6. What is the estimated date of completion?
7. How well is the project doing in terms of its priorities?
 
Try to present the above information in a form worthy of consideration by top 
management.
 
Include an Earned Value table and a Tracking Gantt Chart.
 
Note: Insert May 31, 2012, as the status date in the Project Information box.

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 621
Red Zuma Project
The ARC Company specializes in developing and selling a wide range of high-
quality scooters. Sales representatives report that there is a growing demand for 
racing scooters. ARC’s president, Robin Lane, is excited about the possibilities 
and predicts that one day these kinds of razor scooters will be featured in X-Game 
events. ARC is a small company and uses a strong matrix to optimally utilize lim-
ited manpower.
 
The Project Priority Matrix for the Red Zuma Project is:
 
Time 
Scope 
Cost
Constrain 
 
X 
Enhance 
X 
 
Accept 
 
 
X
Part 1
You are a member of a project team assigned to develop the new razor scooter code 
named “Red Zuma.” Table A2.5 contains the information necessary to create a project 
schedule. For the purpose of this case assume the following:
1. The project begins January 2, 2015.
2. The following holidays are observed: January 1, Martin Luther King Day (third 
Monday in January), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), July 4th, Labor Day 
(first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (4th Thursday in November), 
December 25.
3. If a holiday falls on a Saturday, then Friday will be given as an extra day off, and if 
it falls on a Sunday, then Monday will be given as a day off. If December 25th falls 
on a Friday then Monday will not be given a day off.
4. The project team works eight-hour days, Monday through Friday.
Activity 
Actual Start 
Actual Finish 
Actual Duration 
Remaining Duration
Need survey 
1/3/12    
2/2/12   
22 
 0
Set product specs 
2/3/12    
2/28/12 
18 
 0
Shelf life report 
2/29/12 
3/13/12 
10 
 0
Nutrition report 
3/14/12 
3/19/12 
  4 
 0
Select fruit suppliers 
4/3/12    
4/30/12 
20 
 0
Equipment rehab 
2/29/12 
4/11/12 
31 
 0
Production trials 
4/17/12 
5/4/12 
14 
 0
Quality trials 
5/7/12    
5/31/12 
18 
 0
Market testing 
4/4/12    
5/9/12    
26 
 0
Package design 
5/10/12 
5/25/12 
12 
 0
Select distributors 
5/28/12 
 
  4 
18
Complete FDA certification 
5/11/12 
5/31/12 
14 
 0
TABLE A2.4
Status Report  
May 31, 2012
www.ebook3000.com

622 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
Note: FS refers to a Finish-to-Start lag.
ID
Task Name
Duration
Predecessors
  1
1 Red Zuma Project
260 days
  2
1.1 Market Analysis
  25 days
  3
1.2 Product Design
  30 days
2
  4
1.3 Manufacturing Study
  20 days
2
  5
1.4 Product Design Selection
  10 days
3, 4
  6
1.5 Detailed Marketing Plan
  15 days
5
  7
1.6 Manufacturing Process
  30 days
5
  8
1.7 Detailed Product Design
  45 days
5
  9
1.8 Build Prototypes
  25 days
8
10
1.9 Lab Test Prototypes
  10 days
9
11
1.10 Field Test Prototypes
  15 days
9
12
1.11 Finalized Product Design
  20 days
7,10,11
13
1.12 Final Manufacturing Process
  10 days
12
14
1.13 Order Components
    7 days
12
15
1.14 Order Production Equipment
  14 days
13
16
1.15 Install Production Equipment
  35 days
14FS+20 days,15FS+30 days
17
1.16 Celebrate
    1 days
6, 16
TABLE A2.5
Red Zuma:  
Project Schedule
Construct a network schedule for this project and prepare a memo that answers the 
following questions:
1. When is the project estimated to be completed? How long will the project take?
2. What is the critical path for the project?
3. Which activity has the greatest amount of slack?
4. How sensitive is this network?
5. Identify two sensible milestones and explain your choices.
Include the following printouts:
∙ A Gantt chart.
∙ A network diagram highlighting the critical path.
∙ A schedule table reporting ES, LS, EF, LF, and slack for each activity.
Part 2
The following personnel have been assigned full-time to the Red Zuma project team:
4 marketing specialists
4 design engineers
4 development engineers
4 industrial engineers
4 test riders
2 purchasing agents
Use the file from Part 1 and the information contained in Tables A2.6 and A2.7 to 
assign resources to the project schedule.

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 623
Part A
Prepare a memo that addresses the following questions:
1. Which if any of the resources are overallocated?
2. Assume that the project is time constrained and try to resolve any overallocation 
problems by leveling within slack. What happens?
3. What is the impact of leveling within slack on the sensitivity of the network?
Include a Gantt chart with the schedule table after leveling within slack.
TABLE A2.7 Red Zuma Resource Assignments
$
Number available
Marketing specialist
$80,000/yr   
4
Design engineer
$125,000/yr 
4
Development engineer
$110,000/yr 
4
Industrial engineer
$100,000/yr
4
Purchasing agent
$75,000/yr   
2
Test rider
$70/hr          
4
Note: MS Project considers resources in terms of percentages with one full-time  
worker being 100%.
TABLE A2.6
Red Zuma Project 
Resources
Task Name
Resource Names
Red Zuma Project
Market Analysis
Marketing Specialist [400%]
Product Design
Marketing Specialist, Design Engineer [400%], Development Engineer [200%], Industrial  
Engineer, Purchasing Agent
Manufacturing Study
Industrial Engineer [400%], Development Engineer [200%]
Product Design Selection
Marketing Specialist [200%], Design Engineer [300%], Development Engineer [200%], Industrial 
Engineer [200%], Purchasing Agent [25%]
Detailed Marketing Plan
Marketing Specialist [400%]
Manufacturing Process
Design Engineer, Development Engineer [200%], Industrial Engineer [300%]
Detailed Product Design
Marketing Specialist [200%], Design Engineer [400%], Development Engineer [200%], Industrial 
Engineer [200%], Purchasing Agent [25%]
Build Prototypes
Design Engineer [200%], Development Engineer [200%], Industrial Engineer [400%]
Lab Test Prototypes
Design Engineer [200%], Development Engineer [200%], Test Rider
Field Tests
Marketing Specialist, Design Engineer [200%], Development Engineer, Industrial Engineer, Test 
Rider [300%] 
Finalized Product Design
Marketing Specialist [200%], Design Engineer [300%], Development Engineer [300%], Industrial 
Engineer [200%], Purchasing Agent [25%]
Final Manufacturing Process
Industrial Engineer [300%], Design Engineer, Purchasing Agent [25%]
Order Components
Purchasing Agent
Order Production Equipment
Purchasing Agent
Install Production Equipment
Design Engineer, Development Engineer [300%], Industrial Engineer [400%]
Celebration
Design Engineer [400%], Development Engineer [400%], Industrial Engineer [400%], Marketing 
Specialist [400%], Purchasing Agent [200%]
Note: Resource assignments without brackets are 100%.
www.ebook3000.com

624 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
4. Assume that the project is resource constrained and no additional personnel are 
available. How long will the project take given the resources assigned? (Hint: Undo 
leveling performed in Part A before answering this question.)
Note: No splitting of activities is allowed.
5. How does the new duration compare with the estimated completion date generated 
from Part 1? What does this tell you about the impact resources can have on a 
schedule?
Include a Gantt chart with a schedule table displaying free and total slack depicting the 
resource-constrained schedule.
Part B
Top management is not happy with the resource-constrained schedule. Robin Lane, the 
president, has promised retailers that ARC will begin production in time for the major 
trade show in Las Vegas on January 22, 2016, which means the project needs to be 
completed by January 17, 2016. She has authorized working the first available Satur-
day of each month to help the project get completed sooner. She realizes that this will 
only reduce the project duration by 12–13 days.
 
After talking to the engineers, everyone agrees that they do not have to wait for the 
Detailed Product Design to be 100% completed before starting to build the prototype. 
The consensus is that Building the Prototype can start 30 days after the start of the 
Detailed Product Design. Likewise the Final Manufacturing Process can start 15 days 
after the start of Finalized Product Design.
 
Dewey Martin, director of product development, is also willing to add personnel to 
the project. He is willing to make available at least one more Development, Design, 
and/or Industrial Engineer to the project as well as Marketing Specialist. Since there is 
an acute shortage of personnel at ARC he requests that you only use additional man-
power that will help meet the deadline. Your objective is to develop a schedule which 
will satisfy the deadline with minimum additional resource usage.
 
Prepare a memo that addresses the following questions:
1. What was the impact of introducing Start-to-Start lags to the schedule and budget?
2. Which, if any additional personnel assignments, would you choose to complete the 
project before the January 17th deadline? Explain your choices as well as the rea-
sons for not choosing other options.
3. How have these changes affected the sensitivity of the network and the critical 
path?
Include a Gantt chart with a schedule table displaying free and total slack for the new 
schedule.
Note: Do not assign new personnel to specific tasks, simply add them to the Resource 
Sheet. All new personnel are available full time (100%).
At first glance—this appears to be a very  
complicated, difficult assignment, but if  
you enter the information correctly, the 
computer is able to generate the answers 
with a few simple clicks.

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 625
Part 3
Top management has accepted the schedule created at the end of Part 2. Prepare a brief 
memo that addresses the following questions:
1. How much will the project cost? What is the most expensive activity?
2. What does the cash flow statement tell you about how costs are distributed over the 
life span of the project?
Include a monthly cash flow for the project.
Once you are confident that you have the final schedule, save the file as a baseline. 
Hint: Save a backup file just in case without baseline!
Part 4
Part A
Today’s date is July 8, 2015, the milestone date for the completion of the Prototype. 
You are charged with preparing a status report for top management. Table A2.8  
summarizes progress on the Red Zuma project.
 
Submit a professional status report to Robin Lane that addresses the following 
questions:
1. How is the project progressing in terms of cost and schedule?
2. What activities have gone well? What activities have not gone well?
3. How much of the project has been accomplished (PCIB)?
4. What is the forecasted cost at completion (EACf)?
5. What is the estimated completion date?
6. How is the project doing in terms of priorities (see Part 1)?
Report and interpret relevant Earned Value metrics in your report.
Include a Tracking Gantt chart as well as an Earned Value Table with your memo.
TABLE A2.8 Red Zuma Project Update
Task Name
Act. Start
Act. Finish
% Comp.
Phys. % 
Comp.
Act. Dur.
Rem. Dur. 
  1 1 Red Zuma
Fri 1/9/15
NA
46%
0%
125.85 days
146.4 days
  2 1.1 Market Analysis
Fri 1/9/15
Thu 2/12/15
100%
0%
25 days
0 days
  3 1.2 Product Design
Fri 2/13/15
Wed 4/1/15
100%
0%
35 days
0 days
  4 1.3 Manufacturing Study
Fri 2/13/15
Fri 3/6/15
100%
0%
16 days
0 days
  5 1.4 Product Design Selection
Thu 4/2/15
Fri 4/17/15
100%
0%
13 days
0 days
  6 1.5 Detailed Marketing Plan
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
15 days
  7 1.6 Manufacturing Process
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
30 days
  8 1.7 Detailed Product Design
Mon 4/20/15
Wed 6/24/15
100%
0%
49 days
0 days
  9 1.8 Build Prototypes
Wed 6/10/15
NA
39%
0%
9 days
14 days
10 1.9 Lab Test Prototypes
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
10 days
11 1.10 Field Test Prototypes
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
15 days
12 1.11 Finalized Product Design
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
20 days 
13 1.12 Final Manufacturing Process
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
10 days
14 1.13 Order Components
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
7 days
15 1.14 Order Production Equipment
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
14 days
16 1.15 Install Production Equipment
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
35 days
17 1.16 Celebrate
NA
NA
0%
0%
0 days
1 days
www.ebook3000.com

626 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
Part B
You have told Robin Lane that based on what you know now you need to revise the 
estimates for some of the remaining activities. Detailed Product Design is expected to 
take 3 days longer than planned. Build Prototypes is expected to take 2 days less than 
planned and Finalized Product Design is expected to take 3 days longer than planned. 
Final Manufacturing Process is expected to take 2 days less than planned, while Install 
Production Equipment is now expected to take only 30 days. You also report that 
Detailed Marketing plan will be completed before the end of the New Year. She is 
insisting that the project be completed by January 17th in order to be ready for the Las 
Vegas show. She is willing to spend $50,000 from Management Reserves to expedite 
shipping if necessary. $25,000 would reduce the shipping of components by 5 days 
and/or $25,000 would reduce the shipping of manufacturing parts by 5 days (Hint: 
Adjust lag). Prepare a memo to Robin that addresses the following questions:
1. What is the impact of the revised estimates for Finalized Product Design and Install 
Production Equipment on the project schedule and cost?
2. Would you recommend authorizing the expenditure of $50,000? Explain.
3. What, if any other recommendations, would you make so that the project can 
achieve Robin’s deadline? Justify your recommendations.
Include a Tracking Gantt chart with variance schedule that depicts your final recom-
mendations and revised schedule.
Hint: After adjusting the Installation of Production Equipment and Finalized Product 
Design, level outside of slack to eliminate any resource over allocation problems.
Conveyor Belt Project
Part 1
Project Description
The new computer-controlled conveyor belt is an exciting project that moves and positions 
items on the conveyor belt within <1 millimeter. The project will produce a new system for 
future installations, and for replacement of those in the field, at a low cost. The computer-
controlled conveyor belt has the potential to be a critical unit in 30 percent of the systems 
installed in factories. The new system is also easier to update with future technologies.
 
The Project Priority Matrix for the Conveyor Belt Project (CBP) is:
 
Time 
Scope 
Cost
Constrain 
X 
 
Enhance 
 
X 
Accept 
 
 
X
Table A2.9 has been developed for you to use in completing the project exercises.
Assignment
Develop the WBS outline using the software available to you.
Question
Does this information (WBS) allow you to define any milestones of the project? Why 
or why not? What are they?
 
Remember: Save your file for future exercises!

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 627
TABLE A2.9
Conveyor Belt 
Project; WBS
Conveyor Belt Project
Hardware
Hardware specifications
Hardware design
Hardware documentation
Prototypes
Order circuit boards
Assemble preproduction models
Operating system
Kernel specifications
Drivers
    Disk drivers
    Serial I/O drivers
Memory management
Operating system documentation
Network interface
Utilities
Utilities specifications
Routine utilities
Complex utilities
Utilities documentation
Shell
System integration
Architectural decisions
Integration first phase
System hard/software test
Project documentation
Integration acceptance testing
Part 2
Use your file from Part 1 and the information provided below to complete this  
exercise. (See Table A2.10.)
1. Each work package will represent an activity.
2. The project begins January 4, 2010.
3. The following holidays are observed: January 1, Memorial Day (last Monday in 
May), July 4th, Labor Day (first Monday in September), Thanksgiving Day (4th 
Thursday in November), December 25 and 26.
4. If a holiday falls on a Saturday then Friday will be given as an extra day off, and if 
it falls on a Sunday, then Monday will be given as a day off.
5. The project teams work eight-hour days, Monday through Friday.
Warning: Experience has taught students to frequently make separate backup files for 
each exercise. The software is never as friendly as users expect!
 
Construct a network schedule for the conveyor belt project and prepare a memo that 
addresses the following questions:
1. When is the project estimated to be completed? How long will the project take?
2. What is the critical path(s) for the project?
3. Which activity has the greatest amount of slack?
4. How sensitive is this network?
5. Identify two sensible milestones and explain your choices.
6. Compare the advantages/disadvantages of displaying the schedule as a network  
versus a Gantt chart.
www.ebook3000.com

628 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
Include the following printouts:
∙ A Gantt chart.
∙ A network diagram highlighting the critical path.
∙ A schedule table reporting ES, LS, EF, LF, and slack for each activity.
Hint: the project should be completed in 530 days.
Remember: Save your file for future exercises!
Part 3
Remember the old saying, “A project plan is not a schedule until resources are com-
mitted.” This exercise illustrates this subtle, but very important, difference.
Part A
Using your files from Part 2 input resources and their costs if you have not already 
done so. All information is found in Tables A2.10 and A2.11.
TABLE A2.10 
Conveyor Belt Project; Schedule
Activity
Description
Resource
Duration (days)
Preceding Activity
  1
Architectural decisions
Design
  25
—
  2
Hardware specifications
Development, design
  50
1
  3
Kernel specifications
Design
  20
1
  4
Utilities specifications
Development, design
   15
1
  5
Hardware design
Design, development
70
2
  6
Disk drivers
Assembly, development
100
3
  7
Memory management
Development
  90
3
  8
Operating system documentation
Design, documentation
  25
3
  9
Routine utilities
Development
  60
4
10
Complex utilities
Development
  80
4
11
Utilities documentation
Documentation, design
  20
4
12
Hardware documentation
Documentation, design
  30
5
13
Integration first phase
Assembly, development
  50
6,7,8,9,10,11,12
14
Prototypes
Assembly, development
  80
13
15
Serial I/O drivers
Development
130
13
16
System hard/software test
Assembly
  25
14,15
17
Order circuit boards
Purchasing
    5
16
18
Network interface
Development
  90
16
19
Shell
Development
  60
16
20
Project documentation
Documentation, development
  50
16
21
Assemble preproduction models
Assembly, development
  30
17F-S, lag 50 days
22
Integrated acceptance testing
Assembly, development
  60
18,19,20,21
Note: F-S refers to a Finish-to-Start lag.
TABLE A2.11
Organization 
Resources
Name
Group
Cost ($/hr)
Design
R&D (2 teams)
$100
Development
R&D (2 teams)
    70
Documentation
R&D (1 team)
    60
Assembly/test
R&D (1 team)
    70
Purchasing
Procurement (1 team)
    40

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 629
 
Prepare a memo that addresses the following questions:
1. Which if any of the resources are overallocated?
2. Assume that the project is time constrained and try to resolve any overallocation 
problems by leveling within slack. What happens?
3. What is the impact of leveling within slack on the sensitivity of the network?
Include a Gantt chart with the schedule table after leveling within slack.
4. Assume the project is resource constrained and resolve any overallocation 
problems by leveling outside of slack. What happens? What are the managerial 
implications?
5. What options are available at this point in time?
Include a Gantt chart with the schedule table after leveling outside of slack.
Note: No splitting of activities is allowed.
Note: No partial assignments (e.g., 50 percent). All resources must be assigned 100 
percent.
Part B
When you show the resource-constrained network to top management, they are visibly 
shaken. After some explanation and negotiation they make the following compromise 
with you:
∙ The project must be completed no later than February 2, 2012 (530 days).
∙ You may assign two additional development teams.
∙ If this does not suffice, you may hire other development teams from the outside. 
Hire as few external teams as possible because they cost $50 more per hour than 
your inside development people.
Internal Development
Add as many development units (teams) as needed to stay within the 530 days. If you 
need more than two internal development units, then hire as few external teams as 
necessary. Select the cheapest possibility! Change as few activities as possible. It is 
recommended you keep work packages which require cooperation of several organiza-
tional units inside your company. You decide how best to do this.
 
Hint: Undo leveling prior to adding new resources.
 
Once you have obtained a schedule that meets the time and resource constraints, 
prepare a memo that addresses the following questions:
1. What changes did you make and why?
2. How long will the project take?
3. How did these changes affect the sensitivity of the network?
Include a Gantt chart with a schedule table presenting the new schedule.
www.ebook3000.com

630 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
Part 4
Based on the file created at the end of Part 3, prepare a memo that addresses the fol-
lowing questions:
1. How much will the project cost?
2. What does the cash flow statement tell you about how costs are distributed over the 
life span of the project?
Include a monthly cash flow and a cost table for the project.
 
Once you are confident that you have the final schedule, save the file as a 
baseline.
 
Hint: Save a backup file just in case without baseline!
Part 5
Prepare status reports for each of the first four quarters of the project given the infor-
mation provided here. This requires saving your resource schedule as a baseline and 
inserting the appropriate status report date in the program. Assume that no work has 
been completed on the day of the status report.
 
Your status report should include a table containing the PV, EV, AC, BAC, EAC, 
SV, CV, and CPI for each activity and the whole project. The report should also address 
the following questions:
1. How is the project progressing in terms of cost and schedule?
2. What activities have gone well? What activities have not gone well?
3. What do the PCIB and PCIC indicate in terms of how much of the project has been 
accomplished to date?
4. What is the forecasted cost at completion (EACf)? What is the predicted VACf?
5. Report and interpret the TCPI for the project at this point in time.
6. What is the estimated date of completion?
7. How well is the project doing in terms of its priorities?
Try to present the above information in a form worthy of consideration by top 
management.
 
Include a Tracking Gantt chart with each report.
First Quarter, April 1, 2010
Table A2.12 summarizes the information regarding activities accomplished to date.
 
Be sure to save your file after each quarterly report and use it to build the next report!
 
 
 
Actual 
Remaining
Activity 
Start Date 
Finish Date 
Duration 
Duration
Hardware specifications 
2/9/10    
 
37 
  8
Kernel specifications 
2/8/10   
3/12/10 
25 
  0
Disk drivers 
3/15/10 
 
13 
87
Memory management 
3/15/10 
 
13 
77
Op. systems documentation 
3/15/10 
 
13 
  7
Utilities specifications 
3/8/10  
3/29/10 
16 
  0
Complex utilities 
3/30/10 
 
  2 
85
Architectural decisions 
1/4/10    
2/5/10   
25 
  0
TABLE A2.12
April 1, 2010

Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises 631
Second Quarter, July 1, 2010
Table A2.13 summarizes the information regarding activities accomplished since the 
last report.
Third Quarter, October 1, 2010
Table A2.14 summarizes the information regarding activities accomplished since the 
last report.
Fourth Quarter, January 1, 2011
Table A2.15 summarizes the information regarding activities accomplished since the 
last report.
Part 6
You have received revised estimates for the remaining activities at the end of the fourth 
quarter:
∙ Prototypes will be completed on 3/8/11.
∙ Serial I/O drivers will be completed on 6/30/11.
 
 
 
Actual 
Remaining
Activity 
Start Date 
Finish Date 
Duration 
Duration
Hardware specifications 
2/9/10   
4/12/10 
45 
  0
Hardware design 
4/13/10 
 
56 
11
Kernel specifications 
2/8/10   
3/12/10 
25 
  0
Disk drivers 
3/15/10 
 
77 
33
Memory management 
3/15/10 
 
77 
19
Op. systems documentation 
3/15/10 
4/16/10 
25 
  0
Utilities specifications 
3/8/10   
3/29/10 
16 
  0
Routine utilities* 
4/26/10 
 
47 
18
Complex utilities 
3/30/10 
 
66 
25
Utilities documentation 
5/3/10   
6/2/10    
22 
  0
Architectural decisions 
1/4/10    
2/5/10   
25 
  0
TABLE A2.13
July 1, 2010
* The project manager for the external development team that was hired to perform routine utilities reported that due to commitments to 
other clients they would be able to start on that activity 4/26/10.
 
 
 
Actual 
Remaining
Activity 
Start Date 
Finish Date 
Duration 
Duration
Hardware specifications 
2/9/10   
4/12/10 
  45 
 0
Hardware design 
4/13/10 
7/16/10 
  67 
 0
Hardware documentation 
7/19/10 
8/24/10 
  27 
 0
Kernel specifications 
2/8/10   
3/12/10 
  25 
 0
Disk drivers 
3/15/10 
8/17/10 
110 
 0
Memory management 
3/15/10 
7/30/10 
  98 
 0
Op. systems documentation 
3/15/10 
4/16/10 
  25 
 0
Utilities specifications 
3/8/10   
3/29/10 
  16 
 0
Routine utilities 
4/26/10 
7/27/10 
  65 
 0
Complex utilities 
3/30/10 
8/11/10 
  95 
 0
Utilities documentation 
5/3/10   
6/2/10   
  22 
 0
Architectural decisions 
1/4/10   
2/5/10   
  25 
 0
Integration 1st phase 
8/25/10 
 
  26 
24
TABLE A2.14
October 1, 2010
www.ebook3000.com

632 Appendix 2 Computer Project Exercises
∙ System hardware/software test will start on 7/1/11 and take 25 days.
∙ Order circuit boards will start on 8/8/11 and take 5 days.
∙ Assemble preproduction model will begin on 10/14/11 and take 18 days.
∙ Project documentation is expected to start on 8/8/11 and will take 55 days.
∙ Network interface is expected to start on 8/8/11 and will take 99 days.
∙ Shell is expected to start on 8/8/11 and will take 55 days.
∙ Integrated acceptance testing is expected to start on 12/29/11 and will take 54 days.
Prepare a memo that addresses the following questions:
1. What is the new EAC for the project? How long should the project take given these 
revised estimates?
2. How happy will top management be with these forecasts given the priorities of the 
project?
3. What recommendations would you make?
Include a revised schedule, a Tracking Gantt chart, and cost table with your memo.
 
 
 
Actual 
Remaining
Activity 
Start Date 
Finish Date 
Duration 
Duration
Hardware specifications 
2/9/10    
4/12/10  
  45 
   0
Hardware design 
4/13/10  
7/16/10  
  67 
   0
Hardware documentation 
7/19/10  
8/24/10  
  27 
   0
Prototypes 
11/11/10 
 
  34 
  44
Kernel specifications 
2/8/10    
3/12/10  
  25 
   0
Disk drivers 
3/15/10  
8/17/10  
110 
   0
Serial I/O drivers 
11/11/10 
 
  34 
119
Memory management 
3/15/10  
7/30/10  
  98 
   0
Op. systems documentation 
3/15/10   
4/16/10  
  25 
   0
Utilities specifications 
3/8/10    
3/29/10  
  16 
   0
Routine utilities 
4/26/10  
7/27/10  
  65 
   0
Complex utilities 
3/30/10  
8/11/10  
  95 
   0
Utilities documentation 
5/3/10    
6/2/10    
  22 
   0
Architectural decisions 
1/4/10     
2/5/10    
  25 
   0
Integration 1st phase 
8/25/10   
11/10/10 
  55 
   0
TABLE A2.15
January 1, 2011

G L O S S A R Y
A
360-degree feedback A multirater appraisal system based 
on performance information that is gathered from multiple 
sources (superiors, peers, subordinates, customers).
accept risk When a conscious decision is made to accept 
the risk of an event occurring (i.e., if risk is too large, if 
chance of occurring is slim, or if the budget reserve can 
simply absorb the risk if it materializes).
activity Task(s) of the project that consumes time while 
people/equipment either work or wait.
Agile Project Management (Agile PM) A family of 
 incremental, iterative development methods for completing 
projects.
AOA Activity-on-arrow method for drawing project 
 networks. The activity is shown as an arrow.
AON Activity-on-node method for drawing project 
 networks. The activity is on the node (rectangle).
apportionment method Costs allocated to a specific 
 segment of a project by using a percentage of planned total 
cost—for example, framing a house might use 25 percent of 
the total cost, or coding a teaching module 40 percent of 
 total cost.
avoiding risk Elimination of the risk cause before the 
project begins.
B
balanced matrix A matrix structure in which the project 
manager and functional managers share roughly equal 
 authority over the project. The project manager decides what 
needs to be done; functional managers are concerned with 
how it will be accomplished.
baseline A concrete document and commitment; it 
 represents the first real plan with cost, schedule, and 
 resource  allocation. The planned cost and schedule  
performance are used to measure actual cost and schedule 
 performance. Serves as an anchor point for measuring 
performance.
BATNA Best alternative to a negotiated agreement. Strong 
or weak BATNA indicates your power to negotiate with the 
other party.
bottom-up estimates Detailed estimates of work packages 
usually made by those who are most familiar with the task 
(also called micro estimates).
brainstorming Generating as many ideas/solutions as 
possible without critical judgment.
budget at completion (BAC) Budgeted cost at completion. 
The total budgeted cost of the baseline or project cost 
accounts.
budget reserve Reserve setup to cover identified risks 
that may occur and influence baseline tasks or costs. These 
 reserves are typically controlled by the project manager and 
the project team. See management reserve.
burst activity An activity that has more than one activity 
immediately following it.
C
change management systems A defined process for au-
thorizing and documenting changes in the scope of a project.
co-location A situation in which project members including 
those from different organizations work together in the same 
location.
concurrent engineering Cross-functional teamwork in 
new-product development projects that provides product 
 design, quality engineering, and manufacturing process 
 engineering all at the same time.
contingency plan A plan that covers possible identified 
project risks that may materialize over the life of the project.
control chart A chart used to monitor past project schedule 
performance and current performance as well as estimate 
future schedule trends. 
cost account A control point of one or more work 
 packages used to plan, schedule, and control the project. 
The sum of all the project cost accounts represents the total 
cost of the project.
cost performance index (CPI) The ratio of work performed 
to actual costs (EV/AC).
cost variance (CV) The difference between EV and AC 
(CV = EV – AC). Tells if the work accomplished cost more or 
less than was planned at any point over the life of the project.
crash point The most a project activity time can realisti-
cally be compressed with the resources available to the 
organization.
crash time The shortest time an activity can be completed 
(assuming a reasonable level of resources).
crashing Shortening an activity or project.
633
www.ebook3000.com

634 Glossary
critical path The longest activity path(s) through the 
 network. The critical path can be distinguished by 
 identifying the collection of activities that all have the same 
minimum slack.
cross-cultural orientations A framework which describes 
and/or explains cultural differences.
culture The totality of socially transmitted behavior 
 patterns, beliefs, institutions, and all other products of human 
work and thought characteristic of a community or country.
culture shock A natural psychological disorientation that 
most people suffer when they move to a culture different 
from their own.
D
dedicated project team An organizational structure in 
which all of the resources needed to accomplish a project 
are assigned full time to the project.
Delphi technique A group method to predict future 
events—e.g., time, cost.
direct costs Costs that are clearly charged to a specific 
work package—usually labor, materials, or equipment.
dysfunctional conflict Disagreement that does not 
 improve project performance.
E
early time The earliest an activity can start or finish 
based on network logic, the data date, and any schedule 
 constraints. 
earned value (EV) The physical work accomplished plus 
the authorized budget for this work. Previously this was 
called the budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP).
emotional intelligence (EQ) The ability or skill to  perceive, 
assess, and manage the emotions of one’s self and others.
escalation A control mechanism for resolving problems 
in which people at the lowest appropriate level attempt to 
 resolve a problem within a set time limit or the problem is 
“escalated” to the next level of management.
estimated cost at completion (EAC) The sum of actual costs 
to date plus revised estimated costs for the work  remaining in 
the WBS. The text uses EACre to represent  revisions made by 
experts and practitioners associated with the project. A second 
method is used in large projects where the original budget is 
less reliable. This method uses the  actual costs to date plus an 
efficiency index (CPI = EV/AC) applied to the remaining proj-
ect work. When the estimate for completion uses the CPI as the 
basis for forecasting cost at completion, we use the acronym 
EACf, where EACf =  estimated costs at completion. Includes 
costs to date plus  revised estimated costs for the work remain-
ing. (Uses  formula to compute EAC.)
F
fast-tracking Accelerating project completion typically by 
rearranging the network schedule and using start-to-start lags.
feature A piece of a product that delivers some useful 
functionality to a customer.
Forecasted total cost at completion (EACf). The 
 expected total cost of the project expressed as the sum  
of actual costs to date and forecasted estimate of the cost  
of remaining work based on the current CPI.  
free slack The maximum amount of time an activity can 
be delayed from its early start (ES) without affecting the 
early start (ES) of any activity immediately  following it.
function points Points derived from past software projects 
to estimate project time and cost, given specific  features of 
the project.
functional conflict Disagreement that contributes to the 
objectives of the project.
G
Gantt chart See bar chart.
groupthink A tendency of members in highly cohesive 
groups to lose their critical evaluative capabilities.
H
hammock activity A special-purpose, aggregate activity 
that identifies the use of fixed resources or costs over a 
 segment of the project—e.g., a consultant. Derives its 
 duration from the time span between other activities.
heuristics A rule of thumb used to make decisions. 
 Frequently found in scheduling projects. For example, 
schedule critical activities first, then schedule activities 
with the shortest duration.
I
implementation gap The lack of consensus between the 
goals set by top management and those independently set by 
lower levels of management. This lack of consensus leads to 
confusion and poor allocation of organization resources.
incremental, iterative development (IID) A cyclical 
 development process in which a project gradually evolves 
over time.

Glossary 635
indirect costs Costs that cannot be traced to a particular 
project or work package.
infrastructure Basic services (i.e., communication, 
 transportation, power) needed to support project completion.
inspiration-related currencies Influence based on 
 inspiration (opportunity to do good, be the best, etc.).
L
lag relationship The relationship between the start and/or 
finish of a project activity and the start and/or finish of 
 another activity. The most common lag relationships are  
(1) finish-to-start, (2) finish-to-finish, (3) start-to-start, and 
(4) start-to-finish.
late time The latest an activity can start or finish without 
delaying the completion of the project. 
law of reciprocity People are obligated to grant a favor 
comparable to the one they received.
leading by example Exhibiting the behaviors you want to 
see in others.
learning curve A mathematical curve used to predict a 
pattern of time reduction as a task is performed over and 
over.
lessons learned An analysis carried out during and shortly 
after the project life cycle; they attempt to capture positive 
and negative project learning.
leveling Techniques used to examine a project for an 
 unbalanced use of resources, and for resolving resource 
overallocations.
M
management by wandering around (MBWA)  
A management style in which managers spend the majority 
of their time outside their offices interacting with key 
people.
management reserve A percentage of the total project 
budget reserved for contingencies. The fund exists to 
cover unforeseen, new problems—not unnecessary overruns. 
The reserve is designed to reduce the risk of project delays. 
 Management reserves are typically controlled  
by the project owner or project manager. See budget  
reserve.
management reserve index The percentage of the 
 management reserve that has been used to date.
matrix Any organizational structure in which the project 
manager shares responsibility with the functional managers 
for assigning priorities and for directing the work of 
 individuals assigned to the project.
mentor Typically a more experienced manager who acts 
as a personal coach and champions a person’s ambitions.
merge activity An activity that has more than one activity 
immediately preceding it.
met expectations Customer satisfaction is a function of 
the extent to which perceived performance exceeds 
expectations.
milestone An event that represents significant, identifiable 
accomplishment toward the project’s completion.
mitigating risk Action taken to either reduce the likelihood 
that a risk will occur and/or the impact the risk will have on 
the project.
N
net present value (NPV) A minimum desired rate of 
 return discount (e.g., 15 percent) is used to compute  present 
value of all future cash inflows and outflows.
nominal group technique (NGT) A structured problem-
solving process in which members privately rank-order 
 preferred solutions.
O
opportunity An event that can have a positive impact on 
project objectives.
organization breakdown structure (OBS) A structure 
used to assign responsibility for work packages.
organizational culture A system of shared norms, beliefs, 
values, and assumptions held by an organization’s members.
organizational politics Actions by individuals or groups 
of individuals to acquire, develop, and use power and other 
resources to obtain preferred outcomes when there is 
 uncertainty or disagreement over choices.
outsourcing Contracting for the use of external sources 
(skills) to assist in implementing a project.
overhead costs Typically organization costs that are not 
directly linked to a specific project. These costs cover 
 general expenses such as upper management, legal, market 
promotion, and accounting. Overhead costs are usually 
charged per unit of time or as a percentage of labor or 
 material costs.
oversight A set of principles and processes to guide  
and improve the management of projects. The intent is to 
 ensure projects meet the needs of the organization through 
www.ebook3000.com

636 Glossary
standards, procedures, accountability, efficient allocation of 
resources, and continuous improvement in the management 
of projects.
P
parallel activity One or more activities that can be  carried 
on concurrently or simultaneously.
partnering charter A formal document that states 
 common goals as well as cooperative procedures used to 
achieved these goals which is signed by all parties working 
on a project.
path A sequence of connected activities.
payback method The time it takes to pay back the  project 
investment (investment/net annual savings). The method 
does not consider the time value of money or the life of the 
investment.
percent complete index actual costs The amount of work 
accomplished based on actual costs and revised estimates  
(AC/EAC).
percent complete index budgeted costs The amount of 
work accomplished based on project budget (EV/BAC).  
percent complete index—actual costs (pcic) The amount 
of work accomplished based on actual costs and revised esti-
mates (AC/EAC).
performance review In general, all review methods of 
 individual performance center on the technical and social 
skills brought to the project and team. These reviews stress 
personal improvement and are frequently used for salary and 
promotion decisions.
personal integrity Adherence to moral and ethical 
principles.
personal-related currencies Influence based on enhancing 
another person’s self-esteem.
phase estimating This estimating method begins with a 
macro estimate for the project and then refines estimates for 
phases of the project as it is implemented.
phase gating A structured process to review, evaluate, and 
document outcomes at each project phase and to provide 
management with information to guide resource deployment 
toward strategic goals.
planned value (PV) The planned time-phased baseline of 
the value of the work scheduled. Previously this was called 
budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS).
portfolio management Centralized selection and 
 management of a portfolio of projects to ensure that 
 allocation of resources is directed and balanced toward the 
strategic focus of the organization.
position-related currencies Influence based on the ability 
to enhance someone else’s position within an organization.
positive synergy A characteristic of high-performance 
teams in which group performance is greater than the sum 
of individual contributions.
principled negotiation A process of negotiation that aims 
to achieve win/win results.
priority matrix A matrix that is set up before the project 
begins that establishes which criterion among cost, time, 
and scope will be enhanced, constrained, or accepted.
priority system The process used to select projects. The sys-
tem uses selected criteria for evaluating and selecting projects 
that are strongly linked to higher-level strategies and objectives.
priority team The group (sometimes the project office) 
responsible for selecting, overseeing, and updating project 
priority selection criteria.
proactive Working within your sphere of influence to 
 accomplish something.
process breakdown structure (PBS) A phase-oriented 
grouping of project activities that defines the total scope of 
the project. Each descending level represents an increasingly 
detailed description of project work.
product backlog A prioritized list of project requirements 
with estimated time to turn them into complete product 
functionality.
product owner The person responsible for managing the 
product backlog in Scrum so as to maximize the value of the 
project. The product owner represents all stakeholders.
Program A group of related projects designed to accom-
plish a common goal over an extended period of time.
project A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a 
unique product, service, or result.
project charter A document that authorizes the project 
manager to initiate and lead a project.
project closure All of the activities of shutting down a 
project. The major activities are evaluation of project goals 
and performance, developing lessons learned,  releasing 
 resources, and preparing a final report.
project cost—duration graph A graph that plots project 
cost against time; it includes direct, indirect, and total cost 
for a project over a relevant range of time.
project evaluation The process of assessing, verifying, 
and documenting project results.

Glossary 637
project facilitator A guide who leads the project team 
through an analysis of project activities that went well, what 
needs improvement, and development of a  follow-up action 
plan with goals and accountability.
project kick off meeting Typically the first meeting of the 
project team.
project life cycle The stages found in all projects— 
 definition, planning, execution, and delivery.
Project Management Professional (PMP) An individual 
who has met specific education and experience requirements 
set forth by the Project Management Institute, has agreed to 
adhere to a code of professional conduct, and has passed an 
examination designed to objectively assess and measure 
project management knowledge. In addition, a PMP must 
satisfy continuing certification requirements or lose the 
certification.
project office (po) A centralized unit within an organization 
or department that oversees and improves the management of 
projects.
project portfolio Group of projects that have been 
 selected for implementation balanced by project type, risk, 
and ranking by selected criteria.
project sponsor Typically a high-ranking manager who 
champions and supports a project.
project vision An image of what the project will 
accomplish.
projectitis A condition in which team members become 
strongly attached to their project and disconnected from the 
larger organization.
projectized organization A multi-project organization in 
which project managers have full authority to assign  priorities 
and direct the work of persons assigned to their project.
R
range estimating An estimating technique in which 
 multiple estimating points are given based on some logic 
(i.e., high vs. low or best case, worst case, and most likely 
case).
ratio (parametric) methods Uses the ratio of past actual 
costs for similar work to estimate the cost for a potential 
project. This macro method of forecasting cost does not 
 provide a sound basis for project cost control since it does 
not recognize differences among projects.
reference class forecasting A sophisticated forecasting 
method in which you take an external view and forecast 
project costs based on actual outcomes of similar projects.
relationship-related currencies Influence based on 
friendship.
release burndown chart The trend of work remaining 
across time. In a release or product, the source of data is the 
product backlog with work remaining tracked on the vertical 
axis and number of sprints on the horizontal axis.
resource smoothing A technique that uses slack to reduce 
peak resource demand to increase resource utilization.
resource-constrained project A project that assumes 
 resources are limited (fixed) and therefore time is variable.
responsibility matrix A matrix whose intersection point 
shows the relationship between an activity (work package) 
and the person/group responsible for its completion.
retrospective A methodology that analyzes a past project 
event to determine what worked and what didn’t,  develops 
lessons learned, and creates an action plan that ensures 
 lessons learned are used to improve management of future 
projects.
Revised estimated cost at completion (EACre). The 
 expected total cost of the project expressed as the sum of 
 actual costs to date and revised estimates of the cost of 
 remaining work based on the judgment of those doing the 
work.
risk The chance that an undesirable project event will 
 occur and the consequences of all its possible outcomes.
risk breakdown structure (RBS) A hierarchical depiction 
of the identified project risks arranged by risk category and 
subcategory that identifies the various areas and causes of 
potential risks.
risk profile A list of questions that addresses traditional 
areas of uncertainty on a project.
risk register A register detailing all identified risks, 
 including descriptions, category, and probability of occurring, 
impact, responses, contingency plans, owners, and current 
status.
risk severity matrix A tool used to assess the impact of 
risks on a project.
S
“sacred cow” A project that is a favorite of a powerful man-
agement figure who is usually the champion for the project.
scaling Adapting Agile PM to large, multi-team projects.
scenario analysis Technique for analyzing risks where 
team members assess the significance of each risk event in 
terms of probability and impact of the event.
www.ebook3000.com

638 Glossary
schedule performance index (SPI) The ratio of work 
 performed to work scheduled (EV/PV).
schedule variance (SV) The difference between the 
planned dollar value of the work actually completed and the 
value of the work scheduled to be completed at a given point 
in time (SV = EV – PV). Schedule variance contains no 
critical path information.
scope creep The tendency for the scope of a project to 
 expand once it has started.
scope statement A definition of the end result or mission 
of a project. Scope statements typically include project 
 objectives, deliverables, milestones, specifications, and 
 limits and exclusions.
Scrum master The person responsible for the Scrum 
 process and its correct application.
self-organizing team A semi-autonomous team that 
 manages itself.
sensitivity A function of the number of critical or  
near-critical paths.
social network building The process of identifying and 
building cooperative relationships with key people.
splitting A scheduling technique in which work is 
 interrupted on one activity and the resource is assigned to 
another activity for a period of time, then reassigned to work 
on the original activity.
sprint backlog A list of tasks that defines a Scrum team’s 
work for a sprint. Each task identifies those responsible for 
doing the work and the estimated amount of work remaining 
on the task on any given day during the sprint.
sprint burndown chart The trend of work remaining 
across time in a sprint. The source of data is the sprint 
 backlog with work remaining tracked on the vertical axis 
and days of a sprint on the horizontal axis.
stakeholders Individuals and organizations that are 
 actively involved in the project, or whose interests may be 
positively or negatively affected as a result of project 
 execution or completion. They may also exert influence over 
the project and its results.
strategic management process The process of assessing 
“what we are” and deciding and implementing “what we 
 intend to be and how we are going to get there.” Strategy 
 describes how an organization intends to compete with the 
resources available in the existing and perceived future 
environment. 
strong matrix A matrix structure in which the project 
manager has primary control over project activities and 
functional managers support project work.
systems thinking A holistic approach to viewing problems 
that emphasizes understanding the interactions among 
 different problem factors.
T
task-related currencies Influence based, helping someone 
else do their work.
team evaluation Evaluating the performance of the 
 project team using a minimum core of conditions in place 
before the project began. Evaluation practices should 
 emphasize the team as a whole, while minimizing individual 
performance.
team rituals Ceremonial actions that reinforce team 
 identity and values.
team-building A process designed to improve the  
performance of a team.
template method Use of a prepared form to develop 
 project networks, costs, and time estimates.
time and cost databases Collection of actual versus 
 estimated times and costs of work packages over many 
 projects that are used for estimating new project tasks and 
their expected possible error.
time buffer A contingency amount of time for an  activity 
to cover uncertainty—for example, availability of a key 
 resource or merge event.
time-constrained project A project that assumes time is 
fixed and, if resources are needed, they will be added.
time-phased budget baseline A cost baseline that is 
 derived from the WBS and project schedule. The  budgeted 
costs are  distributed to mirror the project schedule.
to complete performance index (tcpi) The calculated cost 
performance index that must be achieved on the remaining 
work in order to meet the project budget (BAC-EV)/
(BAC-AC). 
top-down estimates Rough estimates that use surrogates 
to estimate project time and cost (also called macro 
estimates).
total slack (TS) The amount of time an activity can be 
 delayed and not affect the project duration (TS = LS – ES 
or LF – EF).
tracking Gantt A Gantt chart that compares planned 
 versus actual schedule information.
transferring risk Shifting responsibility for a risk to 
 another party.

Glossary 639
V
variance at completion (VAC) Indicates expected actual 
cost over- or underrun at completion (VAC = BAC – EAC).
virtual project team Spatially separated project team 
whose members are unable to communicate face to face. 
Communication is usually by electronic means.
W
weak matrix A matrix structure in which functional 
 managers have primary control over project activities and 
the project manager coordinates project work.
white elephant A burdensome possession which is not 
 easily disposed of and whose cost (particulary upkeep) is 
out of proportion with its usefulness.
work breakdown dictionary Provides detailed information 
about each element in the WBS. The dictionary typically 
 includes the work package level (code), name, and functional 
description. 
work breakdown structure (WBS) A hierarchical 
method that successively subdivides the work of the project 
into smaller detail.
work package A task at the lowest level of the WBS. 
 Responsibility for the package should be assigned to one 
person and, if possible, limited to 80 hours of work.
www.ebook3000.com

640
AC 
Actual cost of work completed
ACWP Actual cost of work performed
AOA 
Activity-on-arrow
AON 
Activity-on-node
BAC 
Budget at completion
BATNA Best alternative to a negotiated agreement
BCWP Budgeted cost of work performed
BCWS 
Budgeted cost of work scheduled
BOOT 
Build-own-operate-transfer
CAPM  Certified Associate in Project 
Management
CCPM  Critical-chain approach to project 
 planning and management
CPI 
Cost performance index
CPM 
Critical path method
CV 
Cost variance
DUR 
Duration
EAC 
 Estimate at completion (with revised cost 
estimates)
EF 
Early finish
EQ 
Emotional intelligence
ES 
Early start
ETC 
Estimate to complete
EV 
Earned value
FAC 
Forecast at completion
FF 
Free float
IFB 
Invitation for bid
KISS 
Keep it simple, stupid
LF 
Late finish
LS 
Late start
MRI 
Management reserve index
MBWA Management by wandering around
NIH 
Not invented here
NPV 
Net present value
OBS 
Organization breakdown structure
PCI 
Percent complete index
PCIB 
Percent complete index—budget costs
PCIC 
Percent complete index—actual costs
PDM 
Precedence diagramming method
PERT 
Project evaluation review technique
PMP 
Project Management Professional
PO 
Project office
PV 
Planned value of work scheduled
RBS 
Risk breakdown structure
RM 
Responsibility matrix
SL 
Slack
SPI 
Schedule performance index
SV 
Schedule variance
TCPI 
To complete performance index
VAC 
Variance at completion
WBS 
Work breakdown structure
A C R O N Y M S

641
PCIB = EV
BAC
CV = EV −AC
CPI = EV
AC
EACf = (BAC −EV)
(
EV
AC)
+ AC
EACre = AC + ETCre
MRI = CV
MR
te = a + 4m + b
6
σte = (
b −a
6
)
TCPI = (BAC −EV)
(BAC −AC)
PCIC = AC
EAC
SV = EV −PV
SPI = EV
PV
VACf = BAC −EACf
VACre = BAC −EACre
σTE = √Σσ2
te
Z =
TS −TE
√Σσ2
te
P R O J E C T  M A N A G E M E N T  E Q U A T I O N S
www.ebook3000.com

Chapter 1 Modern Project Management
1.2 Project defined
1.7.1 Project manager
1.3 Project management defined
1.4 Projects and programs (.1)
1.7 Role of the project manager
2.4 The project life cycle (.1.2) (Fig 2.13)
4.1 Integration of project management processes [.2.3.4.5.6]
Chapter 2 Organization Strategy and Project Selection
1.4.1 Projects and programs (.2)
1.4.2 Managing the portfolio
1.4.3 Strategy and projects
13.1 Stakeholders (.2.3.4)(2.2.1) (A1.4.2) (A1.5.24)(A1.6.8)
12.1 RFP’s and vendor selection (.3.4) (A1.6.7) (12.2)
11.2.2.6 SWOT analysis
Chapter 3 Organization: Structure and Culture
2.1.1 Organization cultures 
2.1. Organization structures (.2.3.4.5)
9.1.2.1 Organization charts
1.4.4 Project offices
Chapter 4 Defining the Project 
5.3.1.2 Project charter (A1.4.1)
5.2 Gather requirements
5.3 Defining scope (A1.5.2)
5.4 Creating a WBS
5.4.2 Tools and techniques
6.2 Define activities
9.1.2.1 Responsibility matrix
10.1 Communication planning (.2.3) (A1.7.8) (X3.4)
Chapter 5 Estimating Times and Costs
6.5 Activity duration estimates (.3.1)
6.5.2 Estimating tools (.1.2.3.4)
6.4 Identifying resources
6.4.2.4 Bottom-up estimates
7.2 Activity cost estimates (.1)
5.2.2.5 Delphi method (11.2.2.2) (6.5.2.5)
Chapter 6 Developing a Project Plan
4.2.2 Planning tools
6.3.2.1 Precidence diagramming
6.3 Sequence activities (.2) (Fig. 6-11) (Fig. 6-18)
6.6.3.2.1 Bar and milestone charts (8.1.2.3)
6.6.2.2 Critical path method 
6.3.2.3 Lead and lag activities 
Chapter 7 Managing Risk
11.1 Risk management process 
11.2 Identifying risks
11.3.2.5 Impact matrix (11.3.2.2)
11.3.2.5 Risk assessment
11.5 Risk responses (.2–.1.2) (A1.5.22)
11.2.31 Risk register (11.5.12) 
11.4.2.2 Contingency reserves 
4.5.2.3 Change control management (A1.7.)
Chapter 8 Scheduling Resources and Cost
6.6.3.1 Setting a schedule baseline (7.2.1.4(6.5.1.4)
6.6.3.2 Setting a resource schedule
6.6.2.4 Resource leveling
7.3.3.1 Cost baseline development 
6.6.2.3 Critical chain method
4.0 Change control (A1.7.2)
Chapter 9 Reducing Project Duration
6.6.2.7 Schedule compression 
Chapter 10 Leadership
1.72 Leadership skills (A1.72) (X3.1) (X3.3)
13.0 Stakeholder management (13.1.2.3.)
Chapter 11 Teams
9.2 Building the team (.1.2.3) (A1.6.4) (X3.2)
9.4 Managing the team (A1.6.5)
9.3.2.3 Team building activities
9.2.4 Virtual teams
9.3.3.1 Team performance (9.4.2.2) 
9.4.2.3 Conflict management
9.3.2.6 Recognition and awards
Chapter 12 Outsourcing
12.1 Procurement requirements (.3.2) (12.2.1.7)
12.1.3.3 Contract types
9.4.2.3 Conflict management (X3.8)
12.2.7 The art of negotiating
12.1.3.6 Change requests (12.2.4)
Chapter 13 Monitoring Progress
7.4.2.1 Cost/schedule system 
6.0 Time performance
7.4.2.1 Earned value system
7.4.2.4 E.V., performance status report
7.4.2.2 E.V., forecasts
7.4.2. EV., to complete index (EAC)
7.4.2.1 Schedule and cost variance (Fig 7-12)
Chapter 14 Project Closure
10.2.2.5 Closure report (8.3.3.8) 8.2.2.)
4.5.1.5 Organization processes (12.1.1.9) (11.6.3.5)
4.6 Administrative tasks (A1.8.) 
12.4.1.2 Lessons learned 
9.4.2.2 Individual performance appraisals
Chapter 15 International Projects
4.1.1.4 Culture awareness
Chapter 16 Agile PM
1.5.22 Project management and governance 
1.4.4 Project offices (PMO)(4.1) (4.5.2) (10.3.2.2) (2.2.2)
8.1.3.2 Continuous improvement
5.2 Requirements vs. actual (.1) (5.2.2) (5.2.3.1)
6.7 Schedule control
2.4.2.4 Adaptive life cycle
6.2.2.2 Rolling wave
Cross Reference of Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK, 6th ed) 
Concepts to Text Topics A Socio-Technical Approach to Project Management

A Socio-Technical Approach to Project Management
Level of effort
1. Goals
2. Speciﬁcations
3. Tasks
4. Responsibilities
1. Schedules
2. Budgets
3. Resources
4. Risks
5. Staffing
1. Status reports
2. Changes
3. Quality
4. Forecasts
1. Train customer
2. Transfer documents
3. Release resources
4. Evaluation
5. Lessons learned
Deﬁning
Deﬁning
Start
Time
End
Planning
Planning
Executing
Executing
Closing
Closing
Project Life Cycle
The Technical and 
Sociocultural 
Dimensions of the 
Project Management 
Process
Technical
Scope
WBS
Schedules
Resource allocation
Baseline budgets
Status reports
Sociocultural
Leadership
Problem solving
Teamwork
Negotiation
Politics
Customer expectations
www.ebook3000.com

644
Index
A
Abdel-Hamid, T., 328
Abdelshafi, I., 598
Abramovici, A., 501
Abrashoff, D. M., 365
acceleration options, 307–312
accounting services, 357, 438
Acer Predator 6, 306
Ackoff, Russell L., 545, 572
activity
basic relationships, 168–170
burst, 166, 169, 174
defined, 164, 166, 168
hammock, 188
level of detail, 178
merge, 166, 169, 172–173
numbering, 179
parallel, 166, 169
in project networks, 164–170
splitting, 255, 269, 295–296, 300
activity-on-arrow (AOA), 167–170
activity-on-node (AON), 167–170
versus activity-on-arrow (AOA), 
167–168
automated warehouses, 169, 170,  
171–177, 179–181
backward pass, 173–175
basic relationships, 168–170
computers in developing, 179–182
forward pass, 171–173
fundamentals, 167–168
laddering, 182, 183
lag relationship, 182–187
combinations, 183, 186
finish-to-finish, 186
finish-to-start, 183
start-to-finish, 186
start-to-start, 183–184
use in forward and backward 
pass, 186–187
activity orientation, 557
actual cost (AC)
defined, 466
variance analysis, 468–469
Adams, A. M., 232
Adams, J. R., 395, 407
Adaptive Software Development, 593
adjourning stage of team development, 378
Adler, N., 551, 568, 572
Adler, P. S., 55
administrative support, dependencies 
of, 342
Aerial Transportation, Inc., 135
aerospace industry, 72, 383
Agile Alliance, 593
Agile Manifesto, 593
Agile PM (Agile Project Management), 
221n, 579–595
examples of, 584, 585
iterative incremental development 
 processes (IIDs), 582–584
with large projects, 592–593
limitations and concerns, 593–595
nature of, 579–580
process break-down structure (PBS), 584
scrum, 585–592
traditional methods versus, 580–582
AgileZen, 590
Ahmadi, R., 328
Air France (Concorde), 150
airlines, 150, 438
airplane production, 297, 422–423
Albaugh, Jim (Boeing), 423
Alexander, R. C., 35n6, 57
Allen, Roger E., 101n
Allen, Stephen D., 101n
all-or-nothing projects, 222
alternatives, in group decision making, 394
AMRDEC Maintenance Engineering 
 Division, 434
Anand, V., 365
Anbari, F. T., 501
Ancona, D. G., 365
Andersen, Arthur E., 357
Andersen, Erling S., 366
Angola, 548
Angus, R. B., 456
Aniftos, S., 539
Apocalypse Now (film), 549
Apple, 15, 32, 36, 49, 74, 306, 420, 423
Applebaum, Jeffrey, 431
apportionment, for estimating project times 
and costs, 137
Arenas, Gilbert, 520
Arms, P. B., 555, 572
Arrow, K. J., 258, 291
Arthur Andersen, 356, 357
artificial intelligence, 30
Ashforth, B. E., 365
Ashley, D. B., 102, 124
Atkinson, W., 232
AT&T, 27, 67–68, 138, 535
audit. See project audit
automated warehouses, 169, 170, 171–177, 
179–181
automotive industry, 13, 387
Avatar (film), 404n
avoiding risk, 217
B
backward pass-latest times, 173–175
lag relationships, 186–187
using backward pass information, 
177–178
Badaracco, J. L. Jr., 365
Baker, B. M., 328
Baker, B., 232, 365
Baker, W. E., 365
balanced matrix, 76
Bangalore (India), 420. See also India
Bank of America, 138
Bard, J. F., 367
Barnes, M., 154
Barnes, R., 301, 302
baseline budget, 470–471
baselines
changes in, 483–484
developing, 273–278, 470–471
project cost, 251, 273–278
project monitoring information system, 
461, 467, 470–471, 483–484
time-phased budget, 251, 273–278, 
465, 467
basic nature of people, 557
BATNA (best alternative to a negotiated 
agreement), 438
Baxter, Jerry B., 308n
Bay of Pigs invasion (Cuba), 403
Bedeian, A. G., 232
behavior, in organizational culture, 85
Beijing Olympics (2008), 150
BellAircraft, 222
Benko, C., 20, 55
Bennis, W., 360, 365
Benson, S., 408
Berkun, S., 389n6, 407
Bertsche, R., 365
best alternative to a negotiated agreement 
(BATNA), 438
best practices in outsourcing, 426–434
co-location, 432
conflict management processes 429, 431
fair and incentive-laden contracts, 433
frequent review and status updates, 
431–432
long-term outsourcing relationships, 
433–434

Index 645
Hector Gaming Company, 57–58
The Hokies Lunch Group, 22–25
The Home Improvement Project, 
126–127
Horizon Consulting, 97–99
International Capital, Inc.—Part A, 
245–246
International Capital, Inc.—Part B, 329
Introducing Scrum at P2P, 599–602
Kerzner Office Equipment, 410–412
Manchester United Soccer Club, 
125–126
Maximum Megahertz Project, 542
Moss and McAdams Accounting Firm, 
94–96
Nightingale Project—A, 332–333
Nightingale Project—B, 333–334
The “Now” Wedding—Part A, 
334–336
The “Now” Wedding—Part B, 336
Phuket A, 576
Post Graduation Adventure, 156–157
Power Train, Ltd., 292–294
Scanner Project, 504
Sharp Printing, AG, 155–156
Shell Case Fabricators, 444–446
Shoreline Stadium Case, 204–205
Shoreline Stadium Status Report Case, 
502–503
Silver Fiddle Construction. 234–235
Sustaining Project Risk management 
during Implementation, 238–240
Tom Bray, 371–372
Trans LAN Project, 235–236
Tree Trimming Project, 502
Whitbread World Sailboat Race, 
329–331
XSU Spring Concert, 237–238
Casey, W., 80, 80n, 92
Castro, Edson de, 389
Cavendish, J., 456
C. C. Myers, Inc., 308
CCPM. See critical-chain project 
 management (CCPM)
celebration in closing stage, 521
certification programs, 4
Certified Associate in Project Management 
(CAPM), 4
change management systems, 227–229
change request forms and logs, 227–229
integration of, 228–229
changed priority closure, 518
Chaparral Steel, 80–81, 88
Charnes, A., 291
Chatman, J., 82n, 93
checklists
closing stage, 516, 518, 519
project scope, 103, 105–106
in project selection, 41
time-phased budget baselines, 251, 
273–278, 465
Buehler, R., 147, 154
buffers
feeder, 296
project, 296
resource, 296
time, 225
Build-Own-Operate-Transfer (BOOT) 
 provisions, 217
bureaucratic bypass syndrome, 404
Burgess, A. R., 291
burst activities, 166, 169, 174
Button, S., 301, 302
C
Cabanis, J., 356n6, 365
Cabanis-Brewin, J., 361n, 365
Cahill, T., 547, 572
Caldwell, D., 365
Caldwell, D. F., 82n, 93
calendar dates, for project activities, 182
Calhoun, Chad, 312
California Department of Transportation 
(CalTrans), 308
Callaway Golf, 104
Cameron, K. S., 92
Canan, Cystal, 431
Capability Maturity Model (CMM), 529
CAPM (Certified Associate in Project 
Management), 4
career paths. See project management 
 career paths
Carlton, J., 74n, 92
Carr, M. J., 232
Carrier Transicold, 220
cases
The Accounting Software Installation 
Project, 446–447
A Day in the Life, 20–22
Advantage Energy Technology Data 
Center Migration—Part A, 
202–204
Advantage Energy Technology Data 
Center Migration—Part B, 246–249
Ajax Project, 412–413
 Fly-Fishing Expedition, 233–234
AMEX, Hungary, 574–576
Blue Mountain Cabin, 292
The Blue Sky Project, 367–371
Buxton Hall, 447–450
The CCPM Dilemma, 303
Cerberus Corporation, 372–373
Film Prioritization, 58–59
Franklin Equipment, Ltd., 414–416
Fund Raising Project Selection, 62–63
Goldrush Electronics Negotiation 
 Exercise, 450–451
training and team-building activities, 
428– 429
well-defined requirement and 
 procedures, 426–427
beta distribution, PERT, 240–241
beverage industry, 13
Beyer, J. M., 82n, 92
Biesenthal, C., 366
Big Bertha, 104
“Big Dig” (Boston), 106
Bigelow, D., 55
bio-tech industry, 309
Bird’s Nest (Beijing), 150
Block, T. R., 92, 523n
Bloom, Howard, 520n
Bloomberg Business Week, 547
Boeing, 148, 301, 422
Boeing 787 Dreamliner, 422
Bogart, Humphrey, 420
bottom-up estimates, 134–144
nature of, 134–135
parametric procedures, 140
range estimating, 140
template methods, 140
Bolman, D. G., 385n, 407
Bonar, Robert, 14
Boulter, M., 598
Bourne, Lynda, 119n, 344n, 365
Borsuk, R., 572
Bowen, D., 560n, 573
Bowen, H. K., 88, 92, 389, 407
Bowles, M., 501
Boyer, C., 55
Bradberry, T., 361n, 365
Bradford, D. L., 345, 346n, 365
brainstorming
of cost saving options, 322–323
in generating alternatives, 394
Brandon, D. M. Jr., 501
Brandt, S. E., 395, 407
bread-and-butter projects, 50
bribery, 555, 562, 565
Brin, Sergey, 84
Brooks, Frederick P. Jr., 309, 309n1, 
328, 459
Brown, S., 92
Brown, Tim, 583, 583n
Brucker, P., 291
Bruzelius, N., 149, 154
Bryant, Kobe, 376
Budd, C. S., 302
Bucharest (Romania), 420
budget at completion (BAC), 466
budget reserves, 224
budgets
budget reserves, 224
percent complete index—budgeted 
costs (PCIB), 477
Project Baseline Budget, 470–471
www.ebook3000.com

646 Index
Coppola, Francis Ford, 549
core project team, in accelerating project 
completion, 310
Corning Bio, 309
cost account, 113
Cost and Optimization Engineering (Jelen 
and Black), 159
cost estimates, 130–148
apportion methods, 137
consensus methods, 136
factors influencing quality of, 130–132
forecasting final project cost,  
479–481
function point methods, 138–139
guidelines for, 132–133
learning curves, 139, 157–161
level of detail, 143–144
mega projects, for, 149–150, 152
parametric procedures, 140
phase estimating, 141–143
range estimating, 140
ratio methods, 137
refining, 146–148
template methods, 140
time and cost databases, 148
top-down versus bottom-up, 134–143
types of costs, 144–146
cost performance index (CPI), 476
cost-plus contracts, 454–455
cost risks, in contingency planning, 222
cost saving options, brainstorming of, 
322–323
cost-sharing ratio (CSR), 454
cost/schedule graph, 468, 469
cost variance (CV)
computing, 466, 478
defined, 466
variance analysis, 468–469
Coutu, D. L., 401, 407
Covance, 309
Covey, Stephen R., 358, 360n9, 365, 437, 
437n, 443
Cowan, C., 426n, 443
crashing, 314–321
crash point, 315–316
crash times, 314–316, 319
Crawford, Lynn, 20, 38, 55
critical-chain project  management 
(CCPM), 294–302
accelerating project completion, 
311, 312
in action, 296–297, 301
impact on project schedule, 298
methodology, 296
monitoring project performance, 
300–301
splitting tasks, 300
time estimates, 295–296
traditional scheduling approach versus, 
297–298
conflict management, 394–398
dedicated project teams and, 73–75
dysfunctional conflict, 396, 397–398
functional conflict, 396–397
low-priority projects, 395
matrix management and, 78
in outsourcing, 429–431
resource conflicts, 36–37
virtual project teams and, 402–403
Confucius, 562
Conrad, Joseph, 549
consensus methods
consensus testing in group decision 
making, 393
for estimating project times and cost, 
136–137
construction/demolition agencies, 254
consultants, external
as independent project facilitators, 
525–526
in rejuvenating the project team, 398–399
contingencies, in project estimation, 133
contingency funding, 223–225
contingency planning, 219–223
cost risks, 222
funding risks, 222–223
schedule risks, 222
technical risks, 220–221
Contingency Planning and Management.
com, 548n, 572
contract change control system, 455–456
contract management, 451–456
contract change control system, 455–456
cost-plus contracts, 454–455
fixed-price contracts, 453–454
nature of contracts, 452
in outsourcing, 452–456
in perspective, 456
procurement management and, 452
contractors. See also outsourcing
dependencies of, 343
incentive contracts, 307, 308, 433
selection from bid proposals, 425–426
control. See also project monitoring 
 information system
in conflict management, 397
contract change control, 455–456
defined, 459, 461
project control process, 461–462
risk response control, 225–226
control charts, in project monitoring 
 information system, 462, 463–464
control tower project office, 80
Controlled Demolition Inc., 218
Cooke-Davies, T., 538
Cooper, M. J., 302
Cooper, W. W., 291
cooperation. See also project teams
in leading by example, 355
in negotiations for outsourcing, 433, 435
Chen, M., 555, 572
Chermack, T. J., 56
Chetty, T., 149, 155
Chilmeran, A. H., 124
China
cross-cultural factors in, 562–563
guanxi, 562
legal/political factors in, 562–563
Christensen, D. S., 480, 501
Chudoba, K. M., 408
Chunnel project, 149, 420
Cigna, 134
Citibank Global Corporate Bank, 523
Citigroup, 547
Clark, J., 390, 409
Clark, K. B., 92, 407
clean air industry, 13
Cleland, D. I., 407
Cleveland Cavaliers, 520
closing stage, 8–9, 515–536
adjourning stage of team 
development, 378
dedicated project teams and, 75
evaluation, 516, 532–536
post-implementation evaluation, 516, 
532–536
project closeout checklists, 516, 518, 
539–541
of project life cycle, 8, 395–396
retrospectives, 516, 525–529
sources of conflict in, 395–396
types, 516–518
wrap-up activities, 516, 518–521
Coady, Gerry (Frontier Airlines), 42
Coca-Cola Co., 13
Cochran, Dick, 535n, 536, 538
CogniToys, 13
Cohen, A. R., 345, 346n, 365
Cohen, D. J., 20, 55
Colangelo, Jerry (Phoenix Suns), 376
Collins, J. C., 88, 92, 572
co-location
in outsourcing, 432
team identity and, 387–388
combination of lag relationships, 186
communication
cultural factors in, 551–552, 570. 
See also cultural factors
in international projects, 551, 570
in outsourcing, 427, 428, 431, 433, 437
project communication plan, 119–121
virtual project teams and, 400,  
402–403
compadre system, 556
computer industry, 29, 30, 35, 271
Conaway, W. A., 560n, 573
concurrent engineering, 184–186
conductor metaphor, 344
conference calls, virtual project teams 
and, 402

Index 647
documentation. See also reports and reporting
in outsourcing, 428
public documents in organizational 
 culture, 85
Doh, J. P., 572
doing it twice, in accelerating project 
 completion, 310
Dooley, K. J., 382, 409
Doran, G. T., 33, 33n, 55
Drexl, A., 291
Drexler, John A., 414n, 443, 444
dropped baton, 295
Drummond, Erin, 312n
Duffey, M. R., 501
Dunbar, E., 573
Duncan, David (Arthur Andersen), 357
Duncan, J., 232
DuPont, 138
duration of project. See project duration
Dvir, D., 80n, 94, 301, 302
Dworatschek, S., 92
Dyer, L., 408
Dyer, S., 443
Dyle, Dov, 28
dysfunctional conflict, 396–398
E
EACf (estimated cost at completion, 
 forecast), 479
EACre (estimated cost at completion, 
 revised), 479
Earley, Kristin, 532
early times and late times, 166
earned value (EV)
additional earned value rules, 478–479, 
505–511
defined, 462, 466
development of earned value cost/
schedule system, 464–469, 505–511
50/50 rule, 478
percent complete rule, 467
percent complete with weighted moni-
toring gates, 478
pseudo-earned value percent complete 
approach, 485
in status report, 471
in time-phased budgets, 276
variance analysis, 468–469
0/100 rule, 478
economic factors, 549–550
Economy, P., 443
Eden, L., 572
EDS, 464
Edward, K. A., 444
Einsiedel, A. A., 366
Eisenhardt, K. R., 92
Eiteman, D. K., 573
electronic bulletin boards, virtual project 
teams and, 402
Davis, E. W., 258, 291
deadlines
imposed, 307
in outsourcing, 428
Deal, T. E., 81, 92, 385n, 407
Decarlo, D., 598
decision-making process, 393–394
facilitating, 393–394
importance of, 392–393
nominal group technique (NGT) in, 405
in project meetings, 383–385
dedicated project teams, 71–75
advantages and disadvantages, 72–75
examples of, 72, 74
nature of, 71
projectitis, 74
we–they syndrome, 74
defining stage, 8, 101–121
coding WBS for information system, 
113–115
establishing project priorities, 106–108
organization breakdown structure 
(OBS), 113
process breakdown structure (PBS), 
116–117
project communication plan, 119–121
of project life cycle, 8, 396
project scope, 102–106
responsibility matrices (RM), 117–119
sources of conflict, 396–397
work breakdown structure (WBS), 
108–112
Dehler, G. E., 366
De Laat, P. B., 92
Delbeeq, Andrew, 405n
Dell Children’s Medical Center, 14
Deloitte Consulting, 35
Delphi Method, 136, 212n
DeMarco, T., 310, 328, 407
Demeulemeester, E. L., 291, 302
Deneire, M., 572
Denver Airport, 106, 149, 484
dependencies,
mapping, 348–349
stakeholder, 341–343
Derby, Charles, 20
DeRosa, D., 401, 408
Descamps, J.P., 55
Developing Products in Half the Time 
(Smith and Reinertsen), 220
Dexter, Susan, 309
DiDonato, L. S., 443
DiStefano, J. J., 555n, 573
Dinsmore, P. C., 365
direct costs, 145
project, 314
project overhead, 145
Disney, 464
Doctors Without Borders (Médecins Sans 
Frontières), 547, 547n
critical path method (CPM), 163, 166, 167, 
171, 175–177, 178, 187. See also 
PERT (program evaluation and 
 review technique)
cross-cultural orientations, 557
Crystal Clear, 593
Cullinane, T. P., 456
cultural factors, 551–553. See also commu-
nication; organizational culture
adjustments, 555–556
in China, 562–563
cross-cultural orientations, 557
culture, defined, 554
culture shock, 565–567
in France, 559–560
Hofstede framewok, 558
in Hong Kong, 563
in international projects, 551–553, 
554–568
Kluckhohn-Strodthbeck cross-cultural 
framework, 557
in Mexico, 556, 558–559
in Namibia (Africa), 568
in outsourcing, 428
in Saudi Arabia, 560–561
summary comments, 565
in the United States, 563–564
culture shock, 565–568
coping with, 567–568
culture shock cycle,
four stages of, 566
nature of, 565–566
stress-related, 567
Culver, Irvin, 72
currency fluctuations, 549–550
customer relations
increased customer focus and, 12–14
met expectations, 439–441
project managers as client account 
 executives, 441
customers
assumption of project 
responsibilities, 322
dependencies of, 343
scope checklist review with, 105
D
Dahlgren, G., 443
daily scrum, 588
DaimlerChrysler, 420
Dalkey, N. C., 154
dangler paths, 182
Daniel, Tim, 547
Darnell, R., 20
databases
project monitoring information system, 
460–461, 485
time and cost, 148
Data General Corporation, 389
www.ebook3000.com

648 Index
with slack times, 175
using forward pass information, 
177–178
Foti, R., 37, 40, 56
Frame, J. D., 92, 387, 408, 523n
France, cross-cultural factors in, 559–560
Frank, L., 56
Frankel, Rob, 520
Fraser, J., 457
free float, 177
free slack (FS), 177
Fretty, Peter, 297n, 538
Friedman, Thomas L., 56
Fritz, Robert, 388
Frontier Airlines Holdings, 42
functional conflict, 396–397
functional managers
dependencies of, 343
project managers versus, 7
functional organization, 68–71
advantages and disadvantages, 69–71
nature of, 68–69
“function points,” for estimating project 
times and cost, 138–139
funding risks, in contingency planning, 
222–223
Fusco, Joseph C., 35, 35n4, 56, 533, 533n
G
Gabarro, S. J., 366
Gale, S. F., 598
Gallagher, R. S., 92
Gamble, J. E., 104n
Gantt, H. L., 179n, 202
Gantt chart, 179
baseline, 462–463
in critical-chain project management 
(CCPM), 298, 300
in project monitoring information 
 system, 462–463
tracking, 462–463, 473–474
Gantz, J., 532n
Gardner, D., 523n
Gary, L., 124
GE Appliances, 405
Geary, L. K., 93
Gene Codes, 585
general and administrative (G&A) 
 overhead costs, 145
General Electric (GE), 15, 27, 138, 
405, 535
General Motors (GM), 301
geographical factors, 548
Gersick, Connie J., 380, 380n
Giangreco, D. M., 527n
Gibson, C. B., 408
Ginter, P. M., 232
global project office (GPO), 523
Globerson, S., 125, 367
F
Facebook, 13
facilitators. See project facilitators
Faerman, S. R., 444
failed projects, 517
The Wake, 517
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis 
(FMEA), 215
Faris, R., 598
fast-tracking, 185, 310–311
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC), 526
feeder buffers, 296
Fendly, L. G., 258, 291
Ferrazzi, K., 366
Ferrucci, D., 30n
FHA (Federal Housing Authority), 137
FIFA (Federation Internationale de Foot-
ball Association), 149
Filipczak, B. 92
film industry, 549
final project report, 516, 518, 524–525
analysis, 525
appendix, 525
classification, 525
lessons learned, 516, 525, 526, 527, 
529, 532
recommendations, 525
Financial Accounting Standards Board, 438
financial selection models, 38–40
net present value (NPV), 38–40
payback, 38–40
Financial Solutions Group of Mynd, 351
finish-to-finish lag relationship, 186
finish-to-start lag relationship, 183
Fischer, Randy, 431, 435n
Fisher, R., 435, 435n, 438, 439, 443
fixed-price contracts, 453–454
Fleming, Q. W., 457, 465n, 476n, 480, 501
float, 175–177
free, 177
total, 175–177
Floyd, S. W., 55
Flyvbjerg, Bent, 149, 150, 151, 154
FMEA (Failure Mode and Effects 
 Analysis), 215
folklore, in organizational culture, 85
follow-on contracts, 159
follow-up, in group decision making, 394
Ford, E. C., 232
Ford, Henry, 375
Ford Motors, 138, 387
forecasting
of final project cost, 479–480
reference class forecasting (RFC), 151
forming stage of team development, 378
Fortune 500, 34
forward pass-earliest times, 171–173
lag relationships, 186–187
electronics industry, 13
Eliyahu Goldratt Institute, 301, 301n
e-mail, virtual project teams and, 402
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 305
Emhjellenm, K., 155
emotional intelligence (EQ), 361
Emotional Intelligence (Goleman), 361
empathy, 361
Endurance Antarctic expedition, 354
energy conservation, 14
energy efficiency, 14
Englund, R. L., 92
Enron, 356, 357
environmental factors, 546–553
culture, 551–553
economy, 549–550
geography, 548
infrastructure, 550–551
legal/political, 546–547
security, 547–548
environmental sustainability, 12
Dell Children’s Medical Center, 14
London Olympics (2012), 150
Studio Roosegaarde, 13
equipment factor, as resource 
constraint, 255
Ericksen, J., 408
Ernst, H., 409
errors
as acceptable, 226
network logic, 178
project estimation, 134
reporting, 226
escalation, 429
estimated cost at completion (EAC)
defined, 466, 479
EACf (forecast), 479
EACre (revised), 479
estimated cost to complete (ETC), 466
estimation. See project estimation
ethics, 355–357
bribery, 555, 562, 565
code of conduct, 356
collapse of Arthur Andersen, 357
in leading by example, 355
top management and, 356
evaluation. See project evaluation
Evans, J., 269, 291
Everest (film), 221
exchange rate fluctuations, 549–550
excessive multitasking, 295–296
executing stage, 8. See also implementation
of project life cycle, 8, 396
sources of conflict, 395–396
expectancy theory of motivation,  
320, 320n
expectations
managing, 351
met expectations, 439–441
Extreme Programming (XP), 584, 593

Index 649
performance indexes, 476
project percent complete indexes, 477
software for project cost/schedule 
 systems, 477–478, 511–513
technical performance 
measurement, 481
India
infrastructure factors in, 550
outsourcing in, 428
indirect costs, project, 313–314
individual reviews, 536–536
inflation, 550
“influence currencies.” See law of 
reciprocity
information system. See also project 
 monitoring information system
coding work breakdown structure for, 
113–115
in project communication plan, 
120–121
infrastructure factors, 550–551
Ingebretsen, M., 124, 232  
inspiration-related currencies, 346, 347
integrity, 360
Intel, 27, 301
internal staff specialists, in rejuvenating the 
project team, 398
International Business Machines (IBM), 
88, 138, 148, 300, 558
international projects, 545–571
cross-cultural factors, 554–568
environmental factors, 546–553
personnel selection and training, 
568–570
project site selection, 553–554
virtual project teams in, 399, 400
International SOS Assistance, Inc., 547
Into Thin Air (Krakauer), 221
invitation for bid (IFB), 453
IPC Media, 595
iPhone 7, 306
Irix Pharmaceuticals, 309
iterative incremental development 
 processes (IIDs), 582–584
J
Jackson, M. B., 598
Jago, A. G., 393, 409
Jakarta (Indonesia), 548
James, LeBron, 376, 520
James, M., 598
Jamieson, A., 56
Janis, I. L., 403, 408
Jassawalla, A. R., 93
Jedd, Marcia, 538
Jeffery, R., 154
Jensen, M. C., 377, 409
Jet Propulsion Laboratory, 383
Jobs, Steve, 74
Head, 583
health care industry, 14
Heart of Darkness (Joseph Conrad), 549
Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker’s 
 Apocalypse (film), 549n
Hedberg, B., 443
Heise, S., 501
Helm, J., 56
Helpdesk Automated Site (HASS), 389
Henricks, Paul, 309
Hendrickson, Chet, 579
Hendrix, K., 125
Henry, R. A., 210, 232
Herroelen, W. S., 291, 302
heuristics, 258, 259
Hewlett-Packard (HP), 67–68, 399, 405, 535
Highsmith, J., 598
high-tech toy industry, 13
Hildebrand, C., 598
Hill, L. A., 366
Hirschman, A. O., 149, 154
Hoang, H., 443
Hobbs, B., 38, 55, 79, 93
Hobday, M., 93
Hodgetts, R. M., 573
Hoegl, M., 409
Hoffman, R., 535n, 538
Hofstede framewok, 558
Hofstede, Geert, 558, 558n, 573
Holloway, C. A., 92, 407
Hollywood, 3, 13, 320
Homans, G. C., 379n, 408
Homeland Security, 526
Hong Kong, cross-cultural factors in, 563
Hooker, J., 560n, 562n, 573
Hulett, D. T., 232
Hurowicz, L., 258, 291
Hurricane Katrina, 526
Hutchens, G., 56
I
IBM, 88, 138, 148, 300, 558
IBM System/360, 309
IBM Watson’s Jeopardy Project, 13, 29, 30
Ibbs, C. W., 328, 538
IDEO, 583
implementation
implementation gap in project portfolio 
system, 34–35, 36–37
projects in organization strategy, 33
incentives, 320
incentive contracts, 307, 308
project reward systems, 391–392
independence
in project estimation, 133
project facilitators, 523
indexes to monitor progress, 475–479
additional earned value rules, 478–479, 
505–511
Goal, The (Goldratt), 294–301
Gobeli, D. H., 77, 79, 92, 93, 102, 124, 538
Godfather movies, 549
Gold, Dan, 309
Goldberg, Aaron, 74
Goldberg, A. I., 93
Golden Gate Bridge (San Francisco), 255
Goldratt, Eliyahu, 269, 291, 294–296, 
301, 302
Goldsman, L. P., 457
Goleman, Daniel, 361, 361n
going native, 545
Goo, S. K., 84n
Google, 13, 15, 84
Gordon, R. I., 309n2, 328
governance. See project governance
government agencies. See also names of 
specific government agencies
dependencies of, 343
Governor’s Office of Planning and 
 Research (California), 308
Gradante, W., 523n
Graham, J. L., 562n, 572
Graham, R. J., 20, 55, 92
Grant, Adam, 345, 345n, 366
Graves, J., 361n, 365
Gray, Clifford, 8, 20, 79, 92, 232, 426n, 
443, 616n
Gray, N. S., 154
Green, S. G., 366
Greenland, 548
Griffin, D., 147, 154
Griffiths, M., 598
Gringo, 556
Griswold, T. A., 527n
groupthink, 403–404
Gryglak, Adam, 387
guanxi, 562
Gudergan, S., 366
Gundersen, A., 551, 568, 572
Gundersen, N. A., 456
Gustafson, D. H., 405n
H
Habitat for Humanity, 312, 312n
Hackman, J. R., 408
Haliburton, 519
Hall, C., 306n
Hallowell, R., 560n, 573
Hamburger, D. H., 232
hammock activities, 188
Hansson, J., 443
Harris Semiconductor, 301
Harris, P. R., 561n, 573
Harrison, M. T., 82n, 92
Hartman, Frances, 388n
Harvard Business School, 584
Hawkins, K., 434
HBO, 583
www.ebook3000.com

650 Index
Leading at the Edge (Perkins), 354
leading by example, 353–355
learning curves, for estimating project 
times and costs, 139, 157–161
leave-takings, 561
Leavitt, H. J., 404, 408
Lechler, T., 94
LEED (Leadership in Energy & 
 Environmental Design), 14
Lee, S. A., 328
legal/political factors, 546–547. See also 
organization politics
Leifer, R., 56
Lerner, Matthew, 309n
lessons learned
final project report, 516–518
from Hurricane Katrina, 526
from Operation Eagle Claw, 527
letters of recommendation, 392
Leus, R., 302
leveling, 253, 256–257
level of detail
for project activities, 178
in project estimation, 143–144
for project networks, 178
Levine, H. A., 302
Levi Strauss, 464
Levy, F. K., 202
Levy, S. L., 392, 392n, 409
Lewis, J. P., 124
Lewis, M. W., 366
Lewis, R., 154
Li, M. I., 328
Lieberthal, G., 573
Lieberthal, K., 573
Likert, R., 377n, 408
Lilly, Bonnie, 312
Lincoln, Abraham, 345
Lindberg, Mike, 135
linearity assumption, 319
Linetz, B. P., 408
Lipman-Blumen, J., 404, 408
Lipsinger, R., 401, 408
Lister, T., 407
Loch, C. H., 232
The Lodge at Snowbird (Utah), 593
Logitech, 583
Loizeaux, Mark, 218
London Olympics (2012), 150
Lone Ranger analogy, 352
long-term relationships, in outsourcing, 
433–434
Lonza Biologics, 309
Lockheed Aerospace Corporation, 72
Lockheed Martin, 72, 208
looping, 166, 178
Lorsch, J. W., 93
Lovallo, D., 147, 155
Low, G. C., 154
Lowe, D., 457
Krause, Melissa, 585n
Kruchten, P., 598
Krupp, Goran, 221
Kryzewski, Mike, 376
Kurtulus, I., 291
Kuruppuarachchi, P., 408
Kvalnes, Ø., 366
Kwak, Y. H., 538
L
Lackey, Michael B. (Trojan Nuclear Plant), 
482n
laddering, 182, 183
Ladika, S., 538
lags, 182–187
in forward and backward pass 
 procedures, 186–187
to reduce schedule detail, 182–184
Lam, N. M., 562n, 572
Lamb, J. C., 309n2, 328
Landau, F., 209n
Lane, H. W., 555n, 573
Lange, Merete, 568
Lansing, Alfred, 354, 354n
Larman, C., 598
large projects. See also mega projects, 
149–151
Larson, Erik W., 69, 72, 77, 79, 92, 93, 
102, 124, 355n, 366, 367n, 426n, 
443, 538, 616n
Larsson, U., 93
Laslo, Z., 93
Latham, G. P., 535, 538
Lavell, Debra, 538
law of reciprocity, 345–348
inspiration-related currencies,  
346, 347
personal-related currencies, 346, 348
position-related currencies, 346–347
relationship-related currencies, 
346, 347
styles of social interaction, 545
task-related currencies, 345–346
Lawrence of Arabia (film), 404n
Lawrence, P. R., 94
Leach, L. P., 296n, 302
leadership, 339–362. See also project 
managers
ethics and, 355–356
law of reciprocity and, 345–348
leading at the edge, 354
leading by example, 353–355
managing versus leading a project, 
340–341
project stakeholders and, 341–343
qualities of effective project managers, 
359–362
social network building, 348–355
trust and, 357–359
Johansen, R., 404, 408
Johnson, Clarence L. “Kelly,” 72, 93
Johnson, Magic, 376
Johnson, R. E., 56
Joint Chiefs of Staff, 527
Jonas, D., 20
Jonasson, Hans, 598
Jones, C., 154
Jordan, Michael, 376
Joshi, M., 365
K
Kahneman, D., 147, 155
Kalaritis, Panos, 309
Kanban, 590
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss, 358, 366, 419, 443
Kaplan, R. E., 345, 366
Kaplan, R. S., 56
Karif, O., 13n
Katz, D. M., 124
Katz, Ralph, 385n, 388, 408
Katzenbach, J. R., 385n, 408
Keifer, S., 483n
Kellebrew, J. B., 291
Kelly, J. E., 202
Kendrick, Tom, 538
Kennedy, A. A., 81, 92
Kenny, J., 56
Kerth, Norman L., 538
Kerzner, Harold, 81n, 93, 124, 501
Kezsbom, D. S., 444
Khang, D. B., 328
Kharbanda, O. P., 56, 129n, 130n, 154
Kidd, Jason, 376
Kidder, Tracy, 389, 389n, 390, 390n, 408
Kim, E. H., 501
King, J. B., 355n, 366
Kipling, Rudyard, 163
Kirk, Dorothy, 351, 351n, 366
Kirkman, B. L., 408
Kluckhohn, F., 557, 557n, 573
Kluckhohn-Strodthbeck cross-cultural 
framework, 557
Knoepfel, H., 92
Knoop, C. I., 560n, 573
knowledge explosion, 12
Koh, Aileen, 20
Kokkla (Finland), 548
Kolawa, Adam Dr., 428, 428n
Konda, S. L., 232
Koppelman, Joel M., 465n, 476n,  
480, 501
Korto, R. F., 56
Kotter, J. P., 340, 366
Kouzes, J. M., 353, 366
Krakauer, Jon, 221n
Kraków (Poland), 567
Krane, J., 573
Kras, E., 559n, 573

Index 651
Morigeau, Stuart, 233n
Morris, P. W., 56
Morrison, T. 560n, 573
Morton, Danelle, 383, 383n
motivation
for extraordinary performance, 320
incentives in, 307, 308, 320
Motorola, 420
Motta, Silva, 56
Müller, R., 356, 360, 366, 367
multi-criteria selection models, 40–43
multiproject environments
project networks in, 182
resource scheduling in, 272–273
multiproject resource schedules, 272–273
multitasking, 36–37, 295–296
multi-weighted scoring models, 41–43
Murch, R., 124
Murphy, C., 390, 409
N
Nabisco, 535
Naeni, L., 501
NAFTA, 559
Nambisan, S., 444
Namibia, Africa, cross-cultural factors 
in, 568
NASA Mars Climate Orbiter, 208–209
Nash, Steve, 520
National Basketball Association (NBA), 
376, 520
National Guard, 526
Navistar, 387
Navy Federal Credit Union, 532
NCR, 464
NEC, 27
negotiation
components of principled,  
435–439
in outsourcing, 434–439
Nelson, K. A., 356n7, 367
Nelson, Ryan R., 538
net present value model (NPV)  
in project selection, 38, 39
in risk assessment, 215
Netflix, 13
network logic errors, 178
Newbold, R. C., 269, 291, 302
Newmann, L., 291
new products, concurrent engineering  
in, 184–186
NIH (not invented here), 379
Nike, 583
Nissen, M. E., 444
Nobel Peace Prize, 547
Nofziner, B., 360, 367
Nokia, 583
nominal group technique (NGT) in, 405
Nonaka, Ikujiro, 585, 598
McDougall, Lorna, 357n
McFarlan, F. W., 20, 55
McGrath, M. R., 444
McNerney, Jim, 423
McPherson, S. O., 408
Médecins Sans Frontières (Doctors With-
out Borders), 547, 547n
mediating conflict, 397
meetings. See project meetings
mega projects, estimation for, 149–151
Melnyk, Les A., 526n
Ménard, 79, 93
Mendenhall, M. E., 569n, 573
Menon, R., 232
merge activities, 166, 169, 172–173
Merritt, G. M., 232
met-expectations model, 439
Meyer, A. D., 232
Meyer, D., 269, 291
Meyer, E., 573
Mexico, cross-cultural factors in, 556, 
558–559
MGM, 320
Miami Heat, 520
Microsoft Project, 385, 478, 511–513
middle management. See also top 
management
implementation gap in project portfolio 
management, 34–35, 36–37
level of detail in project estimates, 
143–144
managing versus leading a project, 
340–341
milestones
guidelines for setting, 465
in project scope, 103
schedules, 463–464
Millard, Candice, 552, 552n
Miller, D., 555, 572
Miller, J., 72n, 93
Mills, E., 84n
Milosevic, D. Z., 56, 155, 564n, 573
mission of organization
project manager, understanding of, 28
in strategic management process, 30
Mitchel, Russ, 271n
mitigating risk, 216–217
Mittman, R., 408
Mobil Oil, 535
Moffett, M. H., 550, 573
Mohring, R., 291
Molinski, D., 13n
Molloy, E., 149, 155
Monarch, I., 232
Monroe, Marilyn, 420
Montreal Olympics (1976), 150
Moran, James, 202n
Moran, R. T., 561n, 573
Moran, S. V., 561n, 564n, 573
Morgan, Pat, 387
loyalty, 352
Luby, R. E., 124
Lucas, E., 555, 572
Lucas George, 549
Lucent Technologies, 301
Luthans, F., 573
M
MacCormack, Alan, 584, 584n
MacIntyre, Jeff, 35, 35n3, 56
Mackey, J., 302
MacLeod, G., 155
Madnick, S., 328
Magenau, J. M., 444
Magne, E., 155
Magretta, Joan, 56
Maier, N. R. F., 393n, 408
Majchrzak, A., 93, 408
Malhotra, A. A., 408
“management by wandering around” 
(MBWA), 350–351, 393
Management Reserve index (MRI), 477
management reserves, 224–225
managing expectations, 351
Managing Martians (Shirley and 
Morton), 383
managing upward relations, 351–353
mañana syndrome, 556
Mannakau (New Zealand), 312
Mantel, S. K., 351n3, 367
Marlin, Mark, 538
Marriott Corp., 405
Mars Exploration Program (JPL), 383
Martin, A., 408
Martinelli, Russ, 538
Martin, M., 456
Mass Fatality Identification System  
(M-FISys), 585
materials factor, as resource constraint, 254
Matheson, David, 50–51, 50n, 56
Matheson, Jim, 50–51, 50n, 56
matrix management, 75–81
advantages and disadvantages, 77–78
balanced matrix, 76
example of, 89
nature of, 75
performance reviews, 534–535
project versus functional manager 
 responsibilities, 7, 75
recruiting project members, 381–382
strong matrix, 77
weak matrix, 76–78, 81
maturity models, 529–532
growth levels, 529–532
Maurer, I., 444
MBWA (“management by wandering 
around”), 350–351
McConnel, S., 598
McDermott, C. M., 56
www.ebook3000.com

652 Index
overhead costs, 145
direct, 145
general and administrative (G&A), 145
oversight. See project audit; project  
offices (POs)
overtime
in accelerating project completion, 
308, 310
cross-cultural attitudes toward, 560
ownership, in team building, 399
oyster projects, 50
P
pace of life, 555
padding estimates, 131
Panama Canal expansion project, 13
parametric procedures, for estimating  
project times and costs, 140
parallel activities, 166, 169
Parker, Ron, 10–11
Pakinson’s law, 295
Parsi, N., 13n
partnering charters, 429, 430
Pascoe, T. L., 258, 291
past experience, in project estimation,  
130, 157
path, 166
Patheon Inc., 309
Patterson, J. H., 258, 291
Patterson, J., 258, 291
Patzelt, A. H., 538
Paulus, P. B., 379n, 409
Pavlik, A., 232
payback, model, 38
PBS (process breakdown structure), 102, 
116–117
pearl projects, 50
Peck, W., 80, 80n, 92
Peel, D., 124
people factor
in assigning project work, 271
dealing with unreasonable people, 
438–439
in negotiation process, 434–439
in project estimation, 131
as resource constraint, 254
separating people from problem, 
435–436
People’s Republic of China (PRC).  
See China
Pepsi-Cola, 583
percent complete index—actual costs 
(PCIC), 477
percent complete index—budgeted costs 
(PCIB), 477
percent complete rule, 467
percent complete with weighted monitoring 
gates, 478
performance-based contracts, 433
implications for organizing projects, 
86–88
nature of, 81–83
in project estimation, 131
relationship with project structure, 88
organizational culture review 
questionnaire, 528
Organizational Project Management 
 Maturity Model (OPM3), 529
organization breakdown structure (OBS), 
109, 110, 113
integrating with organization,  
113, 114
time-phased budget and, 274–276
organization politics
project managers and, 361
in project portfolio system, 35–36
in recruiting project members, 382
trust and, 357–359
organization strategy, 28–51
implementation through projects, 33
managing portfolio system, 48–51
project alignment with, 28
project manager understanding of, 28
project portfolio management system, 
37–38
project priority system, 34–37
project selection criteria, 38–43
project selection models, 44
selection model application, 43–48
strategic management process 
 overview, 29–34
strategy, defined, 27
Orlando Sentinel, 209, 232
Osmundsen, P., 155
outdoor experiences/retreats, 399
outsourcing, 419–441
in accelerating project completion, 
309, 322
advantages and disadvantages, 421–424
best practices, 426–434
co-location, 432
communication in, 427–428, 433
conflict management processes, 
429–431
contract management, 433, 451–456
customer relations, 439–441
defined, 420
examples of, 422–423, 428, 431
long-term relationships, 433–434
negotiation in, 434–439
in resource allocation, 272–273
review and status updates, 431–432
team-building activities, 426,  
428–429
traditional approach versus partnered 
approach, 426–427
training activities, 428–429
well-defined requirements and proce-
dures, 426–427
nonfinancial selection models, 40–43
checklist models, 40–41
multi-weighted scoring models, 41–43
nonproject factors, in project estimation, 131
Noreen, E., 302
normal closure, 516–517
normal conditions in project estimation, 
132–133
norming stage of team development, 378
Nortel Networks Corp., 547
Northridge earthquake (California), 308
Norton, D. P., 56
not invented here (NIH), 379
Novell, Inc., 271
numbering activities, 179
O
objectives
characteristics of, 33
in project scope, 102–103
strategy formulation to meet, 32–34
in supporting organization strategy, 33
O’Boyle, B., 306n
OBS (organization breakdown structure), 
109, 110, 113
O’Connor, G. C., 56
Oculus Rift, 13
Oddou, G. R., 573
Office of the Chief Medical Examiner 
(New York), 585
Ohio School Facilities Commission, 431
Olson, E. M., 93
Olve, N., 443
Olympic Forest, 270
Olympic games, 376
O’Neal, Shaquille, 520
operational projects, 37–38
Operation Eagle Claw, 527
Operations and Technology for Global 
Cash Management, 523
OPM3 (Organizational Project 
 Management Maturity  
Model), 529
opportunity management, 223
opportunity, defined, 223
responses to opportunity, 223
optimism, 361
Oregon Health Sciences University 
(OHSU), 135
O’Reilly, Brian, 535n
O’Reilly, C. A., 82n, 93
organizational culture, 68, 81–89. See also 
cultural factors
characteristics of, 83–86
countercultures and, 83, 86, 88
diagnosis worksheet, 85
ethics in, 355–357
example of, 84
functions of, 82–83

Index 653
classification of, 37–38, 43, 50
defined, 6–7
everyday work versus, 7
examples of for college students, 5
implementing organization through, 
33–34
program versus, 7
size, 15
project audits, 516, 521–532
bigger picture of, 529–532
data collection and analysis, 524
external consultants in, 525–526
guidelines for conducting, 522–525
importance of, 521
in-process, 521
initiating and staffing, 522–523
nature of, 521–522
postproject, 521
project maturity models in, 529–532
project offices (POs) and, 522, 523
reporting, 524–525
retrospectives, 525–529
senior management in, 522
Project Baseline Budget, 470–471
project buffers, 296
project charters, 11–12, 105–106, 
project classification
in project selection, 43
types of projects, 37–38, 50
project closure, 516. See also closing stage
wrap-up closure activities, 516, 
518–521 
project code names, 49
project communication plan, 119–121
project control process, 461–462
project complexity, in project 
estimation, 130
project cost baselines, 273–278
Project Cost–Duration Graph, 313–321
crashing, 314–321
determining activities to shorten, 
314–316
project direct costs, 314
project indirect costs, 313–314
simplified example, 316–318
time reduction decisions, 320–321
using, 318–319
project definition. See defining stage
project duration, 305–323
acceleration options when resources 
are constrained, 310–312
acceleration options when resources 
are not constrained, 308–310
cost as issue in, 321–323
lags and, 183–186
practical considerations, 318–321
Project Cost–Duration Graph,  
313–321
in project estimation, 131
rationale for reducing, 306–307
position-related currencies, 346–347
positive synergy, 375–377
Posner, B. Z., 125, 353, 360, 366, 367, 
395, 409
post-implementation evaluation, 532–536
individual reviews, 535–536
performance reviews, 534–536
team evaluation, 532–534
360-degree reviews, 534–535, 536
postproject retrospectives, 525–529
Powell, M., 93
premature closure, 517
Pressman, R. S., 155
Price, M., 56
PricewaterhouseCoopers, 547
Primavera, 385
principled negotiation, 435
priorities
changed priority closing stage, 518
 leading by example, 353
low-priority projects, 395
priority matrix, 107
priority system in project selection, 
34, 36–37
project reward systems, 391–392
responsibility for prioritizing projects,  
47–48, 50
priority matrix, 107–108
priority system, 34, 36–37, 47–48, 50
priority team, 42
proactive approach, 360
probability analysis, in risk assessment, 
215–216
problem identification, in group decision 
making, 393
problem solving
in leading by example, 355
in recruiting project members, 382
process breakdown structure (PBS), 102, 
116–117
procrastination (student syndrome), 296
Procter and Gamble, 27, 583
procurement management
components of, 452
Request for Proposal (RFP), 44, 45, 
63–64, 452
product backlog, 588–589
product life cycle, compression of, 12, 27
product owner, 586–587
program(s)
defined, 7–8
project versus, 7
program evaluation and review technique 
(PERT), 140, 216, 240–244
program goals, 8
program management, 8 
progress measurement. See project 
 monitoring information system
project(s), 6–12
characteristics of, 7
performance indexes, 476
performance measurement. See project 
monitoring information system
performance reviews, 534–536
individual, 535–536
project manager, 534
team member, 532–534
360-degree reviews, 535, 536
performing stage of team development, 378
Perkins, Dennis N. T., 354, 354n
perpetual closure, 517
Perrow, L. A., 328
personal integrity, 360
personal-related currencies, 347, 348
PERT (program evaluation and review 
technique), 140, 216, 240–244
development of, 240
hypothetical example of, 242–244
Pesch, E., 291
Peters, J. F., 538
Peters, Lawrence H., 366, 389, 389n
Peters, L. S., 56
Peters, T., 20, 353, 366, 409
Pethokoukis, J. M., 583n
Pettegrew, A. M., 93
phase estimating, for project times and 
costs, 141–143
Philippines, 547, 549, 553
physical characteristics, in organizational 
culture, 84–85
Pich, M. T., 232
Pinto, J. K., 56, 102, 124, 129n, 130n, 154. 
232, 301, 302, 351n3, 367, 444
Pippett, D. D., 538
Pitagorsky, G., 124
planned value (PV)
costs included in, 467–468
defined, 276, 466
in time-phased budgets, 276
variance analysis, 468–469
planning decisions, 384
planning horizon, in project  
estimation, 130
planning stage, 8. See also project estima-
tion; resource scheduling
of project life cycle, 8, 396
sources of conflict, 395–396
PMBOK (Project Management Body of 
Knowledge), 223n, 232
PM Network, 538
PMI. See Project Management  
Institute (PMI)
PMI Standards Committee, 124
PMI Today, 4n
Poli, M., 94
Porras, J. I., 88, 92
portfolio management, 37–38
senior management input to, 48–49
portfolio risks, balancing, 50–51
Portland General Electric Company, 480
www.ebook3000.com

654 Index
understanding strategy, 28
work breakdown structure (WBS) and, 
108–109
working in a multicultural environment, 
555, 565–568
project measurement. See project monitor-
ing information system
project meetings, 383–387
establishing ground rules, 384–385
project kick-off meeting, 383
scrum, 587–589
subsequent meetings, 386–387
team identity and, 387–388
project monitoring information system, 
459–486
baseline changes, 483–484
costs and problems of data acquisition, 
485–486
critical-chain project management 
(CCPM) in, 300–301
data collected in, 460–461, 485
earned value (EV) cost/schedule 
 system, 462, 464–469, 505–511
examples of use, 464, 480
forecasting final project cost, 479–481
indexes to monitor progress, 475–479
Microsoft Project and, 478, 511–513
process overview, 467
project control process, 461–462
reports and reporting in, 460–461, 
470–475
scope creep, 483
status report, 470–475, 478, 481
structure of, 460–461
time performance, 462–464
tracking Gantt, 462–463
project networks, 163–189
activities in, 163–164, 166–170
activity numbering, 179
activity-on-arrow (AOA), 167–170
activity-on-node (AON), 167–170
activity-on-arrow (AOA) versus, 
167–168
backward pass, 173–175
forward pass, 171–173
backward pass-latest times in, 173–175
basic rules for developing, 166
calendar dates, 182
computers in developing, 179–182
concurrent engineering, 184–186
critical activities in, 176, 184
critical path method (CPM), 163, 166, 
167, 171, 175–177, 178, 187, 317
development
basic rules, 166
computer use in, 179–182
from work breakdown structure 
(WBS), 164–166
yellow sticky approach to, 167
extended network techniques, 182–188
Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK), 223n, 232, 342, 594
project management career paths, 3–5
certification and training, 4
examples of, 4–5, 10–11
projects given to recent college 
 graduates, 5
Project Management Consultants, 431
Project Management Institute (PMI), 4, 6, 
20, 35, 35n5, 367, 465, 480, 529, 
532, 594
project management maturity, 529–532
project management office (PMO), 532
Project Management Professional (PMP), 
4, 594
project management software
Microsoft Project, 385, 478, 511–513
Primavera, 385
project management structures, 68–81
dedicated teams, 71–72, 79, 88
functional organization, 68–70
advantages and disadvantages, 69–70
matrix arrangement, 75–81, 88–89    
organization considerations, 79    
project considerations, 79–81    
relationship with organizational  
culture, 88
project managers, 339–362. See also 
 leadership; project teams
building trust, 357–359
career paths. See project management 
career paths
certification and training, 4
as client account executives, 441
conductor metaphor and, 344
dependencies of, 342–344
developing high-performance project 
teams, 381–399
ethics and, 356
functional manager versus, 9
law of reciprocity and, 345–348
leading at the edge, 354
leading by example, 353–355
“management by wandering around” 
(MBWA), 350–351
managing expectations, 351
managing upward relations, 351–353
motivating for extraordinary 
 performance, 320
nature of, 9–10
performance reviews, 534–536
professional training and certification, 4
project leadership versus, 340–341
project teams, 9, 11–12, 342
qualities of effective, 359–362
role of, 9–10
scrum masters as, 587
skill set, 5
social network building, 348–355
stakeholders and, 341–344
project estimation, 129–151. See also cost 
estimates; resource estimates; time 
estimates
accuracy, 142
adjusting estimates of specific tasks, 
146–148
error reduction, 134
factors influencing quality estimates, 
130–132
guidelines for times, costs, and 
 resources, 132–133
importance of, 130
learning curves in, 139, 157–161
level of detail, 143–144
mega projects, 149–150, 152
refining estimates, 146–148
time and cost databases, 148
top-down versus bottom-up, 134–143
types of costs, 144–146
project evaluation, 532–536
in closing stage, 532–534
statement of criteria, 
project facilitators, 515, 525–529
roles, 525–529
selecting, 525–526
project governance, 15–16
alignment of projects and 
 organizational strategy, 16
governance team in portfolio system, 
49–50
nature of, 15–16
projectitis, 74
projectized organization, 72–73, 79
project kick-off meeting, 383
project life cycle, 8–9
defined, 8
project cycle times, 8
sources of conflict over, 395–396
stages of, 8–9. See also closing stage; 
defining stage; executing stage; 
planning stage
project management. See also project 
teams
critical-chain project management 
(CCPM) and, 301
current drivers of, 12–15
current examples of, 5, 13–14
impact of, 4
importance of, 3–5
integration of, 15–16
leadership versus, 339–341
new-school thinking of, 28
old-fashioned view of, 344
old-school thinking if, 28
project size and, 15, 144, 147
socio-technical approach to, 17–18
sustainable practices and, 12–14
Dell Children’s Medical Center, 14
London Olympics (2012), 150
Studio Roosegaarde, 13

Index 655
rejuvenating, 398–399
reward systems, 391–392
shared vision, 388–391, 396
situational factors in team development, 
379, 381
team identity, 386–387
virtual project teams, 399–403
project vision, 388–391, 396
proposals
contractor selection from, 64
ranking, 46–48
Request for Proposal (RFP), 44, 45, 452
sources of, 44, 45
prototypes, in outsourcing, 428
pseudo-earned value percent complete 
 approach, 485
public documents, in organizational 
 culture, 85
public recognition, 392
Public Utilities Commission, 480
punctuality, 555, 560
punctuated equilibrium, 380
Q
Quality
options for accelerating projects, 
311–312
in project estimation, 130–132
total quality management (TQM), 38
Quintella, Hermida, 56
Quinn, R. E., 92, 444
R
Raja, V. T., 367n
Randall, Doug, 57
RAND Corporation, 136
range estimating, for project times and 
costs, 140–141
Raskin, P., 57
ratio methods, for estimating project times 
and costs, 137
Raz, T., 125, 301, 302
Rea, K. P., 408
Rebello, K., 93
recruitment process, 381–382
considerations in, 382
international projects, 568–570
in matrix management, 381–382
Red Cross, 526
Rees, Kevin, 434
reference class forecasting (RCF), 151
refining estimates, 146–148
Reinertsen, D. G., 88, 94, 220, 232, 291, 
328, 391, 409
Reinman, R., 232
relationship nature, 557
relationship-related currencies, 346, 347
release burndown charts, 590
deadlines, 307
development of earned value cost/
schedule system, 464–469, 505–511
early times and late times, 166
project networks and, 164
schedule variance (SV), 466, 468–469
slippage in, 272
time buffers, 225
project scope, 102–106
changes in, 147, 311, 322
checklist, 103–105
reducing, 311, 322
scope creep, 106, 483
scope statement, 11–12, 17, 19, 
105–106
project screening
financial selection models, 38–40
multi-criteria selection models, 40–43
nonfinancial criteria, 40–43
overview of project screening 
process, 47
project screening matrix, 42–43
project screening matrix, 42–43
project selection, 38–48
financial criteria, 38–40
in international projects, 568–570
multi-criteria selection models, 40–43
nonfinancial criteria, 40–43
prioritizing proposals, 28, 41, 47
project classification, 43
ranking proposals, 46–47
selecting a model, 44
solicitation of project proposals, 44–45
sources of project proposals, 44–45
project site selection, 549, 553–554
project-specific risk. See risk management 
process
project sponsor, 35
dependencies of, 343
managing upward relations, 352
project structure
organizational culture and, 88
in project estimation, 131
project teams, 11, 375–405
building high-performance, 381–399
conflict management, 394–398
decision-making process, 393–394
dedicated. See dedicated project team
dependencies of, 342–344
five-stage team development model, 
377–379
importance of teamwork, 17
improving the efficiency of, 310–311
international project, 558, 568
low-priority project, 395
meetings, 383–387
pitfalls, 403–405
project synergy, 375–377
punctuated equilibrium, 380
recruitment process, 381–382
forward pass-earliest times in, 171–173
hammock activities, 188
laddering, 182, 183
lags, 182–187
in forward and backward pass 
 procedures, 186–187
to reduce schedule detail, 182–184
level of detail for activities, 178
multiple starts/multiple projects, 182
nature of, 163–164
network computation process, 171–177
backward pass-latest times, 173–175
forward pass-earliest times, 171–173
network logic errors, 178
practical considerations, 178–182
project schedules and, 164
sensitivity, 176–177, 320–321
slack/float in, 175–177
free, 177
total, 175–177
terminology, 166
project offices (POs), 80, 523
benefits of, 523
defined, 80
project audits and, 522, 523
services provided by, 523
types of, 80
projected organization, 72
project plans. See project networks
project portfolio management system, 
34–51
benefits of, 37
classification of project, 37–38, 50
implementation gap, 34–35, 36–37
managing the system, 48–51
organization politics, 35–36
priority system in, 36–37, 47, 48, 50
project portfolio in, 34
project selection, 35–48
resource conflicts and multitasking, 
36–37
project priority system, 34–37. See also 
priorities 
implementation gap, 34–35
organizational politics, 35–36
resource conflicts and multitasking, 
36–37
project process review questionnaire, 528
project proposals. See proposals
project queue systems, 272
project reward systems, 391–392
project rollup, 466, 474–475
project schedules. See also time estimates
acceleration options, 307–312
constrained resources, 310–312
unconstrained resources, 308–310
in critical-chain project management 
(CCPM), 297–298. See also 
 critical-chain project management 
(CCPM)
www.ebook3000.com

656 Index
risk response control, 225–226
change control management, 226–229
risk register, 225–226
risk response development, 216–219
avoiding risk, 217
contingency funding, 223–225
contingency planning, 219
mitigating risk, 216–217
opportunity management, 223
retaining risk, 218
time buffers, 225
transferring risk, 217–218
risk response matrix, 220
risk retention, 218
risk severity matrix, 214
risk transfer, 217–218
Ritti, R. R., 392, 392n, 409
River of Doubt (Millard), 552
Rizova, Polly S., 89, 89n, 94
Robb, D. J., 367
Rodriguez, P., 572
Roemer, T. R., 328
Rogers, Will, 207
Romanoff, T. K., 535, 538
Rondon, Candido Mariano da Silva, 552
Roosevelt, Theodore “Teddy,” 552
Rosen, B., 408
Rosenblatt, A., 202
Ross, Jerry, 539
Ross, M., 147, 154
Rothaermel, F. T., 443
Rothengatter, W., 149, 154
Rourke, D. L., 154
Rousculp, M. D., 232
Royer, I., 538
Rubinstein, J., 269, 291
Ruekert, R. W., 93
Russia, legal/political factors, 547
Ryan, Frank, 135n
S
“sacred cow,” 35, 42, 44
Saffo, P., 408
Salehipour, A., 501
Samsung, 306
Samsung Galaxy 7, 306
Sankaran, S., 366
Santayana, George, 515
Sashittal, H. C., 93
Saudi Arabia, cross-cultural factors in, 
560–561
Saunders, C., 573
Sayles, Leonard R., 351n2, 352n, 360, 367
scaling, 592–593
scenario analysis, 213–214
schedule. See project schedules
schedule performance index (SPI), 476
schedule risks. See also resource scheduling
in contingency planning, 222
time-phased budget baseline, 251, 
273–278
types of resource constraints, 254–255
resource smoothing, 252, 256–257
responsibilities
client assumption of, 322
governance team, 49
in project estimation, 132
in risk response control, 226
top management, 47
responsibility matrix (RM), 117–119
retaining risk, 218
retrospectives in closing stage, 525–529. 
See also project audits
archiving, 529
independent facilitators, 525
lessons learned, 526, 527
methodology, 526–529 
reviews, in outsourcing, 431–432
reward systems, 391–392. See also 
 incentives; project reward systems
RFP (Request for Proposal), 44, 45, 63–64, 
424–426, 452
Ricks, D. A., 573
RIM, 306
risk
avoiding, 217
defined, 207
retaining, 218
sources of project, 209
transferring, 217–218
risk assessment, 210, 212–216
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis 
(FMEA), 215
probability analysis, 215–216
in project estimation, 133
risk severity matrix, 214
scenario analysis, 213–214
risk avoidance, 217
risk breakdown structure (RBS), 210–211
risk event graph, 209
risk identification, 210–212
risk management process, 208–230
balancing portfolio risks, 50–51
components of, 209–210
cost of mismanaged risk, 207–209
examples of, 207–209, 218, 221
international projects and, 548
proactive approach, 209
process overview, 210
risk, defined, 207
risk assessment, 210, 212–216
risk identification, 210–212
risk response control, 210, 225–226
risk response development, 210, 
216–219
sources of project risk, 209
risk mitigation, 216–217
risk profile, 211
risk register, 225–226
release planning, 587
religious factors, 551
Relyea, Dave, 585
Remington, K., 56
reports and reporting
change request forms and logs, 
227–229
errors, 226
final project report, 516–518
in outsourcing, 428
project monitoring information system, 
460–461, 470–475
by project offices (POs), 523
status report, 470–475, 478, 481
Request for Proposal (RFP), 44, 45, 63–64, 
424–426, 452
reserves, 224–225
budget, 224
management, 224–225
resource bottlenecks, 272, 296
resource buffers, 296
resource conflicts, 36–37
resource-constrained projects, 252–253, 
255, 257–269
computer demonstration, 262–269
EMR project example, 262–269
examples of, 254
impacts of, 266
nature of, 255, 257–258
parallel method of applying heuristics, 
258, 259
resource allocation methods, 255–262
resource conflicts and multitasking, 
36–37
resource estimates, 130–148
factors influencing quality of,  
130–132
guidelines for, 132–133
level of detail, 143–144
phase estimating, 141–143
refining, 146–148
top-down versus bottom-up, 134–143
resource pool project office, 80
resource scheduling, 250–279
assessing resource allocation, 262
assigning project work, 271
benefits of, 270
critical-chain project management 
(CCPM), 294–303
to develop project cost baseline, 251, 
273–278
multiproject resource schedules, 
272–273
process overview, 252–254
resource-constrained projects, 252–253, 
255, 257–269
resource smoothing in, 252, 256–257
splitting activities, 269
time-constrained projects, 255, 
256–257

Index 657
critical-chain project management 
(CCPM) and, 300
in resource scheduling, 269
sports and recreation, 150, 376, 520
sprint backlogs, 589
sprint burndown charts, 589
sprint planning, 587–588
sprint retrospective, 588
sprint review, 588
Squires, Susan E., 357, 357n
Srivannaboon, S., 56
stakeholders, 341–344
defined, 342
dependencies of, 342–343
stakeholder analysis in project 
 communication plan, 119–120
types of, 342–343
standards of performance in leading by 
 example, 355
Standish Group, 20, 102, 125
start-to-finish lag relationship, 186
start-to-start lag relationship, 183–184
Star Wars (film), 549
statement of work (SOW), 105, 424
status report, 470–475
assumptions, 470
baseline development, 470–471
development of, 471–475
example of monthly, 481
status updates, in outsourcing, 431–432
Staw, Berry M., 539
Sten, Erik, 135
Stern, David (NBA), 376, 520
Stewart, T. A., 20
Steyn, H., 302
Stonehill, I., 573
storming stage of team development, 378
strategic management  process, 29–51
analyze and formulate strategies, 32
defined, 29
dimensions of, 28
implementing strategies through 
 projects, 33–34
objectives support strategy, 33
process overview, 29
project portfolio management system, 
34–38
project selection, 38–48
review and define organizational 
 mission, 31
strategic projects, 37–38
strategy
defined, 27
understanding, 28
stress-related culture shock, 566–567
Strickland, A. J., 104n
Strodtbeck, F. L., 557, 557n, 573
Strohl Systems Group, 548
strong matrix, 77–78, 81
Stubbs, David, 150
Shell, G. R., 444
Shenhar, Aaron J., 28, 57, 80n, 94, 360, 367
Sheperd, D. A., 538
Sherif, M., 379n, 409
Shirley, Donna, 383, 383n
Shtub, A., 367
Sibbett, D., 408
Siebdrat, F., 409
Siemens Medical Systems, 594
Sieminski, G. C., 49n, 57
Singer, Carl A., 400, 400n
Sirisomboonsuk, Pinyarat, 616n
Shawshank Redemption, The (movie), 398
Skelton, T., 232
Skilton, P. F., 382, 409
Skunk Works, 72. See also dedicated 
 project teams
situational factors in team development, 
379–381
slack, 175–177
free, 177
total, 175–177
Sleeping Dictionary, The (film), 404n
Slevin, D. P., 102, 124, 367
slippage, 272
Sloan, John, 372n
small projects, 15
smartphone industry, 306
Smith, B. J., 390, 409
Smith, Cynthia J., 357n
Smith, D., 155, 302
Smith, D. K., 35n6, 57, 385n, 408
Smith, M., 93
Smith, P. G., 88, 94, 220, 232, 328, 391, 409
Snapple Company, 208
Snizek, J. A., 210, 232
Snyder, D., 154
social network building, 348–355
leading by example, 353–355
“management by wandering around” 
(MBWA), 350–351
managing upward relations, 351–353
mapping dependencies, 348–349
social network, defined, 348
social skills, 361
Sochi Winter Olympics, 106
Software Engineering Institute (SEI), 
529, 531
Somalia, 547
South Africa 2010 World Cup, 149
socio-technical approach to project 
 management, 17–18
Sojourner (Martian rover), 383
Sony, 15
Sood, S., 302
Soul of a New Machine, The (Kidder), 
389, 389n
Spalding, 520
Spirit Aero Systems, 297
splitting activities, 
schedule variance (SV)
computing, 466
defined, 466
variance analysis, 468–469
Schein, E., 82n, 94, 377n
Schilling, D. L., 444
Schkade, J., 379n, 409
Schmidt, Eric, 271
Schuler, J. R., 232
Schultzel, H. J., 444
Schur, M., 594, 598
Schwaber, K., 579, 598
Schwalbe, K., 457
Schwartz, Peter, 57
scope creep, 106, 483
scope statement, 11–12, 17, 19, 105–106
Scown, M. J., 547, 573
scrum, 585–592
features, 585–586
meetings, 587–588
origins, of, 585
process overview, 586
product and sprint backlogs, 588–589
roles and responsibilities, 586–587
sprint and release burndown charts, 
589–592
scrum master, 587
scrum meeting, 587–588
Sculley, John, 74, 74n, 94
Sears Roebuck, 138
Seattle Kingdome, 218
Secret of Success, The (Rizova), 89
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 357
security factors, 547–548
Segalla, M., 572
selection. See project selection
self-awareness, 361
self-motivation, 361
self-organizing teams, 587
self-protection, 295
self-regulation, 361
Senge, P. M., 360, 360n8, 367, 389n5, 
409, 538
senior management. See top management
sensitivity, of project network, 176–177, 
320–321
September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, 547, 587
Seta, J. J., 379n, 409
Seven Habits of Highly Effective People 
(Covey), 358, 360n
Shackleton, Ernest, 354
Shadrokh, S., 501
Shanahan, S., 258, 291
Shao, J., 366
shared vision, 388–391, 396
Shaw, L., 13n
Sheen, Martin, 549
Shelby County Habitat for Humanity 
( Alabama), 312
www.ebook3000.com

658 Index
tracking decisions, 384
tracking Gantt charts, 462–463, 473–474
training
certification and, 4
in outsourcing, 428
in international projects, 568–570
transferring risk, 217–218
transportation services, 135, 308
Trevino, L. K., 356n7, 367
triple bottom line, 11–12
Trojan Nuclear Plant decommission, 480
trust
leadership and, 357–359
in negotiations for outsourcing, 433
virtual project teams and, 401–402
Tuchman, B. W., 377, 409
Tuller, L. W., 559n
Tung, R. L., 562n, 567, 573
Turne, J. R., 38, 55, 366
Turner, J. R., 360, 367
Turner, R., 366
Turtle, Q. C., 186, 202
20th Century–Fox, 320
2008 Olympic Redeem Team, 376
U
“Ugly American,” 554
U.S Green Building Council, 14
U.S. Air Force, 301
U.S. Army, 222
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 270
U.S. Department of Defense, 3, 222, 433, 
434, 464
U.S. Department of Defense’s Value 
 Engineering Awards, 434
U.S. Federal housing Authority (FHA), 137
U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 343
U.S. Forest Service, 270, 485
U.S. Navy, 301, 424
U.S. West, 405
Uhlenbruck, K., 572
Ulrich, F. C., 232
United States Golf Association 
(USGA), 104
United States, cross-cultural factors in, 
563–564
Unruh, V. P., 444
urgency, in leading by example, 355
Ury, W., 435, 435n, 438, 439, 443
Uzbekistan, 548
V
Value Engineering Awards (U.S. 
 Department of Defense), 434
Van de Ven, Andrew H., 405n
Van Slyke, C., 573
Vanderjack, B., 598
scheduling interval in applying 
 heuristics, 258–262
smoothing resource demand, 252, 
256–257
time estimates, 130–148. See also project 
schedules
apportion methods, 137
consensus methods, 136
in critical-chain project management 
(CCPM), 295
factors influencing quality of, 130–132
function point methods, 138–139
guidelines for, 132–133
learning curves, 139, 157–161
level of detail, 143–144
parametric procedures, 140
phase estimating, 141–143
range estimating, 140
ratio methods, 137
refining, 146–148
template methods, 140
time and cost databases, 148
top-down versus bottom-up, 134–143
Time Inc., 595
580, time management, 361
time performance, in project monitoring 
information, 462–464
time-phased budget baselines, 251, 
273–278
creating, 274–276
need for, 276–278
To Complete Performance Index (TCPI), 
480
top-down estimates, 134–144
apportion methods, 137
consensus methods, 136
“function points,” 138–139
learning curves, 139, 157–161
nature of, 134
ratio methods, 137
top management. See also middle 
management
dependencies of, 343
ethics and, 356
functional organization and, 68–69
implementation gap in project portfolio 
system, 34–35, 36–37
level of detail in project estimates, 
143–144
managing upward relations, 351–353
in portfolio system, 48–49
in project audits, 522
in project portfolio management, 48–49
responsibility for prioritizing 
projects, 47
time orientation, 557
Torti, M. T., 441, 441n
Total quality management (TQM), 38, 347
total slack/float, 175–177
Toyota, 27, 420, 433
Stuckenbruck, L. C., 94
student syndrome (procrastination), 296
Studio Roosegaarde, 13
Sullivan, Stacy Savides, 84
Sun Microsystems, 271
Swahl, W., 124
Swanson, S., 57, 134n
Sweden, 548
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats) analysis, 32
Symons, C. R., 155
synergy, 375–377
systems thinking, 360
T
Takeuchi, Hirotaka, 585, 598
Talbot, B. F., 258, 291
Tanzania, 550
Tarne, R., 590, 598
task-related currencies, 345–346
Tate, K., 125
team building, 381–399
five-stage team development model, 
377–379
in outsourcing, 428–429
punctuated equilibrium, 380
recruiting project members, 381–382
rejuvenating the project team, 398–399
team-building techniques in, 399
team charter, 385
team evaluation, 532–534
team identity, 381, 387–388, 395
team rituals, 387–388
team spirit, 404
technical performance measurement, 481
technical requirements, in project 
scope, 103
technical risks, in contingency planning, 
220–221
technological expertise
outsourcing and, 421
in recruiting project members, 382
template methods, for estimating project 
times and costs, 140
terrorist attacks of 2001, 547, 587
Tesluk, P. E., 408
Tektronics, 464
Thamhain, H., 221, 226, 232, 395, 409
Thompson, A. A., 104n
Thompson, G. L., 202
Thompson, Hine & Flory, 431
Thompson, M. P., 444
Thoms, P., 409
360-degree review, 534, 535, 536
3M, 40, 87, 301, 402, 402n, 409, 583
time and cost databases, 148
time buffers, 225
time-constrained projects, 255, 256–257
nature of, 255

Index 659
groupings found in, 108–109
in helping project manager, 108
integrating with organization,  
113, 114
level of detail in, 143–144
process overview, 110
simplified WBS development, 109–112
time-phased budget and, 273–278
work package, 111
World Cup (2010), 149
World Trade Center terrorist attacks 
(2001), 585
Worldcom, 356
Worthen B., 42n, 598
Worthington, M. M., 457
wrap-up closure activities, 516, 518–521
closedown activities, 518
partial administrative closure 
checklist, 519
X
Xerox, 35–36, 86
Yates, J. K., 539
Yazici, H., 81n, 94
Yeak, William R., 357n
Yeung, I., 562n, 573
Yin, M., 328
Yovocich, B. G., 568n
Youker, R., 94
Young, Bruce, 320
Young, J., 93
Z
Zaitz, Les, 539
Zalmanson, E., 301, 302
Zander, A., 379n, 409
Zaphiropoulos, Renn (Versatec), 86
Zenisek, Joseph, 297
z values, PERT, 242–244
Zwikael, Ofer, 20
Zyliss, 583
Watson, G., 202
Watson’s Jeopardy Project (IBM), 13, 29, 30
WBS dictionary, 115
WBS. See work breakdown structure (WBS)
weak matrix, 76–78, 81
weather station project office, 80
Webb, A. P., 365, 501
Webber, S. S., 441, 441n
Weiler, Ed, 209
Wells, W. G., 501
Welsh, M. A., 366
West, J. D., 202
West, Tom, 389, 389n
Wexley, K. N., 535, 538
Wheatly, M., 539
Wheelwright, S. C., 92, 407
white elephants, 50, 149
Whitten, Danny, 320
Whybark, D. Clay, 334n
Wiest, J. D., 291
Wilemon, D. L., 395, 409
Willie, C. J., 252, 291
Willis, Kerry, 134
Wilson, Pete, 308
Windows 10, 452
Windows 11, 213–214
Wisneiski, Mary, 431n
Wolfe, M., 538
Wolff, Alexander, 376n
Woodward, H., 57
Woodworth, B. M., 252, 258, 291
Woolridge, B., 55
work assignment
as incentive, 391–392
in resource scheduling, 271
work breakdown structure (WBS), 102, 
108–117
baseline development in project 
 monitoring information system, 
461, 470, 474, 483–484
coding for information systems, 113–115
creating, 112
development of project network from, 
164–166
variance analysis
actual cost (AC), 466
cost variance (CV), 466
earned value (EV), 466
methods of, 468–469
planned value (PV), 466
schedule variance (SV), 466, 468–469
variance at completion (VAC)
defined, 466, 468
variance analysis, 468–469
Varkonyi, Greg, 376n
Vecta, 583
Versatec, 86
Veryzer, R. W., 56
Verzuh, E., 328
videoconferencing, virtual project teams 
and, 402
virtual project teams, 399–403
communication patterns and, 402
in global environment, 399–400
outsourcing and, 421
trust and, 401–402
virtual reality technology, 13
vision, 388–391, 396
Vogel, D. R., 573
Vroom, V. H., 320n, 328, 393, 409
W
Wake, William, 585
Walker, C. F., 232
Walker, D., 366
Walker, O. C., Jr., 93
Walmart, 8
Walt Disney World, 391
Walters, H., 84n
Wang, Q., 93
Wang, R., 328
Warner Brothers, 320
Warner-Lambert, 535
Washington Wizards, 520
waterfall method, 116, 116n, 580–581, 584, 
595. See also process breakdown 
structure (PBS)
www.ebook3000.com

