

Safe Surfer
Protecting Your Privacy in the Digital Age
Martin Hellweg


All rights reserved. No part of this book shall be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, magnetic, photographic including photocopying, recording or by any information
storage and retrieval system, without prior written permission of the publisher. No patent liability is
assumed with respect to the use of the information contained herein. Although every precaution has been
taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or
omissions. Neither is any liability assumed for damages resulting from the use of the information contained
herein.
Copyright © 2015 by Martin Hellweg
ISBN 978-1-4958-0803-6
ISBN 978-1-4958-0804-3 eBook
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2015913468
© of the English edition Martin Hellweg,
Zurich/Switzerland 2015. All rights reserved.
Translated from the German original by:
Mark Wilch, Vienna/Austria
Edited by:
Gwenyth Lloyd, Bristol/UK
© of the original German edition Ullstein Buchverlage Gmbh,
Berlin/Germany 2014. All rights reserved.
Published September 2015
INFINITY PUBLISHING
1094 New DeHaven Street, Suite 100
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2713
Toll-free (877) BUY BOOK
Local Phone (610) 941-9999
Fax (610) 941-9959
Info@buybooksontheweb.com
www.buybooksontheweb.com


Table of Contents
Prologue
Axioms of Digital Communication
1. If in Doubt: Best Not to Do It
2. Make Your Legal Name a Scarce Commodity
3. Business and Personal – Two Separate Worlds
4. Is That Really You?
5. Keeping Correspondence Private in Modern Times
6. Do Not Put the Fox in Charge of the Henhouse
7. Digital Eyes are Everywhere
8. Keeping Intruders Out
9. The Right Lid for Every Pot
10. Open Sesame!
11. Now, Where Did I Put That Key?
12. Who’s Looking Over My Shoulder?
Customize Your Infrastructure to Ensure Your Privacy
13. Lock the Door Behind You
14. Offline Storage
15. High in the Clouds …
16. Digital Blackmailing
17. Avoiding Data Loss
18. Sweeping Dirt Under the Rug
19. Dirt On the Rug
20. Invisible Ghosts
21. Getting a Second Chance
Using Devices Correctly
22. Backdoors and Greedy Data Collectors
23. Getting Rid of the Clutter
24. E-mail from the Fridge
25. Over and Out

26. Just Between the Two of Us
27. Inadvertent Sharing
28. Ineffective Lock Screens
29. Following Every Step You Take
30. Appmania
31. Chattanooga
Communicating Online
32. A Photo Travels Around the Globe …
33. Snapchat Hack
34. White Gorillas in Mongolia
35. Surfing in the Right Mode
36. Secure Surfing
37. Marking Your Presence
38. Well-set
39. My Name is Blonde…
40. Your Professional Profile
41. Digital Billboard
42. Interesting – That’s What He Did Last…
43. Pressure to Communicate
44. Using Other People’s Devices
45. Smile!
46. Face Recognition
47. Paytime!
48. Care for a Few Chips?
49. The Innermost Circle
In Closing
50. Checking Your Data Traces
51. There’s No Facebook in Heaven (Yet)
52. Privacy Fitness Program
Epilogue


Prologue
It was 10 in the morning and I was on my way to a conference when my personal assistant
forwarded a call to me. Eve, a young woman from Cologne, was in a state of shock. Her ex-
boyfriend had just launched a digital attack against her. The evening before, her ex had asked
her to come back to him but Eve had refused. She had told him just this in a calm yet firm
voice and asked him to stop contacting her. Eve wanted to gain some distance at last and
thought it would be best for him too. She felt that it was best that they both start a new
chapter in their lives. She would never have dreamt that her ex would be capable of this kind
of deceit. He had obviously spent weeks preparing the attack. Basically, everything had started
two years before: Back then he had kept a hidden camera running while they were intimate
with each other. It was unconceivable: Since that morning, videos of their most private
moments with each other had been uploaded to various porn websites on the Internet. A
neighbor of her parents also reported having received a DVD with these videos in the mail. As
we found out later, her ex-boyfriend had sent dozens of these DVDs all around Cologne and
elsewhere to people in her personal and professional life.
Frank had finally achieved the coveted post of manager of a five-star hotel in Los Angeles after
twenty-five years of hard work. One of the service employees Frank was supervising had ashes
on his forehead in the shape of a religious symbol. In the midday sun, the symbol gradually
began running – not an appetizing sight. Frank had already asked the employee twice to
remove the ashes but the employee had not heeded his requests. In the kitchen the dam finally
broke. Frank lost his patience and shouted at the employee: “Wipe that f****** thing off your
face!” Of course, he should not have lost his composure, but the consequences of his losing
control of himself for this one moment in his long professional life were dramatic. The union
blew up the incident as an obvious act of discrimination. This supposed act of discrimination
received newspaper and TV coverage. Anyone looking for Frank on the Internet would find
site after site with references to this one moment of weakness in his life. Frank lost his job and
was unable to find a new one for three years. He ended up taking a position at a casino hotel
in the Chinese special administrative district of Macau while his wife and children remained
in Los Angeles. He saw them twice a year — a high price to pay for one unguarded moment.
Pastor Alex could not believe his eyes. Police were searching his house and confiscating his
computers in response to an anonymous tip they had received. Upon inspection, the police
did find child pornography on one of his hard drives. Pastor Alex was completely unaware of
the images, he had never downloaded or viewed any child pornography and was completely
baffled as to how this material had made its way onto his hard drive. If the testimony of a
witness shortly thereafter had not explained what had actually happened, his life would have
been ruined. He could have lost his family and everything he had worked for. It came to light
that a right-wing criminal hacker had remotely uploaded the photos onto Alex’s laptop. The
intent was to take revenge on Pastor Alex for fighting right-wing extremism in his local
community. He had done so with great personal dedication and a degree of success. For
instance, following an attack on a kebab shop, his efforts had made it possible to track down

and arrest the perpetrators. Now Pastor Alex himself had almost become the victim of an
attack – a digital attack.
These three stories did not happen exactly as described above. They are based on the
experiences of people I have known in my own life and on situations to which I have become
privy to in my capacity as a Virtual Bodyguard1. A growing number of us are familiar with
similar scenarios. The events may not always be as dramatic but they frequently have far-
reaching – and undeserved – consequences for people and their privacy. Many dangers lurk in
the digital world. Some dangers are posed by so-called black-hat hackers.2 These hackers can
remotely hijack our laptop webcam, taking pictures of us without our knowledge. Then there
are employers who surreptitiously monitor their employees’ private e-mail. Internet mobbing
is another example of these dangers – among teenagers, co-workers or former friends.
These stories may dampen some people’s enthusiasm about the digital age. This would be very
regrettable because the existence of the Internet has made the world more transparent, more
social and more democratic. Oppressed people use social networks to organize themselves and
to assert their rights. Students without means can attend online courses at elite American
universities without having to pay a cent to set foot on campus. Online encyclopedias such as
Wikipedia make knowledge immediatey available to everyone today, thereby replacing static
standard works such as the Encyclopedia Britannica.
Innovations in the digital world improve the quality of our everyday lives as well.
Smartphones and laptops let us be productive whereever we are. This book is a prime
example. I have written it not only at my desk, but also on the train and while enjoying red
wine and pasta in the winter sun in Ticino. Nearly the whole time, I had online access to
valuable information. I was able to write down my thoughts as they came to me anywhere I
happened to be.
The digital world has changed our lives considerably – and that is a very positive thing. At the
same time we have to learn to handle these many innovations with proper awareness, to
minimize any detrimental effects on our lives resulting from them. This is a perfectly normal
learning curve. Motorized traffic was also something unknown and chaotic when it first
occurred. Apparently, people even initially considered having a horse walk in front of each car,
the idea being that anything faster than a horse could be dangerous. Today we know there are
clear rules. We learn them, practice driving and get a driver’s license. Road traffic has become
quite safe. There is a residual risk, however, because there is no such thing as hazard-free
mobility. The task is to minimize the inherent risk.
The same holds true for the digital world. Many of us are still very inexperienced but so much
is already possible today. We race across the information superhighway at a speed of 300,000
kilometers a second. Yet, we know much too little about how to protect ourselves against
“accidents” in the digital world. Lawmakers are also overwhelmed. They effectively give a carte
blanche to private companies like Google, Facebook, Apple and a host of other less prominent
but nonetheless powerful players. Most nations lag dramatically behind in laying the necessary
legal groundwork for a secure digital life for their citizens.
Edward Snowden’s revelations about the extent of worldwide surveillance and espionage by
secret services rightfully triggered an important discussion about privacy and personal security

in this digital age. Yet a far-off American intelligence agency is hardly our most direct risk. Of
course, we have to keep an eye on public authorities and governments as well ensuring that
they, too, steer clear of activities that violate data privacy. But the wheels will turn slowly here,
too. The political decision-making process on digital matters is still in its early stages.
Yet our privacy is already in danger today. From my own experience, typical threats stem in
most cases from our immediate surroundings – from people we once called friends or perhaps
even loved ones. From rivals in our private and professional lives or from companies whose
products and services we wish to use. Let’s not forget those hackers. Most of the time we don’t
know them at all but they are eager to play cat and mouse with us.
We alone are responsible for protecting ourselves and our loved ones from digital attacks,
today and presumably also in the future. We must adopt behaviors that protect our privacy.
We must be attentive, develop an awareness of risks and avert them wherever possible. If an
incident does occur, we must at the very least minimize the damage incurred. Our biggest
enemy is ignorance. We often consider ourselves invulnerable until something actually
happens.
The Safe Surfer provides you with 52 practical and readily understandable tips to help you
protect your own privacy. Some vivid examples will sensitize you to dangers so you have an
easier time detecting them early on. Furthermore, the book will help you adopt effective
modes of thought and good digital habits to protect your own privacy. You can use The Safe
Surfer as a how-to book and apply the tips in it immediately after you read them. While doing
so, you can take personal notes to document just what it was that you implemented. If you do
take the approach just described, always keep the following in mind: You should either record
your notes in a way totally incomprehensible to others or keep your notes in a safe place with
other confidential documents and information such as access codes or passwords (Chapter 11
elaborates on this matter).
I do refer to specific applications and products in some places in this book, but this remains
the exception rather than the rule. Quite often, there are multiple possibilities and you can
choose freely among them. Moreover, it would go beyond the scope of this book to write
separate operating instructions for every single device, operating system and application.
Having said this, my aim is to guide and help you as effectively as possible. To do this, I have
set up a website to accompany this book. There you will find useful further information. So,
along with reading and applying the recommendations in this book, feel free to visit
www.safe-surfer.com/book.
Even though this book and the aforementioned website contain useful tips, I encourage you
to also research issues of online security and privacy on your own. Doing so is often not
difficult and will hone your skills for effectively and promptly facing new challenges posed by
the digital world. If a difficult situation that you cannot fully understand on your own does
arise, I recommend contacting a nearby technical expert. It is important that he or she be a
person you can trust (refer also to Chapter 6).
Please do not regard the Safe Surfer as an alternative to IT security advice. Indeed, there is an
overlap between IT security and privacy protection. As a result, some tips contain technical
components while others solely focus on helping you to change your behavior and make

better decisions for the protection of your privacy. But this book does not fully cover the
subject of IT security. Vice versa, even comprehensive IT security measures will not be enough
to protect your privacy. The two subject matters are complementary. Your protection needs
both avenues. Therefore, please regard the Safe Surfer as reading for the protection of your
privacy in additon to what you are or should be doing in the field of IT security.
One further comment about the stories and examples in this book: Unless they concern
stories appearing in various media about public figures, I have altered the events and rendered
them anonymous. Sometimes several experiences have been combined into one account. In
other words the stories are fictional but all based on real-life circumstances.
I hope you enjoy reading this book and I wish you much success in applying the tips!
1
Virtual Bodyguard, 2015, http://vbodyguard.com/?lang=en
2
The hacker scene is divided into so-called “white-hat hackers” and “black-hat hackers”. While the former regard
themselves as the good guys (and they usually are, detecting software flaws and reporting them in order to see
them fixed), the latter are the ones that bother us. When talking about hackers in this book, me mean “black-hat
hackers”.


Axioms of Digital
Communication


I
1
If in Doubt: Best Not to Do It
n September 2012 the French magazine Closer published pictures of Kate Middleton
topless. Paparazzi had shot the photos during her vacation in southern France. Although
the pictures were never shown in a British newspaper, they did find their way to Ireland,
Sweden and Denmark and – what was much worse – onto the Internet as well. According to a
survey the polling firm YouGov conducted for The Sunday Times, seven million Britons saw
the pictures of Prince William’s topless wife within the first week of their posting. You can
imagine how unpleasant ensuing conversations in the royal household probably were for poor
Kate. Her royal duties aside, like most other people, she presumably had no interest in having
millions of people see her naked. The Internet, a fantastic medium in itself, made this possible
in the blink of an eye.
In today’s digital world, one unguarded moment can change people’s lives. That is true
not only of celebrities but also of any private individuals – regardless of whether they actively
use the Internet or not. It is not up for us to decide whether or not we want information
about ourselves to appear on the internet. Content about ourselves simply appears.
Therefore, my first piece of advice to you is this: For any action you take, consider
whether the benefits outweigh the costs. Or to put it simply: Is it worthwhile – as The
Duchess of Cambridge – to sunbathe topless on a terrace visible from the outside? I would
like to say this clearly: What Kate did, is perfectly legal and something she should have a right
to do. I am not suggesting in any way that she has done anything wrong. But, was it worth it?
Did the benefit (sunbathing topless) outweigh the costs (public display of topless pictures,
unpleasant discussions within the Royal Family, etc.)? Only Kate can make this decision – a
decision that should be made consciuously, with all the possible outcomes in mind. That’s
what this opening chapter is about.
One cannot always control when pictures or recordings are taken (more on this aspect in
Chapter 46) and what information from one’s private life becomes public. Therefore,
whenever you have a choice of doing something or refraining from doing it, you should
consider whether the experience is worth the potential risk of exposure and make a deliberate,
careful decision. This advice is not meant to unnerve you; just to get you to stop and think for
a moment. For instance, did the wild S&M orgy in which Formula 1 boss Max Mosley was
involved really give him so much of a thrill, that the pain he and his family suffered after the
disclosure of the videos was worth it?
Of course you can file legal suits against the unauthorized publication of these kinds of
recordings. But what good does that ultimately do? As Max Mosley said in an interview with
the German magazine Der Spiegel in October 2009: “The court may even rule in my favor but
it cannot order [a story like this] to be erased from people’s minds again. Instead, a trial makes
the whole situation much worse because something meant to be private for all times is

dragged back into the limelight time and again.” Sadly he was all too correct in his assessment.
Please do not misunderstand this first piece of advice. This book cannot – and is not
intended to – be a guide to personal behaviour. This is your own, very personal decision. But
do consider all the possible consequences of your actions. The world has changed
fundamentally since the advent of the Internet, smartphones with cameras or any espionage-
ware which is purchasable online at discount prices. You will never be able to rule out the
scenario of becoming a victim of a digital attack.
Even if you exercise the necessary caution in the digital world, you could still be attacked
if people you previously trusted deeply turn against you. But you can at least minimize your
risk if you let this first piece of advice guide your actions.
Tip: For any possibly risky action you undertake, always consider whether the benefits
outweigh the costs. If they do not, then it is best to refrain from taking the risk.
That is the best protection.


I
2
Make Your Legal Name a Scarce
Commodity
f you have ever worked on your laptop in a hotel room, the following situation may sound
familiar. On the side of the laptop’s window where you view your folders and files, a list
with names of other guests staying at the hotel appears – delivered free of charge. How can
this happen? It is easily explained: When configuring their laptops, your fellow hotel guests,
knowingly or unknowingly, assigned their full legal names to the device. As a result, the entire
hotel is informed about “Sam Miller’s laptop” and “Nina Meyer’s cell phone”. You may find
your name being shown to every other guest unpleasant. If you do, I won’t have to say much
more to convince you to follow the next tip. However, if you are unconcerned about the
situation described above, then I am happy to help trigger your imagination.
If a stranger only has a few drinks at the bar using your name, you will have gotten off
easy. But he might also pay the bill at the award-winning hotel restaurant with your name,
too. Try out the following ruse in a hotel restaurant yourself sometime: “My name is Sam
Miller. I’m afraid I have forgotten my room number.” In all too many cases, the waiter will
accept your name for signing the bill and even include on the bill the room number that goes
with the name. If that information gets in the wrong hands … Well, I think there is really no
need to elaborate further. Everything is fine until it isn’t anymore. The benefit of assigning
your own name to your laptop or cell phone is minimal at best. So, avoid taking this
unnecessary risk.
Even on the Internet, divulging your own name can have dire consequences, as the
following example shows. Paula was no longer happy with her job. She went to an online
forum for legal advice. She wanted to find out what to keep in mind if she were to resign.
When applying for new positions, she was surprised to be asked back so rarely for interviews
despite her impeccable credentials. Then she discovered that her chat in the legal advice portal
was the only posting that ever appeared when her name was entered in a search engine like
Google. Many employers presumably felt wary about a person who sought legal advice – even
though she naturally had every right to do so. Paula would have been better off seeking advice
under a fake name. She would have gotten the same answers even while using a pseudonym.
The following piece of advice sounds trivial but is extremely important: In the digital
sphere, you should use your real name only where absolutely necessary. Whenever it is
possible, use a fake name, a pseudonym. Be equally stingy about sharing personal details such
as your address, your date of birth, information about where you are employed and the like.
Countless providers of information, services and products seek to obtain your personal
data. When you order something, you cannot avoid entering it; but how about the examples
of people using their real names to make a simple request for information on the Internet or

to stay in contact with friends in a social network? Be active but use a fake name! If you use a
pseudonym, do not worry about whether you will still be found by old school chums and
other companions who are looking for you. You will be found, provided you want to be, of
course (more on this subject in Chapter 40).
Create multiple identities for the different activities and aspects of your life. To do so, you
are usually required to set up a free e-mail account for these identities. This takes just five
minutes and the time is well spent. The best method is to write down a few of your favorite
names on a piece of paper. The bank employee Sam Miller may well want to go by “Sammy
Mills” and pursue his sideline as a Heavy Metal musician under this pseudonym. And if he
merely wants to ask for information at a given website where it is mandatory for him to
register then he can do so as “Miles Samson”.
Three names generally suffice for the Internet: your legal name (which you should use as
sparingly as possible), a side-line name (for all activities not requiring your official name) and
a throw-away name (which you employ at places you stay only briefly or if you are unfamiliar
with a website). The number of names you utilize depends on the number of activities in
which you are involved. In the digital age, you simply have to keep them distinct. After all,
the strait-laced banker Sam Miller does not want to be seen in the same search results with
Heavy Metal Rocker Sammy Mills.
I am not suggesting you should attempt to conceal something this way or even that it is
possible. A company like Google will be able to link your identities anyway – using your IP
address, for example. But this tip helps you incorporate a bit of structure into what people can
find readily about you on the Internet. So, when the Head of Human Resources at a company
that wants to hire you googles you as “Sam Miller”, your career details appear on his screen
first thing instead of dozens of critiques of your Heavy Metal songs. The head of HR seeing
those critiques would probably not be so detrimental in this case but it could cause
unnecessary confusion. Wait until you have built up a good working relationship with your
colleagues at your new company before outing yourself as a Heavy Metal rocker.
Remember, the point here is not merely to optimize search engine results. Your very
security is at stake. The point is to minimize the risk of identity theft. You are better off not
even having to imagine what could be done with a stolen identity in today’s digital world. You
should therefore handle your identity as the very valuable asset it is. Use your legal name only
where doing so is really worthwhile or unavoidable.
Tip: In the digital age, you should use your name, address, date of birth and all other
personal details only in cases where it is worthwhile to do so or where you are
required to do so.


M
3
Business and Personal – Two
Separate Worlds
y good friend Luke works for a tour operator. He recently told me a story that was
quite amusing for anyone not directly involved. Catherine, one of his employees, had
started a relationship several weeks before with a customer she had met at the summer party
put on by Luke’s company. Catherine felt it was her duty to let her boss know immediately
that she was seeing this customer privately. Luke briefly considered whether this relationship
could cause any problems. Although the situation was not ideal, Catherine was a valued
employee and the customer was important. So, he gave both of them his blessing and wished
them all the best. He added a warning, however. He told them to lie low so as not to cause
undo gossip as long as the relationship was still new and had not yet stood the test of time.
After a wonderful weekend together in the mountains, the customer e-mailed Catherine.
The two still had contact with each other on business matters, too, so he told her in the e-mail
about a holiday resort in Fuerteventura – just as he always had before when something new
came on the scene. In a P.S. he thanked her in intimate terms for the fabulous time the two of
them had had at the mountain lodge that weekend. When Catherine received the e-mail, she
was on her way to an appointment elsewhere but wanted to let her colleagues know about the
new resort right away – as was the customary practice in the company. So she forwarded the e-
mail “To all”, i.e. all two hundred employees in the agency. Unfortunately, she had not
noticed the P.S. … You can imagine all the hardship she suffered. Her lover’s spicy terms of
endearment were recited in the corridors and Catherine became the laughingstock of the
company.
This is just one of innumerable examples where people use a professional medium – here a
business e-mail – to communicate about sensitive private matters. It is a digital transgression
you should never commit. It is best to keep these two worlds totally separate from each other.
Do not surf about private matters on your work PC because this activity usually can and will
be monitored precisely. Do not save any personal data within your company files. Do not
even do so for a single day because many companies carry out automatic backups overnight.
The file then remains in the company servers forever even if you delete it from your PC the
next day. Keep these two digital worlds separate: your professional life and your private life.
Your company cellphone might be an exception. An occasional private call with this
device is allowed. You should be able to assume that the content of your calls is confidential.
Of course, phone calls can also be tapped. Incidentally, tapping calls is easy to do as is
monitoring everything you send or retrieve over your company’s internal Wi-Fi. Although this
is rarely done in actual fact, you cannot rule out the possibility. There have been cases where
an employer has monitored his employees beyond legal limits. And legal limits unfortunately

do not help you in retrospect. It is best to always keep the fact in mind that anything private
transmitted over digital infrastructure at work will not necessarily remain confidential.
Keep in mind that your employer generally receives a detailed statement of individual calls
– complete with all the numbers you have called. If the same number pops up twelve times a
day, a colleague might become curious and can easily find out whose number it is.
The simplest solution is to take a personal cellphone with you to work. Instead of
connecting it to the company Wi-Fi, use the phone network of the cellphone for data transfer.
To do so, switch off the Wi-Fi option for the entire time you are at work. You can still
continue going online over the cellular network. Your employer would have to have a great
deal of criminal intent and suitable technical knowledge to tap your private cell. So, you are
usually protected if you take along a personal cellphone for private matters at work.
Incidentally, many cellphones today can also generate a hotspot, i.e. their own Wi-Fi over the
phone network. You can use this hotspot to go onto the Internet with your laptop or tablet. If
need be, this approach would certainly be preferable at work over connecting to the company
Wi-Fi.
Tip: Keep professional digital infrastructure completely separate from personal
infrastructure, in other words, use separate devices, programs and data
transmission channels (e.g. Wi-Fi). Take your personal cellphone with you to work
for private communication during working hours.


V
4
Is That Really You?
anessa Schultz sent out an e-mail with an urgent request for help. She told several
friends she had been robbed on her road trip through the American Southwest.
Apparently her cellphone, credit cards, money – everything was gone. All she had left was her
passport. In this e-mail, Vanessa asked for a loan of $1,800 to be sent as quickly as possible so
she could check out of the hotel and book a flight home. If several friends would agree to
transferring her money, there was no need to worry: She would be back home in 48 hours and
would pay back her friends the money she owed them; but now she needed immediate
assistance. She asked that the money be sent to the Western Union office on 3rd Street in San
Francisco, where she could pick it up after producing an official photo ID. Wheels went into
motion back home to respond to the emergency situation. After all, their good friend needed
help. The e-mail came from her usual account so there was no doubt that the message was
actually written by Vanessa.
But was it actually her? Unfortunately, it was not. Vanessa was totally oblivious to what
was happening. The scammers had gone on Facebook looking for someone whose last entries
revealed that they were on vacation. The next step was to hack her e-mail account so they
could send out messages from within it. And finally, her profile photo from Facebook had
been used to get a fake US driver’s license in her name. It was a matter of a few dollars, as any
teenager in the US knows who seeks a fake ID for underage drinking or access to clubs. The
money was then picked up from Western Union without any trouble with this fake driver’s
license. Afterwards, the scammers were never seen again and the money was gone.
These scams naturally require some technical knowledge and some skill. But be wary:
They happen more often than you might think. And the creativity of these crooks seems
limitless. One terrible true story widely reported in the news, was that of the esteemed British
physicist Paul Frampton. A South American gang of drug traffickers fooled Frampton into
believing for months that he was chatting with Denise Milani, a model who actually existed.
After several months of pleasant online conversation, the two agreed to a meeting in La Paz,
Bolivia, where Denise Milani allegedly had a modeling assignment. When Frampton arrived,
she was no longer there. He received a message that she had a follow-up job in Brussels and
would send him a plane ticket to fly there. The message said he should follow her and asked
that he take along a piece of luggage she had forgotten in Bolivia. The ticket arrived, the
suitcase was there and Frampton departed for Brussels. Long story short: The suitcase
contained two kilograms of cocaine. Frampton had been misused as a drug courier and was
arrested and charged when he changed planes in Buenos Aires.
The theft of Denise Milani’s identity was the key to this scam, which, although elaborate,
was technically quite simple to execute. A member of a drug gang had reserved an e-mail
address with Milani’s name (which is no problem at all to do) and began chatting. With a

measure of perseverance, the gang member turned a lonely scientist with ambitions for the
Nobel Prize into an unintentional drug courier.
Also worth mentioning in this context are the countless attempts fraudsters make to
obtain your data – using fake e-mails that look as if they came from your bank, or from online
payment systems such as PayPal, eBay or Amazon. They may send you links in the hope you
will click on them and often a deceptively genuine copy of a website will appear, for instance,
your bank’s website. You should be extremely skeptical if you are sent an e-mail of this kind or
even just a link and don’t understand why it was sent. Under no circumstances should you
comply with the request to provide personal details or click on any link,or picture or interact
with any website that may be fake. If you do so, you run the risk of catching a virus that could
spread rapidly throughout your system. Never put yourself at such risk! Delete strange e-mails
immediately and unopened if at all possible.
If you think the e-mail may have come from a reputable sender, then contact that person
directly using his or her official coordinates. Always do so in a separate new e-mail; not by
responding to the suspicious e-mail. Ask the alleged sender if he or she actually did send this
e-mail. All too often, a practice called “phishing” is involved where requests for information
are made of you in body of the e-mail or where you are supposed to enter your personal
details on the website presented to you. Phishing is an attempt to obtain personal data from
you through fake websites or e-mails in order to siphon money out of your bank accounts or
commit some other misdeed.
I do not want to make you paranoid. You need not be suspicious of every e-mail you
receive from friends, companies and other contacts. However, whenever communication is
linked to requests for information, personal details, money or even your credit card details,
you should always check that the message really is from the indicated person or company. The
good professor mentioned above would only have had to insist on a Skype video call to
confirm that he really was chatting with Denise Milani. The friends of Vanessa Schultz should
have done likewise. Skype video calls are good insurance because they can be conducted from
any Internet café, even by a person robbed of all communication devices.
If a video call cannot be arranged, you should send the other person an e-mail containing
several questions only that person can answer. Such as, what was the last restaurant we went to
together? How many pets does our friend David have? What color is my car? When coming
up with questions, make sure the answers cannot be found in the objects that were ostensibly
stolen. For instance, the address of your buddy John can be found in the address book. The
questions should therefore touch on aspects that are not jotted down anywhere.
Tip: Be wary if someone you believe you know contacts you digitally and requests
something unusual from you. If this happens, confirm the identity of the sender,
ideally in a short video call. If that proves impossible, send the person an e-mail
with questions that a stranger could not answer. Also do not click indiscriminately
on any links or images in suspicious e-mails.


T
5
Keeping Correspondence Private
in Modern Times
he secrecy of correspondence via traditional post is an important basic right that many
countries guarantee in their constitution. It protects the inviolability of letters posted
and their content. Goethe, Mozart and a host of other less known people wrote wonderful
love letters, whose content they did not necessarily want to have shared with everyone during
their lifetime. This applies to more than just love letters, however. The taxman sends us a tax
bill containing data on our assets and income; our doctor sends us the bill for a highly
confidential examination; and friends write letters on very personal subjects, pouring out their
woes and asking for advice.
Has it been ages since you got a letter like that from one of your friends? It would not
surprise me if that is what you are thinking right now. Today, almost no one writes a letter by
hand and sends it by regular mail. Moods, personal problems, feelings of elation are generally
all communicated electronically – by e-mail, Facebook message, SMS and through other
digital channels of communication. The content is the same as always, however, only the
format has changed. And that is precisely why we must reevaluate the sanctity of
correspondence once again in today’s digital world. After all, we still have one responsibility,
to define a protected sphere for confidential communication for ourselves and for those we
correspond with.
Of course not everything needs to remain secret. Almost everyone feels the need to discuss
matters with a good friend or our significant other. But we must create a system that enables
us to make a conscious decision as to when maintaining secrecy is appropriate and when it is
not. It is also a question of showing respect toward the people who confide in us. They could
encounter difficulties if you handle their messages carelessly. Maybe they do not want other
people to find out about their serious illness or the breakdown of their marriage You must
protect these messages of a sensitive nature. Even if you openly share everything that moves
you, you have no right to expose others to the public eye through your own desire to share.
Most of us also want to read sensitive messages while alone and treat them as private
matters. That is how I feel in any case – and that is why my cellphone and my laptop are
basically off limits to other people. By contrast, I have declared my tablet to be common
property. All messaging programs there are deactivated; in other words, there are neither e-
mail accounts nor texting services set up on it. Nor can anyone ever remain logged into a
social network like Facebook or Google+ on this tablet. So, Jack cannot read that Mack thinks
he’s stupid just because he happens to be surfing with my tablet when a message to that effect
arrives from Matt.
Tip: Deliberately define and configure personal devices in such a way that only you

have access to this protected sphere.


T
6
Do Not Put the Fox in Charge of
the Henhouse
ony generously offered to set up “Find My Phone” on a smartphone for his girlfriend,
Emma. This helpful app can pinpoint the location of a lost or stolen phone in an
emergency. A little later Emma was surprised when Tony accused her of not having been at
her mother’s at all on Saturday afternoon, but instead at the Hyatt Hotel. He wanted to know
who she had been with, because he suspected some kind of rival.
Emma was appalled. She and her mother had spontaneously decided the previous
Saturday to have a cup of coffee in the popular lobby of the Hyatt Hotel. Her jealous
boyfriend had become all worked up. Apparently, he saw helping with the configuration of his
girlfriend’s phone as an invitation to spy on her. His audacity triggered a deep crisis in the
couple’s relationship. For Emma, unconditional mutual trust was fundamental to a good
relationship, yet this basic trust had been destroyed by Tony’s jealousy and intrusion for a long
time to come.
You may wholeheartedly believe your significant other would never do something like
this. He (or she) would never stoop so low as to snoop around behind your back. If you are
absolutely sure about their trustworthiness, do what you feel comfortable with and perhaps let
him or her configure your cellphone or laptop. But my advice in the last chapter on private
communication is good to keep in mind when configuring personal devices yourself or with
the help of a professional. There are better ways to configure your devices outside of using the
help of those closest to you or even your employer’s IT team. It is just too difficult to gage
these possible helpers’ curiosity.
My friend Sophia had troubles like this at work when the company IT expert Fred
installed a so-called keylogger on her private laptop at the company CEO’s request.
Keyloggers are perfidious: They record every key stroke and command entered on the
computer. Everything is revealed in the process. The CEO had erroneously suspected Sophia
of exchanging business secrets with a colleague at a competing company. This type of
monitoring was of course illegal but that did not bother Sophia’s boss. It did not even occur to
him that he could be caught.
Sophia had actually done very well in protecting her personal life at work. She never wrote
personal e-mails on her work computer. She refrained from using her PC for non-work
matters; she had purchased a private laptop for that purpose. However, when something
became too complicated for her technically, she would ask Fred from the IT department for
assistance. And that was her big mistake: She had clearly separated her professional hardware
from her personal hardware but had nonetheless let someone from her work life configure her
private laptop.

So, do not put the fox in charge of the hen house. Do not be neglectful or unnecessarily
lazy! Today, you can find many answers to questions you may have about setting up your
laptop or mobile phone with a little internet research. Just open a search engine and enter
your question. Understandable, step-by-step instructions generally appear for whatever
installation procedure you desire. And if you do not make any headway with that approach,
go to a respected computer or phone store. Many retailers offer help in setting up your device
as part of free customer service.
Tip: Configure your devices yourself if at all possible or let them be configured by
someone with whom you have no personal, professional or other connections.


D
7
Digital Eyes are Everywhere
o you still remember the example at the beginning of the book of Kate Middleton
being photographed topless by paparazzi? You might think something like that could
never happen to you because you are not the Duchess of Cambridge, a celebrity in the public
eye. You would be wrong. These days, no one is immune to such unfair attacks.
You probably have had a camera lens pointed at you for several hours today that would
only have to be properly activated for it to take snapshots of you and your surroundings
without your knowledge. Today, webcams are an integral part of laptops, tablets and
smartphones, and are very useful for video calls and photography. This webcam is usually
aimed right at you while you are operating these devices and that is exactly what can make
each of us a potential paparazzo victim. You may think you are not notable enough to be
bothered by a paparazzo or hacker seeking photos or videos of you, but this is not the case.
My cousin Sara was recently the victim of this kind of attack. Sara is by no means a
prominent woman. She teaches at a university, does not post anything on Facebook and
appears on the Internet site of her alma mater with only a picture and a brief profile.
Nonetheless a black-hat hacker identified her and proceeded to infiltrate her laptop using a
so-called remote-access Trojan (RAT). The hacker had probably spotted her at work and
found her attractive. Infatuation of this kind, combined with a digital stalker’s criminal intent,
motivated him to launch an attack on Sara’s private life. In any case, over a period of two
weeks he took photos of Sara unnoticed, along with the part of the apartment at which her
laptop’s webcam was pointing and whatever was going on there. Many pictures were naturally
frontal shots of Sara while she was sitting directly in front of the camera built into her
computer. Like many people when they are at home, she was not always completely dressed
on these occasions. You can imagine how Sara felt when she became aware of the photographs
the hacker had taken.
I therefore recommend that you always mask your webcams when you are not using them.
For instance, you can cut a Post-it into the right size or order ones on the Internet. In any
case, keep this keyhole into your private realm closed to prying eyes.
The same is true of the microphone in your device. A webcam can be taken out of service
by being fully masked over but the situation becomes somewhat more complicated with a
microphone. In many cases, masking alone does not help stop sound waves reaching the
microphone. Taping over the microphone might be an option for a computer. However, this
method is ineffective for a smartphone – after all, the microphone is constantly needed for
making calls. For this reason, the only ironclad advice I can give you here is this: Switch off
any devices you have with built-in microphones anytime you are conducting confidential
conversations. Alternatively, you can deactivate the microphone in the audio settings of your
device. Even then, you will be assured only a bit more security because experienced hackers

could continue remotely tapping into your microphone. The only secure option is switching
off the device entirely. Fortunately, we do not murmur confidential mantras the whole time
we are working on our laptop, so we rarely need to switch off our cellphones entirely.
Tip: Mask your webcams whenever you are not using them. When conducting
confidential conversations, turn off devices with built-in microphones so they
cannot be misused for eavesdropping.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/07


T
8
Keeping Intruders Out
he suggestion I made in the previous chapter has all the hallmarks of a foolproof
solution, simple yet very effective. Once you cover over your device’s camera, hackers
will no longer be able to photograph or film anything through it no matter how skilled they
are. Unfortunately, there are not these kind of foolproof remedies for all threats coming from
the digital world. We therefore need additional electronic means to protect ourselves as best
we can against unwelcome intruders in our private life and in general to ensure our digital
security.
When I now describe the myriad dangers from which you must safe guard yourself, I hope
you do not react like my friend Victor. With all the risks inherent in using the Internet, he
soon took no pleasure at all in using modern technologies and shunned them in general. It
would be a shame if you did the same. The Internet is a fantastic, enriching aspect of life
today. But you must protect yourself – just as you have to put clothes on in the morning
before leaving the house and put on a seat belt before driving a car.
Imagine you lived in a medieval fortress. You have buildings within it (devices such as
your cellphone or laptop) and maintain an infrastructure (Wi-Fi). This fortress is protected by
a wall (firewall) against unwelcome intruders (malware). At the gate, you check all newcomers
to prevent them from using your fortress unbeknownst to you (a botnet) and examine their
intentions so they do not enter and then destroy files or give the inhabitants diseases (viruses
and worms). Sometimes you have to look more closely because the visitors’ true intention is
hidden (a Trojan horse) or because they try to sneak in through an unguarded entrance (a
backdoor). Your guards (virus protection programs) are well trained, however, and are aware
of even the newest types of tricks (updates). If they somehow fail to detect something at the
gate, they also check within the fortress to see whether anything contagious is being spread. If
these guards actually find something, they isolate it from everything else (a quarantine). You
will find excellent descriptions of all these terms online, eg. on Wikipedia. For the purposes of
this book, it is imperative for you to keep the following in mind: You do not want to allow
these intruders into your smartphone, tablet or computer!
That is the purpose of virus protection and firewalls. The virus protection product on
your device examines existing and newly arrived data for suspicious content, while firewalls
protect your device from being accessed from outside by unauthorized parties. It is important
that you install all software updates for your operating system and your other software
immediately after they appear. The best solution is to activate the option for automatic
updates.
If you are unsure as to whether your devices are correctly configured for protection, check
their status. Unfortunately, I do not have any simple tip for you because every device is so
different. Consult an expert if you are unsure. It is vital that your virus protection and your

firewall function correctly. On the website for this book you can find several other
fundamental pieces of information and product tips to delve more deeply into this subject.
It is important to understand that your smartphone and tablet are small computers. In the
same way you protect desktops and laptops, you should therefore also protect their smaller
siblings. There is a comprehensive selection of virus protection programs for the Android
operating system for this purpose. Apple takes the view that iPhones and iPads do not need
separate virus protection because Apple already vets every app before it is approved for
installation. Android is a different story. This increases the diversity of applications offered,
but also makes effective protection necessary.
Despite all the precautions, any of us could be caught off-guard. A new virus unfamiliar to
the protection program could install itself from an inadvertent click on a file supposedly from
a friend but actually from a hacker – and the damage is done. The worst case scenario is that
the computer crashes completely and is not functioning at all.
Even leading antivirus software vendors admit openly that they only catch some, but not
all malicious software. This is by no means a reason not to protect oneself properly. If there
was only protection against typhoid offered, but not cholera, we would still protect ourselves
against the former. Some protection is better than none. So please follow my advice and install
a good antivirus software and firewall.
As painful as the idea may be to see one of the devices one uses infected by a virus and
possibly even completely breakdown as a result of it, it need not have any serious
consequences if you are prepared for these unfortunate events. In particular, you should save
your sensitive data in encrypted form and make backups at regular intervals. You might prefer
to store especially delicate data completely offline. There will be more on offline storage in
later chapters.
Tip: Install a firewall and virus protection programs on your devices and select
automatic software updates as an option.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/08


J
9
The Right Lid for Every Pot
ohn wanted to be on the safe side and declared all data on his computer to be confidential.
He downloaded an encryption program and defined an extra-long password that was
difficult to figure out.
What John did not realize is that the ostensibly ultra-secure method he was using did not
actually protect anything. Every time he opened his computer, he decrypted all data with his
password in order to set to work. At the end of his work session, he encrypted everything
again and shut off his computer. John could just as well have dispensed with encryption. In a
shutdown computer, his data was already well-protected from digital attacks coming from the
outside. But when he worked on his computer and decrypted all his data, his files were just as
vulnerable as someone’s who does not use encryption at all.
So, if you do decide to protect confidential data, it is important to categorize data by
degrees of confidentiality:
1. Non-confidential: Data that you are comfortable sharing with any known or
unknown person without perceiving this as an intrusion into your privacy.
2. Confidential: Data you would like to keep private. However, if they did become
public, the possible damage would be negligible or at least manageable.
3. Strictly confidential: Data that you would not want anyone to have access to or ever
become public. Data that, if in the wrong hands, could have dire personal or
economic consequences.
With this system you can easily categorize your data. The folder with the bills for the
purchase of a new refrigerator, for painting the walls and so forth – most of us would consider
this data to fall under the “non-confidential” category. In addition, there are also last year’s tax
returns or the private letter in which a friend asks for a loan. This type of information is
generally considered confidential and not something we would want to have made public. If
this data happened to be leaked at some point, the damage would not be catastrophic. So this
second category is “confidential.” Finally, let us turn to information that genuinely strictly
confidential. The best examples are passwords or access data to bank accounts. Anyone who
became privy to this information could genuinely wreak havoc in a person’s life.
You hardly want to go through every individual document to judge which category it falls
into. You probably have folders that cover certain topics or aspects of your life. If you do not,
you should create some. Decide which category each folder falls into, in other words “non-
confidential”, “confidential” or “strictly confidential.” Several of the following chapters assume
you have already assigned a certain degree of confidentiality to your various types of
information – so, it is now time to categorize your data.

Tip: Classify your data in different levels of confidentiality, divided according to the
potential effects the disclosure of this data would have for you privately or
professionally.


M
10
Open Sesame!
y good friend Heidi’s grandfather does not use any passwords – either for his cell
phone or his laptop. Living alone on a mountainside far from civilization, he sees no
threat for himself and thinks passwords are much too complicated. Is he being negligent?
There is no clear-cut answer. The crucial question is whether he keeps confidential
information on his cell phone or laptop, is registered with online vendors, or has confidential
aspects of his life to protect elsewhere. Let’s say, Heidi’s grandfather only makes occasional
phone calls with his cell phone and a black-hat hacker could cause his laptop to crash. If his
laptop contains no confidential data, it is no problem if he lives without passwords. Protection
only makes sense if there is something worth protecting – for almost all of us there is. To be as
carefree as Heidi’s grandfather, you would have to live on a remote mountain somewhere,
keep no personal data on your devices, conduct no transactions over the Internet and not even
have a credit or debit card.
If you are like most people, passwords are an inevitable part of life. You have no choice
but to use them. And that is where things start to become complicated. The pertinent how-to
books will tell you that passwords should be at least 8 to 20 characters long and that you
should use a different one for each purpose. They should never be a word or a name but
instead should contain a mixture of upper and lower-case letters, numbers and special
characters (e.g., @, % or *). If we abide by these requirements without further ado, most of us
are lost. Who can really remember a password like “Gr56gb%jcj()vjKI?” Well, most of us
cannot. So, many of us end up using easy passwords or carrying our passwords along with us.
This is extremely risky. Let me suggest two alternative approaches. Both are practical and both
promise to provide an extraordinary amount of security.
The first approach involves adopting your own logical procedure for creating passwords. It
will also help you remember them. Here is an example for the fictional Heidi:
1. Heidi joins two words together, namely her favorite color, blue, and her favorite
animal, a giraffe, capitalizing both words. The result is “BlueGiraffe”. The
important thing here is to create a made-up word that does not actually exist. Many
black-hat hackers have their programs search through entire digital encyclopedias
when they want to crack passwords. They would presumably not find “BlueGiraffe”
there.
2. To have a separate, different password for each application, Heidi creates an
individual combination of letters for each application. She derives this combination
from the name of the application itself by creating an abbreviation from each
second letter of the name, for instance for Amazon it would be “mzn”, for Facebook
“aeok” or for Gmail “mi”.

3. Next Heidi has to join together the word formed in step 1 and the abbreviation
created in step 2 as well as meet the requirement that the password contain a
number and special characters. It does not take her long to come up with an idea.
Heidi’s lucky number is 5. She adds an ampersand (“&”) and the number to the
abbreviation. The result in the case of Facebook is “aeok&5” and in the case of
Amazon “mzn&5”. The number 5 serves yet another purpose for Heidi: It
determines where this combination will be inserted in “BlueGiraffe”, namely, after
the fifth letter.
Applying this three-rule procedure, you end up with the password “BlueGaeok&5iraffe”
for Facebook or the password “BlueGmzn&5iraffe” for Amazon. Sounds complicated. And
that is precisely what it should be! The whole point of the exercise is to create passwords that
are as difficult as possible to crack. Too complicated to remember? Not at all! The three rules
are easy and you will remember them well after using them a few times. The big advantage is
that you obtain a different – rather complicated – password for each application without
having to commit it to memory. This password management approach puts you far at the
forefront of everyday users.
If you go about adopting a few rules for your own passwords, please do not use the rules
verbatim from the above example. Invent your own, ones that work for you and that you can
remember easily. Do not necessarily think about colors and animals. Instead, you might
consider a special place from your childhood or the spot where you kissed your partner for the
first time. Combine this, for example, with your favorite food – give free reign to your
imagination. And if you need a number, it can also be the number of siblings you have or the
number of visits you have paid to your aunt in Hawaii. When you go through the important
step of individualizing the password for each application, you can also read the first and third
letters going backward, for example, or use the letters that appear in the alphabet before and
after the first letter of the application. Let your imagination run wild. The more original and
personal your system for creation is, the better your passwords will be.
In most cases you can apply the rules described above without restriction. But there are
exceptions here and there: Some vendors do not allow passwords with special characters, for
example. A few others put restrictions on the length of passwords – which is ludicrous. These
exceptions are fortunately rare. If you do encounter one, I recommend that you adjust the
rules to the restriction and then apply them that way. If, say, a special character is not allowed,
you can simply leave it out. If a limit is put on the length of the password, type as many of
your characters as possible and just leave the rest of the password out.
If you still have a hard time remembering your passwords even with straightforward rules
(plus certain exceptions), I recommend that you work with a password manager such as
MobileSitter, a product developed by the Fraunhofer Institute. These password managers are
programs and apps that save all of your passwords. There are a large number to choose from.
What I especially like about MobileSitter is it has an additional feature: It intentionally
misleads an attacker by providing him with false passwords. The Fraunhofer Institute also has
a sterling reputation. If you turn to their product, you can be sure of not getting taken in by
some dubious company – an important advantage when sensitive data items such as

passwords are involved.
Password managers can likewise be a good supplement to the system described above. In
other words, you apply your password rules in everyday life; if your memory fails you at some
point, however, you can resort to your password manager and look up your passwords there.
One thing must be clear. Your password manager is only as well protected as your master
password is difficult to crack. In other words, there is always something you have to remember
here, you are not allowed to forget this master password.
In closing, I would just like to mention that passwords should be changed at regular
intervals. Now, I would not dream of proclaiming an interval of “every three months” the way
many pertinent how-to manuals do. It does no good to make unrealistic suggestions – in any
case, nobody that I know changes all their passwords at such a short interval. However, do not
let years pass by before changing your system of rules (and with them, your passwords). A
general overhaul of your password approach is necessary from time to time. You should make
this overhaul a set part of your privacy fitness program (refer to Chapter 52).
Tip: Devise a unique system for creating individualized passwords for each application.
Alternatively or additionally, you can acquire a password manager in the form of a
program or an app. Change your set of passwords on a regular basis.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/10


T
11
Now, Where Did I Put That Key?
here are many reasons people might forget their passwords. In any case, it is important
that you save or deposit your passwords securely and in more than one location. The
same holds true with your user names. Usually you need both a user name and a password to
log-in. The simplest method of recording them is a sheet of paper on which you record the
application as well as the user name and password you use for it. I do not have to tell you how
sensitive this sheet of paper is. It should be inaccessible to others in nearly all conceivable
situations, even if someone breaks into your house. It should also be put somewhere
unaffected by severe weather or by fire. If you have your vital documents in a safe deposit box
at the bank, this sheet should also be placed there. If you want to keep this sheet of paper at
home, the storage site has to be highly secure. Even burglars who turn your home completely
upside down should not be able to find it.
Maybe you could even use your own safe – but it would logically have to be permanently
anchored or built into the wall. The conventional wisdom for safes weighing less than 1,000
kilograms is that burglars can transport light safes out of homes to another site, then take all
the time they want to break them open. You be the judge in this case. My recommendation is
to get a safe deposit box at a bank. The costs are usually within bounds and the safe deposit
box is a very secure place for highly personal or difficult to replace documents, for example,
transcripts, crucial contracts and the like.
It is understandable to want to steer clear of an electronic solution as the ultimate backup
for passwords and instead opt for the classic approach of writing them on paper. Having said
that, there are of course also programs or apps for password management as mentioned in the
previous chapter. The electronic approach for backing up passwords can also have its
drawbacks. So, if you do have a really secure place to store a sheet of paper, you should go that
route – it is unbeatable.
Tip: Record your user names and passwords on a sheet of paper and store it in a secure
place, preferably in a safe or a safe deposit box.


A
12
Who’s Looking Over My
Shoulder?
t a party, my friend Henry was showing his guests vacation photos on his cellphone. He
also used this device to stream the music for that evening. His cellphone went into
action several times during the party, serving different functions. Henry was astonished when
eight-year-old Lisa, a young guest at the party, came up to him and said: “I know what your
PIN code is!” Although taken aback, Henry did ask Lisa to share her new-found knowledge.
And wonder of wonders, Lisa actually did know his PIN! Lisa’s trick was as simple as it was
effective. She had simply looked over Henry’s shoulder when he opened his cellphone. Eagle
eyes are generally not needed to see what code is being entered. Many people think no one
will see their code if they enter it fast enough, but speed makes very little difference. And the
person who wants to crib the password also tends to be helped by a feature many keypads
have, namely, the entered digit lights up briefly by way of confirmation.
What motivated little Lisa to find out passwords was that she had sought to access the fun
games on her Dad’s cellphone. But it does not take much imagination to envision other, more
serious scenarios. For instance, you want to show something on your computer to a curious
colleague at the office and have to log in to do so. Or you might enter your cellphone code
during a train ride only to notice after getting off, that the person sitting next to you has
absconded with this very cellphone. And of course there are the con artists out there who are
the reason you are told to put your hand over the keypad when entering your credit card and
ATM card PINs. It blocks their view.
Make sure no one is looking over your shoulder when you are entering a password. Turn
away somewhat while making the entry and if you are working on a permanently installed
desktop computer do not be afraid to tell someone flat-out to look away for a moment. It is
simply proper procedure, which everyone should adhere to and not be offended by.
Besides someone physically looking over your shoulder to spy on your data, there are also
technical aids for doing so. A camera can be used or the keylogger mentioned earlier – a
particularly effective method. A cover over the keypad does nothing to foil keyloggers because
they are programs in the device itself that record every single keystroke. Anyone with access to
these records can see for example that »www.amazon.com« is entered from the keypad, then
the user name with password.
Good virus protection programs generally prevent outsiders from installing a keylogger on
one of your devices. But, for example, untrustworthy individuals can install a keylogger if you
leave your laptop or cellphone in their hands just for a brief moment. They do not have to be
experienced hackers because these programs are sold on the Internet at bargain prices and can
be installed without expertise. Unfortunately, keyloggers are installed all too often by someone

who is close to the person. You should therefore never lend out the devices you consider
personal in accordance with Chapter 5.
People do not always spy on others with criminal intent. Significant others can suffer from
jealousy and try to spy on their partner. Some parents also believe they should monitor their
teenage children by running keyloggers on all the computers in the house. Granted, their
intent generally is to protect their children – an honorable goal in and of itself. Yet, as children
get more mature, they also have a right to privacy. Once a certain maturity level is reached,
parents are committing a breach of trust by monitoring their teenage childrens’ internet
behaviour with spy software. This can have serious negative effects on the relationship
between family members, sometimes irreparably. One should respect and protect the privacy
of one’s partner and mature children.
Tip: When entering access data such as user names and passwords, do not let anyone
look over your shoulder, physically or virtually.


Customize Your Infrastructure
to Ensure Your Privacy


I
13
Lock the Door Behind You
n Chapter 8 on virus protection, I used the metaphor of a medieval fortress where you have
buildings inside (devices such as cellphone and laptop) and maintain an infrastructure
(Wi-Fi). This fortress is protected by a wall (firewall) against unwelcome intruders (malware).
In this context, you can only reduce the risk of intruders, not eliminate it altogether. Even the
Pentagon does not manage to ward off hackers with complete success. Intruders have
managed time and time again to sneak into the computers of the US Department of Defense.
So, if you should ever be the victim of an attack, don’t blame yourself entirely. You are in
good company. The object is always to minimize risk. You cannot eliminate it altogether.
Otherwise you would have to cease existing digitally – and that would be neither enjoyable
nor sensible. You would be like the proverbial safest plane in the world that attained this status
by staying on the ground all the time and never flying.
In the unpleasant event that you do become a victim of an attack on your privacy, it is
important to have your data stored in encrypted form. There is no need to fret about
encryption. It is not at all complicated; software takes care of everything. It is as easy as if you
were opening a password-protected file. Afterwards, you have unhindered access to your
documents stored in encrypted form.
A whole series of manufacturers now sell encryption software and you may initially think
you are spoilt for choice. That is not the case, however, because the products of many IT
companies are not really secure from access by third parties. The problem is that many
companies – especially in the US – are forced to build in “backdoors” for government
authorities and intelligence services. They can then access the program through the backdoor
even without your password.
In your self-assessment, you may conclude that you do not have any data the government
or secret services would not be allowed to see. But things do not stop there. It used to be that
only individuals suspected of an actual crime had to fear having their privacy invaded with a
search warrant issued by a judge. Today, Internet users are all apparently under general
suspicion. You consent to this “digital search warrant” by simply approving of the terms and
conditions of business in fine print. By way of example, read the following three excerpts of
the conditions and terms of service from three companies that were not exactly random
choices:
Apple: » It may be necessary − by law, legal process, litigation, and/or requests from public
and governmental authorities within or outside your country of residence − for Apple to
disclose your personal information. We may also disclose information about you if we
determine that for purposes of national security, law enforcement, or other issues of public
importance, disclosure is necessary or appropriate. We may also disclose information about

you if we determine that disclosure is reasonably necessary to enforce our terms and
conditions or protect our operations or users. Additionally, in the event of a
reorganization, merger, or sale we may transfer any and all personal information we
collect to the relevant third party. «3
Google: » We will share personal information with companies, organizations or
individuals outside of Google if we have a good-faith belief that access, use, preservation
or disclosure of the information is reasonably necessary to:
•
meet any applicable law, regulation, legal process or enforceable governmental
request.
•
enforce applicable Terms of Service, including investigation of potential
violations.
•
detect, prevent, or otherwise address fraud, security or technical issues.
•
protect against harm to the rights, property or safety of Google, our users or the
public as required or permitted by law. «4
Facebook: »We may also access, preserve and share information when we have a good faith
belief it is necessary to: detect, prevent and address fraud and other illegal activity; to
protect ourselves, you and others, including as part of investigations; or to prevent death or
imminent bodily harm. For example, we may provide information to third-party partners
about the reliability of your account to prevent fraud and abuse on and off of our
Services.«5
These privacy statements do not even deserve to fall under the category “protection of
data privacy.” Based on them, these private companies can comb through your data at their
discretion without a court-issued warrant – an unpleasant thought. And even if that does not
bother you, the backdoors are still a problem. As long as backdoors of this kind are integrated,
they can be opened by unauthorized parties under certain circumstances. It is only a matter of
time before a nefarious hacker gang uses the same backdoors actually intended for government
authorities.
That is why you should avoid software containing backdoors as much as possible. But it is
not always clear where these backdoors are installed. Wherever you can, try to use the
following recommendations and the software that has no built-in backdoor. Against this
backdrop, the field of possible choices thins out quickly.
First you should not choose products from US companies and international companies
with a sole US branch. The reason can be seen from the story of Lavabit, for example, a US
company that began to offer encrypted e-mail communication in 2004. Nine years later it was
forced to close its doors because of massive pressure from US authorities. Owner Ladar
Levison had the following comments in the letter accompanying the closure:
“This experience has taught me one very important lesson: without congressional action or
a strong judicial precedent, I would strongly recommend against anyone trusting their
private data to a company with physical ties to the United States.”6
The equation “product from the USA = bad and product from somewhere else = good”

would be too short-sighted, however. Of course, other countries also have an interest in
forcing companies to integrate backdoors in their applications. Experts therefore give the
greatest credibility to encryption products that were programmed independent of particular
interests in a properly documented open-source process (so third parties can examine the
application).
One of these products is TrueCrypt. Incidentally, TrueCrypt has a clear-cut policy on
backdoors:
“We have not implemented any kind of ‘backdoor’ in TrueCrypt (and will never
implement any ‘backdoor’ or deliberate weakness, even if asked to do so by a government
agency), because it would defeat the purpose of the software.”7
That is exactly what we want to read. Among experts, the application was therefore
considered to be the best possible option and usable for normal users because of its simple
operation. The German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI) gave the
recommendation on its website to use TrueCrypt as a data encryption product. I am aware
that the image of government institutions has been greatly tarnished by the Snowden
revelations, yet the BSI performs its duty properly and points out leading encryption
standards that are difficult to crack not just for intelligence agencies and government
authorities but also for black-hat hackers and other villains. With its independent
recommendations, the BSI has built up a good reputation that even has skeptics forgetting it
is a government agency.
I would like to recommend TrueCrypt without qualification but one aspect should be
mentioned. In May 2014, the TrueCrypt website was suddenly rerouted to a site belonging to
Sourceforge. On that company’s site, someone speaking in the name of TrueCrypt said there
had been security concerns about the application but did not go into any detail. At the same
time a recommendation was issued to switch to BitLocker, an encryption product from
Microsoft. It was precisely this recommendation that made it so hard for insiders to believe
that the TrueCrypt protagonists had actually written this message out of conviction. We will
never know for sure, but in all probability, Microsoft had been forced to integrate the
backdoors mentioned above. The rumor spread that the same thing may have happened to
the developer of TrueCrypt as to Ladar Levinson from Lavabit.
These events surrounding TrueCrypt may discourage you from using this application to
encrypt your data. But I myself see no reason not to continue using TrueCrypt until a better
alternative comes along. Better in this context means to be open source and well-documented
and above all, to have a credible record when it comes to the eschewal of backdoors. It may be
that TrueCrypt will soon find a home and be further developed. A follow-up team is looking
for corresponding support while hosting the last version of TrueCrypt that functioned
properly. You will find these further links on the Internet site for this book. You should not
use the former website of TrueCrypt in any case (www.truecrypt.org). Ithas been rerouted to
Sourceforge and will not lead you to the correct software.
Once you have downloaded your encryption software, you should create not one
encrypted folder but rather at least three:

•
Folder 1 for non-confidential data.
•
Folder 2 for confidential data.
•
Folder 3 for strictly confidential data.
Techies might turn up their noses at the term “folder” but the functionality is just the
same for non-experts. To use the TrueCrypt terminology, “containers” are created where data
can be stored as in a folder. I therefore take the liberty of talking about folders, which are
sometimes encrypted and sometimes decrypted. When these containers are decrypted, they
correspond to folders.
Why do you need at least three folders? You will recall how we classified data according to
confidentiality in Chapter 9 – and with good reason. This step is essential because you do not
always encrypt all your data simultaneously. For example, if you want to get at a totally
harmless document such as a draft letter to cancel a newspaper subscription, you do not
decrypt sensitive areas at the same time. The basic rule is this: Always open just the folders
you need. That way the data in the other folders remains protected for the duration.
You should pay special attention to the encryption of your strictly confidential data. In
other words, the data where a loss of control would definitely affect you and could even result
in personal or economic consequences. This strictly confidential data should be kept in a
decrypted state as briefly as possible, namely just for the few moments it takes to file away or
to retrieve a given document. Otherwise, this data is consistently encrypted.
It can make sense for you to save strictly confidential data separately by subject fields in
different folders. This approach also boosts security. That is why I said earlier at least three
folders because you can naturally also use more than that. Let us assume for example that you
have defined three types of strictly confidential information: (1.) Password list, (2.) Love
letters and (3.) Tax returns. My recommendation would be to create three encrypted folders
for these three categories. Setting up these folders will take you all of five minutes, but will
ensure that you do not always have to open your extremely sensitive password list only
because you are looking for something to warm your heart and want to read old love letters.
You decrypt only the folder whose content you need at that moment.
If you plan on working on a file for an extended period, you can remove it temporarily
from an encrypted folder, save it separately, work on it and then later return it to the original
encrypted folder. That way the given folder remains encrypted while you are working on a file
from inside it. In this case, be sure that all copies of the file are deleted again after you return
the document to the encrypted area. To this end, it is always advisable to use the same place
for temporary storage, for instance your desktop.
Another point, after storing the file in the encrypted area you should run a check by
entering the name of the file in the search engine of your device. If the file has been deleted
everywhere (except in the encrypted area of course), the search will yield no results if all
folders are properly encrypted – and that is exactly what you want. What this unsuccessful
search means is that the file is no longer found anywhere else but in the encrypted folder. This
brief check is essential because our computers sometimes have a life of their own and may put
a copy of a document in an unexpected folder. After putting the file back in the encrypted

area, you should be on the safe side if you briefly search through your computer – a procedure
that takes a matter of seconds.
In closing I will add that it is advisable for you to create a non-encrypted copy of your
data. But more on that later, in Chapter 17, where we talk about backups.
Tip: Encrypt your data with an application that has no built in backdoor. In the
process, separate non-confidential, confidential and strictly confidential data from
each other so you do not have to keep all data decrypted simultaneously.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/13
3
»Apple Privacy Policy«, Apple Inc., as of September 17, 2014, http://www.apple.com/legal/privacy/en-ww/
4
»Google Privacy Policy«, Google Inc., as of December 19, 2014, http://www.google.ch/intl/en/policies/privacy/
5
»Facebook Data Policy«, Facebook Inc., as of January 30, 2015, https://www.facebook.com/policy.php
6
Ladar Levison, August 8, 2013, http://lavabit.com
7
»TrueCrypt 
Frequently 
Asked 
Questions«, 
TrueCrypt 
Foundation, 
as 
of 
January 
2, 
2014,
http://andryou.com/truecrypt/faq.php


M
14
Offline Storage
y friend Boris practices an especially effective method of confidential data storage. He
stores all his data on an old computer he keeps completely offline. He went ahead and
removed the whole network interface card. If that bit of surgery on a live subject is too
advanced for you, you can achieve quite an acceptable level of security by shutting off the Wi-
Fi, Bluetooth and all other data transmission routes permanently. Generally speaking, you
should never hook up this old storage-only computer to any network via a data channel. You
must make sure that your backup computer never has access to the Internet.
Whenever Boris needs any of this strictly confidential data, he boots up the computer and
views it there – completely detached from the online world. Special care is called for if you
need a copy of data from this confidential area to edit it, for example. In this case, you should
burn the data onto an unused CD or DVD if possible. An external hard drive such as a USB
flash drive is another option.
If the USB flash drive or external hard drive has been used previously, you must make sure
that it is free of viruses. Entire mainframe computers and even industrial plants, such as power
stations have been incapacitated by viruses on USB flash drives and external hard drives. If
you are not able to burn a CD or DVD, please be careful with USB flash drives and external
hard drives. Before using USB flash drives or external hard drives for relocating confidential
material, clean them with special software known as data shredders or also erasers. You can
readily find data shredders on the Internet.
These simple yet radical methods are also the most effective. Just as no one can take
pictures of you through a masked webcam, it is likewise impossible for confidential
information to leave your devices if they are not online.
You should keep this computer in a safe place, too, ideally in a safe deposit box or safe
(refer to Chapter 11); otherwise, hide it well. For the sake of completeness, I would like to
mention at this juncture something that is presumably already clear to you. The need for
effective password protection applies also and in particular to this offline computer as well and
the data on it should be stored in encrypted form. Also do not forget to keep a copy of this
strictly confidential data. Any device can break down at some point. The worst case scenario is
that the data can no longer be recovered. Chapter 17 explains sensible ways of making and
maintaining copies of data and backups.
Tip: To be on the safe side with extremely sensitive data, store it on a separate computer
that remains permanently offline. Exercise great care when removing this data from
this offline computer.


I
15
High in the Clouds …
n the late 1980s, I worked as a young trainee at a bank, serving customers. We already had
monitors and keyboards at our desk. However, the data and programs themselves were all
stored in a central data center far from the branch bank. I had to tell customers quite
frequently that the line was down and that I could not retrieve their account information at
the moment. Our terminals back then were “dumb:” They solely assured us access to the
central data center.
Today, a quarter of a century later, we appear to have come full circle. Under the term
“cloud computing” companies are trying to get us to store our data again in some unknown
data center far from home. Our PCs are increasingly turning into mere input and output
terminals – the same as twenty-five years ago.
Of course, basic conditions are much better today than they were back then. The so-called
transmission lines have become more powerful and more stable. Wi-Fi networks provide us
many places at home and on the road for accessing this cloud, where our data is stored,
provided we take advantage of this service. The term “cloud” is very telling in this context
(presumably inadvertently): Where this data is saved is usually “in the clouds” for us as users
of this service – in other words, we have no idea where it is.
Why do many users still trust their data to unknown data centers? The big advantage of
cloud computing is that the data is saved regardless of the device and is actually accessible
from any location with a data connection. That means you can be using your desktop
computer, laptop, smartphone or tablet and all these devices will have access to the same data.
You begin to write a letter on your desktop PC and can continue working on it on your
laptop while riding on a train. You photograph your friends with your smartphone and the
photo is available immediately on all devices. There are further advantages to cloud
computing. For instance, you can rent memory capacity in unlimited quantities as required.
However, the crucial advantage is that your data is stored independent of a given device.
Nothing comes free in life so there is a big downside here, too. If you use a cloud, your
data physically leaves your own sphere of influence, the area over which you yourself have
control. The data centers run by the cloud service providers are spread across the globe. Often
you do not even know where your data is stored at any given moment. If you take certain
precautions, this drawback poses no problem at all. And my intent with this book is not to
keep you from using advances but instead to help you to utilize them to your own advantage
without compromising your privacy too much. And cloud computing is undoubtedly a major
advance. You have access to your data regardless of your location or device and the cloud
offers a further effective backup to protect you against data loss.
If you set off to look for a good cloud service, you will have a hard time seeing the forest

for the trees. This is a highly lucrative line of business and countless providers are eager to
store your data for you. If you run a search for “cloud service providers” on the Internet,
myriad choices open up – from small local providers to giants in the industry such as Amazon
or Apple that are investing vast sums in cloud computing.
The field of acceptable service providers thins out considerably, however, if you want to
protect your privacy in a sustainable way and you follow a fundamental rule. Your data must
be stored in the clouds only in encrypted form and, equally importantly, it should leave and
reach your devices also only in encrypted form. In other words, encryption and decryption
occur on your device, not in the cloud.
Why is this aspect so important? You may recall the famous diagram an NSA employee
drew showing how the NSA hacks into Google databases. Google does a good job encrypting
the stored data as far as we know. But there are points during transmission where the data is
not encrypted and the secret services tap precisely into those spots. You may not care that a
wannabe 007 is reading your data in some basement in Virginia. But whatever the secret
services can now do, a good hacker team keen on misusing your information will also soon be
able to achieve if they are not already able to do so. And you should put a stop to this activity
as quickly as possible.
You have two alternatives to choose from if you want to send exclusively encrypted data
over the Internet:
1. You encrypt your data yourself on your computer with a program like TrueCrypt.
Only then do you send the encrypted data to the cloud and retrieve it from there.
2. You select a cloud service provider that does provide encryption and decryption on
your devices instead of on its own servers. These processes hold up for the entire
transmission process and are likewise known as end-to-end encryption. What you
want to hear from any possible provider of this service is that only you know your
password for data encryption and decryption and that the password never leaves
your devices.
Of course you can combine the two approaches. In other words, you look for a cloud
service with this end-to-end encryption and deposit only data you previously encrypted
yourself.
It is also important that the encryption you use is asymmetric. Essentially encryption of
this kind involves a pair of keys, one public and one private. Without the private key, files
cannot be encrypted. The private key is created, known and stored by only you and remains
private at all times. You alone have control over this key. No one should be able to get access
to your data, eg. through a backdoor.
How do you find out whether a service provider satisfies these requirements? Nearly all
cloud computing providers give you a florid description of how well they protect your data
only to contradict themselves at another juncture. Here is an example of this from Apple. The
website of the provider stated the following under the heading “Data Privacy”:
»iCloud secures your data by encrypting it when it’s sent over the Internet, storing it in an

encrypted format when kept on server«8
Actually sounds quite good. But it is not. If you look around the Apple website on
another page you find the following passage on data privacy:
»It may be necessary − by law, legal process, litigation, and/or requests from public and
governmental authorities within or outside your country of residence − for Apple to
disclose your personal information. We may also disclose information about you if we
determine that for purposes of national security, law enforcement, or other issues of public
importance, disclosure is necessary or appropriate. We may also disclose information about
you if we determine that disclosure is reasonably necessary to enforce our terms and
conditions or protect our operations or users.«9
These two contradicting statements show that Apple possesses a general key that gives the
company unrestricted access to your data at any time. Now, of course you are an upstanding
citizen and are not involved in anything the authorities should not be allowed to see. But
whatever Apple can do, others can theoretically do just as well. To avoid belaboring the
example of the black-hat hacker, let us say that the other party in this case is a disgruntled
Apple employee keen on damaging his company by disclosing customer data. If you are, say, a
psychiatrist and the contact list and calendar entries you have stored in the iCloud suddenly
become public, your patients are sure to be anything but delighted. A cloud that reserves a
general key for itself is therefore not acceptable under any circumstances. It is just a question
of time before the first general key is hacked or made public by a former employee bent on
mischief. You should therefore not entrust your date to these types of clouds.
Not wanting to single out Apple alone, let me just say that Amazon, Google and
Microsoft are US companies who are also obligated to create these kinds of general keys. The
justification is protection from terrorist dangers; the discussions are well-known. The one
aspect you must be aware of is that these general keys pose a security risk for your confidential
data, and you should avoid them.
Things can also be done differently as shown by the company Wuala, a cloud service that
was developed in Switzerland and runs data centers in Switzerland, Germany and France. As
far as we know, Wuala has no backdoor that would allow the company itself or a third party
to access your data with the help of a general key. And Wuala says so on its website:
»All files are encrypted on your computer before being transferred to the cloud. Your
password never leaves your computer, so no unauthorized user, not even LaCie employees,
could ever access your data. … LaCie employees have very limited access to your data.
They can only see how many files you have stored and how much storage space they occupy.
The files themselves, as well as all metadata (folder names, file names, comments, preview
images, etc.), are encrypted.«10
This is the kind of message one wants to read. Of course we could be a shade more
paranoid or fatalistic if you will and say no one can be trusted and any code can be cracked –
and there would probably be some truth to that. But if you get the kind of unrestricted
assurances that Wuala issues, you have done enough to protect your data to your best ability.
If you keep confidential contact data, say, as a physician, journalist or lawyer, this kind of

assurance from a cloud service provider is important for demonstrating compliance with your
data privacy obligations to your clients if for nothing else. If you want more, you can ratchet
up the security of your data yet again by using the alternatives above additively, in other
words, encrypt your data on your device (for example with TrueCrypt) before depositing it in
the cloud memory unit of a service with asymmetric encryption.
It should be mentioned that Wuala changed its service offer in June 2014 to a payment
system. I hope you do not fall victim to the “for free” addiction so rampant on the Internet
and make do with a non-secure service just to avoid paying a small charge. Your personal data
is at stake. A few dollars to protect it is money well spent.
If you commit to this effective approach to data protection, you have already paid half the
rent for the secure use of a cloud service. However, it is very important that the cloud not be
the only storage site for your data. After all, cloud providers can also go bankrupt, their data
centers could be destroyed by natural disasters or black-hat hackers could corrupt them.
Anyone who doubts that this black-hatter scenario cannot happen need only recall the Iranian
centrifuges for uranium production that were put out of operation by software smuggled in by
secret services. What would prevent a hacker team from wanting to bring a renowned cloud
data center crashing down at some point? In a case such as this, the cloud should not be the
only place you store your children’s pictures, the addresses of friends and acquaintances, your
calendar entries and other important documents. It is therefore important to have a well-
functioning backup system outside the cloud. You will find more about these types of backups
in Chapter 17.
Tip: If you want to deposit your data in a cloud outside your control, make sure you
encrypt the data first. Make sure your data undergoes encryption on your
computer before transfer and that you wait until the data is downloaded to decrypt
it. This ensures that both in storage and during transfer, your data is secure. Be
sure that the password for encryption and decryption is located solely on your
computer.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/15
8
»iCloud security and privacy overview«, Apple Inc., as of November 8, 2014
9
»Apple Privacy Policy«, Apple Inc., as of September 17, 2014, http://www.apple.com/legal/privacy/en-ww/
10 »Wuala Security«, LaCie, as of April 29, 2014, https://www.wuala.com/en/learn/technology


A
16
Digital Blackmailing
t first glance, this chapter would seem to apply solely to users of Apple products. But the
message here can also apply analogously to other self-contained systems and is something
you should keep a sharp eye on.
In the course of establishing its Maverick operating system in 2013, Apple did away with
the feature for synchronizing contact and calendar data directly among the different devices
using its own program iTunes without making much fuss about the matter. Consequently,
users of Apple products were then able to synchronize their data only using the so-called
iCloud, the cloud product from Apple. With this step, Apple brutally forced its customers to
use its own cloud services. Apple’s intent with iCloud is crystal clear to Forrester analyst Frank
Gillett. He noted in Chip Online that, with iCloud, Apple controls the entire ecosystem for
user data. Once it is set up and expanded, it will be practically impossible for users to switch
to another supplier.11 In other words, this innovation is a deliberate, strong-armed tactic to
ensure customer loyalty.
For many Apple users, the elimination of the local synchronization option posed a
genuine problem. What were customers supposed to do, for instance, if they used Apple
devices but had opted for a different cloud application? What were they to do if their jobs
required them to treat customer data confidentially? Just think of the psychiatrist who has his
patients’ appointments, addresses and phone numbers stored on his cellphone and computer.
The only acceptable approach for people in these occupations is to use the safe cloud
described in the previous chapter. For others of us, it is simply a matter of principle, we do
not want outsiders to be able to look into our private address book or calendar.
Many Apple users felt their relationship with the beautifully designed products from
California had become deeply troubled when faced with the prospect of having to use iCloud.
Alongside the big advantage Apple offers in its synchronized devices, software and hardware,
customers suddenly began sensing the blatant attempts at digital blackmailing. Apple turned
the thumbscrews on any user who did not want to go into the iCloud. The only choice for a
disciple of Apple’s products and services was to obey or switch to a different digital religion.
Ultimately, there was a happy end. Apple heard the cries of protest from scores of
customers who had been expressing their outrage about this extortionate approach for months
in forums and blogs. Six months later it reintroduced local synchronization, in other words,
synchronization without having to resort to the iCloud. Apple took this step just as quietly as
it had taken the step to eliminate this feature before. But who is to say whether another
attempt will be made by Apple to force customers to enter their cloud? Time will tell.
Incidentally, the other greedy data collectors such as Google, Microsoft et cetera are hardly
much holier. The following also applies to Facebook, LinkedIn, Xing, WhatsApp and others:

They are all searching for access to as much of your data as possible and repeatedly find new
ways of tapping into aspects of your digital life. The difference between these others and
Apple, however, is that you can do without most of these products in individual cases because
they are not part of a self-contained system. With Apple, however, functionality and user-
friendliness decrease markedly as soon as you try mixing Apple products with other ones.
For years, the discussion about open and closed systems for normal users was rather
superfluous because very few people used what was “open” in operating systems like Windows
or Android compared to the world of Apple. With the coercion from Apple to use iCloud,
this situation could well become an issue of data security. Once users get trapped in a self-
contained system, they become susceptible to digital blackmail unless they want to replace all
their hardware overnight. MacBook and iPhone deliver a reliable service and bring enjoyment
into our everyday lives at home and at work. But the handling of confidential data is not
something to consider lightly. Storing this data in a cloud may therefore not be an option for
many of us. As a final consequence, a departure from the world of Apple may become
unavoidable unless the use of iCloud remains optional – of course, without limiting the
functionality of Apple products.
Tip: When initially purchasing hardware and an operating system, consider your needs
as far as security goes, and keep the inherent risks of self-contained systems such as
Apple in mind.
11 Translated from »Apple iCloud: Zweifel am Datenschutz angemeldet«, Chip online, April 4, 2012,
http://business.chip.de/news/Apple-iCloud-Zweifel-am-Datenschutz-angemeldet_55330207.html


F
17
Avoiding Data Loss
rom a concerted attack by a hacker destroying the storage facilities of your cloud
provider, to your laptop falling on the floor – your data is subject to a myriad of dangers.
This is why you should make copies of your data. Many computers offer an automated
backup solution. You should make use of this feature, provided you store these backups on a
properly encrypted medium. Please keep in mind, all the protection you apply to your main
data set is senseless if your backup is unprotected.
Along with these complete backups of your computer, I recommend that you also make a
copy-and-paste copy of your important data and not encrypt it. Exactly, you read that
correctly: Do not encrypt it! Although no one I know has ever been a victim of this scenario,
it is conceivable that a problem might occur at some point with data decryption. And if it
does you should also have an non-encrypted copy of your important data.
You must naturally store this non-encrypted copy in a very well-protected place. As with
passwords, I would recommend you store it in a safe deposit box at a bank or in a safe (refer to
Chapter 11). A non-encrypted copy of your important data should be kept in a highly secure
place in any event.
I consider this copy to be indispensable. Whatever degree of security the backup of your
entire computer seems to give you, this security is only useful if you can actually utilize the
data if need be. And users occasionally have unpleasant experiences in this situation. If you
use a fifth-generation C4-PO computer but your backup is from a second-generation
computer, it could be that you will not even be able to use this backup on the new computer.
A clean, system-independent copy of your data is therefore irreplaceable.
Remember you have to update this copy on a regular basis. It is not easy to be as
scheduled as automatic updates which can be set to take place daily without your action –
provided you have set up your system for these updates and have connected it to a backup
storage medium. But go ahead anyway and make a classic copy-and-paste copy at regular
intervals based on the volume of new data you add during a certain period.
Incidentally, make sure to do the same for your smartphone and tablet. In most cases,
these devices do automatic backups when you connect them to your computer. Do so
regularly! The backup for these other devices is also assured automatically with the computer
backup. To this end, I recommend that you save important data or data you would hate to
lose – such as photos of vacations or of holidays – not only on your smartphone or tablet but
also as copies on your computer. This will ensure your safety across multiple devices.
A final word on the subject of backups. Not everything can and must be saved in
digitalized form. Saving physical paper copies in a secure place is recommended especially for
originals of documents such as transcripts, diplomas, etc. that you collect over the course of

your life. A scanned copy is certainly helpful but saving the original is indispensable. A safe
deposit box or safe is the most secure spot for these kinds of vital documents, which are also
frequently hard to replace.
Tip: Protect yourself against data loss with an automated backup system for your
computer, one that saves the data in encrypted form, plus a non-encrypted,
securely kept “copy-and-paste” version of your data.


Y
18
Sweeping Dirt Under the Rug
our computer accumulates a lot of dirt – and then sweeps it under the rug. You would
not think these logical machines would share this human tendency toward messiness and
disorder but they do. You have to clean up regularly because your computer is not going to
clean up by itself. There are various places in your computer where data is stored, long after
you have hit the delete button and believed this data long gone.
Where does this data originate? Well, there are the famous examples of employees who, on
their last day of work, quickly dump any personal data they have on their company computer
into the recycle bin but then forget to empty the bin. You are probably laughing at how
anyone could be so stupid but guess what? The author of this book made a similar mistake! I
may not ever have forgotten to empty an obvious recycle bin on my desktop but many
programs such as photo editing software have their own separate bins. If you edit e-mails
directly in your browser at the service provider, there are recycle bins there that you should
empty manually on a regular basis.
That’s not all. Take the example of Ben who felt compelled to open all of his friend Brent’s
emails and their attachments. Yes, Brent sometimes sent inappropriate content, but how
would Ben know in advance? He therefore checked out his friend’s emails and their
attachments each time. Ben immediately deleted any inappropriate content Brent sent. Time
went by and a download folder filled up with material that Internet aficionados like to call
“not suitable for work” or “NSFW” for short. Ben had no idea about this folder. But when
Ben bought himself a new laptop and gave the old one to his son Benjamin, you cannot
imagine how delighted the eleven-year-old boy was. While Benjamin was looking for a game
he had downloaded, he happened upon the wondrous cache of films that were actually “not
suitable for home” (“NSFH”) either – what a film festival with all his friends this was, thanks
to his dad!
When you download files from the Internet or open attachments in e-mails, your
computer frequently makes a copy of the files in a folder you usually do not even know exists.
If you open the search function and enter “download” or “download e-mail” there, you will be
surprised what you will find. If your settings are such that downloaded files are saved in a
different folder, you should have a look there as well.
Even upstanding citizens have at some point received a bawdy video from a friend. They
may open it innocently and play it. They might hit the delete button immediately, not
wanting to keep anything questionable in their inbox. The email may be deleted and gone
from their inbox. But the computer may have generated a copy of the file without one’s
knowledge. Many computers do so when one opens an attachment.
For this and other reasons, it pays off to thin out the download folders at regular intervals.

If you proceed as described above, in other words, enter “download” as a keyword, you should
generally find all download folders. But be careful when deleting. You may still need one or
more of the files in this folder. If you do, shift that file to another place before deleting the
entire download folder.
To protect your own privacy, I recommend that you manually clean out “the dirt from
under your computer’s rug”. There is also computer cleaning software that you can certainly
use to optimize your computer’s performance. But from the perspective of protecting your
own privacy, only you can reliably judge which documents must be deleted and which ones
must be saved. For this reason, I recommend that you manually go through the download
folders.
Tip: From time to time, you should clear your computer of any “dirt swept under the
rug.” Delete files you do not need and look for recycle bins that should be
emptied.


A
19
Dirt On the Rug
fter your computer has gotten what it deserves, we should be a little hard on ourselves,
too. All too often we leave dirt just lying around – on top of the rug, not even under it.
We keep files we have not used for a long time and don’t need anymore although we know
how to located and delete them. One forgets to delete them or is simply too lazy to do so.
Once again, only you yourself can carry out this task. You are the only one who knows what
data you still need and what data can be discarded. Do not be afraid to throw out files!
Whatever no longer exists, can also no longer be a risk to your privacy.
Thinning out the e-mail folder is part of this big clean-up operation. That means both the
e-mails you receive and the ones you send. As harsh as it may sound, many e-mails are simply
not worth saving. Whether or not they are, depends primarily on the person with whom you
are communicating. That is why I recommend that you initially arrange the e-mails you
receive by sender and the e-mails you send by recipient. Then delete any communication
neither subject to a legal obligation to be saved nor having a sentimental or other present-day
value. You can easily detect whether e-mails fall into these categories by the sender and the
recipient.
How you proceed depends on how radical you want to be about file deletion. Should files
really disappear altogether from planet earth? If so, you should also think about copies that
might exist in your backups and other data copies. Unfortunately, automated total backups of
devices can usually not be separated in a way that allows you to delete only one part of them.
The only possibility in this case would be to create new backups after a big clean-up and then
to delete any previously created backups in their entirety. However, other old data you may
have deleted once but might look for again in the future would then be gone. One purpose of
backups is to enable data to be found again. It is up to your discretion how thoroughly files
should be deleted. You are the only one who can decide which solution is the right one for
you.
During a big cleanup, do not forget that there are documents you definitely want to keep,
also for the long term. It is best for you to convert them into PDFs and save them in your
regular document folders. The reason for converting them to PDF format is that the programs
we all use are revised and replaced over the course of many years. In my estimation, a simple
PDF document will always be able to be opened somehow. This may become impossible at
some point in time with other more complicated programs. To be on the safe side, you can
incidentally save a second copy in paper form. You must naturally keep confidential
documents in a safe place.
Tip: Do regular fundamental cleanups on your devices and delete whatever you no
longer need. You should convert files into a well-established and timeless format
such as PDF to save documents you want to keep electronically.



I
20
Invisible Ghosts
n 1997, at the start of my first job as a management executive, I was put in charge of
restructuring the troubled South American subsidiaries of the company. There was
something strange about this crisis, as the markets and our operations were in good condition.
Soon after I assumed the position, we uncovered a serious case of fraud and began a search for
embezzled money and suitable evidence. Lo and behold, a detective agency we hired struck
pay dirt – on computers whose data had supposedly all been deleted. The criminals’ entire e-
mail correspondence appeared before my amazed eyes along with a whole lot more. How was
the existence of all this data possible?
I came to realize that “delete” does not mean the files are also removed from the hard disk
– not by a long shot. The memory of the deleted file does not fade on the hard disk until the
same memory location is overwritten repeatedly with other data. After the file is deleted, the
only thing that happens to the file, is that it is initially no longer displayed but is very often
still completely intact on the hard disk.
Once I deleted the chip in my digital camera too early by accident and lost nice vacation
pictures. Then I remembered what had happened in Brazil and looked on the Internet for
software that would recover the deleted photos. I simply entered “recover deleted photos” in
the search engine. There was software available for this purpose and I was able to recover all
the vacation photos.
There can be very good reasons why recovery of your data is not something you want to
be possible. You could sell your smartphone, tablet, laptop or even a used camera or give one
of these items to someone as a present. Another instance where effective data deletion is vital
is with devices that you use at work but that you are also explicitly allowed to use privately.
Nothing stands in the way of a sustainable cleanup of your devices, provided you have already
properly stored all company data belonging to your employer in another location. This
cleanup requires more than merely deleting e-mails and other files.
Incidentally, these procedures also apply if you scrap a device or also discard external hard
disks or USB flash drives. People do snoop around in garbage and these kinds of devices
should not be thrown in the garbage anyway. They contain valuable materials and should be
professionally recycled. Once you have properly “shredded” your data, you can go ahead and
recycle.
Tip: Effectively delete data from all devices, hard disks and USB flash drives that you
sell, give away as a present, recycle or handover permanently for other reasons.
There are special programs for this purpose on the Internet.
For further information, please visit:

www.safe-surfer.com/book/20


M
21
Getting a Second Chance
y friend Fred is my personal IT guru. His main line of work is to design and
implement security plans for major companies. Whenever I come up against an
insurmountable problem, I consult Fred. From time to time nearly all of us need an expert of
this kind. It is no wonder that my many conversations with Fred provided fresh impetus for
this book. The digital world has changed daily life in wonderful ways but sometimes it can
just be complicated and frustrating. Believe me, I know the feeling!
Fred’s assistance generally benefits me greatly. After his interventions, the IT sun shines
brightly again, replacing a virtual sky covered with dark clouds or even full of thunder and
lightning. Sometimes Fred has lapses, however, and overshoots the mark. When this happens,
no measure is good enough for him. He sees only problems. Eventually he may come up with
a solution but it is much too complicated. And in the words of the great nuclear physicist
Enrico Fermi, “I am still confused, but on a higher level.” Then I have to remind him in a
friendly way that his tips are only useful to me if they are implementable and suitable for daily
use – i.e. if I can use them even when he is no longer sitting beside me helping.
I am telling you this because there is a good chance your “Fred” might be very similar to
mine. It seems to be in the genes of many IT professionals. They mostly offer good tips. But
somtimes, they do not realize that their advice requires a level of technological know-how that
flies far over most of our heads. Incidentally, I am quite sure some IT aficionados will consider
some of the tips in this book primitive and not approve of them (taping over the webcam is
probably a provocation to them, but it works!). It does not bother me and shouldn’t bother
you. Your IT expert is only helpful if their recommendation is useable. So, do not cave in.
Demand effective help from your expert. Demand more until you have a solution you
understand and consider practicable.
Having said this, I can fully understand the occasional lapses Fred has. Almost nothing in
the digital world is a hundred percent safe. Very rarely, you know exactly whom you are
dealing with. When you download software, for example. you don’t meet the programmers in
person in order to get an impression of them. All you usually see is a website and the
information provided on it. One can do a few checks on the internet, but in the end, one has
to decide whether to trust the website or not, without ever having spoken to a person. There
frequently remain lingering doubts. If you are like Fred and doing a job day in and day out
where enemies are lurking everywhere, it is presumably a big challenge to remain constructive
all the time. Basically, it is like the never-ending fight between organized crime and the police.
Capabilities constantly develop and advance on both sides – a tool used for fighting crime
today is certain to be outdated by tomorrow. If the police were to give up because of this,
chaos would break out. The only way to go is to keep upgrading! You have no alternative if
you want to protect your own privacy.

You get your really big chance to take a huge step forward when you acquire a new device.
At that point, you can try to do everything correctly from the outset. “Everything” is
admittedly quite a blanket claim. As mentioned before, you will not eliminate your risk in the
process but you will reduce it substantially all the same. So, just as you usually close the front
door behind you even though doing so will not completely prevent burglaries, you should also
configure your devices for the best possible protection from the onset and thereby ward off
most dangers.
Unfortunately, it is impossible to present you with a comprehensive checklist for
configuring a new device. The reason is that the procedure differs for each operating system,
its various versions and to a certain extent, even for each type of device. I can therefore only
give you a few generally applicable pieces of advice at this juncture. You have to do the
essential work yourself or seek help from your “Fred”, that is, the IT expert of your choice.
To lay a solid foundation for all subsequent steps you need to read the operating
instructions thoroughly. They usually are available only on the manufacturer’s website. Many
times they contain tips on optional settings that provide you with greater security and privacy.
Judge for yourself what you think you are capable of doing. In case of doubt, bring in a
reliable IT expert. Please don’t simply give up and, in doing so, possibly open yourself up to
massive risks. If your firewall is not correctly activated, for instance, you may not notice
anything initially – until it is too late. This should just not happen.
Once you start configuring your device, you may soon notice that decisions are not always
easily made. Security and privacy are often directly at odds with user friendliness. Certain
functions may not even be fully available if you opt for strict security and privacy settings. In
many cases, you unfortunately have to accept an “either/or” option instead of a “both/and”
option. Say, you configure your devices to avoid automatically exchanging photos between
them because you do not want every picture you take with your smartphone appear
simultaneously on the readily accessible tablet computer in your living room. With this
configuration, you dispense with a beneficial feature. You simply have to decide for yourself
which applications you decide to use on a case by case basis.
Nor must you be a willing pioneer for every advance. It is generally better to wait awhile
until an application has stood the test of time. Leave it to others to serve as guinea pigs for
new applications. This way you can learn from the mistakes of initial users and wait until a
new app has been tried and tested before hopping on board.
You don’t have to wait until buying a new device before tackling reconfiguration. If you
created a comprehensive copy of your data (see Chapter 17), you can reset your existing device
to its factory settings and start from the beginning. The device will be virgin territory, like a
new one. Many dread the task of reconfiguration but it is a positive feeling once the task is
completed, comparable to a freshly renovated apartment. All the electronic muck that piled
up over time is cleared away in a thorough major cleanup. If you want to try, you cannot
simply take the most recent backup. If you did, your computer would be just like before,
including all the potential security problems. The whole idea of the reconfiguration of your
device is to make progress.
As a first step, you should configure your computer exactly as if you had purchased a new

device. During the configuration keep in mind the pointers from the operating instructions
mentioned above, possibly also other sources on the Internet if you trust yourself to do so –
and of course the recommendations made in this book. Then install the software that you
wish to continue using and that is not already part of the basic features of your device. This is
usually quite simple to do. You just insert a CD or DVD with the corresponding software or
download the software from the manufacturer’s website on the Internet.
Sometimes you need an activation code or have to log in to put the software into
operation. If you failed to jot down this information earlier, your omission catches up with
you at this juncture. But there’s no way around it. At one point, you have to go through this
vale of tears and correct this mistake from the past. So if you are missing information, write to
the software manufacturer and explain that you do not have the data you need to put the
software into operation. Generally, the necessary information will be sent to you without
complication. For future reference, you should record all pertinent information in a file that
you can use as a crib sheet for equipment setup. Save the file in the part of your computer for
strictly confidential encrypted data and keep a paper copy of it in a safe place.
After installing the necessary software, create the different kinds of encrypted folders – at
least three in number, as described earlier in this book (see Chapter 9). Then take the personal
data you previously saved from your old computer and copy them into the three folders based
on their degree of confidentiality. This is an ideal opportunity to reflect again on the degree of
confidentiality you wish to assign individual data. You may conclude that many a file would
be better off in a different folder than before.
When copying your data, you naturally also run the risk of inadvertently copying viruses
along with it. It’s like fitting a square peg in a round hole. We do not want to be without our
previously accumulated data. Therefore, we have no choice but to copy it onto the
reconfigured device. But, this creates the risk of copying old viruses as well.
The only real alternative is to maintain two devices and use the old computer to look up
old data while starting the new computer with a blank profile without old data. The old
computer should then be offline at all times, as already described in Chapter 14.
I would like to go beyond just giving you this rather technical recommendation, however.
Use this opportunity to break with old patterns of behavior as well – especially if after reading
this book you conclude that you really should change your conduct. Follow the advice in the
closing Chapter 52 and mark set dates in your calendar for carrying out recurring cleanup and
maintenance procedures. I can tell you from experience: All this takes very little time but
yields great benefits.
In conclusion, let me say that the same holds true for smartphones and tablets. These
devices today are mini-computers. Incidentally, so too are many modern television sets,
refrigerators and other so-called “smart devices.” You will find out more about the latter in
Chapter 24. At this point just note that you should treat all these devices like their bigger
brothers, laptops and desktops. Everything must be properly configured.
Tip: Seize the opportunity when acquiring a new device to use initial configuration as
way to improve your data and privacy protection. You can also reset an existing

device to its factory settings and then configure it as if it were a new device.
Remember that moments like these are also opportunities to change your patterns
of behavior. Your behavior can do much in determining how well your privacy is
protected.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/21


Using Devices Correctly


W
22
Backdoors and Greedy Data
Collectors
hen you buy a new computer you generally decide also on an operating system and a
basic set of programs. You select the browser with which you surf on the Internet. You
register your computer, the software and so forth. In the process, you set up user accounts. As
a rule, everything is served to you in bite-size pieces. Windows from Microsoft or OS X from
Apple is the operating system installed on most computers. In other words, you usually do not
make a deliberate choice – the operating system comes with the device.
Let’s not kid ourselves: Most of the leading user products come from US companies. And
even companies not based in the US have to decide whether or not they want to conduct
business there. If they do, we can assume they will have to grant authorities and secret services
access to user data if asked to do so. You are better to assume that certain institutions can read
everything you leave behind at Google, Microsoft, Apple, Amazon and others. Even if you
play Angry Birds, the US Secret Service can apparently follow how you are faring in the game
according to the latest revelations. You might even get a job offer if you are an especially good
shot …
I understand only too well if you are uncomfortable with the idea that government
authorities can comb through the life of respectable citizens with minimal effort and without
legitimation by simply entering a search command. As long as we live in a functioning
democracy the side-effects may still be acceptable. The surveillance cameras in London show
the direction things are heading. Initially, they were justified by a promise to keep the streets
safe from criminals. Now even common parking violators who may otherwise be upstanding
citizens are recorded by these surveillance cameras and they receive a ticket if their cars are
filmed incorrectly parked somewhere. In this case, too, many of us can still turn a blind eye.
When it becomes really dangerous is if a totalitarian regime establishes itself and can monitor
every e-mail, every phone call, every round of Angry Bird and every citizen in real time.
Beyond this governmental dimension, data collection by private companies is increasingly
a focal point of public discussion. The growing discomfort and disapproval amongst internet
users hardly keeps pace with the speed at which these businesses find new ways and means of
obtaining your personal details, preferences and habits. If you want to change this situation,
make your voice heard as a citizen. But to address the direct need to protect your own privacy
you have to take a different approach. You have no choice but to make the best of today’s
circumstances. One of these circumstances is that most of us have to come to terms with the
operating systems Windows and OS X without special IT skills whether we want to or not
and “tame” them as best we can. There are ways of taming them although a determined Secret
Service agent would probably find a way into your device if need be. However, as stressed

earlier, this is not only the prying eyes of governments. There are other threats as well.
A consequent alternative would be not to use Windows and OS X, but to install another
operating system, such as Ubuntu based on Linux or OpenBSD based on Unix. This step
would be quite gutsy though. The technical know-how is probably beyond most of us.
Furthermoe, many programs and hardware drivers are not available for these operating
systems or workarounds are required, i.e., bypasses using additional software. All of this can
quickly become too much for normal users.
If you are not a computer whiz I would advise against opting for an alternative operating
system. Incidentally, even if you have a close friend, well versed in IT who could install the
system for you, this step could endanger your friendship because merely installing the
operating system is generally not enough. As soon as you begin using the new operating
system or want to install further programs or to connect external hardware such as a printer,
questions will presumably come up time and again and you will start driving your friend –
maybe quite soon your former friend – crazy with your requests for help. Of course a person
can research all kinds of things on the Internet and become an autodidact – something I also
regularly recommend in this book. But what is at stake here is your operating system, the very
heart of your device. The decision to take a different operating system away from the norm
can have momentous consequences – and you have to possess the expertise and time to deal
with the challenges these less-established operating systems create. This option is not practical
for most of us.
Tip: Unless you possess special IT skills, there are few choices outside of the Microsoft
Windows and Apple OSX operating systems. These limited choices do not mean
you have to feel exposed, you can do much to protect your privacy with the
recommendations in this book. If you do choose to take the path less traveled and
install an operating system outside of the two above, assess your needs and whether
they will be met. Fully understand the difficulties that may arise out of installing a
“non traditional” operating system.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/22


I
23
Getting Rid of the Clutter
f I write at this juncture that you should be cautious when installing programs and apps, it
may almost sound trite. And yet many users forget that they take a risk of harm to their
system every time they carry out an installation procedure. Many people even develop a
collector’s passion of the wrong kind and think it is great to have pages of apps on their
smartphone.
The best protection is to refrain from installing unnecessary apps in the first place. You
cannot be hurt by something that is not present on your devices. That is why you should be
cautious when installing any new program or app. Make sure a product has a good reputation
before you make it part of your digital home. A little Internet research prior to installation
usually does the trick. Enter the name and company that created the program or app in a
search engine, and see what information is out there. In a second round you can add the term
“security problem” or also just “problem” and check again as to whether a credible source has
uncovered something negative about the program or app. And if there is a product you have
not found useful, discard it by uninstalling it.
Tip: Install only programs and apps that are reputable in terms of origin and user
experience. Regularly review and assess the value of apps and programs ypu have
installed. Delete all that have not been useful. You cannot be put at risk by
something that is not present on your devices.


I
24
E-mail from the Fridge
n January 2014 Google bought the thermostat and smoke detector manufacturer Nest
Labs for 3.2 billion dollars. This deal should come as no surprise to you. The big
heavyweights in the digital world want to integrate our home appliances into our digital lives.
For us users with busy lives, the ease promised is quite tempting. After all, these technologies
could give us a warning about something moving in our homes, allow us to turn on the
furnace remotely just before we return from vacation or let us check the refrigerator to see if
we have everything we need for supper.
So many exciting innovations. However, we have to be aware that information about our
personal lives gained by implementing this home help can also be exploited and sold on to
marketing firms and data brokers. If you own a smart TV you, perhaps unwittingly, are
creating a record of your viewing habits. This information is used to analyze television viewers’
behavior and allows companies to broadcast advertising tailored just for your home to the
Smart TV. We should have full knowledge about this fact when we use these technologies.
In addition you may be surprised to learn, the use of Smart TV’s and other appliances
open us to the risk of an attack from black-hat hackers. It may seem comical at first but it is
deadly serious. In December 2013, hackers succeeded in sending spam e-mails from smart
televisions and refrigerators. These devices are often just as vulnerable as your laptop or
cellphone, often even more so because we are unaware that they are mini-computers. Have
you ever considered virus protection for your smoke detector?
Once again it is time to look closely at the situation. If we decide to control home
appliances and installations online, we pay with some more data striptease and have to protect
ourselves from digital rapscallions. This is anything but a trivial task.
As regards to data collection, you should first check whether your device has a setting that
prohibits this from happening. A scandal involving the TV maker LG at the end of 2013
shows that you cannot be certain as to whether the setting works reliably. The LG television
sets passed on data as soon as the device was hooked up to the Internet, regardless of the
setting chosen by the TV’s owner. The menu point “collect viewer data” turned out to be fake.
This story might compel us to decide not to connect our home appliances to a Wi-Fi at
all, but then they revert to being the dumb helpers we had before they became “smart.” The
bottom line with knowledge of the risks might be that you prefer them rather dumb. If so,
you will have eliminated the dangers just described.
But if you should want to venture into the world of networked toasters and microwaves,
make sure you opt for settings that are as restrictive as possible. Keep cameras and
microphones in mind, too. They are often integrated in many smart TVs, for example. You
should deactivate the microphone in the device settings if at all possible and once again cover

up the camera when you are not using it. Otherwise, you run the risk of having the TV
camera take wonderful pictures of your living room or even bedroom in whatever direction it
is pointing. This topic reminds me of my great-grandmother. My father told me she would
always throw a wool blanket over the TV and never sit in front of it unclothed because she
was afraid the news anchors might be able to see her. In fact, her notion was not very far-
fetched, but quite visionary.
There are ways of controlling your personal data leaving your household. George – a
colleague of mine competent in these matters – talks about “authentication proxies”, “web
washers” and other wild stuff. It is not easy to understand and certainly not easy to set up.
Very few of us would be able to do so without outside help. You also have to be aware that
many functions will only be partially usable if you want to be careful about divulging your
data.
If you are willing to accept this limited usability in exchange for more privacy, I
recommend you bring in an expert to set up a well-functioning and secure digital
infrastructure in your home. I cannot give you any better advice than this: Go to a
professional. In my estimation, that is the only way to get your home, its equipment and
installations “ironclad”; it is very difficult to do it alone.
Tip: Keep an eye on your “smart” household appliances. If they have online access, you
should deactivate it unless you want to make use of the features Internet access
affords. In any case, be as restrictive as possible with any settings that involve data
transmission. Consider having a professional come in and set up an infrastructure
for your home with a sufficient degree of digital security.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/24


H
25
Over and Out
ere is yet another piece of advice that may seem a bit trivial at first but that is quite
helpful. Turn off programs and interfaces such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and the like on
your devices when you are not using them. Incidentally, you can also hook up your Wi-Fi
router to the power using a timer switch. It is then switched off automatically at times when
its usage is not needed.
Also make sure you deliberately configure the auto-start feature on your computer. This
feature determines which programs are opened without any further action on your part when
you switch on your computer. That is quite useful for many applications. Your virus
protection program with real-time antivirus checks, for example, should always be open from
the start – refer to Chapter 8. But does a program such as Skype, say, have to be running
throughout an entire work session or can it be opened when a call needs to be made? Keeping
it open all the time creates unnecessary loopholes.
Tip: Turn off programs and interfaces such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth and the like whenever
you are not using them. Configure the auto-start feature on your devices.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/25


C
26
Just Between the Two of Us
harlotte and Johann were not destined to come together as lovers. At times, Johann had
fought to win her favor, declared his love to her in grand words – even though Charlotte
was married. Johann was not single either. That did not keep the two of them from remaining
in contact with each other over the course of four decades and from writing 1,700 letters to
each other. Yes, you read that correctly: one thousand seven hundred. Today, the two of them
would probably be writing e-mails to each other. Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Charlotte
von Stein would have opted for encrypted e-mails. The care with which they sealed their
letters indicates they would not have wanted others to read them during their lifetime today
either.
Many people are obviously less concerned. But are they really? Or is it just a matter of
convenience? All too often people press the send button carelessly and send out messages
containing highly personal information. In my professional life, I have repeatedly witnessed e-
mail correspondence being sent out unencrypted even by law firms, whose business involves
the handling of highly confidential information.
I do not want to repeat the dangers highlighted by so many others and warn against
foreign secret services – the immediate dangers lurk elsewhere. As always, it is a matter of cost
versus benefit as to whether you take action or not. Once it is installed, e-mail encryption is as
simple as can be to use and involves no loss of time. There is actually no excuse for sending
confidential e-mails unencrypted over any routes passing through other people’s data
networks. The routes are not only lined with dubious characters such as Harry Hack and Karl
Kraken.
Since Edward Snowden’s revelations, many companies have been trying to cash in on the
encryption trend. Similar to cloud encryption, the enthusiasm about this fact dwindles quite
quickly when looking at the options a bit more closely. Very few offers deserve our trust.
Before you end up with the wrong solution, I rather recommend a concrete product to
you here. Use, the cryptographic system from GNU Privacy Guard. The official website of
this product is https://www.gnupg.org.12 There you will also find all the links that help you
set up an e-mail encryption system. The package for Mac users there is called GPG Tools; the
one for Windows users is designated GPG4win. There is further information about this
encryption product on the Safe Surfer website. Having said that, I also want to say candidly
from the outset that some of the individuals that I have recommended this product to
managed to set up the GNU system with no difficulties, but others didi not. Do not hesitate
to consult your IT expert if you need to. The website for the Windows product also offers you
contact addresses for professional support.
There are tips in this book that have varying levels of importance and some are easier to

implement than others. Although it takes some patience and skill to install the encryption
solution recommended here, this tip on encrypted e-mail communication is one of my most
vital pieces of advice. I assure you that once you have the system set up, writing encrypted e-
mails on a daily basis is as easy as can be. Encryption involves just a one-time effort – do not
shy away from it.
The encryption of e-mails cannot really function as described here unless you and the
people with whom you share confidential communication install the same encryption system.
So, one step is unavoidable: you and the people with whom you share confidential
communication must settle on a standard product. As I said above, I recommend GNU
Privacy Guard as this standard. It is solidly designed and has a good reputation.
Although you will find corresponding pieces of advice also in the operating manuals and
discussion forums for GNU Privacy Guard, I would like to emphasize one bit of advice again
because of its vital importance. The quality of your password largely determines whether your
e-mail ultimately remains encrypted or not. With a proper password, you can set up major
obstacles and protect your communication with a high level of security.
One more word regarding the e-mails you still have on hand. You presumably have some
in your inbox and outbox because very few of us regularly delete all our old e-mails. It would
be best for you to clear these folders at the same time as you do the clean-up campaign
recommended in Chapter 19 so that confidential e-mails from the past are not lying around
unencrypted. Save important e-mails separately as PDF documents. Alternatively, your e-mail
program presumably also offers you an archiving function. It has a big drawback, however. If
someday you should no longer use the program, you can presumably also no longer open the
archive. I therefore recommend that you save the e-mails as PDF documents. This format is
so widespread that there should always be a solution for opening it, as I mentioned before.
Tip: Install the tools from GNU Privacy Guard for your confidential electronic
communication. Archive non-encrypted confidential e-mails by creating PDF
documents from them and saving them reliably.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/26
12 »GNU Privacy Guard«, https://www.gnupg.org


I
27
Inadvertent Sharing
t was the most important day of the year for Thomas Wendel. He was allowed to present
his new concept for family-friendly work to his fellow employees assembled for this
purpose in the company cafeteria. He had received a new laptop, a MacBook, the day before
and had configured it that evening. It was wonderful, had so many new features and such an
elegant design. Thomas began his presentation; everyone was listening attentively. He would
have continued holding their attention if a small window had not opened up in the upper
right hand corner of his screen. Two hundred employees read the following message in the
small window: “You are so sexy up there, honey. Looking forward to the next company party!”
A certain Else appeared as the person who sent the message. Else, the personal assistant of
Thomas Wendel? The audience saw Else sitting on the far right in the first row and saw that
her blushing face was a shade redder than her blazer.
Facing the audience, Thomas Wendel initially did not realize what had happened. When
the embarrassed silence slowly gave way to laughter, he turned around and looked at the
screen. What he saw caused him to gasp. Two minutes before he had felt his phone vibrate in
his pants’ pocket. He had apparently received a message, which simultaneously appeared on
the screen of his computer and thereby in full view of everyone in the cafeteria. He
immediately realized that the situation was even more serious. He had left his tablet lying
around at home on the coffee table in the living room. This message wouldn’t appear there
too, would it!? … Thomas Wendel knew what had happened. The evening before, he had set
up the iMessage service so that it would send his text messages directly to all his devices. He
had not been aware of the serious consequences this setting might have.
Visibly upset, he brought the rest of his presentation to a close and raced home.
Fortunately, he was well thought of at the company and could depend on the goodwill of his
employees. His tablet was lying on the table as he suspected. And in fact, the same message
appeared there on the screen. Luckily, his wife had not yet come home! An incident that was
nothing more than a moment of weakness at a company party could have triggered a disaster.
His personal assistant Else had kissed him on the lips in a quiet corner of the room at that
party – and he had admittedly not resisted. Although they cleared up matters in a
conversation the next day, he continued to put up with occasional teasing from her involving
shows of affection and admiration. He did feel a little flattered but that was all. After all, the
two of them had worked together for many years and were a good team.
Apple smartphones, tablets and laptops offer users the option of having messages sent over
iMessage and FaceTime simultaneously to different devices. Although this feature can be
practical, it can also undermine your efforts to make private use of certain devices while
making other devices available to the people around you. I advise you to make a conscious
decision about the devices you want to show text messages – not all devices have to receive all

messages.
For instance, on the iPad in my living room that is used by everyone, I have logged out
the Apple ID and completely deactivated this function. If you want to send and receive
messages with multiple devices but over separate accounts, you need to log into the messages
area with different Apple IDs. That is not a problem per se. All you do is create another ID
and use a second e-mail address for it. A cellphone number is not required because most of us
have just one, which is likewise already linked to the traditional Apple ID. Till now, this
approach has been possible on Apple devices even if you use the same Apple ID on all devices
for other applications such as iTunes. If the approach should change, I will report on it at
www.safe-surfer.com/book.
Be careful not to be easily swayed when reconfiguring your device. Sometimes you have to
log in solely with your user account and the device views this as a command to display your
messages on it as well. If this happens, you must purposely log out and delete the numbers
and e-mail accounts associated with your user account. If you wish to use the message
function nonetheless, you must subsequently log in with your alternative Apple ID.
iMessage is a widely used system that links the message services of multiple devices with
each other. I know of no other such system from other manufacturers. Otherwise, the same
applies analogously. If alternative systems from other manufacturers should gain in relevance,
I will provide corresponding directions at www.safe-surfer.com/book.
It is worthwhile for you to run a small practical test after you have entered your preferred
settings. For instance, you could check how the settings function on your devices. Imagine
typical situations in which you use your devices. Have several test messages sent to you. The
effort is small but after running the tests you will know exactly what your settings are.
Tip: Deliberately configure the devices on which you want to receive messages. Test
your settings after you finish configuring them.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/27


T
28
Ineffective Lock Screens
here was once a time when lock screens did what their name implied. They locked the
screen, thereby preventing, say, curious co-workers having a look during lunch to see
what you are up to. Of course, this feature only worked if the unlocking of the screen was
protected by a password. Most of us dutifully set up this function years ago.
In the meantime, the trend has moved increasingly toward a relaxation of this feature.
Smartphones allow users to take pictures even with a locked screen. And in newer versions
you can also turn on the flashlight function or set flight mode. Flight mode shuts off all
connections from the outside and the phone is then offline. The fact that someone at a party
can take pictures with your phone despite a locked screen is tolerable for most people. But
what if a thief wants to ensure that you can no longer locate your cellphone? He can easily set
flight mode without opening the locked screen. This gives him enough time to escape. The
phone, which is now offline after all, no longer leaves a trace any longer and the thief can take
all the time he wants to reconfigure it.
The point is well made: You should carefully consider which exceptions from the rules
you want to allow. Usually you can determine in the setting menu of your device what you
can control in the lock screen and what it should display in general.
Tip: Determine the functions to which you want to enable access when your device is in
locked screen mode.


M
29
Following Every Step You Take
any functions we use today on a device are not active unless the device knows where
we are. This capability is known as a positioning service. Once again, you have to
weigh how much functionality you want in exchange for giving up privacy. Hardliners who
recommend shutting off positioning services altogether, usually forget to mention that their
phone company is able to locate them anyway if their cellphones are switched on and have to
be connected to radio masts. On TV cop shows, you have certainly already seen attempts at
locating a cellphone this way.
So, let’s not kid ourselves: If we do not want to leave behind any positioning data, we
should not use a cellphone that is traceable to us. It may be helpful to shut off positioning
services categorically only if your aim is to stop feeding Facebook, Google & Co. with further
marketing information. You know in the meantime that I am not such a hardliner. We use our
devices to make our lives easier and more pleasant. To my mind, this use also includes
assistance from the positioning function for selected applications. It may be useful for you to
see your own position on a smartphone map in an unfamiliar city, for instance, to be sure you
are going the right way. “Nearby” can be a helpful app when you are looking for restaurants,
and weather is also only shown automatically if positioning is enabled.
My recommendation is to make a deliberate decision as to which apps with positioning
are most helpful for you. Is it the camera function, because you want to record the place each
picture is taken? Is it the cellphone ticket option from the railroad that allows you to make a
purchase as quickly as possible while the train is already pulling into the station? Or is it the
fitness app that lets you record your jogging data? Be selective. Enable the positioning feature
on your devices only if you definitely derive additional benefits from doing so. You can find
out on the Internet how to set the positioning feature for each app. There are helpful
guidelines there on this subject as well.
Lastly, keep in mind that the position of a switched-off cellphone cannot be determined –
not even via radio masts. And a switched-off app should not be transmitting positioning
information either. In other words, if you consistently switch off software and equipment you
are not using, you considerably reduce the information on your position that is passed on and
do not leave behind a complete geographic profile of your life.
Tip: Determine the most beneficial apps if the positioning function on your device is
enabled. Switch off an app or the entire device outright if you do not want your
position to be determined at all.


H
30
Appmania
ave you ever seen people in a restaurant showing each other the great new apps they
just loaded on their smartphones? I have certainly also gotten interesting app tips from
friends. For many people, however, a genuine app mania seems to have broken out. They are
crazy about collecting apps. The more apps the merrier, apparently.
However, not all apps are recommended. These little devils are fond of divulging all too
much about you, your devices and your habits. Apps can transmit your device number, your
position, your age and gender and much more without you being aware of it. They like to
record what you enter, look for and find.
This information is bought by major advertising firms with which we are usually not even
familiar. They are called AdMob, Flurry, Inmobi or Mobclicx. They talk candidly about the
“monetization of mobile apps.” These stalkers from the advertising industry help others to
earn money from your personal profile and naturally earn money in the process themselves.
This activity is not prohibited and many of us are not especially concerned about it. But you
should be aware of it.
Apps are often talkative little creatures so remember this rule of thumb here too: If apps
do not generate sufficient benefits for you currently do them justice and press the delete
button. Remove such apps from your devices – or do not download them in the first place.
As a user of an Android device, you should steer completely clear of apps from unknown
and dubious sources. They could install vicious malware. The danger is often depicted
somewhat dramatized but you should not ignore it completely. If you have a good virus
protection program installed (consult Chapter 8), you should be sufficiently protected.
Tip: The fewer apps you install, the less information will leave your cellphone. Install
only the apps you really want and use.


T
31
Chattanooga
he story of WhatsApp is impressive. The company was founded in 2009 and by
February 2014 was already reporting more than 450 million users. This program for
exchanging messages over the Internet has taken the world by storm and is continuing to do
so. Every day several billion messages are sent via WhatsApp. In February 2014, Facebook
bought the company for 19 billion dollars.
Equally impressive is the tiny number of WhatsApp users who ever asked who actually
wanted access to their contact data. It is rumoured that the company had its registered office
in a sushi restaurant in a shopping center until being taken over by Facebook. Certainly,
WhatsApp tried to largely stay out of the public eye. And so it was difficult to find out what
was actually supposed to happen to the data WhatsApp obtained through its service.
The messaging service can only be employed to a reasonable extent if WhatsApp users
allow it to scan their address books. The company thereby obtains all contacts found in its
users’ personal address books. The treacherous thing about this app is that the personal
coordinates of people who opted not to use this service become known to the company in this
way, too, because in all probability they also appear in an address book of one or another of
WhatsApp users. They unwittingly become part of the WhatsApp treasure trove of data.
And this treasure trove of data is worth 19 billion dollars. Facebook did not pay this huge
amount of money for great program codes or fifty talented employees. Data was for sale; no
one doubts that fact. Over 450 million users and their address books – that could nearly
encompass the entire digitally connected world. There are probably very few companies in a
better position to produce a worldwide phone directory. Yet that is not all. Imagine if these
data holdings were to fall into the wrong hands. This is not impossible. Several experts have
raised their concerns about WhatsApp being a quite unsafe application.
It is simply astounding the way lawmakers in nearly all countries tolerate a privately run
company accumulating such massive volumes of sensitive information and storing it at some
random place in the world. It is irrelevant whether WhatsApp promises not to use this data
for another purpose. Even if the company did keep its promise in the past, the taboo was
broken when it sold out to Facebook. About 40 dollars were paid per user including his or her
address book.
The Netherlands and Canada have in any case decided to take legal action against
WhatsApp for violation of data protection law. Further compelling initiatives beyond the
borders of these two countries are not in sight right now. Incidentally, this malaise applies not
just to WhatsApp. The same is true in equal measure for Google, Facebook and all other data
collectors. WhatsApp is just the most blatant example.
Few of us can reverse this intervention in our personal privacy. Anyone who has ever

registered for WhatsApp is among the 450 million who have already divulged their sensitive
data. The bundling of this unfathomable volume of data is a ticking time bomb. On the
takeover of WhatsApp with Facebook at the latest, the data set on a person includes not just
name and phone number (from the person him/herself and all individuals saved as contacts)
but also photos, birthdates, postal and e-mail addresses, employer, personal preferences (e.g.,
“likes”), insights from communication by chat and e-mail, etc. You do not need much
imagination to envisage the extensive ways such comprehensive sets of data could be misused.
Yet lawmakers simply watch and are amazed – at best. Their response is anything but decisive
action.
Now back to the need for the immediate exchange of messages. If you want to select a
secure alternative for the future, delete your account at WhatsApp and switch to a provider
with a genuine end-to-end solution, in other words, to a product connected from device to
device without encryption gaps – and one that has a credible commitment to data protection.
We cannot look into the minds of providers but it seems to me that Threema is a suitable
replacement for WhatsApp – and definitely the lesser evil. For an instant messaging service,
Threema offers a proper amount of encryption and lets you choose either to enter your
contacts manually or to grant – encrypted – access to your contacts. You can assume that this
feature renders further use of the contact data impossible. Incidentally, classic instant
messaging is no alternative. It does not have end-to-end encryption and is therefore readable
by third parties. In other words, Threema is superior also to classic SMS.
An alternative text messaging service naturally does you little good if it cannot be used by
a sufficiently large number of potential communication partners. The dominant position held
by WhatsApp is the biggest obstacle preventing people from switching services. WhatsApp
and Threema coexist well on your smartphone. If you take decisive action against the
backdrop of the problem just described, you will have to delete your WhatsApp account
completely. Your friends and acquaintances will presumably switch to an alternative app to
avoid the charges for SMS. It can be worth a try.
Note the following when removing the app. You must first delete your account within the
WhatsApp application and then the app itself. If you do the latter first, you no longer see
WhatsApp as an application on your device but your account continues to exist. That is not
the point of this exercise; what you want to do is bid farewell to WhatsApp altogether.
Moreover, friends could continue writing messages you would not see. That is why you
should first delete your WhatsApp account.
Finally, for confidential conversations, I advise you to switch to a different medium such
as encrypted e-mail or a face-to-face conversation. As soon as you are aware that a chat has
reached a confidential level, politely suggest that the chat not be conducted any longer on a
messaging app. The person to whom you are talking will generally understand this suggestion
and presumably even welcome your initiative. Often people simply do not remember and are
happy to have someone give them a friendly reminder.
Tip: Chat using an app that transmits your data and information in encrypted form and
that is sufficiently trustworthy. Switch media once your conversation becomes
confidential.

For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/31


Communicating Online


A
32
A Photo Travels Around the
Globe …
friend invited several people he knew for a weekend at his house in the country. One
couple brought along their fifteen-year-old daughter. Upon arrival, she began
photographing like crazy, documenting every moment of the weekend. She also had an
affinity for luxury goods and was especially passionate about taking pictures of valuable items
in the house and the cars on the drive out front. She naturally posted all the photos with their
precise geographic position on an application called Instagram – until the owner of the house
stepped in to stop her. The film playing in his head – unfortunately quite a realistic one – was
that a gang of burglars would drive up with a furniture truck and load up his entire
belongings. It would have been a break-in with a lead-in, prepared in depth by the young
guest – albeit unintentionally on her part.
Welcome to the world of photo portals! The rise of these applications is similarly
impressive to that of WhatsApp. At the end of 2013, Instagram had over 16 billion uploaded
photos. Not bad for a service that first saw the light of day in the fall of 2010. Not even two
years later in the spring of 2012, Facebook plunked down about five billion dollars for the
company. At the time it had only twelve employees. The rise of the Google photo portal
Picasa and of Yahoo’s Flickr was not quite as steep but still rapid. A number of other apps such
as Imgur, Photobucket, ImageShack or Snapchat complete the overall picture.
If you are considering giving this book to your teenagers to read, you might wish at this
junction that I strongly advise against using these photo portals at all. But that advice would
run contrary to the philosophy of this book. All users have to weigh for themselves what
benefits they derive from a photo sharing portal and what the associated costs or risks are. You
have to realize that you probably lose all control over pictures once they are posted on the
Internet.
No one could have summed up this situation better than Google itself once did in its
terms and conditions of use. Actually these words seem like a joke but they are dead serious.
They read as follows:
“By submitting, posting or displaying the content you give Google a perpetual, irrevocable,
worldwide, royalty-free, and non-exclusive license to reproduce, adapt, modify, translate,
publish, publicly perform, publicly display and distribute any Content which you submit,
post or display on or through, the Services.”13
These terms and conditions were extremely advantageous for Google. In 2010, the
company revised them but the text shows what was actually planned. You can assume the
guidelines were adjusted only in response to outside pressure, not because of a sudden starry-

eyed idealism popping up in the company. Terms and conditions of use can be formulated
more aggressively again at any time – and as a rule, we cannot verify compliance with them
anyway. With posted pictures, you can assume they are out of your control irrevocably and
forever. Every picture you post should stand up to this test: It should be able to accompany
you throughout the rest of your life. The fact that there is general public discussion about the
risks of posting photos online can give us hope that these warnings will also be understood by
today’s young users.
If you download a photo sharing application, adjust the settings first, before posting any
kind of picture. In the privacy settings, you determine what you do and do not want to share.
Fundamentally I would like to advise you against activating the positioning service for photos.
But if you do consider it a big benefit, you should at least be cautious that the public does not
find out the location of the Ming vase you just purchased at an auction is located after you
proudly photographed it and post the photo.
Finally, I recommend that you intervene immediately if any personal property is
photographed by guests. These guests may not share your cautious nature when it comes to
Internet photo sharing. Of course, you cannot fully monitor everything, but it is usually
sufficient to state clearly that you do not want any photos from your private life or of your
possessions posted..
Tip: If you post pictures on photo portals, adjust settings beforehand to protect your
privacy. Before publishing any photo, ask yourself whether you would mind
having the picture outside your control and accompanying you for the rest of your
life.
13 »Picasa«, Wikipedia, as of May 11, 2014, http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Picasa


T
33
Snapchat Hack
oday, modern burglars are hackers. And they are talented, considerably more talented
than the clumsy Beagle Boys of Walt Disney. But great talent is not even always needed.
All too often, hackers can rely on their targets’ cluelessness. That should not surprise us in
light of startups that only have a post-box address at a restaurant and a handful of employees
yet supply the world with a social media app used by millions of people.
On New Year’s Day 2014, the names and phone numbers of 4.6 million users of the
photo app Snapchat suddenly appeared on the Internet. Although an IT security firm had
warned Snapchat a short time before that the Snapchat database was vulnerable to access from
outsiders, hackers succeeded in reading the data and publishing it on a website. For all that,
they were friendly enough to black out the last two digits of the phone numbers. Nine days
later Snapchat posted a new, supposedly more secure version of its product but the damage
had already been done: 4.6 million Snapchat users had been compromised. What was already
a catastrophe became even more piquant in this case because Snapchat is known for a special
feature. Photos that are sent are supposed to be visible for only ten seconds. In good faith that
the images would disappear after a short time, people had sent highly personal pictures over
Snapchat from all facets of their lives, for example, to delight their sweethearts or to elicit a
“Wow!” from their friends.
The case of Snapchat shows how important it is for you to be cautious in your use of
photo sharing applications. As you may recall, this book began with a piece of advice: Always
carefully weigh whether you really have to do something. And unaware young people are not
the only ones addressed here because age, experience and education do not stop people from
acting like fools. The American politician Anthony Weiner made it all the way to US
Congressman only to start tweeting photos of regions of his bare body to young ladies. He
became the laughingstock of the country as a result – not an especially good idea.
But even if you send just photos of daisies, you should refrain from registering with your
own name if at all possible and from giving your phone number or address. By remaining
anonymous you prevent malicious third parties from all too easily determining your identity.
Many apps also register further data of yours such as your IP address, as mentioned in
Chapter 2. However, a published IP address does not bear the same risks as your name and
phone number.
Remember the advice I gave you in Chapter 2 of this book: Use pseudonyms. Do not
write your phone number in your profile and use no e-mail address with your real name.
Instead, create an e-mail address for your fake name and use it. Example: You call yourself
“Flying Fred” because you enjoy posting pictures of airplanes. Create a free e-mail address for
the other service providers and use it to register yourself.

Tip: Wherever possible, register with a pseudonym and the e-mail address
corresponding to that fake name.


I
34
White Gorillas in Mongolia
f you use a messaging program, you may feel the desire to send a photo occasionally. At
this moment, you generally are asked in a friendly way whether your app can access your
photos. You will probably allow it to do so as a rule – and you can do so without any worry
provided your photo collection is not offensive and you use sufficient encryption when
sending messages.
But the exchange between the photo programs on smartphone and tablet and other apps
do not function in just one direction. My friend Peter was once showing me and several of his
other friends, his vacation photos from Mongolia. We were surprised to see a white gorilla,
two bathing beauties on a beach and a built-in kitchen among the photos. We did not
associate any of the three images with the Gobi Desert. What Peter had failed to notice was
that his settings in WhatsApp allowed photos sent to him over this texting service to be
transmitted automatically to his photo collection. And that is how his Mongolian photos
became intermixed with the Barcelona zoo, two acquaintances sunbathing at Phuket and
proud friends who had just renovated their kitchen.
If you want to avoid these kinds of incidents, you must enter the appropriate settings in
the apps that are set up to allow access your photos. You can usually continue saving photos
you want to keep. That no longer happens automatically; only if you consent to it manually.
Tip: Make a conscious decision whether you want your photos to automatically transfer
from your messaging apps to your photo folder. Choose the settings accordingly.


O
35
Surfing in the Right Mode
ur gate to the Internet is our browser. Once it was just a simple window in which you
entered Internet addresses. Over time, it has become quite an intelligent module
integrated into your equipment. Be it the Internet Explorer, Google Chrome, Opera, Safari or
Firefox, all these browsers allow you to bookmark pages, view pictures and videos, listen to
music, use search engines and much more. Whether you are using a laptop, tablet or
smartphone – any of the three would be inconceivable without a browser.
Browsers are generally also connected to a search engine. Most of us use the services of
Google, Bing or Yahoo, although Google is the definite Number 1 player in the market. Many
people talk about “googling” when they want to look something up on a search engine. As a
rule, a browser comes complete with search engine free of charge. From daily life we know
that very little in life is really free. And as a matter of fact, you do pay when surfing with a
browser and doing research with a search engine – not with money but with your data.
There are not just negative side effects to disclosing data while surfing. For instance,
Google refines your search for terms based on your previous behavior and settings so you are
more likely to obtain results of relevance to you. Of course, there is also a danger of
manipulation by Google when it comes to deciding which of the search results we are given to
view. It is true, nonetheless, that a search that is tailored to us is usually more helpful. For
these benefits, you pay the price of divulging your data and behaviors. Like other search
engine providers, Google records this data using a variety of methods, analyzes them in ever
more sophisticated ways and monetizes them.
A lot has already been written about this subject, especially since the revelations of Edward
Snowden, which did much to increase general awareness of privacy. Big Data – the term for
large-scale data collection and analysis – can already have direct effects on our lives today,
above and beyond foreign secret services, yet only a handful people are aware of this fact. The
company Kreditech makes no secret that it uses Big Data as a basis for making credit
decisions. As a consequence, our surfing behavior can have an impact on whether we receive
financing for the purchase of a new car. Even more sensitive is the entry of Big Data into the
health care sector. Probabilities of illnesses breaking out can be calculated based on disclosed
data. That may have positive effects on prevention but at the same time it opens the
floodgates to socially undesirable health discrimination. In other words, it is clearly advisable
for us to be conscious and fully aware when we are surfing. Basically speaking, we should ask
ourselves which data traces we leave behind through our actions and where we leave them.
Where do we see the potential of data misuse? We should surf anonymously to avoid leaving
data tracks and traces.
You may be looking for a solution that offers you genuine anonymity while allowing you
to maintain the same benefits you have come to expect from the usual browsers and search

engines – if so, sorry, I have to disappoint you. And I would also advise against making
anonymity your sole goal. We don’t do this in the rest of our daily activities either. Otherwise
you would be forced to cut up your credit cards and just pay cash in the future. Or pull a
mask over your head while walking through the train station. And your cellphone would no
longer be allowed to log into radio masts; as a matter of fact, it would have to be shut off all
the time. You see the absurdity of this approach. If you really want to disappear from the
digital scene, you become a mere bystander of modern life – and the effects would become
more severe over time. Society would outdistance you technically and with time, you would
become digitally illiterate. There are only a few lifestyles where you could afford this luxury.
Maybe if you were a cheesemaker in a small alpine village – but even there, you would
probably prefer receiving an avalanche alarm on time over your cellphone than not at all.
In other words, complete anonymity may sound desirable but it is unrealistic. There will
almost always be a digital profile of you. For most people, the goal can be to minimize the
sensitive information in these profiles and to keep it out of these profiles in the first place
wherever possible. I recommend you pursue a dual strategy: Use a common browser.
Configure this browser deliberately instead of negligently leaving the initial settings. You will
find out more about this step in Chapter 36.
In addition to your everyday browser, install a second product for guaranteeing genuine
anonymity. Although these products are available, you have to be careful not to fall for any
pseudo promises. Businesses like advertising with the catchwords “security” and “privacy”
nowadays. Many do not keep their promises, however. Common browsers suggest you could
adequately protect your privacy with settings such as private surfing. These claims are nothing
short of ridiculous. You are far from surfing privately with these settings, a fact you can verify
for yourself. You will find an anonymity test on the Internet site JonDonym. With it you can
conduct one test on the browser you are currently using – even after changing the setting to
“as secure as possible” and “as much privacy as possible.” You will see that the setup is still
anything but genuinely confidential, let alone anonymous.
For anonymous surfing worthy of the name, I recommend a holistic solution such as the
Tor browser bundle (www.torproject.org) or JonDonym (www.anonym-surfen.de). Other
providers of anonymous surfing are increasingly attempting to enter the market but Tor and
JonDonym have had the most positive feedback. IT experts can argue long and hard about
which of the two users should choose. I prefer the Tor browser because it is easier to install
and operate. Both versions work well, however, and have a good reputation.
At this juncture, I will spare you an explanation of exactly how Tor functions. If you are
interested in the details, I suggest you read the article on this subject in Wikipedia.14 Do not
let the many technical explanations and also the limits of Tor as regards confidentiality scare
you off – these are discussions by experts totally unrelated to the needs of normal users. In any
case, the Tor browser lets you achieve an extremely high degree of anonymity. Although it
may not be effective against secret services electronically armed to the teeth, it definitely
provides solid protection against known data krakens and Big Data collectors.
Incidentally, the use of the search engine Startpage is included with the Tor browser.
Startpage is considered a secure place for ensuring the anonymity of your inquiries. In

combination with the Tor browser, you have a good overall solution – provided you stick to
the rules Tor recommends to you.
These rules are also the reason I would not advise you to use the Tor browser for all
Internet sessions but only as an alternative to engage in confidential surfing. You see Tor can
guarantee anonymity only under certain specific conditions, which limit the way you can use
the browser. For instance, Tor does not like additional installations such as Flash Player or
QuickTime. This fact greatly restricts your visits to certain Internet sites, in some cases
rendering visits impossible. Even on YouTube you will not be able to see all the videos.
Given these restrictions, it would be considerably more convenient for you to use one of
the common browsers when conducting non-confidential searches. I therefore recommended
that you pursue a dual strategy, as mentioned above: Use Tor when surfing for sensitive
subjects. If a session is non-critical from your perspective, use the common browsers that are
not particularly confidential but that have greater functionality. It is up to you whether you
use Google on the one hand or Startpage on the other. Simply decide on a case-by-case basis.
Tip: Use different browsers and search engines based on the confidentiality of your
searches. If you wish to surf anonymously, use the Tor browser together with
Startpage, the search engine configured there.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/35
14 »Tor 
(anonymity 
network)«, 
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tor_%28anonymity_network%29#Tor_Browser


T
36
Secure Surfing
here is a need to engage in confidential surfing on occasion without curious by-standers
lining the data highway. Beyond that, we should not forget one well-known category of
potential risk: viruses. You must prepare all browsers to deal with them effectively and gear
your own surfing behavior accordingly. It is irrelevant whether your browser provides
confidentiality or not. A Trojan horse is happy to travel to you on confidential routes. It is
therefore crucial that you select the right settings. As mentioned in Chapter 8, you should
have at least one antivirus test activated in real time. Only then will your data communication
be checked the moment it passes the entry gate of your device.
You can also adjust appropriate settings in browsers to increase your security. Given the
diversity of browsers and versions of browsers, I recommend you search for guidelines on your
browser on the Internet. Enter “security” and the name of your browser. That should be a
good start. You will find further information on this subject on the website for this book, as
well.
Even the best technical protection cannot help, however, unless you adapt your own
surfing behavior to minimize risks. Follow this rule of thumb: The less familiar you are with
an Internet site or its creators, the more carefully you should behave on that site. Pay special
attention to so-called “active content.” Picture this content as a little program that is sent to
you when you open the website and then performs work in your device. This work is often
good because it results in useful functionality. Unfortunately, these programs also contain
material that you absolutely do not want to have on your computer. For this reason, I
recommend that you select settings that enable this active content to be sent to you only with
your consent on a site by site basis. You might make an exception for Internet sites you trust.
The same is true of cookies, those small files deposited on your computer. Cookies are also
not evil per se. They help you, for instance, by auto-filling familiar data in the same place on a
form. There are many other types of cookies, however. I therefore recommend once again:
Select settings that give you control over which cookies you welcome on your device and
which ones you do not.
There are other ways hackers can attack you while you are browsing but I do not want to
make you overly worried. Presumably you have been surfing for years without any problems
and are asking yourself what the big deal is. The issue is not black or white. Protect yourself as
effectively as you can and as long as you can still benefit. There is no sense in achieving perfect
protection if you can no longer use important features in your browser.
Tip: Deliberately adjust the security settings in your browsers before you use them. Use
a real-time virus scanner.
For further information, please visit:

www.safe-surfer.com/book/36


T
37
Marking Your Presence
hings can change so quickly. A generation ago nearly all of Germany fretted about a
census that was to record a ridiculous amount of data from today’s perspective. And back
then it was chic not to appear in the phone book – any self-respecting individual had his or
her name put on the so-called “black list.” Today, just a generation later, more than a billion
people have already revealed much, much more about themselves on Facebook than was to be
anonymously asked back then on a simple one-page questionnaire. And they have also
included their name and a photo voluntarily. Not just any photo of course. On Facebook
everyone looks like a star. And as a star, everyone tries to adorn him or herself with the largest
possible number of friends. Number of friends = social power. A person can never have
enough friends yet Facebook has unfortunately set the limit at five thousand. The reasoning
was probably that, otherwise, Facebook users could go broke celebrating birthday parties with
all their “friends”…
It would be too easy to reduce the phenomena of today’s social networks to modern
exhibitionism. There must be more value behind it if a billion people frequent this kind of
platform. Of course, many go on Facebook to enjoy his or her “15 minutes of fame” Andy
Warhol style. But most users simply want to keep in contact with friends far and near in quite
an efficient way, to share experiences, and to be informed about what is happening. It can be
great to use these networks to hunt down an old school buddy who now lives in halfway
around the world.
In addition, it is useful to mark your presence at least passively – and there are two reasons
for this: First, anyone without an online presence in today’s media-conscious world is quickly
viewed as suspicious. And second, this step is no protection either against being hurt by the
Internet. These cases may be rare but it really can happen that a person sets up an account in
your name and then looks to see what friends write who think the profile is genuine. This
situation can be quite unpleasant under certain circumstances. You can at least mark your
presence using a basic profile without extensive information, with high security settings and
without your own activities instead of leaving the field to a bunch of identity thieves. I call
this an electronic business card.
Your name and a photo should suffice for setting up an electronic business card on
Facebook and perhaps also on Google+. The photo can also be one that has been taken from a
distance but if possible it should enable friends, acquaintances and co-workers to identify you.
That is the only way to ensure that you actually receive any inquiries and messages that are
sent. If need be, you can also add schooling and educational institutions. That would already
make your profile concrete enough for you to be recognized by people who know you. With
this information, most of us are not giving anything more away than what is already readily
available somewhere else on the Internet.

But be careful about successively succumbing to the online exhibitionism trend. Many
people initially determined never to be on Facebook start with a quite passive profile, but little
by little, they become part of the online burlesque show and reveal more and more about their
personal lives. I will show you in Chapter 40 a way to engage actively on the social networks
while still keeping privacy your first priority. However, with your official profile you should be
able to manage a very moderate, passive user site and consider Facebook and other social
networks to be a modern phone directory. You are listed in the directory – no more and no
less.
In closing, the question arises as to where you should maintain such an online presence.
That is a question of personal taste. There is much to be said for Facebook; after all, the point
is to engage in and enjoy social networks. And a network can only function for you if you are
connected to other people. Ultimately, the choice of how connected through online networks
you want to be, is your own personal one.
Tip: Maintain a passive profile on social networks with your official name as a type of
electronic business card. You expose yourself to less risk, but do maintain your
presence.


I
38
Well-set
f you have set up a profile on social networks, you will generally be asked in never ending
series of ever changing inquiries appearing on your screen, to reveal more information
about yourself. Initially ignore these inquiries and do not allow any synching between the
address book in your device and the social network! Otherwise you would be divulging not
only a part of your own private life but also the private life of everyone in your address book –
and these individuals may not want to see their data being uploaded somewhere in far-away
California. Always refrain from sharing your address book out of respect for the privacy of
friends and acquaintances.
You should also adjust the settings of your social network profile from the outset.
Unfortunately this is not a one-time task. You have to check your settings on a regular basis.
Facebook and the like constantly revise their platforms, change modules, and add new
features. This is not reprehensible per se but these constant changes can create gaps in your
privacy settings. Therefore, monitor the security and privacy settings of your profile on the
social networks you use at least every two to three months.
To be sure you have covered all the bases, it is helpful to team up with a person you trust
and to check the settings together. Try to post on each other’s profiles. Tag the other person
on a picture you post yourself. Click on his or her list of friends. If your privacy is well
protected, none of these actions should be possible or you should at least be asked for your
consent before something is posted on your profile or any photo is tagged with your name.
Occasionally, you should also run a search for yourself on a search engine. If you have these
social media privacy functions switched on, nothing should appear. Incidentally, do not forget
to delete all trial entries as soon as you complete this test.
Beyond settings, you also have to regularly exercise judgment during surfing on the
Internet. The more unfamiliar you are with a profile, a site, an app or even just a link, the
more skeptical you should be toward it. Be careful and ask yourself whether a contact request
is plausible. The small culprits fish “only” for your data; the big ones also send you a virus –
possibly with dire consequences. Keep in mind in particular that persons sending you mail do
not necessarily have to be who they say they are. Facebook, Google+ and others demand no
proof at the time of registration. That means anyone can assume anyone else’s identity. You
may still recall the story of the professor who traveled all the way to South America to see a
woman with whom he had in fact never actually communicated? Everything from start to
finish was a hoax – with bitter consequences.
Be just as cautious of online contact as you would be about someone standing outside
your front door. Check to see who is knocking before you let the person in. Remember the
moment the door is open, the stranger can step immediately into the heart of your social
media realm. So communicate only with people you can readily identify without question;

ignore any suspicious attempts to contact you. Do not even answer any out of the ordinary
contact to let the person know that you are not interested. That alone can be too much. The
best solution is simply to ignore suspicious inquiries of this kind altogether!
Tip: If you do decide to utilize social networks, never allow access to your address book
by these networks. Select settings that optimally protect your privacy and check
them on a regular basis. Exercise a healthy dose of skepticism and caution anytime
someone tries to establish online contact with you.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/38


T
39
My Name is Blonde…
he people who pose the biggest threat to your privacy are unfortunately often individuals
you know: someone who wants to get back at you, an unrequited love or an envious co-
worker – these individuals can negatively affect your life in a myriad of harmful ways.
Fortunately, they do not usually have hacker traits and skills. It often suffices simply to
maintain a healthy distance from people who strike you as having the potential to be stalkers,
pests or trouble makers.
If you maintain more than just a passive profile on social networks, have valued
connections with friends and are actively posting, I recommend that you set up a second
profile. Put yourself passively in the network with your official name for the reasons cited in
the last chapter, but at the same time keep your valued activity under a fake name. This action
will be accepted by anyone who understands what privacy protection means in today’s world –
and it will not harm you. With this second profile under a pseudonym, you create a buffer
that friends and acquaintances in the know can easily overcome because they are aware of your
privacy concerns. However, it shields you from unwanted contact from third parties outside of
your informed friends, family and acquaintances.
Even if you pursue this parallel strategy with two (or more) profiles, you should be aware
that you cannot trick the providers of these services, that is, Facebook, Google+ or Twitter
themselves. They can easily detect that multiple profiles are coming from the same place based
on the IP address and other distinguishing characteristics of your device. That may result in
you being prompted to become friends in one profile with another of your online presences.
Of course you do not confirm this friendship but instead keep the two profiles completely
separate from each other. But be clear about one thing: This buffer allows you to avoid giving
information unnecessarily to third parties who are looking for you, but it is not absolutely
ironclad.
For this reason, you should also be level-headed about the way you handle your second
profile. Remember, it can also be linked to your name at some point – for instance, if face
recognition continues to spread, which is certain to change our world dramatically. The
spread of this technology would mean that as a stranger, you could identify people based
solely on a picture. The other implications of this capability are issues in and of themselves.
What they mean in our context, however, is simply this: At the current time, you can use a
second profile to create a buffer, which is better to have than not to have. Nonetheless, what I
said in connection with photo portals continues to apply here. Before posting each photo, ask
yourself this test question: Do you want it to accompany you for the rest of your life? How
you present yourself and in what circumstances naturally depends on your individual
surroundings, your orientation in life and of course also your professional endeavors. This
decision is therefore one you yourself have to make; there are no general rules to apply

regarding it.
Here is a practical tip on what to do if someone with whom you do want to have contact
attempts to reach you via your passive profile. Ignore the request on your passive profile
because otherwise it would no longer be passive. Instead, contact the person seeking contact
with the other account using your pseudonym and candidly explain to him or her that you are
active only under this fake name and would like to establish contact with him or her. The
person will usually accept this offer without any trouble.
Within social networks, users can also write direct messages to each other. The same as
what I said earlier also holds true here: If the messages exchanged are highly confidential,
switch to a different medium such as encrypted e-mails or a face-to-face conversation.
Tip: If you want to be active in a social network, set up a profile with a pseudonym to
create a buffer between yourself and individuals with whom you would prefer not
being in contact. Be active and engage in the social network only under your
pseudonym. But even there, make sure you only post views, impressions, photos
etc that you are comfortable with in the long term, think carefully about their
content and what it says about you.


T
40
Your Professional Profile
he social networks that are based on people’s professional lives represent a special case.
The world’s leading platform of this kind is called LinkedIn. Professionally it can be very
valuable to have a presence on this site. The type of presence you want to maintain depends
on your particular situation. Do you just want to have a presence or do you want to actively
establish business contacts? Does it bother you if other people contact you about professional
interests whether or not they may be helpful to you? You can decide whether to maintain only
an electronic business card or an active profile based on how you answer these questions.
Again, be sensitive about the risks involved. On professional sites you should concentrate
solely on professional matters. If someone with whom you wish to remain in social but not
professional contact with should look to network with you on these professional sites, take the
approach mentioned earlier. Write to this person from your active profile and tell him or her
you are active only there and that you would like to establish contact with him or her.
Incidentally, I don’t see the drawback of maintaining a professional profile on multiple
sites. LinkedIn is the global market leader yet there are further important platforms in certain
regions, e.g., Xing in German-speaking countries. Once you have made your intial decision
regarding professional online profiles, it does not matter whether you maintain this profile on
one or multiple websites.
Tip: Maintain profiles on professional platforms such as LinkedIn if doing so is
advantageous to you professionally. Concentrate solely on professional content on
these networks. Keep all social contacts firmly in the social network realm.


I
41
Digital Billboard
was quite surprised. Gabriel, one of my business partners, popped up in the middle of
current Facebook status messages as the promoter of a dating platform. “Gabriel also uses
HappyDate” is what the promotion said. An unknown brunette beauty in a picture
underneath had such a sad gaze you wanted to comfort her immediately. What could Gabriel
be looking for on a dating platform? He was on vacation in Sardinia with his wife and
children; something seemed wrong about it all.
I called Gabriel immediately and asked whether he had recently posted anything of this
kind on Facebook. Gabriel said he had not visited his profile for weeks, hardly used it
anymore and added that he was not currently active on Facebook. I explained that his profile
was actively endorsing an online dating platform. A long stillness ensued on the other end of
the line. Then, Gabriel explained to me that despite being happily married, he had dipped his
toe into the online dating world, only wanting to see whether he’s still perceived as attractive.
Maybe a cup of tea with someone, but certainly not more.
Whatever the impetus for his activity, Gabriel had certainly made a poor decision. When
he registered at HappyDate, he was offered a choice: either to set up a new user account or to
use his already existing Facebook account. Gabriel thought nothing of using his Facebook
account. But he had failed to read the fine print. On registering, he had consented to have
HappyDate use him to promote their business on Facebook. Gabriel had become a promoter
of the site without even knowing. You can wag your finger and say Gabriel should not have
visited the site in the first place. Yet it is not the duty of an app to bring the morality of its
users into question. HappyDate ruthlessly used Gabriel to promote its own platform, thereby
exposing his status as a possible adulterer-to-be before family, friends and business associates
and all the social implications of this exposure ensued.
Dating apps are not the only ones that attempt to convince new users to set up their
account so it can be automatically connected to Facebook, Google+, Twitter and other social
networks. Photo portals, apps for rating hotels and restaurants, streaming services for music or
videos as well as many other apps attempt to make this step “easy” for you as a user. And their
objective is always the same: to get you to become a digital billboard for these companies.
They want to use your name to advertise their business to your friends and acquaintances –
and that can be more than just uncomfortable.
My advice to you is this: Consider carefully the sites at which you register. If you have
decided to open a user account at a service, read carefully to see what exactly you are giving
your consent to. Read the terms and conditions of use as best you can. Some are interminable,
written in totally incomprehensible legalese or available only in foreign languages. These
shortcomings in terms and conditions may be reason enough for you to refrain from installing
a certain application. With time, the review becomes easier as you develop a trained eye for

which passages are important and which ones address subjects such as privacy and security. I
wish I could make it easier for you but, unfortunately, the terms and conditions of use are
indeed your contract with the provider of an application. And I advise you to not blindly
press the accept button.
In particular, do not allow any app to post for you. It is best to register with a brand new
user account, not via your Facebook account or the like. Use a pseudonym along with an e-
mail address to go with it – it would not be a particularly smart idea to use your pseudonym
with your genuine e-mail address. You do not have to assume a new pseudonym for every user
account either. In particular, avoid linking an existing profile with a new one if there is any
risk of the latter wanting to use you for promotional purposes. Categorically refuse all such
connections because the benefits you gain from easily linking profiles may end up with your
profile being used to promote a company or services, that you want no connection with
whatsoever.
Incidentally, half the world does not need to know where you are traveling and what other
activities you might be pursuing via the Internet. Presumably not everyone is even interested
in knowing. And if so, there may be people who look on with malicious glee as you make a
fool of yourself – and that is something you can well do without. Do not become a digital
billboard!
Tip: Be sparing about app registration. Use pseudonyms and e-mail addresses coupled
them. Be aware of the terms and conditions to which you consent and do not ever
allow an app to post in your name. Do not connect to or use any sites or apps that
seek to use you for advertising purposes.


O
42
Interesting – That’s What He Did
Last…
n returning to work from his vacation, Gabriel, whom you met in the previous chapter,
wanted to correct his slipup as quickly as possible. Fortunately, no one had noticed
anything about his foray into online dating. A greater weight could not have been taken off
Gabriel’s mind, especially as he worked as an administrative manager at a monastery. The
monks might well have been upset that he, as a husband and father would be curious about
dating websites.
Gabriel wanted to delete his profile completely from HappyDate because he had come to
realize that his visit to the site had been an ill thought out idea from the start. He opened his
laptop to go to the HappyDate site on the Internet and put an end to everything. But wait!
He had started reading the “Safe Surfer” the week before. Although he had only gotten
through the first few chapters, he knew that he should never visit sites of this kind over the
company network. Gabriel avoided the Wi-Fi at the monastery, using his smartphone instead
to create his own hotspot. He connected his laptop this way and then opened the site of the
dating portal. He logged on at HappyDate and looked for the option for allowing users to
delete their own profiles. He murmured to himself: “It is hard to find the delete function in
the menu, as usual.” Once again the dating site opened with all the distraction on display. As a
knock sounded at the door, Gabriel quickly closed his laptop. Fortunately, it was only a
colleague who had come by to pick him up for lunch.
He was just getting back to work when the abbot himself appeared wanting to go through
a press release that Gabriel had prepared. Gabriel opened up his laptop which had awoke from
sleep state – and resumed precisely where it had left off prior to lunch. On Gabriel’s screen a
blonde named Inge cheerfully chattered away about the kind of man she was looking for – for
life and for other things in full view of the abbot. The abbot was taken aback but as someone
living in a glasshouse, immediately knew better than to throw stones. After all the abuse
scandals that had shaken the church and especially his monastery, he was hardly in a position
to swing the moral club and bawl out Gabriel. After all, the subjects on the website were not
minor-aged choir boys. Gabriel and he decided merely to forget the episode and Gabriel
promised to refrain from such activities in the future.
Gabriel had learned his lesson and you should also take note. Whenever you end a work
session, you should close all files, programs, and web browser windows so they do not jump
out at others the moment you open your device the next time. Pay especially close attention to
the browser history. If a colleague enters a keyword, many browsers initially have a feature that
displays the Internet sites last visited. Naturally you should visit only reputable sites but if you
are a member of the Hell’s Angels, for example, and the lsast site you visited was one on

crochet courses, this feature could even damage your reputation. You should delete the history
after every session. Other programs such as Word, for instance, offer to open a document
under the command “Recent.” This is not good if a file named, “draft resignation” appears in
recent file names while your boss is standing behind you.
The basic rule of thumb is this: Just as you clean off your desk at the end of the day, so
too should you clear away any remnants of your last use from your electronic devices.
Tip: Close all files and programs at the end of a work session. Delete the browser
history and do not use the “Recent” command to open up windows or files when
other people are present.


“W
43
Pressure to Communicate
hy didn’t you answer me? After all, you were online!” “You read my message yesterday
afternoon at 5 then you posted something on Facebook. Why haven’t I gotten any feedback?”
Who among us has not had to listen to reproaches like these? In their default settings, many
apps including messaging services, social networks and Internet phone service providers in
particular, show other users whether you are online or whether you have read a message.
This feature is a breach of your privacy that you should not underestimate. It is a question
of social survival for us to be able to treat our families and close friends differently than how
we treat distant acquaintances. The former might perhaps have the right to an immediate
response whereas the latter do not. Nor can it be in our interest to let everyone under the sun
know whether we happen to be online currently, when we were last online or when a new
message was read. Therefore you should always manually set your status in the corresponding
applications to “online” or “offline” and not let these settings be entered automatically for you.
If this is not possible, shut down an application if you do not need it. Once it is shut down,
the status usually reported is “offline.”
Check these settings if you do not want people to see when you were last online or for
senders to receive a “read” confirmation automatically to their mails. You can often simply
turn these types of functions on and off. If you cannot and you still want to prevent such
information from being passed on to others, look for an alternative application that allows
you to adjust these settings.
Tip: Select your settings actively and on a case-by-case basis so that you are not put
under undo pressure to answer messages.


A
44
Using Other People’s Devices
nne fortunately had no criminal tendencies. She had just clicked on the browser on a
computer for guests in the foyer of a London hotel to check the address of the restaurant
where a business associate was waiting for her. The browser opened on the screen and a
window with e-mails appeared. The previous user had obviously not logged out but merely
closed the browser. A beginner’s mistake you might say, yet it happens quite often, especially
when people are in a hurry.
If you are using someone else’s or a public computer, make sure at the end of each session
not to leave any sensitive data behind nor stay logged in anywhere. Browsers typically offer a
resetting function in their menu. Select the version with the biggest possible effect, in other
words deletion of all categories offered. Do not forget in the process that copies of data you
have downloaded can be in a download folder. Even if these folders are not easy to locate on
other unfamiliar devices, you should make an attempt to find them. As already described in
Chapter 18, you can efficiently look for the name of a file using the search function in your
device.
Tip: Be careful when using other available devices, especially in public places. Reset the
browser and delete all copies of your files temporarily saved there.


P
45
Smile!
rince Ernst August of Hanover visited the Expo in his home city of Hanover, Germany.
On the way from the Monegasque pavilion to the German one he felt a sudden
uncontrollable urge to relieve himself and had his car stopped in front of the Turkish pavilion.
He proceeded to mark this foreign territory. He did not remain unobserved in the process. A
photo was shot, found its way into the tabloids and was soon seen around the globe. He
turned from “Prügelaugust” (Punching August) to “Pinkelprinz” (Peeing Prince) – a dubious
advance.
All this took place in the summer of 2000. Back then, it needed an ambitious professional
paparazzo. Today, almost all of us are potential paparazzi due to the advent of cellphones with
a camera function. Permanently installed surveillance installations record what’s happening in
the public and private sphere. It is nearly inconceivable nowadays for a public event not to be
video monitored. There is no street in London’s financial district where cameras are not
installed in the name of fighting crime. And these “crimes” have in the meantime come to
include simple parking violations, which are recorded and punished without human input.
Even German forests have countless permanently installed cameras that are meant to monitor
wildlife but which often capture people with wanderlust and other kinds of lusts as well.
We should not wish all of these cameras banned. Some actually do help to clear up crimes
– remember the bombers at the Boston Marathon. And there was also the woman in England
who threw a live cat in the garbage bin. She was caught in the act by a surveillance camera and
subsequently convicted. And in a branch bank we also feel safer if there is video surveillance
installed.
As a respectable citizen, however, it is important to be aware that the recording of still and
moving images in public has become a fixed part of our lives alongside our right to privacy.
The situation is exacerbated by the advancing miniaturization of cameras, which led to
something known as the “Pen Film Scandal.” In the summer of 2012 a waitress at a bar in
Zurich discovered a pen glued to the wall in the women’s bathroom. The police determined
that the pen was in fact a mini-camera and belonged to a film director in whose apartment
police later found dozens of films of women using this very bathroom.
Internet video calls can likewise be recorded without major technical resources. In my
professional life I dealt with a crass violation of privacy of this kind. The former boyfriend of a
client posted recordings of Skype images where she had finished a shower but was not yet
completely dressed. Actions of this kind may seem reprehensible to you but they are by no
means isolated cases. A woman I know who is the mother of an eight-year-old boy was
recently called in to the principal’s office because her son had threatened girls in the class with
taking their picture and posting the images on the Internet. Using audio and visual recordings
to exert pressure on others is apparently already a hot issue on school playgrounds.

This fact should not make us paranoid but it does show that a little vigilance is called for.
Children in particular should be sensitized about such matters nowadays. Try broaching the
topic with an adventuresome approach: Awaken their “James Bond fascination.” For instance,
on entering an unknown apartment James Bond would always begin by briefly checking for
anything suspicious. Or a tip for the older ones among us: If you have a first date with
someone and do not yet know the person very well, it is better to meet on neutral territory –
this also makes sense for other security reasons. Once again, these tips only help to minimize
risk. There is always a certain residual risk of your being the victim of an unfair attack unless
you lock yourself up in your house and remain completely offline. Reduce this risk. It pays to
keep a wary eye on your surroundings.
If images or videos in which you are recognizable are nevertheless posted on the Internet,
you are entitled in most countries to insist on their being deleted or pixelized (the picture
stays but your image is blurred beyond recognition). Make use of this right in a worstcase
scenario. If you consider it important to have the images removed from the Internet but you
do not seem able to achieve this alone, hire a lawyer. The lawyer cannot always help., but it is
worth a try.
Tip: Be aware that audio and visual recordings of you can be taken in public and private
settings. Check your surroundings with a wary eye. If the risk to your privacy
seems too great, shift your activities to more neutral turf or if need be, to a setting
over which you have control. If a picture or video of you is posted online, you can
often get it deleted or pixelized.


I
46
Face Recognition
magine sitting in a commuter train in the morning on your way to work and all of a
sudden some complete stranger comes up and takes a photo of you. A few minutes later –
you have just sat down at your desk at work – you receive a friend request from this same
stranger at your e-mail address at work. He might be your dream business associate of the
future but he could also just be a wacko with whom you want nothing to do.
We are less than a step away from this very scenario because face recognition is no longer a
technical challenge. Software apps can now take a photo and effortlessly find further photos of
the same person on the Internet and with them, usually the person’s name and other contact
details. If you are on the company website with your photo and a contact address as in the
above case, a photo on the train would suffice for a stranger to find you.
The age when companies want to venture onto the mass market with this face recognition
software is very near. FacialNetwork initially intended to put an app called NameTag on the
market in the first quarter of 2014. Politicians appealed to the reason of those responsible and
asked that the product launch be postponed. One important aspect of the controversy is
whether FacialNetwork feeds its database without people’s consent and you must take action
not to be involved – known as opting out – or whether you are recorded by FacialNetwork
only if you register yourself – known as opting in. Take Facebook or Twitter as examples: In
both cases, you yourself decide whether or not you want to set up a profile. FacialNetwork
goes a step further. It no longer wants to wait for that decision. Instead it sets up an online
profile for you from freely available information without ever asking your permission.
Whether face recognition comes into use in this extremely bold and presumptuous way or
some other gentler approach is taken, this technology will be part of our everyday lives sooner
or later. And here once again, as in so many other cases, legislation is lagging hopelessly far
behind digital reality and will hardly afford us any protection. So, we have to reckon with the
possibility of some crazy person shooting a photo of us on the street and showing up at our
front door a short time later after doing a few minutes of research. Happy are those who wear
burkas we might then say – a topsy-turvy world!
I openly admit to you that I find it difficult to come up with a sensible piece of advice on
this subject. Your attitude is presumably like most everyone else’s. A photo of you with your
name has long existed somewhere on the Internet. There is little you can do to change the
situation. If I would recommend that you wear oversized, mirrored sunglasses in public plus
the fake beard from the last company Halloween party, you would probably say I was nuts.
But something has to happen for us to be able to move around in public in the future without
concern. And since we cannot rule out that there are or will be photos of us with our names
on the Internet, we can only hope that the Karl Lagerfelds and Vivienne Westwoods of this
world will come up with new facial adornment to render the recognition of a photographed

person impossible. Time will tell.
Tip: When face recognition becomes digital reality, we should think about protective
mechanisms to render recognition difficult if not impossible.


P
47
Paytime!
art of life is to settle open accounts. Many of us pay in different ways from one situation
to the next: in cash, with an ATM card or credit card or by bank transfer. On the
Internet we encounter additional payment systems such as PayPal or completely new types of
online currencies such as Bitcoin.
When and how we pay for goods and services are matters we frequently leave to chance or
decide on the basis of convenience. Possibly we might also think about security aspects,
having repeatedly heard from the media about worrying cases of fraud. You should definitely
apply the best possibe IT security standards on the device you plan to use for online banking.
While this book is primarily about protecting your privacy (as I already mentioned in the
prologue), I highly encourage you not to view this book as a replacement for applying proper
IT security, but as additional reading. I’d like to stress one important security feature before
turning to the aspect of privacy in regards to payments: Please make sure that besides user
name and password, you have to enter a further identification feature, which is different every
time log-in. This log-in version is called “two factor authentication”, or 2FA for short. It’s a
very effective measure against abuse of your accounts. Reputable financial institutes offer two
factor authentication to you as a standard feature.
It will come as no surprise to you if I want to emphasize another aspect here that is often
forgotten in connection with payments. Payments have a privacy dimension well worth
noting. I will therefore share several thoughts below that might help you make decisions the
next time you have to render payments.
Though obvious, the easiest rule seems to have faded somewhat into obscurity. I therefore
want to remind you of it again. Whatever you can pay for in cash, you should pay for in cash.
Nothing leaves fewer data traces behind than a coin or banknote passing from one hand to
another.
But cash payment is not always possible, for instance, when making a purchase at Amazon
or eBay. If you buy a pan, footwear or a used bicycle there, the effect on your privacy is
perhaps still limited. But you can also increasingly buy medicinal products on the Internet
and other sensitive goods; even your order of a simple book can reveal much about you under
certain circumstances. It is more than understandable if you do not wish to leave major data
traces behind when making a payment for goods puchased online.
Not leaving traces takes more or less creativity on your part depending on the situation.
There is effort involved, in any case – and exerting that effort may make sense for you only if
you absolutely do not want your name to be linked with the purchase and payment of a
service or product. Allow me a small digression below – it should help you decide more easily
whether you want to exert this effort.

As mentioned several times in this book, it is normal that we all make different demands
on our privacy. Some of us just want to guard against direct dangers from our immediate
surroundings and black-hat hackers. Others among us are bothered by the enormous volumes
of data that Internet gorillas such as Google, Facebook or Amazon on the one hand, and the
no less dangerous but much less well known data brokers such as the company Acxiom (who,
for example, claims to have already collected in excess of 1,500 data points for more than 500
million people), gather about us largely uncontrolled. And others find it unpleasant that
domestic and foreign authorities as well as secret services pass on our data unmonitored – even
though the vast majority of us are respectable citizens.
In this book I have tried to show the biggest danger, which in my experience, lurks
primarily in a person’s immediate personal surroundings. In saying that, I do not want to play
down the potential dangers emanating from the aforementioned public and private data
collectors. And so I must tell you openly: If you are among those not only seeking protection
from your immediate surroundings and black-hat hackers but also not wanting to be pumped
for information by greedy data collectors, authorities and secret services, then almost any form
of cashless payment is bad for you. Payments are observed and analyzed on a massive scale,
from the SWIFT agreement that regulates the handover of payment system data to the United
States, to credit card use that documents your name, the place of payment and the purchased
product, all the way to customer loyalty cards that many of us use quite indiscriminately. All
this is generally justified as part of the fight against terrorism. Of course a moot point is
whether the benefit (e.g., the prevention of an attack) is in a healthy ratio to the cost for, or
threat to, our free societies that we fought so hard over the centuries to establish and maintain.
You may sense that I have my doubts.
For the purposes of this book just let me say this: Your cashless payments leave major data
traces that say much more about you and this information can potentially be used in
interesting ways by the major players mentioned above. Always be aware of this fact. It
remains to be seen whether things will really reach a point one day where health insurance
firms refuse to insure you anymore because the analysis of your data suggests that you have
unhealthy habits. But this is already technically possible today. We can only hope that legal
regulations will put limits on this form of consumer discrimination. The option remaining for
all of us is to help each other help ourselves.
Now, if you want to pay anonymously, you should consistently start by refraining from
putting any delivery address under your name. This is easier than you might first think.
Invent a pseudonym and write this name on the post office box of a friend. You may want to
do the same for them. This way, the delivery address cannot be linked to you. Register an e-
mail address with the pseudonym at a free e-mail provider. Next, shop under your pseudonym
using a browser which provides anonymity (refer to Chapter 35), so that in the end no
conclusions can be drawn about your true identity from the device you use. If you want to opt
for this approach, you have to follow all the steps suggested above; otherwise you are not really
shopping anonymously.
The issue of payment is the only one remaining. Ideally, you render it with a gift
certificate, made out not to your actual name but to your pseudonym. You simply give your

pseudonym this gift certificate beforehand as a present – also using an anonymized browser –
or purchase it somewhere in a store. Amazon, for instance, has gift certificates of this type for
amounts up to $2,000 – enough to purchase quite a number of items. You will not be able to
pay amounts substantially higher than that using this method because online providers are
obligated in most countries to prohibit money laundering. I assume you have nothing to do
with such goings-on. You merely want to shop on the Internet without leaving data traces,
just as you can at any store by paying cash. You absolutely have the right to do so as a law-
abiding, innocent consumer. There’s no reason why you would have to feel bad about
shopping anonymously.
In some countries you can buy prepaid debit cards without having to register by name and
that allow anonymous payment. The maximum amount you can pay with these cards tend to
be quite low though again in order to prevent money laundering. As regulations vary from
one country to the next, I recommend that you conduct your own research on gift certificates
and prepaid cards available in your region.
Steer clear of dubious offers on the Internet. Put your trust instead in established
companies with impeccable reputations and websites on the Internet. For prepaid cards, you
must make available the credit amount in advance. If the card does not work, your credit is
also gone. Therefore, confine yourself solely to gift certificates or prepaid cards from
established service providers.
You can substantially reduce the data traces you leave behind when paying if you follow
these simple rules. Above all – and I cannot emphasize this enough – cash payments are
unbeatable from a privacy perspective.
Tip: Pay cash whenever possible. If you are purchasing sensitive products such as
pharmaceuticals and cannot do so in cash (for instance online), acquire gift
certificates or other available means of payment that is as personally neutral as
possible or that is issued to a pseudonym. When doing so, make sure the service
provider is reputable; give dubious sites on the Internet a wide berth.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/47


T
48
Care for a Few Chips?
he idea of radio-frequency identification chips (RFID chips) is fundamentally
reasonable. They are integrated in credit cards and allow you to make a payment at a
cash register without having to take the card out of your wallet or purse. Incidentally, this
technology can be used in so many different places such as in your own ID documents, in
clothing or in food packaging and is quite practical. But as so often, it too has its drawbacks.
It leads us to disclose information generally without even noticing.
What we can say is that the receiver of information from these radio chips has to be in our
immediate vicinity. This radio technology works only over distances of several meters, perhaps
10 or 20, but not (yet) over greater distances. However, the mere presence of a suitable
scanner nearby suffices for you to disclose your geographical position. This disclosure happens
when you enter a store that has this equipment or when you take part in a demonstration. Of
course in a country where the rule of law is functioning, it is illegal to identify the participants
in a demonstration using these techniques and therefore does not occur – or so we believe. Yet
if you wear these radio chips for a purpose connected to personalized data, the chips basically
render you identifiable without your having to introduce yourself by name.
In the case of ID documents, ATM and credit cards the very real risk of identity theft
must be mentioned. If a black-hat hacker manages to read your data, he can use it to wreak
havoc with your identity. To do so, he does not even need to see your card at all, just be close
to it – which is the basic idea behind these radio chips to begin with. And in actuality he does
not even have to be a genuine hacker because anyone can buy reading devices for these radio
chips.
Fortunately, there is a very simple method you can use for at least taming your cards and
IDs. Put everything bearing a radio chip in a Faraday cage. If you have forgotten this physics
lesson back in school, the Faraday cage is an electrical shield. The radio chips do not work as
long as they are within this shield. By the way, there are appropriate cases also for your
cellphone if you want to make sure your position cannot be determined. But be aware: You
cannot call anyone or send any data either as long as your cellphone is in a Faraday cage. Once
again you have to decide which is more important to you: preventing others from determining
your current location or being constantly reachable. You might opt for one or the other
depending on the situation.
Ironically, Amazon and other online retailers offer remote readers of these chips – which
can be used for more or less noble reasons – on the one hand and protective cases for IDs and
cards for preventing this chip reading on the other hand. Basically, you need both, of course.
After all, if you want to detect all radio chips you are carrying around with you, you first have
to identify them. For many of us, it is enough to neutralize the radio chips integrated in
sensitive documents such as IDs and cards. You will find corresponding products on the

Internet to do just that.
Tip: Put radio chips inside a case that acts as a Faraday cage or shield. By doing so, you
control whether or not these radio chips work. You can do the same with your
cellphone if you want to prevent it from disclosing your present geographical
position.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/48


E
49
The Innermost Circle
ven if we go through life fully aware and keep the data traces we leave behind as small as
possible, the profiles that even strangers can compile of us are becoming more and more
elaborate. This is because unfathomable volumes of data are being collected and research
methods are becoming increasingly sophisticated. We have established the different levels of
confidentiality. You can also picture them as concentric circles around a central point. The
closer you get to that point, the more personal and confidential things become.
For most of us, the central point of these circles is our home. When we close the front
door from within, we want to be certain that we are alone and that our privacy is protected –
for ourselves and for those closest and dearest to us who are living with us. In this digital age,
the address of your own home therefore takes on a special significance. There may be very
little that is private anymore but we would like to have privacy at least at home. We do not
want some unknown stalkers peering through our windows. We do not want to be the victim
of identity theft. And even if it is rare indeed, we do not want to be the target of a combined
online-offline attack, either, where black-hat hackers plunder and pillage us data-wise followed
by burglars who do so physically. Hopefully none of this will happen to us ever, but we live in
a time in which we must actively protect ourselves against such eventualities.
That is why we must keep our innermost circle – our center of confidentiality, namely our
private address – out of as many sources of information as possible, especially publicly
accessible ones. It all begins with the classic phone directory where we should no longer
appear and in other directories that often offer a blacklist option, i.e., the option of not being
listed publicly. This effort then continues with the Internet. Your Facebook profile, for
instance, needs no postal address, not even the city in which you live. All these bits of
information can serve as mosaic pieces for completing your profile. Perhaps you cannot avoid
entering your address if you, say, make a purchase on the Internet; but right after delivery you
can delete this address too. There are many individual actions you can take to ensure that your
private address does not become a public commodity.
Yet we should not have any illusions. In all probability, the major data brokers have long
had our address. If a company like Acxiom claims to have more than 1,500 data points on
over 500 million consumers worldwide, our residential address is more than likely among that
data. But it is still worthwhile to keep your coordinates out of as many sources as possible.
You may not be able to protect yourself against globally operating data brokers, but you can
do so against hackers, thieves and other culprits – and that alone is worth a great deal.
Imagine for a moment that the face recognition technology described in the previous
chapter becomes the standard and some stalker finds your address on the Internet without any
effort. You can be happy if the admirer who visits you is just a Cyrano de Bergerac type
wanting to recite verses under your window. Unfortunately, many of our contemporaries no

longer have that kind of style and decorum and their attention quickly becomes a nuisance or
even a threat.
Tip: Try to keep your private address out of as many publicly accessible sources of
information as possible – on the Internet and elsewhere.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/49


In Closing


I
50
Checking Your Data Traces
f you have now made it to this chapter in the book, it is presumably more than clear to you
what extensive data traces we leave behind over the course of our lives, at a wide variety of
places, on the Internet and elsewhere. You have the chance to understand and reconstruct
these data traces more effectively. Most democratic countries have a vested legal right to
information. This right allows you to demand that authorities, employers, health insurance
carriers, banks, landlords, address brokers and others reveal whatever information they hold
on you. In some cases, you need some perseverance to obtain an answer. Ultimately, you
should receive one, however.
You will find useful assistance on the Internet and in certain instances, also forms you can
use to submit a request for information. Just type in the keyword “right to information” or
“RTI law” plus the country in which you live because the regulations vary according to
national legal systems. In most cases, the costs for this information will be nil or minimal. You
can naturally also demand to be told the costs in advance.
Under certain circumstances, you may also be entitled to have the data deleted; this
matter is dealt with differently from one country to the next. But you will also find useful
instructions on these subjects on the websites of agencies and authorities entrusted with data
protection. My advice is this: Never request information and deletion at the same time. If you
do, you will receive a confirmation of deletion at most and will then not know exactly what
information about you was being held. Since you can never examine whether everything was
actually deleted, you should ask to be told what information was previously held or perhaps
what is still being held.
In addition to these actions, you should occasionally enter your name in a search engine
and see what you can find about yourself on the Internet. When doing so, search once for
your name without quotation marks and then for your full name in quotation marks. The
difference is that the latter search looks for your complete name. Also try combining your
name in the search box with key elements of your life that could pop up on the Internet, for
instance, your employer or a sports team. This step is especially important if you have a
common name such as Walter Meyer or Catherine Smith. If you are looking for yourself and
not a South African painter or an English poetess, you will have to combine your name with
other keywords. Do not be too sad if you have a lot of namesakes. The confusion that occurs
when there are multiple people with the same name gives you a small measure of anonymity.
Important: Many search engines adjust the search results to the person conducting the
search. I have already reported on the methods used by Google & Co. to identify who is
active at any given time. You should therefore conduct the above search occasionally also on
computers other than your own. This approach may well give you brand new insights into
yourself.

Tip: Check the data traces you leave behind. Find out which information is being held
on you. Conduct a search on the Internet for information on yourself – on your
own computer and if at all possible, on other peoples’ computers.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/50


F
51
There’s No Facebook in Heaven
(Yet)
or a number of reasons, one should also consider life after death from a digital
perspective. I do not mean posthumous video messages for the bereaved but rather your
presence on electronic devices such as computers, tablets and smartphones, your e-mail
accounts, your profiles on social networks or your registrations with providers of products and
services on the Internet. All these items do not cease to exist when you head heavenward. To
spare those closest to you from receiving inappropriate posts during this difficult time but also
to prevent other misuse such as posthumous identity theft, you are well advised to give
someone else authority to close your accounts or – if the site operator allows – to put your
account on memorial status.
My recommendation is that you give a person close to you or a lawyer a list of your user
accounts, passwords and other important digital data in a sealed envelope to be opened when
the time comes. You will recall that you should already be keeping a list of this kind for your
own purposes during your lifetime anyway, updating it and filing it in a safe place. You could
also give a person you trust a copy of this very list. Do not forget to replace your list of user
names and passwords with a current version on a regular basis, because things change over
time.
You have an important decision to make when assigning this responsibility. The person
you entrust with this task will have access to a large volume of digital data from your life. You
may want just your immediate family to be able to examine this data and take care of
everything – or the exact opposite: you may not want family to read what kind of e-mails you
sent and received in the past. They should be left with whatever they inherit, but they have no
right to a record of everything that went on in your life. If you see things this way, you should
select a separate person not involved in the inheritance to perform the task of digital cleanup
after you die. Be aware that if you make no arrangements for your digital legacy, your family
will have access to your data, provided it is accessible. There is no data protection after death.
In the meantime, there are websites on the Internet that promise to perform this task. I do
not think highly of these services and would advise against using them. For one thing, a
company that knows you only virtually can hardly judge what to do – for instance, when
something should be deleted, when something should be printed out and what should be
handed over to the heirs or whether a subscribed online service should be terminated, if need
be, without informing the family. All of these decisions require knowledge of you as a person
and can involve delicate matters.
Another problem regarding professional online services arises with respect to this topic. To
carry out this task when the time comes, these service providers need a large amount of

sensitive data from you such as user names and passwords. In other words, you would have to
send an unknown company highly sensitive information beyond your profile on the Internet.
You will want to personally know to whom you are entrusting this information. And if there is
a data accident or even misuse of your data, you will have to take legal action against the
person or company. This can be done with reasonable effort only in your own country. All of
these reasons are good cause to not use a service you know only from the Internet and are
unable to check on personally. Finally, planning for digital life after death is usually a very
long-term matter. What says that providers of these services will even still be around at the
time of your death? The Swedish provider MyWebWill.com for instance was founded in 2009
and no longer exists today. These kinds of unknowns should not exist for such an important
issue.
If the person you select for this highly confidential task is not one of your closest relatives,
he or she will usually not have access to a document that can be submitted to prove you have
died. For many services, this document is not needed because the existing accounts can be
deactivated and deleted easily. In many cases, however, a document of this kind is vital. To
deal with these cases, this trusted person should receive a “transmortal power of attorney”
from you, i.e. a power of attorney that remains valid beyond your death. It is of course limited
to this specific task of digital cleanup. You can attempt to formulate this power of attorney
yourself. You will find suitable examples on the Internet. For the document to be completely
legal and valid when the time comes, however, I advise you to have a lawyer or notary public
assist you with drawing up the power of attorney.
Tip: Entrust a person close to you, a lawyer or a notary public to perform the task of
digital cleanup of your devices in the event of your death. Provide this person with
a list of your user accounts, passwords and other important digital data. Update
this list regularly.
For further information, please visit:
www.safe-surfer.com/book/51


E
52
Privacy Fitness Program
nough of these morbid thoughts; let us turn once again to our thriving digital lives. You
have fought your way through nearly this entire book and hopefully can take along and
implement a few good tips for protecting your privacy. Several procedures in this book must
be carried out regularly. The thorough cleanup of your laptop, in other words, the deletion of
data no longer needed, is an example of one of these regularly recurring tasks. Social media
sites constantly change their structure, making it necessary for you to check your privacy
settings from time to time or also whether new options to protect your privacy have been
added.
Whatever pieces of advice from this book you find useful, I recommend that you make
permanent entries in your calendar for procedures that have to be done with regularity. Take
this approach to develop your own fitness program for your privacy but do not go overboard.
This book only recommends what is reasonably achieveable because I believe that only these
things get done. For instance, I know of no one in my circle of friends and acquaintances who
changes all their passwords every three months. Of course, this would be desirable but if no
one actually applies this rule, good intentions become the opposite and nothing at all is done.
So, it is better to enter reasonable targets in your calendar for maintaining effective protection
of your privacy. I recommend that you schedule regular checks every 3 to 12 months
depending on the intensity of your activity in the digital world.
Tip: Enter set dates in your calendar for recurring work procedures aimed at protecting
your privacy.


I
Epilogue
should be delighted if you have always been a committed champion of privacy or have
become one through reading this book. But if you fervently broach the subject with friends
and acquaintances at the next party you attend, you could well fall flat on your face. In a
study, the consumer research firm GfK found that the chances are about 50/5015 that your
important views and insights into the subject of privacy will be quashed with the retort: “I
have nothing to hide!”
Unfortunately many people do not realize how senseless this statement is, until they
themselves are victims of a hacker attack, they experience cyber mobbing first hand or they
gain too much weight and are suddenly subject to restrictions when choosing a health care
plan or when applying for a loan. These individuals who previously shouted from the rooftops
that they had nothing to hide also come to realize that everyone needs a bit of privacy and
that this need has very little to do with concealment.
You do not have to look far for examples of how disturbing it can be if the intrusion on
others people’s privacy is no longer a taboo. In December 2013, citizens were demonstrating
against the Ukrainian government on Maidan Square in Kiev. You may recall the incident.
Pictures went around the world of peaceful demonstrators, including entire families. You can
well imagine how surprised the people on the square were when they received the following
text message on their cellphones from the police: “You are registered as a participant in a mass
disturbance.”16 This is just a taste of what is possible in a digital world where everybody’s lives
are fully transparent. We are approaching this situation with seven-league strides. Data
krakens like Google, Microsoft, Apple or Facebook are paving the way. Rogue regimes, non-
legitimized authorities, black-hat hackers and other criminals are following in their wake.
If we wish to act responsibly, we cannot leave it up to the Internet giants to shape our
digital future. Eric Schmidt, chairman of Google, is one person who regularly talks himself
into trouble, thereby providing insights into the prevailing mindset of people in the industry.
Allow me to share two choice quotes from him with you:17
“If you have something that you don’t want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn’t be doing
it in the first place.”
“We know where you are. We know where you’ve been. We can more or less know what
you’re thinking about.”
In addition, Eric Schmidt made this suggestion in all seriousness: “Every young person
one day will be entitled automatically to change his or her name on18 reaching adulthood in
order to disown youthful hijinks stored on their friends’ social media sites.” Is your stomach
churning like mine is? Imagine for a moment letting a mind like that shape the future of our
society. For avid readers, the novels “Brave New World” or “1984” instantly come to mind.
The mentality revealed in the above quotes forms the core of what is required to open the

floodgates to a totalitarian dictatorship – even if it is “only” the dictatorship of the white
sheep, the do-gooders and the crashing bores who establish a mainstream moral codex and
marginalize dissidents. Orwell’s visions of thought-crime, unpersons and hate weeks could
become reality.
It remains to be seen whether things will ever really come to that. I do not subscribe to
conspiracy theories and apocalyptical scenarios. But on the one hand, a totalitarian regime is
not completely inconceivable and on the other, marginalization, character assassination,
blackmail or the like start much earlier and are even already taking place in some cases. The
underlying point of this discussion has relevance one level lower. We cannot allow one group
within the population to steal the right to privacy of another group – it is a human right we
have fought too hard to establish and maintain.
If you now proceed to implement the tips in this book, you not only do yourself and your
loved ones a big favor. You actually do much more. By better protecting your privacy, you
make it more difficult for the Eric Schmidts of this world to know where you are, where you
were and what you are thinking about. And in doing so, you might spare yourself and your
children the trouble of having to change names.
The intent of this book is to give you as the everyday user with average IT skills, the
chance to become a “Safe Surfer.” I hope my 52 tips have helped lay the groundwork for
ensuring your digital privacy. Of course there are myriad other things a person can do. Many
IT pros undoubtedly protect themselves in much different ways. But those approaches do not
help us if we cannot implement them. Do not let any genuine or self-acclaimed IT experts
confuse you so much that you end up resigning and throwing in the towel. That would be the
worst solution of all. Do what you are capable of doing. That is the best way for you to help
yourself and those closest to you.
There are probably a host of further great ideas that could have been included in this
book. And the digital world is undergoing constant change. That is why I would like to close
with a request to you: Please send any comments or suggestions on how to expand the
knowledge contained in this book to me at ideas@safe-surfer.com. Your involvement will
make this book as comprehensive as possible, and will be a help to everyone navigating the
constant influx of new technology that appears every day.
And last but not least: Do not let yourself be swayed by friends or family who are
suspicious of your efforts to protect yourself in the digital age. It is necessary, the threats are
real and “full disclosure” online may be acceptable for some but not for everyone. Dividing
the world into black and white sheep, where the former have something to hide and the latter
do not is too narrow a point of view. The world is more complicated and our lives are full of
diverging roads. We must always try to decide which road is the right one to take in our best
estimation. Once you make this decision, the only thing left to do is to protect your privacy
and that of those closest and dearest to you as effectively as possible. I wish you luck in this
endeavor. I hope you continue having a lot of fun experiencing the wonderful digital world –
presumably with greater awareness now, but hopefully with equal enthusiasm.

15 »Die WELT«, as of April 13, 2014, http://www.welt.de/wirtschaft/article126882276/Deutsche-unterschaetzen-
den-Wert-persoenlicher-Daten.html
16 »New York Times«, as of January 21, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/22/world/europe/ukraine-
protests.html
17 »Eric Schmidt«, Wikiquote, as of May 22, 2015, http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Eric_Schmidt
18 »Google 
and 
the 
Search 
for 
the 
Future«, 
Wall 
Street 
Journal, 
as 
of 
August 
14, 
2010,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052748704901104575423294099527212



