

If you want to know how. . .
7 Ways to Build Your Pension
How To Deal with Death and Probate
How To Earn Money in Retirement
How To make Your Own Will
How To Pay Less for More
How To Save Inheritance Tax
Investing in Stocks and Shares
Seven Ways for Anyone to Boost Their Income
Spending the Kids’ Inheritance
The Personal Security Handbook
Your Retirement Masterplan
howtobooks
Please send for a free copy of the latest catalogue:
How To Books
Spring Hill House, Spring Hill Road,
Begbroke, Oxford OX5 1RX, United Kingdom
Tel: (01865) 375794. Fax: (01865) 379162.
info@howtobooks.co.uk
www.howtobooks.co.uk

howtobooks

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by How To Content,  
A division of How To Books Ltd, 
Spring Hill House, Spring Hill Road, 
Begbroke, Oxford OX5 1RX, United Kingdom 
Tel: (01865) 375794. Fax: (01865) 379162 
info@howtobooks.co.uk 
www.howtobooks.co.uk 
 
How To Books greatly reduce the carbon footprint of their books by sourcing 
their typesetting and printing in the UK. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or stored in an 
information retrieval system (other than for purposes of review) without the 
express permission of the publisher in writing. 
 
The right of Matthew Record to be identified as author of this work has been 
asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988. 
 
@ 2008 Matthew Record 
 
First published in electronic form 2008 
 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
 
ISBN 978 1 84803 263 7 
 
Produced for How To Books by Deer Park Productions, Tavistock 
Typeset by PDQ Typesetting Ltd, Newcastle-under-Lyme 
 
NOTE: The material contained in this book is set out in good faith for general 
guidance and no liability can be accepted for loss or expense incurred as a 
result of relying in particular circumstances on statements made in the book. 
The laws and regulations are complex and liable to change, and readers should 
check the current position with the relevant authorities before making 
personal arrangements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Contents
Preface
vii
1
What is Identity Theft?
1
Types of identity crime
2
How your personal information is used
12
Tackling identity fraud
14
Fraud prevention measures
22
Victims’ stories
27
2
Protecting Your Identity
29
Keeping your identity safe
29
Using credit and debit cards safely
35
Types of card fraud
39
Keeping your personal documents secure
44
Destroying your personal information
48
Shredding your information
51
Identity fraud protection services
54
Top ten tips to protect your identity
60
Victims’ stories
61
3
Keeping Your Computer Secure
64
Protecting your computer
64
Using passwords
67
Internet security
74
Firewalls
79
Viruses
83
Spyware
87
Spam
90
Computer networking
94
Upgrading and updating
101
Peer-to-peer (P2P) ﬁle sharing
103
Erasing your hard drive
107
Top ten tips to keep your computer secure
111
Victims’ stories
112
v

4
Using the Internet Safely
114
Types of internet fraud
114
Using online usernames and passwords
125
Shopping online
126
Banking online
135
Using secure websites
137
Top ten tips for using the internet safely
140
Victims’ stories
141
5
Identifying if You Are a Victim
143
Lost or stolen personal documents
143
Disappearance of mail
144
Irregular and unauthorised transactions
145
Your credit rating has been reduced
145
Top ten tips to identify if you are a victim
147
Victims’ stories
148
6
Reporting Identity Fraud
151
Contacting the police
151
Contacting other organisations
152
Keeping accurate records
153
Protective registration from CIFAS
154
Jargon Buster
157
Useful Addresses
165
Useful Identity Fraud Protection Websites
169
Index
175
vi / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDE NTITY

vii
Preface
Your identity is the single most important commodity that
you own and it must be protected at all times. It is used to
prove who you are, where you live and what credit rating
you have. This information is a necessary and funda-
mental part of everyday modern life, but at present it
cannot be proven with a single document or a single
means of identiﬁcation. This is because diﬀerent organisa-
tions use diﬀerent documents to conﬁrm who you are and,
unfortunately, these can be easily stolen, forged or altered
to create a false identity or to steal an existing one.
If you become a victim of identity theft, reclaiming your
identity and restoring your ﬁnancial status can be a
lengthy, time-consuming and emotionally draining experi-
ence. However, with a little forethought and careful
planning, a number of simple preventive steps can be
taken to reduce the possibility of this happening. This
book explores what identity theft is and provides practical
advice about how to protect yourself from its damaging
consequences.
Matthew Record

This page intentionally left blank 

1
Whatis IdentityTheft?
Identity theft is just one of many identity-related crimes
but because of the media coverage it generates it is often
perceived as the only identity-related crime. This book
will explain the diﬀerences between the various types of
identity crimes and will oﬀer practical advice about how
to protect yourself, what to do if your identity is stolen,
and where to get further help.
Identity fraud is the UK’s fastest growing crime. It aﬀects
individuals, government departments and private sector
organisations and is estimated to currently cost the UK
economy around £2 billion per annum. With just a few of
your personal details, criminals can open bank accounts,
buy expensive goods, claim beneﬁts, obtain credit cards,
loans and mortgages and apply for passports and driving
licences – all in your name. They can also claim the
identity of deceased people, including children, which can
be extremely distressing to family members.
Your identity is extremely valuable and should be safe-
guarded at all times, but most people are unaware of how
easily it can be stolen or compromised. If you do become a
victim, then reclaiming your identity and restoring your
ﬁnancial status can be a lengthy, time-consuming and
emotionally draining experience. Fortunately, there are a
1

number of simple preventive steps that you can take to
protect it from criminals.
TYPES OF IDENTITY CRIME
There are many ways that your identity can be stolen and
there are many ways that your identity can be used. This
can often lead to confusion when attempting to diﬀer-
entiate between the various types of identity-related
crimes. To help clarify the situation, the Home Oﬃce
Identity Fraud Steering Committee (IFSC) has developed
a series of deﬁnitions as follows.
Identity crime
This encompassing term is used to describe the three main
types of identity related crime that are committed against
private individuals. These are identity theft, creating a
false identity and committing identity fraud. Criminals
and fraudsters use a combination of scams and schemes to
commit identity crime and these will be explored
throughout this book.
Identity theft
Identity theft occurs when criminals acquire enough of
your personal details to either assume your entire identity
or to create a new and ﬁctitious identity based on your
details. This information includes:
X your name
X date of birth
X current or previous address
X mother’s maiden name
X National Insurance Number.
2 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTI TY

W H A T I S I DE N TIT Y T H EF T? / 3
For further information, see page 12, How Your Personal
Information Is Used.
False identity theft
As the name implies, a false identity is one that has never
existed before. This can be created in one of two ways:
either a completely new identity can be produced from
counterfeit documents or a ﬁctitious identity can be
created from genuine documents that have been altered. A
false identity can be used to:
X hide from the authorities
X avoid existing legal and ﬁnancial obligations
X continue with fraudulent activities
X conceal a criminal past
X work with children (this may be necessary if the
fraudster has been convicted of a criminal oﬀence).
Identity fraud
Identity fraud is used to describe crimes committed
whereby a false or existing identity is used to fraudulently
obtain goods or services such as:
X bank accounts
X credit cards
X hire agreements
X loans and mortgages
X state beneﬁts
X mail order goods
X internet purchases
X mobile phone contracts.

4 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTI TY
Impersonation of the deceased
This is perhaps the most distressing type of identity-
related crime because it aﬀects the family and friends of
the deceased. This can be particularly distressing when it
involves the identity of a deceased child. A long-standing
problem has been that death records are not shared with
other organisations. This means that ﬁnancial organisa-
tions have been unable to verify if credit applicants are
recorded as deceased and direct mail companies are
unaware when deceased people need to be removed from
their databases. It is estimated that of the 10 billion pieces
of mail annually generated by the direct mail industry,
approximately 22 million are regularly sent to deceased
people. These mailings can be fraudulently used by
criminals to apply for credit cards, loans and mortgages.
However, the introduction of a clause to the Police and
Justice Act 2006 means that this information can be
shared with organisations for the purpose of fraud
prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution.
There are also practical and preventative steps you can
take to help protect the identity of the deceased. These
begin with the death announcement and continue
throughout the initial period of bereavement. This can
be an extremely traumatic time and protecting the
identity of the deceased is not always at the forefront of
somebody’s mind. However, when a death or funeral is
announced try to avoid listing the date of birth, age or
address of the deceased. As innocent as these details may
appear, they can be used by fraudsters to successfully
impersonate the deceased.

W H A T I S I DE N TIT Y T H EF T? / 5
It is also important to notify all of the necessary
organisations, companies and government departments
as soon as possible and that any pension books, allowance
books, credit cards or membership cards are either
destroyed or returned by recorded delivery. These include:
X the deceased’s doctor
X the deceased’s employer
X the deceased’s solicitor (if applicable)
X HM Revenue & Customs
X local authorities (council tax, local housing depart-
ment)
X Department for Work & Pensions (DWP)
X UK Passport Agency
X Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA)
X banks and building societies
X credit card companies
X utility companies (gas, electricity, water, telephone)
X Television Licensing
X satellite, cable or digital television companies
X insurance companies
X clubs, associations, season tickets
X Royal Mail (for mail redirection).
If any correspondence continues to be received, then it
may be necessary to make a formal complaint to the
relevant organisation. It is also a good idea to check with
Royal Mail that a mail redirection has not been set up on
the deceased person’s home and to arrange to have their
mail redirected to your own address for at least a year.
This is particularly important if the property is empty or
is for sale because fraudsters have been known to view

6 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTI TY
empty properties with the sole intention of stealing mail.
To help avoid this, make sure that all viewings are
accompanied and regularly check for mail that may be
accidentally delivered.
As an extra security measure, details of the deceased can
be registered with the following organisations that
specialise in the removal of people from mailing lists:
The Bereavement Register
FREEPOST SEA8240, Sevenoaks, TN13 1YR
Tel: 0870 600 7222
Fax: 0870 400 5644
Email: help@the-bereavement-register.com
www.the-bereavement-register.org.uk
Deceased Preference Service (DPS)
Windhill Manor, Leeds Road, Shipley, BD18 1BP
Tel: 0800 068 4433
www.deceasedpreferenceservice.co.uk
Mail Preference Service (MPS)
FREEPOST 29 LON20771, London, W1E 0ZT
Tel: 0845 703 4599
Fax: 020 7323 4226
Email: mps@dma.org.uk
www.mpsonline.org.uk
Registering with these organisations will help to reduce a
vast majority of direct mail but it is also important to
ensure that existing correspondence and documents are
not inadvertently made available to fraudsters. For
example, before disposing of a deceased person’s clothes,

W H A T I S I DE N TIT Y T H EF T? / 7
wallets, handbags or other personal eﬀects, always check
that any identity-related items have been removed. Any
documents that are no longer required should be
shredded before being thrown away because fraudsters
can sort through rubbish bags to try to ﬁnd useable
information. For further information regarding destroy-
ing and shredding personal information, see page 51,
Shredding Your Information.
Corporate identity crime
It is not only individuals who are susceptible to identity
theft. Businesses and business owners can also fall victim
to corporate identity crime. As with identity crime, see
page 2, the Home Oﬃce Steering Committee has
developed a series of deﬁnitions to diﬀerentiate between
the various types. The term ‘corporate identity crime’ is
used to describe the three main types of corporate
identity-related crimes. These are corporate identity
theft, creating a false corporate identity and committing
corporate identity fraud.
Corporate identity theft
This occurs when a genuine business is cloned and its
name and credit accounts are used to fraudulently obtain
goods, services and money. This is known as corporate
identity fraud, see page 8, and is estimated to cost British
industry £50 million a year. A company can be cloned by
ﬁling fraudulent documents with Companies House to
change the registered business address or to appoint
directors and thereby create the impression that the
fraudster owns the business.

8 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTI TY
The fraudster can then illegally trade as the genuine
company, which means that the genuine company will be
liable for all debts incurred by the fraudster. One way to
do this is for the fraudster to set up a merchant account in
the genuine company’s name, accept multiple stolen
credit cards and deposit the proceeds in their own bank
account. When customers complain that their credit cards
have been fraudulently used, the card companies will then
charge the genuine company for their losses. Companies
House recognises that this is a problem and has
introduced a variety of security measures to help
companies protect themselves, see page 9.
Creating a false corporate identity
A false corporate identity is created when ﬁctitious details
are used to set up and register a business that does not
exist. This can also be achieved by altering the details of a
genuine company to create a new business. The over-
whelming common dominator in both scenarios is that a
false corporate identity is created with the sole purpose of
committing fraud. The fraudster can use the details of a
ﬁctitious company to order goods with stolen credit cards
or credit accounts that appear to be from a genuine
company.
Corporate identity fraud
This is committed when the details of either a genuine
business (corporate identity theft) or a ﬁctitious business
(false corporate identity) are used to fraudulently obtain
goods or services. Fraudsters will go to extraordinary
lengths to obtain private and sensitive company informa-
tion. For example, they will often search through rubbish

W H A T I S I DE N TIT Y T H EF T? / 9
bins or seek menial employment to discover bank details,
steal passes, obtain passwords and acquire other corpo-
rate information.
Companies House
Fraudsters recognise and exploit the fact that Companies
House does not have the authority to inspect the contents
of documents sent to them for ﬁling. Therefore, it is
possible for company details to be changed without their
permission or knowledge, so companies are advised to
regularly check that their details have not been altered.
To help address this problem, Companies House has
taken a proactive approach by introducing a variety of
services that allow companies to securely ﬁle and
electronically check documents:
X WebFiling service
X Software Filing service
X PROOF (PROtected Online Filing) service
X Monitor alert system.
To access these services, companies ﬁrst need to register
online with Companies House. During the registration
process, stringent security checks are carried out to
ensure the applicant is authorised to apply for the service.
These checks begin with a security code being sent by
email with a further Company Authentication code
posted to the company’s registered oﬃce. Company
Authentication codes are unique to each company and
are used to verify the identity of a company in the absence
of a signature.

WebFiling service
This is a safe and secure way for companies to
electronically ﬁle their statutory information. Companies
can save 50% on the cost of ﬁling an annual return and
the following documents can be ﬁled online free of charge:
Return of allotment of shares (excluding non-cash) (88
(2))
Notice of increase in nominal capital (with resolution)
(123)
Change of accounting reference date (225)
Change in situation or address of registered oﬃce (287)
Appointment of director or secretary (288a)
Terminating appointment as director or secretary (288b)
Change of particulars for director or secretary (288c)
Location of register of members (353)
Notice of place for inspection of register of members
which is kept in non-legible form, or of any change of
that place (353a)
Location of register of debenture holders (190)
Notice of place for inspection of register of holders of
debentures which is kept in a non-legible form, or of
any change in that place (190a)
Audit Exempt Abbreviated Accounts
Dormant Company Accounts (DCA)
Annual Return (363)
Software Filing service
The Software Filing service is primarily aimed at
companies who regularly submit statutory documents,
such as limited company accounts or annual returns.
With this service, these documents can be electronically
sent to Companies House by email. These are then
automatically authenticated for compliance with the
Companies Act prior to being accepted or rejected.
10 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

W H A T I S I D E N T I T Y T H E F T ? / 11
PROOF (PROtected Online Filing) service
In addition to their WebFiling and Software Filing
services, Companies House has introduced the PROOF
service to help companies further reduce the possibility of
fraud. To access this service, companies will ﬁrst need to
be a registered WebFiling or Software Filing user. The
service works by only allowing companies to electronically
ﬁle speciﬁc forms relating to changes of address and
directors’ details. Companies House will then reject any
paper versions of these forms that claim to come from the
company.
The following forms can be submitted under the PROOF
service:
Change in situation or address of registered oﬃce (287)
Appointment of director or secretary (288a)
Terminating appointment as director or secretary (288b)
Change of particulars for director or secretary (288c)
Annual Return (363)
Monitor alert system
As an additional protection service, Companies House
has introduced an instant email alerting system, called
Monitor. The system allows users to ‘monitor’ public
domain documents ﬁled by themselves, their competitors
and business collaborators. As soon as these documents
are received, registered and available, users are notiﬁed
and given the opportunity to order and download this
information.
There are also a number of independent companies that
oﬀer similar business monitoring services, these include:

12 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENT ITY
Formations House
29 Harley Street, London, W1G 9QR
Tel: 020 7016 2727
Fax: 020 7637 0419
Email: info@formationshouse.com
www.formationshouse.com
Protect My Company
Matthew House, Matthew Street, Dunstable, LU6 1SD
Tel: 0845 400 0777
Email: Admin@ProtectMyCompany.co.uk
www.protectmycompany.co.uk
HOW YOUR PERSONAL INFORMATION IS
USED
After a fraudster has successfully obtained your personal
details there are a number of illegal ways that this
information can be used. For example, they can either
use some of your details to create a brand new false identity
or they can use all of your details to assume your entire
identity. Each of these scenarios could potentially leave you
liable for any criminal activity committed in your name.
However, in reality it is unlikely that you will be prosecuted
but clearing your name and restoring credit status can be a
lengthy and emotionally draining experience.
A completely new identity may be useful if the fraudster
needs to conceal their past. For example, they might have
a poor credit history and want to avoid paying their
existing debts or they may want to continue breaking the
law without arousing suspicion from the police. Other
reasons include to work with children, which may be

W H A T I S I D E N T I T Y T H E F T ? / 13
necessary if they need to conceal a criminal past, to drive a
vehicle despite being disqualiﬁed or to remarry without
being divorced ﬁrst.
When an existing identity is assumed it is generally for the
purpose of ﬁnancial gain. With your personal details and
credit rating, fraudsters can obtain goods or services that
they have no intention of paying for. They can also apply
for ﬁnancial services such as credit cards, bank accounts,
loans, mortgages, mobile phone contracts and state
beneﬁts. In addition to this, they can also use your
name to apply for passports, driving licences and to
register vehicles.
Funding illegal activities
Identity fraudsters do not conform to a particular proﬁle.
They could as easily be working on their own or form part
of a larger, highly organised criminal network. These
criminal networks commit fraud on a grand scale by
acquiring and exploiting multiple identities and are
collectively estimated to generate a daily cashﬂow in the
region of £10 million. This is then used to fund other
illegal activities such as terrorism, drug smuggling, illegal
immigration, people traﬃcking and money laundering.
Money laundering
Money laundering is extremely complex and would
probably require an entire book to explain it fully. It is
particularly linked to identity theft because fraudsters
need to legitimately conceal the ﬁnancial proceeds of their
criminal activities. As an overview, money laundering can
be described as a three step process:

14 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
1. Placement – this involves ‘placing’ money in the
ﬁnancial system, usually as far away from where it
originated as possible.
2. Layering – moving money through a variety of
transactions, in a variety of countries, using a variety
of ‘shell’ companies. ‘Shell’ companies appear to look
legitimate but in fact stand in front of the real
company, organisation or individual which proﬁts
from the transactions.
3. Integration – returning the money to a place where the
fraudster can gain access to it. This often involves
oﬀshore banking because they have strict privacy laws
and minimal regulations, which means that the
identity of who owns a company or bank account is
almost impossible to determine.
With millions of ﬁnancial transactions happening every
day, tracing the source of laundered money is incredibly
diﬃcult. Therefore, law enforcement agencies rely on
ﬁnancial organisations to notify them of any suspicious
activity. However, deﬁning exactly what constitutes
‘suspicious’ is not made clear. In most countries a
ﬁnancial threshold exists, whereby only transactions
over this amount need to be reported to the authorities.
This has led to the practice of smurﬁng, which involves
processing multiple transactions just below the threshold
level.
TACKLING IDENTITY FRAUD
In recent years, identity fraud has become such a large
and growing problem that governments worldwide are

WHAT I S I DE NT I T Y T H E F T ? / 15
constantly ﬁnding new ways to address the issue. In the
United Kingdom this task has been undertaken by the
Home Oﬃce which, in 2003, established the Identity
Fraud Steering Committee (IFSC) and the Identity Fraud
Forum (IFF) which is a joint collaboration between UK
ﬁnancial organisations, government departments and the
police. The overreaching objectives of these initiatives
include the following.
X Identifying new ways to share information between
public and private sector organisations.
X Reducing fraud involving the impersonation of the
deceased.
X Accurately recording the cost of identity fraud to the
UK economy.
X Examining and statistically tracking the eﬀect of
identity fraud on victims.
X Improving public awareness and providing identity
checking training for those in the ﬁnancial sector.
As part of these initiatives, the Identity Fraud Reduction
Work Programme was established to develop and
introduce new initiatives to help combat the problem.
The programme, which also encompasses the Govern-
ment’s Identity Cards Programme, has successfully
launched an identity fraud awareness campaign that
includes a comprehensive website, posters and leaﬂets. Go
to Home Oﬃce Identity Fraud Steering Committee
at
www.identity-theft.org.uk

16 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
For further information, see page 23, Raising Awareness.
In addition to the work of the Home Oﬃce, the following
new legislation and increased penalties have also been
introduced as a deterrent to criminals.
Criminal Justice Act 2003
Before this Act was introduced, the maximum ﬁne for
illegally obtaining a driving licence was only £2,500.
However, given the fact that a driving licence is frequently
used as a primary source of identity proof, and in view of
the vast amount of fraud that can be committed with a
counterfeit licence, a £2,500 ﬁne was considered inade-
quate as a deterrent. The Criminal Justice Act 2003
sought to address the balance by bringing the penalty for
illegally obtaining a driving licence in line with the penalty
for illegally obtaining a passport. Both of these are now
arrestable oﬀences and carry a maximum custodial
sentence of two years in prison.
Identity Cards Act 2006
The Identity Cards Act 2006 received Royal Assent on 30
March 2006 and came into force on 7 June 2006. The
main purpose of the Act is to make provision for the
introduction of identity cards that the Government intend
to introduce as part of the National Identity Scheme. This
Act established new criminal oﬀences for possessing,
distributing or supplying false identity documents such as
passports, immigration papers and driving licences. The
Act applies to both UK and foreign documents and also
includes genuine documents that have been illegally
obtained or have already been issued to somebody else.

W H A T I S I D E N T I T Y T H E FT ? / 17
National Identity Scheme
Proving who you are is a necessary and fundamental part
of everyday modern life but at present this cannot be done
with a single document or a single means of identiﬁcation.
The main problem is that diﬀerent organisations require
diﬀerent documents to establish identity. In addition,
utility bills, statements and other identity conﬁrmation
documents can be easily stolen, forged or altered to create
a false identity or to steal an existing one.
To address this, the government has taken the ﬁrst steps
towards establishing a National Identity Scheme which is
designed to protect identities from being fraudulently
used. At the heart of the scheme is the proposed
introduction of ID cards to all UK residents over the
age of 16. These will provide residents with a simple and
secure way to prove who they are with a single means of
identiﬁcation. The scheme was ﬁrst announced in the
Queen’s Speech on 17 May 2005 but it will not become
fully operational for a number of years.
The scheme will be run by the Identity and Passport
Service (IPS) who will work with the Home Oﬃce
Immigration and Nationality Directorate (IND) and the
UK Visa Service to conﬁrm both nationality and identity.
The National Identity Scheme will comprise four main
components:
1. enrolment
2. National Identity Register (NIR)
3. identity cards
4. identity veriﬁcation service.

18 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Enrolment
The ﬁrst stage of enrolment is registering your identity.
This is a two-stage process that involves creating a
biographical footprint and recording your biometric
data. A biographical footprint is simply a record of
your name, address and date of birth. When you apply for
an ID card these details are then cross-referenced against
other identity veriﬁcation databases such as National
Insurance, DVLA and the electoral roll.
Registering your biometric data is an essential part of the
enrolment process and involves creating high quality
digital images of your face, irises and ﬁngerprints. This
unique data is then permanently linked to your biogra-
phical information to deﬁnitively prove who you are. To
make enrolment accessible to as many people as possible,
a number of local enrolment centres will be created with
additional mobile centres being used for rural areas.
National Identity Register (NIR)
The National Identity Register will only be used to collate
and store identity-related biographical and biometric
information. Additional personal data such as medical
records, tax details, beneﬁts information and other
government records will not be included in the register.
However, the register can be accessed by relevant
organisations to conﬁrm if the information contained
within their own systems agrees with those in the register.
Identity cards
The ﬁrst identity cards are not due to be issued until 2009,
when they will initially be available with adult passports
and renewals. Until 1 January 2010 you will have the

W H AT IS ID E N T I T Y T H E F T ? / 19
option to decline an ID card when you receive a passport
but your details will still be entered into the National
Identity Register. Stand-alone ID cards will become
available at a later date for people who do not want or
need a passport. The cards will be similar in size to a
credit card and will contain:
X your name
X an image of your face
X your unique Identity Registration Number (IRN)
X an electronic chip with basic identity information
X a Personal Identiﬁcation Number (PIN), that can be
set in the same way as a credit card PIN.
Identity veri¢cation service
With your consent, approved organisations will be able to
use this service to conﬁrm your identity. There are many
diﬀerent situations when this may be useful, for example
when opening a bank account, registering with a doctor,
applying for a job or hiring a car. The service will oﬀer a
variety of identity-checking options that range from a
basic search to prove your age to whether you have a
criminal record.
Fraud Act 2006
The Fraud Act 2006 received Royal Assent on 8
November 2006 and came into force on 15 January
2007. The purpose of the Act was to simplify and replace
the existing common law oﬀence of ‘conspiracy to
defraud’ with a new, statutory oﬀence for fraud. This
new oﬀence deﬁnes three separate ways of committing
fraud.

20 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
1. By false representation – i.e. creating or selling
counterfeit goods, dishonestly using a credit card,
phishing over the internet or committing corporate
identity theft.
2. By failing to disclose information – i.e. providing false
or inaccurate details on insurance proposals or
solicitors not sharing important information with
their clients.
3. By abuse of position – i.e. employees who steal from
their employers or someone who acts for personal gain
against the best interests of clients or the company.
In each of these cases, fraud can be proven if the person
has acted dishonestly with the intention of making a gain
for either themselves or someone else or if they have
inﬂicted a loss or potential loss on someone else. This
means that identity-related frauds that were previously
diﬃcult to prosecute, such as those involving counterfeit
goods, credit cards or phishing can now be more easily
prosecuted.
The Act has also created new fraud oﬀences:
X Obtaining services dishonestly
This includes illegally downloading music, software or
movies, fraudulently using false credit card details or
receiving satellite television with no intention of
paying.
X Possessing, making and supplying articles for use in
frauds
These include machines that can be used to clone credit

WHAT IS IDE NTIT Y THEFT? / 21
cards, illegally view satellite television or cause
electricity meters to give false readings. This could
also include lists of credit card details, computer
programs to create credit card numbers or templates
for phishing and scam letters.
X Participating in a fraudulent business
This includes selling counterfeit goods, being a bogus
charity collector, knowingly defrauding customers and
suppliers or using the business as a barrier between the
fraudster and the victims. This oﬀence also extends to
sole traders, trusts and partnerships.
Working together
Identity-related crimes span a variety of diﬀerent indus-
tries and therefore it has been necessary for companies
and organisations to work together in an attempt to
combat the problem. For example, the Identity and
Passport Service (IPS) and the Driver Vehicle Licensing
Authority (DVLA) work jointly to ensure that the most
stringent and highest levels of identity checking are
constantly applied before passports and driving licences
are issued. The IPS also shares its database of lost and
stolen passports with international police forces and
border authorities through Interpol.
The IPS was established on 1 April 2006 as an Executive
Agency of the Home Oﬃce to work closely with the
Border and Immigration Agency, the Foreign and
Commonwealth Oﬃce and UK Visas. One of its primary
objectives is to develop and introduce common working
practices between organisations regarding the way that
identity-related information is exchanged and managed.

22 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
When the National Identity Scheme is introduced, the IPS
will be responsible for issuing ID cards for British and
Irish nationals living in the UK. It will also link the
scheme to foreign nationals living in the UK by issuing
biometric immigration documents.
In addition, the Home Oﬃce, DVLA and UK Passport
Service (UKPS) have worked alongside the Finance and
Leasing Association (FLA), APACS and the Credit
Industry Fraud Advisory Scheme (CIFAS) to produce
Identity Fraud – The UK Manual. This manual is
speciﬁcally designed to help organisations identify coun-
terfeit passports and driving licences by highlighting the
existing and changing security features of genuine
documents.
Another example of the way that identity information is
shared can be seen through the introduction of a clause to
the Police and Justice Act 2006 regarding the deceased.
This clause means that death registration information can
be shared with organisations for the purpose of fraud
prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution.
With this information becoming available it is anticipated
that fraud involving the impersonation of the deceased
will be dramatically reduced and eventually completely
eradicated, see page 4, Impersonation of the Deceased.
FRAUD PREVENTION MEASURES
With identity-related crime continuing to increase, a
variety of fraud prevention measures have already been
introduced with many more being developed. These
include the introduction of the following.

W H AT IS ID E N T I T Y T H E F T ? / 23
X Chip and PIN technology which has resulted in a
signiﬁcant reduction in credit card fraud.
X A Dedicated Cheque and Plastic Crime Unit
(DCPCU) to tackle plastic and cheque fraud.
X Secure payment systems such as MasterCard Secure
Code and Veriﬁed by Visa for online transactions.
X The Industry Hot Card File which allows retailers to
check if a card is being fraudulently used.
X A veriﬁcation system to conﬁrm if the cardholder
address and card security code system is correct when
accepting internet and telephone orders.
X Intelligent fraud detection systems that are designed to
identify fraud by checking for unusual spending
patterns.
Raising awareness
At the heart of the ﬁght against identity-related crime is
the necessity to raise awareness of the problem. The
Home Oﬃce Identity Fraud Steering Committee has
developed a very informative website which is an excellent
place to start. Go to Home Oﬃce Identity Fraud Steering
Committee at www.identity-theft.org.uk
In addition to providing general identity theft-related
information, the Home Oﬃce has also produced an
Identity Theft – Don’t Become a Victim leaﬂet together
with a series of posters. These have been distributed to a
wide range of places including Citizens Advice oﬃces,
police stations, public libraries, passport oﬃces, the
DVLA, doctors’ surgeries and victim support schemes.

24 / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDEN TITY
They are also available to download from the website, see
page 23.
National Identity Fraud Prevention Week
Identity fraud has become such a major concern that an
annual awareness campaign has been launched to help
people protect themselves by providing practical help and
advice. The National Identity Fraud Prevention Week
takes place every October and has been put in place by a
variety of organisations including the Metropolitan Police
(and other regional police forces), CIFAS, Royal Mail,
Federation of Small Businesses (FSB), Callcredit,
Experian, Equifax, DVLA, Identity and Passport Service,
British Bankers’ Association (BBA), HM Revenue &
Customs, APACS, SOCA, City of London Police, the FSA
and Fellowes. For further information visit the cam-
paign’s dedicated website at www.stop-idfraud.co.uk
Identity fraud related websites
Owing to the growth of identity related crime, a number
of websites have been launched to provide help, advice
and guidance about identity theft and protecting yourself
from its associated consequences. These include:
Anti-Phishing Working Group – www.antiphishing.org
Cross-industry global group supporting those tackling
phishing and pharming by providing advice on anti-
phishing controls and information on current trends.
APACS – www.apacs.org.uk
Association for Payment Clearing Services (APACS), is
the UK trade association for the banking industry that
provides a forum for its members to come together on

WHAT I S I DE NT I T Y T H E F T ? / 25
non-competitive issues relating to the payments industry.
They also work with police, retailers, cardholders and
organisations to ﬁght payment card fraud.
Bank Safe Online – www.banksafeonline.org.uk
Bank Safe Online is run by APACS on behalf of its
member banks to help online banking customers stay safe
online.
Card Watch – www.cardwatch.org.uk
Card Watch raises awareness about all types of plastic
card fraud in the UK and provides information to prevent
fraudulent use of credit cards, debit cards, cheque
guarantee cards and charge cards.
Consumer Direct – www.consumerdirect.gov.uk
A government-funded telephone and online advice service
operated by the Oﬃce of Fair Trading (OFT) providing
clear, practical advice on a wide range of consumer issues.
The advice is free and you can call 0845 404 0506 as many
times as you need to.
Dedicated Cheque and Plastic Crime Unit (DCPCU) –
www.dcpcu.org.uk
The DCPCU is sponsored by APACS on behalf of the
banking industry, it comprises a group of specialist police
oﬃcers and civilian staﬀto tackle the organised gangs
responsible for much of the UK’s card and cheque fraud.
Get Safe Online – www.getsafeonline.org.uk
Protect yourself from identity thieves, viruses, phishing
and other internet threats with expert advice from the
British Government, the Serious and Organised Crime

26 / P RO TECT I NG YO UR I D E NTI T Y
Agency and industry specialists who will help you guard
against online dangers.
Fraud Watch International – www.fraudwatchinternation
al.com
Combines anti-phishing education, monitoring and detec-
tion services and preventative software solutions for
consumers and corporate clients.
ID Theft Protect – www.id-protect.co.uk
Provides guidance and a comprehensive step-by-step
programme designed to protect you from identity fraud.
Microsoft Security At Home – www.microsoft.com/
security/protect
Useful help and advice to protect your computer, yourself
and your family from online threats and inappropriate
content and contact.
Miller Smiles – www.millersmiles.co.uk
A large archive of spoof email and phishing scams.
Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) – www.soca.
gov.uk
Non-geographic police unit responsible for undertaking
pro-active operations against serious and organised crime.
Spamfo – www.spamfo.co.uk
Organised collection of news, reviews and links about
unsolicited bulk email (spam).
Shop Safe Online – www.shopsafeonline.org.uk
Provides information about registering and using Mas-
terCard SecureCode and Veriﬁed by Visa.

W H A T I S I D E N T I T Y T H E F T ? / 27
Shopsafe UK – www.shopsafe.co.uk
A UK online shopping directory listing secure UK online
shops so you can shop on the internet with conﬁdence.
The site also includes special oﬀers, gift ideas and safe
shopping advice.
Stay Safe Online – www.staysafeonline.info
Provides free and non-technical cyber security and safety
resources to the public, so that consumers, small
businesses and educators have the know-how to avoid
cyber crime.
VICTIMS’ STORIES
Impersonation of the deceased fraud
After Jack’s fatherdied, his bank accounts were closed, credit
cards were cancelled and his mailwasredirected.However,
within a short while Jack started to receiveletters from
creditcard companies, debtcollection agencies and
department stores claiming that his father had failed to make
repayments on credit and store cards that he hadtaken out.
Jackcontacted each company but was disappointed to
receive a mixedresponse ranging from a lackof interestto
disbelief of who hewas.Jack’s father had always paid his bills
ontime and had never beenin debt so Jack was devastated
that his father’sreputationwas being tarnished. After two
years ofcontinualcorrespondence, the situationwas
eventuallyresolved but not before more creditcards and
store cards were taken out.
Corporate identity fraud
When ABCComputing registered with a risk-monitoring
service theyknew they would be notif|ed when another
business withthe same name f|led anypapers at Companies

28 / P RO TECT I NG YO UR I D E NTI T Y
House.Whenthis happened theychecked with Companies
House and discovered that a change of address had been
f|led againsttheirown business.Before the unauthorised
changes could be restored, ABCComputing had to apply to
the High Courtfor a Court Order whichtook a greatdeal
oftime and money to sortout.This had a detrimental e¡ect
onthe business because during this period, marketing
campaigns and productlaunches had to be cancelled.In
additionto notifying their bank, theyalso had to inform
everycustomer and supplier to ensure their business
remainedintact.
Since this unfortunateincident, ABCComputing has signed
up for the PROOF (PROtected Online Filing) service
provided by Companies House.Thisis a password protected
service thatonlypermits nominated companyowners to
make changes online.Bysigning uptothis service,Companies
Housewillnowreject anypaperdocuments from ABC
Computing which means thattheircorporateidentitycan be
fullyprotected.

2
ProtectingYour Identity
Your personal information is an extremely valuable
commodity and criminals will go to extraordinary lengths
to steal it from you. Therefore, it is important to protect
and safeguard your identity at all times. This can
sometimes be diﬃcult because there are legitimate
occasions when it will be necessary to disclose personal
information, for example, when applying for credit,
joining a club, hiring a vehicle or opening an account.
The real diﬃculty comes when you are unexpectedly
asked for information in circumstances that may appear
genuine but which have been carefully orchestrated by
fraudsters. This chapter will look at how your identity can
be stolen and will oﬀer practical help and advice about
how to reduce the risk of this happening.
KEEPING YOUR IDENTITY SAFE
In addition to directly stealing your personal information,
criminals also use various indirect methods to steal your
details through email, telephone, fax or canvassing. In
recent years, the advancement of home computers has
made it possible to create oﬃcial-looking documents,
headed notepaper and emails that can easily pass as
genuine to the casual observer. Unsolicited emails or
spam, as it is more commonly known, is an eﬃcient way
29

to target millions of potential victims at next to no cost.
This is covered in more detail in Chapter 3, see page 90,
Spam.
Unsolicited letters and faxes are often used to advise you
that you have either won a lottery or are about to inherit
some money. You will then be asked to provide your bank
details to enable the funds to be transferred, which of
course do not exist. Instead, this information will be used
by criminals to clear your bank account. Telephone
canvassing is a popular marketing method that compa-
nies use to retain existing customers and generate new
business. In order to ensure that they are speaking to the
right person, they will often ask the customer a series of
security questions. In most cases, this is a perfectly
legitimate process that is designed to protect both the
customer and the company.
Giving out your personal information
Fraudsters employ similar techniques to get your personal
information by claiming to be from your bank or credit
card company. A common scam is to persuade you to
conﬁrm your account number, password or PIN as a
security measure when in fact the caller never has this
information in the ﬁrst place. Remember that genuine
companies will never request your details in this way, so
always be extra vigilant when dealing with these types of
calls. If you have any suspicions about the caller then
either end the call immediately or insist on verifying the
caller’s identity. Genuine callers will not object to this and
they will probably welcome your security concerns. This
can be done by politely oﬀering to call them back through
30 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y / 31
the main company switchboard. Never return a call to a
direct line because this will not necessarily conﬁrm where
they are calling from.
When giving out your personal information, it is essential
to exercise extreme caution. Always think about who is
asking for your information, why they need it and
whether they are genuine. Even the most friendly or
oﬃcial-looking people may not always be what they seem,
so if you have any doubts about who you are dealing with
then the golden rule is to never give out your information.
Reducing unsolicited communication
Unsolicited telephone calls, mail, faxes and emails can be
obtrusive, annoying and time consuming to deal with.
They also mean that your personal details are in a number
of sales and marketing databases, which are often sold on
to other companies. Fortunately, by registering with the
Telephone Preference Service (TPS), Mail Preference
Service (MPS), Fax Preference Service (FPS) and the
Email Preference Service (eMPS) you can greatly reduce
these types of unsolicited communication. After register-
ing, you will still receive information from organisations
with whom you have a continuing relationship such as
mail order companies or charities. The only exception
would be if you have speciﬁcally asked them not to
contact you in this way.
Registration to these services is completely free, so if you
are ever asked for payment to register then refuse and
immediately notify the relevant preference service because
this will be a scam. To register with the TPS, MPS, FPS
or eMPS contact:

Telephone Preference Service (TPS)
3rd Floor, DMA House, 70 Margaret Street, London,
W1W 8SS
TPS Registration Line: 0845 070 0707
Tel: 0845 703 4599
Fax: 020 7323 4226
Email: tps@dma.org.uk
www.tpsonline.org.uk
Mail Preference Service (MPS)
FREEPOST 29 LON20771, London, W1E 0ZT
MPS Registration Line: 0845 703 4599
Tel: 0845 703 4599
Fax: 020 7323 4226
Email: mps@dma.org.uk
www.mpsonline.org.uk
Fax Preference Service (FPS)
3rd Floor, DMA House, 70 Margaret Street, London,
W1W 8SS
FPS Registration Line: 0845 070 0702
Tel: 0845 703 4599
Fax: 020 7323 4226
Email: fps@dma.org.uk
www.fpsonline.org.uk
Email Preference Service (eMPS)
www.dmachoice.org/EMPS/
This global service is managed by the Direct Marketing
Association in America, which allows you to register your
email address so you do not receive unsolicited sales and
marketing email messages from companies or organisa-
tions who use eMPS to clean their lists.
32 / P RO TECT I NG YO UR I D E NTI T Y

P R O TECT I NG Y O U R I D E NTIT Y / 33
Before registering with any of these services it is worth
considering that you will no longer receive information
that may have been of interest to you. For example, some
companies and organisations use these methods to
advertise special oﬀers or new products and services.
Charities also use these methods to raise awareness and
generate support. As an alternative you could contact
speciﬁc organisations that you do not want to receive
information from and ask for your details to be removed
from their lists. However, from an identity-related
perspective it is highly advisable to register with each of
these services.
Social networking
Social networking is a relatively new and exciting way to
search, ﬁnd and stay in touch with friends, family and
work colleagues. Popular sites such as Bebo, Facebook,
Friends Reunited, MySpace, and Saga Zone allow users
to create and upload personal proﬁles but, unfortunately,
not everybody is searching for people they know.
Criminals are also using these sites to collect personal
data that they can fraudulently use.
Personal proﬁles will often contain seemingly innocent
information such as date of birth, place of birth, mother’s
maiden name, schools attended, pet’s name, previous and
current addresses, telephone numbers and email
addresses. However, this information is highly sought
after by criminals because it is often used as passwords or
by organisations to conﬁrm an identity. Social networking
is an extremely popular online activity but you need to
think carefully about the information you are making

34 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
available because it can be used by criminals to apply for
credit, steal your identity or apply for beneﬁts. Fortu-
nately, there are a variety of precautionary measures that
can be taken to protect yourself and your identity.
X Do not publish any common veriﬁcation details
These include your date of birth, place of birth,
mother’s maiden name, schools attended, pet’s name,
address, telephone numbers or email address.
X Use the privacy settings
Most websites have privacy ﬁlters that allow you to
control who can see your proﬁle, who can ﬁnd you and
how much information you want them to see.
X Choose who you accept as a friend
Do not automatically accept everyone as a friend and
provide them with full access to your proﬁle. Only
accept people that you know and consider limiting
access to those people that you do not know well.
X Do not publish your precise holiday arrangements
This information could be used by burglars to ﬁnd
empty properties which could also possibly invalidate
any insurance claim.
X Be careful about the information you publish
These websites are often searched by potential and
current employers so be careful about what informa-
tion you want to become publicly available. Never
publish anything that could incriminate you or hinder
your employment prospects.

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 35
USING CREDIT AND DEBIT CARDS SAFELY
Credit and debit cards have become a large part of our
everyday lives and are an easy way to pay for goods or
services. Unfortunately, they have also become a target for
fraud which is estimated to cost the UK economy around
£1 million a day. New initiatives such as Chip and PIN are
helping to reduce this ﬁgure but users need to help
themselves. Fortunately, there a number of preventive
measures that can be adopted to use your cards safely:
X Keep your account number, password and PIN secure
Do not carry your password or PIN with you or
disclose the number to anyone, even if they claim to be
from your card company or the police. Your card
company will never ask for your full password or PIN
so always be wary if you are asked for this information.
If you are unsure whether the caller is genuine, then
oﬀer to call them back on a recognised number. Never
call back on a direct line because you can not
guarantee exactly where they are.
X Never let your card out of your sight
This particularly applies when using your card in a
retail outlet such as a shop, restaurant or petrol
station. Ask for the card terminal to be brought to you
or accompany the member of staﬀto the till.
Fraudsters can swipe your card through a skimming
machine, make a note of your security number and
create a clone from the card’s magnetic strip, see page
40, Counterfeit and Cloned Card Fraud (Skimming).
X Shield your PIN from prying eyes
When using your card in a public place always shield

36 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
the keypad with your free hand. This will prevent
anyone from ‘shoulder surﬁng’ or watching security
cameras to get your PIN, see page 42, Cash machine
fraud.
X Only buy from recognised websites
When shopping online only buy from recognised
websites that have a landline and a full postal address.
Never buy from a website that uses a mobile number or
a PO Box address because it may be diﬃcult to resolve
any problems that may arise. Look out for websites
that promote MasterCard SecureCode or Veriﬁed by
Visa which oﬀer enhanced security features when
buying over the internet, see page 126, Shopping
Online.
X Regularly check your bank and card statements
It is important to carefully check your bank and card
statements and immediately query any transactions
that you do not recognise. If you have internet banking
then this can be done on a regular basis without having
to wait for your monthly statement.
X Always shred card statements and receipts
Always use a cross-cut (confetti) shredder to dispose of
unwanted bank or card statements and receipts.
Fraudsters have been known to search through rubbish
bins for information to fraudulently use, see page 51,
Shredding Your Information.
X Never carry more cards than you need
Before you leave home, think about where you are
going and which cards you will need. There is no point
in carrying more cards than are necessary because this

PR OT ECTI NG YOUR IDEN TITY / 37
will only increase the chance of cards becoming lost or
stolen.
Protecting your cards
If your credit or debit cards are lost or stolen then it is
important to cancel them immediately by notifying your
card providers. This will prevent thieves, criminals and
fraudsters from using your cards to obtain goods or
services illegally. To ease this process it is advisable to
create a list of your card numbers and keep this together
with a list of their respective emergency telephone
numbers. Alternatively, your cards can be registered with
a card protection company. Depending on which company
you use and which level of protection you buy, insurance
policies range from between £12 and £30 per year. Some
policies can be extended to include other family members
and most companies will oﬀer a discount if you sign up for
more than a year at a time, so it is worth shopping around.
Card insurance policy benefits
As with any type of insurance, no two companies are the
same and no two policies will provide the same level of
protection or oﬀer the same range of beneﬁts. Therefore,
it is essential to carefully consider exactly what each
company is oﬀering before signing up to any policy. Card
insurance policies will include a variation of the following
beneﬁts.
X Card cancellation and replacement service for all of
your registered cards.
X Cover against the fraudulent use of your cards if they
are lost or stolen.

38 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
X Change of address service to notify card providers
when you move.
X Passport and driving licence replacement service.
X Cash replacement if money is lost or stolen with your
cards.
X Emergency cash advance for travel tickets or hotel
costs if you become stranded abroad.
X Communication costs for notifying the police or
insurers about lost or stolen cards, tickets or property.
X Security labels for luggage and keys to encourage the
ﬁnder to return your lost property.
X Replacement cover if your wallet, briefcase, handbag,
purse etc is stolen with your cards.
There are many diﬀerent card protection companies to
choose from but which type of policy is best for you will
depend on your personal needs. Further information can
be obtained from:
Card Protection Plan (CPP)
Holgate Park, York, YO26 4GA
Tel: 0870 608 1529
www.cpp.co.uk
Sentinel Card Protection
FREEPOST PT391, Portsmouth, PO3 5BR
Tel: 0800 414 717
www.sentinelcardprotection.com

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 39
In addition to these, banks and other ﬁnancial institu-
tions will either oﬀer their own range of card insurance
policies or have their own preferred card protection
supplier. So if you are considering card protection
insurance it is worth contacting these organisations in
the ﬁrst instance, because they will sometimes oﬀer
discounts to existing customers.
TYPES OF CARD FRAUD
According to APACS card fraud is estimated to cost the
UK economy approximately £430 million per year.
Unfortunately, this huge ﬁgure is not the result of one
particular type of fraud that can be easily identiﬁed,
rectiﬁed and reduced. Instead, the ﬁgure comprises a
variety of diﬀerent types of card fraud which include:
X lost or stolen card fraud
X card identity theft
X card-not-present (CNP) fraud
X counterfeit and cloned card fraud (skimming)
X postal interception fraud
X cashpoint fraud.
Lost or stolen card fraud
This occurs when a criminal poses as you to obtain goods
and services with your lost or stolen card. The majority of
this fraud happens before the loss has been reported so it
is important to immediately notify card companies as
soon as you realise that your card has been lost or stolen.
For further information, see page 35, Using Credit and
Debit Cards Safely.

40 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
Card identity theft
With just a few of your utility bills or bank statements it is
possible for criminals to assemble enough information to
apply successfully for new credit cards or take over your
existing accounts. Therefore, it is important to always
shred personal documents that you no longer need.
Criminals will use whatever they can ﬁnd to convince
ﬁnancial organisations that they are you. They can also
arrange for funds to be taken from your account, for your
address to be changed and for new cheque books and
cards to be sent to the new address.
Card-not-present (CNP) fraud
As the name suggests, this happens when a card is not
required at the point of sale to complete a purchase, such
as through mail order, over the telephone or online. The
problem for companies is that without physically seeing
the card, it is very diﬃcult to conﬁrm if the card and the
customer are genuine. This means that once a criminal has
stolen your card, copied your number or found your old
receipts, they can then attempt to use your card
fraudulently. Since the introduction of chip and PIN,
this has become the most common type of card fraud in
the UK.
Counterfeit and cloned card fraud (skimming)
Counterfeit and cloned cards are produced by electro-
nically copying (skimming) data from your genuine card
onto a fake blank card without your knowledge. This
involves swiping the magnetic strip of your card through
an electronic device which captures your account infor-
mation. Skimming can occur whenever your card is used

PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y / 41
to pay for goods or services so always ensure that your
card is kept in full view at all times. A common scam is for
the shop assistant to accidentally drop your card and then
quickly swipe it before you realise what has happened.
Skimming devices can also be ﬁtted to cash machines to
get your details, see page 42, Cash Machine Fraud.
Skimming has been around for quite a while, but Chip
and PIN technology has severely limited the number of
places where a criminal can attempt to use a counterfeit
card. Only outlets and overseas cash machines that have
not yet upgraded to Chip and PIN can be targeted by
criminals with counterfeit cards. However, a criminal
must also have your PIN number to use a counterfeit card
in an overseas cash machine. Counterfeit cards are
essentially a duplicate of your original card and therefore
you will probably be unaware that your card has been
skimmed until your statement arrives.
Postal interception card fraud
This happens when your new card is stolen in transit
before the card company has been able to deliver it to you.
People who live in properties with shared letterboxes such
as in ﬂats or student accommodation and people who
have failed to have their post redirected after moving are
particularly vulnerable to having their post stolen. If you
suspect that your post has been lost, stolen or tampered
with, then contact Royal Mail Customer Care on 0845
774 0740. For further information, see page 46, Securing
Your Post.

42 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Cash machine fraud
There are a number of ways that cash machines can be
used to steal from you so it is important to exercise
caution when using them. Pickpockets often operate near
cash machines so always put your cash and card safely
away before leaving the machine. Thieves have been
known to snatch money straight from the machine or
from your hand. Since the introduction of Chip and PIN
technology, credit and debit cards are not as useful to
criminals as they used to be without your PIN. But when
criminals have both your card and your PIN they can
simply use the nearest cash machine to access your money,
so never keep them together in case they become lost or
stolen. This is why it is important to memorise your PIN
and shred the notiﬁcation slip as soon as possible. To get
your PIN, criminals will often use a technique called
‘shoulder surﬁng’.
Shoulder sur¢ng
This happens when criminals look over your shoulder as
you enter your PIN at a cash machine or card terminal in
a shop, restaurant or garage. They will then attempt to
steal and use your card before you even notice it is
missing. Therefore, it is important to protect your PIN by
never telling anyone the number or letting anyone see you
enter the number. You can do this by covering the keypad
with your free hand and also by positioning yourself to
shield the keypad from potential onlookers. Criminals
who shoulder surf are very discreet so you may not even
notice that you are being watched.
Alternatively, criminals can use card trapping or skim-
ming techniques to obtain your card by tampering with

cash machines. Before inserting your card into a cash
machine, always check for tampering by running your
thumb across the card slot. If you can feel any protrusions
then the machine may have been tampered with so do not
use it. Instead, walk away and immediately contact the
police or the bank. Criminals will usually only target
external machines so, whenever possible, always use a cash
machine inside the bank.
Card trapping
This involves ﬁxing a thin plastic or metal sleeve into the
card slot of a cash machine that will trap your card so you
think the machine has stopped working or retained your
card. The criminal will then watch as you enter your PIN
and may even helpfully encourage you to re-enter the
number to try to get your card back – which will obviously
not work. After you have left the machine, the criminal
will then retrieve your card and use your PIN to steal your
money. A more sophisticated variation of card trapping
involves recording your PIN by attaching a small pinhole
camera or a fake keypad to the machine.
Skimming
This is an electronic device that is discreetly ﬁtted to the
entrance of the card slot to read and record the
information on the magnetic strip as the card enters the
machine. This technique does not involve retaining the
card because the information is used to create a duplicate
(cloned) card by copying the data onto a blank magnetic
strip. The cloned card can then be used as normal to shop
or withdraw money from your account. Some skimming
machines involve ﬁtting an entire false fascia to the outside
of the machine that appears completely genuine.
P ROTECT ING YOUR IDE NTITY / 43

44 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
If you notice that a card trapping or skimming device has
been attached to the machine, do not attempt to remove it.
Some of these devices can be very expensive and criminals
may use violence to protect them. Instead, walk away and
immediately contact the police or the bank. Further
information about card fraud prevention can be obtained
from the following organisations.
APACS – www.apacs.org.uk
The Association for Payment Clearing Services (APACS)
works with the police, retailers, cardholders and organi-
sations to ﬁght payment card fraud.
Card Watch – www.cardwatch.org.uk
Card Watch raises awareness about all types of plastic
card fraud in the UK and provides information to prevent
fraudulent use of credit cards, debit cards, cheque
guarantee cards and charge cards.
DCPCU – www.dcpcu.org.uk
The Dedicated Cheque and Plastic Crime Unit (DCPCU)
is sponsored by APACS on behalf of the banking
industry. It comprises a group of specialist police oﬃcers
and civilian staﬀto tackle the organised gangs responsible
for much of the UK’s card and cheque fraud.
Shop Safe Online – www.shopsafeonline.org.uk
Provides information about registering and using Master
CardSecureCode and Veriﬁed by Visa.
KEEPING YOUR PERSONAL DOCUMENTS
SECURE
Personal documents are just as valuable to thieves as any
of your other possessions such as electrical goods,
jewellery, paintings and antiques. Although your posses-

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 45
sions have an immediate resale value, there is also a
growing market for personal documents that can either be
sold to identity fraudsters or retained by the thief for their
own use. The types of documents that are particularly
attractive to thieves and fraudsters include:
X passports
X birth certiﬁcates
X driving licences
X marriage certiﬁcates
X vehicle registration documents
X insurance documents
X utility bills
X share certiﬁcates.
A fraudster only requires a small selection of these to
assume your identity and steal from you so it is very
important to ensure that your documents are always kept
safe and secure. There are also a number of preventive
measures you can employ to help safeguard your
documents, these include the following.
Storing documents at home
Any documents that are kept at home should be stored in
either a secure cabinet, a lockable drawer, a home safe or
ideally a combination of all three. Always avoid keeping
your documents in one place because if a thief ﬁnds them,
then they will have instant access to whatever they need.
Instead, use a variety of secure locations and remember
the more diﬃcult you make it for thieves to ﬁnd your
documents then the less likely they are to steal them.

46 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Using a bank
For valuable documents with a high ﬁnancial or senti-
mental value such as title deeds, share certiﬁcates, or
irreplaceable family documents, consider using a bank or
solicitor to secure them on your behalf. Unless you are a
premium customer, then most banks will charge a fee for
this service but this is money well spent against the
possibility of having them stolen.
Carrying personal documents
Whenever you carry personal documents there is always a
risk that they will become lost or stolen. You can reduce
this risk by only carrying documents that are absolutely
necessary so before you leave home, think about where
you are going and what you really need. For example, you
will probably have more than one credit card but do you
need to take all of them with you. One card is useful for
emergency purposes but any others should be left safely at
home. From a security perspective, you should also avoid
carrying your PIN number with your cards.
Similarly your driving licence, vehicle registration and
insurance documents are useful if you are stopped by the
police whilst driving but they are not always needed and
they should certainly never be left in an unattended
vehicle. Other important documents to avoid carrying are
your passport and birth certiﬁcate which should only be
taken out of the house when it is absolutely necessary.
Securing your post
The majority of personal documents are sent through the
post and although some are sent by recorded or registered
delivery this is not always the case. Despite the problems

PROTEC TING YOUR I DE NTIT Y / 47
of card fraud it is surprising that banks and card
companies still only use standard mail to send out card
and cheque books. It is possible that your post can be
intercepted or stolen and this is most likely to happen if
you live in a shared house or a ﬂat with a communal
letterbox. To reduce this risk, arrange to collect these
from your bank or try to collect your mail as soon after it
has been delivered as possible. Obviously this can be
diﬃcult if you are regularly out when the postman calls so
it may be worth installing a separate lockable letterbox to
safely secure your post. These are relatively inexpensive
but are worth every penny for the peace of mind they
provide.
When you are away from home for an extended period or
if you want to protect the security of your post, arrange to
have it held at your local delivery oﬃce until you return or
until it can be collected. Royal Mail oﬀers a Mail Collect
service, a Keepsafe service and they can also provide a
rented PO Box.
Mail Collect service
This is a free service that allows you to collect your post
from your local delivery oﬃce. To sign up for this, simply
complete a Mail Collect application form (P6266) and
return it to your local delivery oﬃce together with your
proof of identiﬁcation. For further information, contact
the Royal Mail Sales Centre on 0845 795 0950.
Keepsafe service
This service can be used to hold your mail for up to two
months and then deliver it upon your return. This costs

48 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
from £5.70 for two weeks and will avoid returning to a
pile of unopened mail on your doorstep. For further
information contact the Royal Mail Keepsafe Team on
0845 777 7888.
PO Boxes
PO Boxes enable your mail to be safely delivered to a
rented box at your local delivery oﬃce for collection at a
time convenient to you. These cost £57.85 for a year or
£46.95 for six months. Further information can be
obtained from the Royal Mail Sales Centre on 0845 795
0950.
Alternatively, ask someone who you trust to deal with
your post in your absence. However, if you suspect that
your post has been tampered with, has been stolen or has
gone missing, then contact Royal Mail Customer Care on
0845 774 0740.
DESTROYING YOUR PERSONAL
INFORMATION
Your name and address is relatively easy for fraudsters to
get and is often the starting point for fraud. Fraudsters
only need a few of your personal details to steal your
identity so it is essential that any documents with your
name, address, signature, account numbers or other
seemingly innocent information are completely destroyed
before being thrown away. Some of these documents
include:
X bank and credit card statements
X receipts and invoices
X utility bills

P ROTECT ING YOUR IDE NTITY / 49
X pre-completed application forms
X pre-approved credit card application forms
X cheque book counterfoils
X credit or debit card transaction receipts
X National Insurance letters
X payslips
X working tax forms
X Inland Revenue tax reminders
X car tax reminders
X letterheads
X direct mail letters (junk mail)
X subscription renewal notices
X expired driving licences or passports
X magazine mailing labels
X appointment letters and reminders (doctor, dentist,
hospital)
X insurance forms
X expired credit, debit and store cards
X expired membership or insurance cards
X any other documents that contain personal details.
Any of these documents can be used by fraudsters but
despite warnings to the contrary, many people throw these
away without realising their worth to criminals. This has
resulted in everyday rubbish becoming an unlikely target
for theft. In fact some organised gangs have been known
to pay people to steal or search through rubbish bags,
which is more commonly known as ‘bin raiding’.
Bin raiding
Rubbish is an easy target for thieves because it is usually
left outside, which not only makes it easily accessible but

50 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
you may also be unaware that it has been raided or stolen.
Your rubbish can potentially contain all that a fraudster
needs to steal from you so it is important to carefully
consider what information you are throwing away. Junk
mail is one of the most common pieces of rubbish to be
thrown away and will often be unopened. At the very
least, this will contain your name and address but if you
have previously ordered from a catalogue, donated to
charity or subscribed to a magazine, organisation or club,
then your mail can also contain all kinds of other
information that will be very useful to a criminal.
For example, unopened letters could contain your account
number or a change of address card. Criminals can use
this information to contact the sender and change your
address which means that your name and credit rating
will move to theirs. Some companies carry out extensive
checks to prevent this from happening but not all
companies are as thorough. Unless you know exactly
when your bank or credit card statements are due you may
not even realise that your address has been changed. For
peace of mind, it is worth keeping a record of when
regular and important correspondence is expected and
immediately contact the company concerned if your mail
is late. You can also check with Royal Mail Customer
Care on 0845 774 0740 if you have any concerns about
your mail.
Credit card applications are another useful source of
information because they are often partially completed to
encourage you to apply. Criminals can use these to apply
for a credit card, have it sent to their address and then

P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY / 51
apply for other cards and loans using your name and
credit rating. Payslips are also useful because they can be
scanned, altered and used to apply for a mortgage. Your
date of birth is a little more diﬃcult to get but is not
impossible because it will often be written on medical-
related letters such as appointment reminders. Some
people also use their date of birth as a PIN number so this
can be very useful to criminals.
Since the introduction of Chip and PIN (see page 39,
Types of Card Fraud) your signature is not as valuable to
criminals as it once was, but banks and other companies
will sometimes require written conﬁrmation before
changing your address. Your signature can also be
diﬃcult to get but simple oversights such as putting all
the pieces of a cut-up credit card into the same bin can be
disastrous because they can easily be reassembled. In fact,
any personal information that has been ripped up can be
put back together so it’s very important to shred any
documents that could be useful to a criminal.
SHREDDING YOUR INFORMATION
One of the best ways to ensure that your important
documents are completely destroyed is to use a shredder.
These can be bought from most high street stationers and
oﬃce supply companies and vary according to their
features, intended use and level of security. In addition to
paper, shredders are capable of shredding a variety of
other items such as ﬂoppy discs, compact discs, DVDs,
credit cards, staples and paperclips. There are two
diﬀerent types of shredder:

52 / P RO TECT I NG YO UR I D E NTI T Y
X strip-cut shredder
X cross-cut shredder.
Strip-cut shredders
These cut paper into long thin strips that vary in width
from 1.9mm to 10.5mm. From a security point of view
they are less eﬀective than cross-cut shredders because
with a little glue and a lot of patience, a document can be
restored to its original state. Strip-cut shredders are
suitable for everyday non-sensitive documents but for
documents containing any personal information such as
bank details, utility bills or passwords then a cross-cut
shredder is highly recommended.
Cross-cut shredders
Cross-cut shredders cut paper into tiny pieces (particles)
that vary in size from 0.78mm611mm to 10.5mm
680mm. In addition to increased security, the particles
also compact under their own weight, which means that
the waste box will require emptying less often.
Choosing a shredder
The type of shredder best suited to your needs will depend
on how often the machine is to be used and which level of
security you require. As with most business machines,
shredders are manufactured for diﬀerent markets.
X Home shredders – suitable for light use of up to 20
sheets a day.
X Home oﬃce shredders – suitable for light to medium
use of up to 50 sheets a day.

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 53
X Oﬃce shredders – suitable for medium use of up to 100
sheets a day.
X Business shredders – suitable for heavy, continuous use.
Security levels
Shredders are assigned a security level in accordance with
the Deutsche Industrial Norm (DIN) which ranges from
DIN 1 (low security) to DIN 5 (high security). These
security levels relate to how small the machine will shred
the paper. DIN security levels have been speciﬁcally
designed to standardise shredder production and help you
make an informed choice when buying a shredder.
X DIN 1 – low security (general documents)
This is suitable for general paperwork that does not
contain any personal information. A strip-cut shredder
will produce single strips that vary from 10.5mm to
11.8mm wide and a cross-cut shredder will create
pieces ranging from 10.5mm640mm to 10.5mm
680mm.
X DIN 2 – low to medium security (internal documents)
A strip-cut shredder will produce single strips that vary
from 3.9mm to 5.8mm wide and a cross-cut shredder
will create pieces ranging from 7.5mm640mm to
7.5mm680mm. This level of security is suitable for
home use and internal oﬃce documents such as
computer printouts, personal notes and poor quality
photocopies.
X DIN 3 – medium security (conﬁdential documents)
This is recommended for conﬁdential business docu-
ments such as ﬁnancial papers, marketing plans or

54 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
personnel ﬁles. Strip-cut shredders will cut extremely
narrow strips of up 1.9mm wide and cross-cut
shredders will create small particles ranging from
3.9mm630mm to 3.9mm650mm.
X DIN 4 – medium to high security (sensitive documents)
This level of security can only be achieved with cross-
cut shredders that can create very small particles of
1.9mm615mm. Sensitive documents that speciﬁcally
relate to protecting your livelihood or the integrity of a
company would require this level of security.
X DIN 5 – high security (top secret documents)
This level of machine is speciﬁcally supplied to
government and military locations where it is essential
that documents are shredded to preserve national
security. As with DIN 4, this can only be achieved with
a cross-cut shredder that create extremely small
particles of 0.78mm611mm.
IDENTITY FRAUD PROTECTION SERVICES
With the continued rise of identity related crime, banks,
credit card companies, insurers and other ﬁnancial
organisations have started to oﬀer a range of identity
fraud protection services. These include:
X insurance policies
X access to your credit report
X CIFAS protective registration
X Garlik DataPatrol.
Identity fraud insurance
There has been a mixed reaction to this insurance because

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 55
although it is undoubtedly useful if you become a victim
of identity fraud, in most cases the services provided can
be obtained without the need of a policy. Nevertheless,
identity fraud can be a traumatic experience but the peace
of mind provided by a policy can be money well spent.
Depending on which type of policy you buy and which
company you buy from, policies range from around £4 to
£7 per month. Although these will help to prevent identity
fraud, it is worth remembering that they will not insure
you against becoming a victim or compensate you for any
money that you may lose to fraudsters. The variety of
beneﬁts oﬀered by these policies includes the following.
X Financial cover against the cost of reclaiming your
identity and restoring your credit rating. This could
include legal expenses, loss of wages, telephone calls,
rejected loan application fees and postage costs for
sending registered mail. The amount of cover oﬀered
can vary considerably from £5,000 to £60,000, so it is
worth shopping around and reading the policy care-
fully.
X Emergency money if you are temporarily unable to
access your bank accounts or use your credit, debit or
store cards.
X Access to your credit report and notiﬁcation when any
changes are made. Some companies oﬀer unlimited
access whereas others will send a monthly or quarterly
report.
X Credit correction service to help amend your credit ﬁle
with credit providers and reference agencies.

X Protective registration with CIFAS if any of your
personal information becomes lost or stolen, see page
154.
X A personal identify fraud expert to provide profes-
sional guidance, advice and support. For complex
cases, some companies may arrange to send a
dedicated expert to your home.
X A conﬁdential advice line to answer speciﬁc identity
fraud-related enquiries.
X Document registration and replacement service for
valuable documents such as passports and driving
licences.
X Registration with Garlik DataPatrol that allows you to
monitor and control online places where your personal
information is stored by searching the internet for your
details. They will also provide regular risk assessment
reports and a quarterly credit report, see page 60.
Further information about identity fraud insurance can
be obtained from:
CPP Identity Protection
Tel: 0870 121 9187
www.cpp.co.uk/identityprotection/
Identity Care Insurance
Tel: 0870 606 4050
www.identitycare.co.uk
Sentinel Identity Theft Protection
Tel: 0800 414 717
www.sentinelcardprotection.com
56 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

PR OT ECTI NG YOUR IDEN TITY / 57
Some credit card companies now include free identity
fraud assistance as a standard beneﬁt with certain types of
card. If you have had your card for a while then it is worth
checking with your card provider because this may have
been added to your existing beneﬁts. Although identity
fraud assistance will not provide ﬁnancial protection
against the cost of reclaiming your identity, it can still be
worth having for the specialist expert advice oﬀered
through their identity fraud helpline. Alternatively, you
may be able to upgrade to ﬁnancial protection so it’s
worth contacting your card provider.
Checking your credit report
One of the best ways to combat identity theft is to
regularly check your credit report for any changes that
have been made without your knowledge. Your report
contains a comprehensive history of any loan, credit card
or mortgage application you have made, money you have
borrowed and details of your repayment history. This
information is used by credit reference agencies to
determine your credit rating which is one of the most
valuable assets that you have. If your rating is damaged by
fraudsters then you will have diﬃculty securing credit
until your rating is fully restored so it is important to
protect and safeguard this at all times. This can be
achieved by regularly obtaining a copy of your credit
report from one of the three credit reference agencies:
Callcredit
One Park Lane, Leeds, LS3 1EP
Automated Helpline: 0870 060 1414
Tel: 0113 244 1555

58 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Fax: 0113 234 0050
www.callcredit.co.uk
www.mycallcredit.com
Equifax
Credit File Advice Centre, PO Box 1140, Bradford, BD1
5US
Tel: 0870 010 0583
www.equifax.co.uk
Experian
Consumer Help Service, PO Box 9000, Nottingham,
NG80 7WP
Tel: 0870 241 6212
www.experian.co.uk
Alternatively, Check My File allows you to choose
between a Single Agency Report from one of the above
agencies, a Triple Agency Report from all three or
Unlimited Access to Triple Agency Reports:
Check My File
Credit Reporting Agency Limited, 13 High Cross, Truro,
TR1 2AJ
Tel: 0800 612 0421
Fax: 0870 094 0069
www.checkmyﬁle.com
From your report you will be able to immediately see if
your identity has been fraudulently used to set up any
loans or credit accounts. You will also be able to stop any
pending applications, rectify your credit report and

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 59
prevent fraudsters from continuing to use your identity.
These agencies also oﬀer a range of subscription services
that can monitor your report and contact you if there are
any changes. Some services permit unlimited access to
your report and will also send regular identity theft news
together with advice and tips about how to protect
yourself. For further information see:
MyCallcredit E-Alerts
www.mycallcredit.com
Equifax Credit Watch
www.equifax.co.uk
Experian CreditExpert
www.experian.co.uk
CIFAS Protective Registration
The Credit Industry Fraud Advisory Scheme (CIFAS) is
the UK’s fraud prevention service. They do not provide a
credit reference service but their information is used by
fraud prevention agencies and credit reference agencies
when any fraudulent activity is suspected. If your
personal identiﬁcation documents have been lost or
stolen or if your identity has been used to apply for
ﬁnancial services then you can apply for a Protective
Registration notice to be placed on your credit ﬁle. This
will ensure that further security measures are taken to
conﬁrm your identity before approval is granted. For
further information, see page 154, Protective Registration
From CIFAS or contact:
CIFAS Protective Registration Service
PO Box 1141, Bradford, BD1 5UR
Tel: 0870 010 2091
Email: protective.registrationuk@equifax.com
www.cifas.org.uk

60 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Garlik DataPatrol
Garlik DataPatrol is a subscription service that monitors
the internet for any online places where your personal
details could be stored. These range from website entries
to public records such as Land Registry, credit ﬁles and
the Register of Births, Deaths and Marriages. In 1996, no
electronic public records were available in the UK but
today there are nearly 700 million. Garlik will regularly
search these ﬁles and records for your details and will
send a monthly report listing online places where your
personal information has been found. They will also send
frequent risk assessment reports together with advice
about how to manage and monitor your digital proﬁle and
will also notify you of any changes made to your online
presence. In addition, quarterly credit reports will also be
sent that can be used to identify and rectify any unknown
entries that may aﬀect your credit rating. For further
information contact Garlik at www.garlik.com
TOP TEN TIPS TO PROTECT YOUR IDENTITY
 Buy a cross-cut shredder and use it to shred old bank
statements, card receipts, utility bills, invoices, delivery notes,
medical letters, direct mail and any other personal and
confidential documents that contain your details.
 Never disclose your personal information to anyone that you
do not know. This particularly applies if you are unexpectedly
contacted by telephone or email.
 Always question why you are being asked for personal
information and if you have any concerns or doubts, refuse to
disclose your details.

PROTEC TING YOUR I DE NTIT Y / 61
 Keep your personal and confidential documents secure in a
lockable drawer, secure cabinet or safe, or ideally a
combination of all three, and only carry these documents
with you when it is absolutely necessary.
 If you are moving, immediately notify every company and
organisation that you deal with to give them your change of
address and also arrange with Royal Mail to have your post
redirected for at least a year.
 When using your credit or debit card, always shield the keypad
to conceal your PIN from onlookers and never let your card
out of your sight. This particularly applies when paying in a
shop, garage or restaurant.
 Limit the number of credit or debit cards that you have. Never
carry more cards than you need and immediately notify your
card provider if they become lost or stolen.
 Do not include your date of birth, National Insurance or
driving licence number on your CV. There is no need for
potential employers to have these and you cannot guarantee
how they deal with confidential information.
 Register with the Mail Preference Service (MPS), Telephone
Preference Service (TPS), Fax Preference Service (FPS) and
Email Preference Service (eMPS) to have your personal details
removed from sales and marketing lists.
 Ensure that any dormant accounts are formally closed because
mail order or credit card accounts could easily be reactivated,
particularly if they are registered to a previous address.
VICTIMS’ STORIES
Credit card identity theft
When Darcey became frail, her familyarranged for Rebecca

tovisitthree times aweek to cleanthe house andrunthe
occasional errand.Rebecca gotto know Darcey wellbut,
unbeknownto her,Rebeccawasgatheringas much of
Darcey’s personalinformation as she could.In a short period
oftime,Rebecca had acquired enoughinformation about
Darcey totake out severalcreditcardsin her name.By the
time the fraud was discovered,Rebecca had amassed debts
of over »14,000.
Although Rebeccawas arrested and charged with fraud,
Darcey’s family wereleftto help her sortoutthe mess.They
arranged for a copyof Darcey’s credit reportto be sent and
used this as a starting pointto notifyeveryorganisation and
company that she had an account with aboutthe fraud.They
also arranged for a Protective Registration alertto be
placed on hercredit reference f|le to help stop any further
applications.
Postal identity fraud
When Jake moved from one rented property to another he
contacted Royal Mail and arranged to have his post
redirected to his newaddress for six months.He also
notif|ed everycompany, organisation and government
departmentthat he had an accountordealings with.For nine
months everything was f|ne butthen he received a letter
from a debtcollection agencyclaiming that he owed over
»1,500 to a catalogue company.He thought it must be a
mistake andimmediatelycontacted the company.It soon
became clear that an account had been setup usingjust his
name and previous address.Eventhough his date of birth,
mother’s maiden name and employmentdetails were all
incorrectthe companystill opened a credit account in his
name.
62 / P RO TECT I NG YO UR I D E NTI T Y

PROTE CTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY / 63
After numerous telephone calls andletters, the catalogue
company f|nally believed Jake and agreed notto pursue him
for the outstanding debt.Jakewas concerned thatthis could
happen again so he applied to CIFAS, the UK’s Fraud
Prevention Service, for a Protective Registration notice to
be placed on his credit reference f|le.Thisinforms potential
lenders that he has been a victim of identity fraud and
requests that additional securitychecks are conducted to
prove the credit applicationisgenuine before approvalcan
be granted.

3
KeepingYour Computer Secure
As the popularity of computing continues to increase, so
does the necessity to keep your computer secure. This
chapter will provide an overview of how to protect your
computer by using passwords to restrict access from
unauthorised users and will also explore internet security,
ﬁrewalls, viruses, spyware and spam. It will also look at
creating a secure network, upgrading and updating your
computer and the problems associated with peer-to-peer
(P2P) ﬁle sharing. The chapter will conclude with advice
about securely erasing ﬁles and folders on your hard drive
to prevent them from being fraudulently accessed.
PROTECTING YOUR COMPUTER
Your computer is an integral part of your identity because
it contains enough information to assume your identity and
steal from you. This information is highly sought after by
criminals and fraudsters so it is important to protect it at all
times. Unfortunately, this cannot be achieved with the push
of a button or a single computer program. Instead, a
variety of procedures and protocols need to be employed to
preserve the contents of your computer.
Controlling access to your computer
At the heart of any computer security system is
controlling who can access it and who can access the
64

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 65
information that it contains. Besides the obvious threat of
anonymous online hackers there is another less consid-
ered security risk. Family members, work colleagues and
temporary staﬀcan also sabotage, destroy or steal your
valuable information unless you restrict their access.
Fortunately, this can be inexpensive and relatively easy to
implement.
For circumstances when you need to restrict who can
physically access your computer then your BIOS (Basic
Input Output Setup) settings can be modiﬁed to boot-
proof your hard drive or password protect your BIOS.
You can also enable start-up and screensaver passwords
that will restrict access from unauthorised users.
Boot-proofing your hard drive
With the assistance of a bootable ﬂoppy disc or CD it is
possible for an intruder to access and read your hard
drive without having to start-up your entire system. In
order to avoid this, your BIOS settings can be modiﬁed to
disable boot devices from your start-up sequence. If this is
not possible, then your hard drive can be selected as the
primary boot device, which means that your computer
will only boot from the hard drive and not from any other
source. Alternatively, you could physically remove the
ﬂoppy and CD/DVD drives and disable or remove any
USB or FireWire ports which could also be used to boot
your computer from a USB device or FireWire hard disk.
Password protecting your BIOS
To prevent your computer being started without your
permission it is possible to assign a password to your

66 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
BIOS, which means that your system will not start until
the correct password is entered. Some newer BIOS
systems can also be set to prevent any settings being
changed without a password. BIOS passwords are a good
security feature but they are not completely secure
because some systems accept master passwords that are
freely available online. More resourceful intruders can
reset passwords by moving a jumper on the motherboard
or by disconnecting and reconnecting the power to the
BIOS.
Using biometric log-in devices
As more people start to seriously consider computer
security, biometric log-in devices are gradually becoming
very popular. They provide an extremely high level of
security and, with prices ranging from £30 to £40, they are
relatively inexpensive to buy. Some systems combine a
biometric ﬁngerprint scanner, with password manage-
ment and encryption software. This means that with the
press of your ﬁnger the device can be used to log-on to
your system, log-in to websites, encrypt and decrypt ﬁles
and protect your system from unauthorised users.
Encrypting your files and folders
Data encryption makes it more diﬃcult for your
computer to be accessed from an installation disc, for
your passwords to be uncovered or for important
information to be stolen. Some operating systems already
have data encryption built into them but for others you
will need to purchase separate encryption software. Your
operating manual should be able to tell you if your system
is capable of data encryption and what steps to take. Data

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTE R SE CURE / 67
encryption is ideal for laptops and other portable devices
including hard drives, computer discs and ﬂash memory
USB sticks. However, data encryption is very time-
consuming, can slow the performance of your computer
and can make it more diﬃcult to retrieve lost, damaged or
deleted ﬁles. Only consider this if you have highly sensitive
information to protect. For the majority of computer
users, data encryption is unnecessary provided other
security measures have been taken.
USING PASSWORDS
Passwords have become a necessary and important part of
everyday life. They are needed to access a variety of
systems, accounts and activities including:
X computer systems, programs and ﬁles
X credit card accounts and PIN numbers
X websites
X email accounts
X online banking
X telephone banking
X alarm codes
X door entry systems.
Creating a diﬀerent password for each account is essential
to provide a barrier between you and those who want to
access your information. However, with so many pass-
words to remember there can be a temptation to use the
same details more than once. This should be avoided
because if your details are discovered then this will
compromise every account and system that requires a
particular password. This section will look at how

68 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
passwords are used and will show you how to create, store
and protect your passwords.
Log-in passwords
Most operating systems can be conﬁgured to require a log-
in password before they can be accessed. This can also be
used to lock your computer when you are temporarily away
from your desk and do not want to completely shut it down.
Log-in passwords are an ideal way to protect your system
from intruders and are particularly useful for laptops that
can be stolen more easily. If your computer is stolen then at
least if you have created a strong log-in password (see
below), there is a possibility that the thief will not be able to
access the contents immediately. However, a number of
password retrieval programs are freely available and can be
misused to discover your password.
Screen saver passwords
As an extra precautionary measure, enable a password-
protected screen saver to automatically activate and log-
oﬀthe system if your computer is idle for a set period of
time. This means that a casual passer-by will be unable to
use your computer during your absence. Some people ﬁnd
that ﬁve minutes is an adequate delay while others
consider 15 minutes to be more reasonable but this will
depend on your work pattern.
Creating strong passwords
Regardless of the information that they protect, pass-
words should always be as strong as possible and,
fortunately, creating a strong password is a relatively
simple process. The strength of your password will

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 69
depend on a number of contributory factors such as the
length and random combination of characters used. Your
password should ideally be no less than eight characters
long but passwords of 14 or more characters are better
because they provide a greater level of protection. The
strongest passwords are those that use the entire keyboard
and appear to look like a random string of upper and
lower case letters, numbers, keyboard symbols and
punctuation marks.
In addition, some password systems also permit the use of
the space bar which means that lengthy phrases, known as
passphrases, can be used. These are often easier to
remember than speciﬁc passwords and can also be more
diﬃcult to crack. When deciding on a passphrase, always
choose a sentence that you can easily remember but will
be diﬃcult for others to guess, for example, a line from
your favourite book, poem or song. To further strengthen
your password, spell words incorrectly, mix upper and
lower case letters and include numbers.
Alternatively, if your password system does not support
passphrases then simply create an acronym password
(mnemonic) whereby the ﬁrst letter of each word is used
to create an unintelligible word that will be diﬃcult to
decipher. Once again, mix upper and lowercase letters
and include numbers. For example, ‘Three blind mice,
see how they run’ could become ‘3BmsHtR’. As a ﬁnal
check, consider checking the strength of your password
with an online password checker. Microsoft have a very
good one that does not retain or distribute any checked
passwords. Microsoft Password Checker available at

70 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENT ITY
www.microsoft.com/protect/yourself/password/checker.
mspx
Passwords to avoid
When creating a password there are some sequences and
combinations that should always be avoided because they
will only create weak passwords that can be easily
cracked. These include the following.
Repeated, sequential or adjacent keyboard characters
Combinations such as ‘aaaaaa’, ‘123456’ or ‘qwerty’ are
very weak.
Dictionary words or regular names
Even if these are spelled incorrectly or backwards they can
easily be uncovered with one of the many cracking tools
used by hackers.
Personal information
Your name, log-in name, date of birth, telephone numbers,
previous street names, favourite teams, mother’s maiden
name, pet’s name, names of family members or any of their
personal details can be easily guessed.
Single words with common character replacements
Predictable replacements such as an ‘a’ for an ‘@’ and an
‘o’ with a ‘0’ as in ‘p@ssw0rd’, or an ‘e’ for a ‘3’ and an ‘i’
for a ‘1’ as in ‘wh1sk3y’ are already known to hackers.
The same password more than once
This is never a good idea because if a hacker discovers
your password then they will be able to access any other
system with the same password.

KE EPIN G YOUR COMPUTE R SECURE / 71
Blank passwords
Some operating systems such as Windows XP allows you
to assign blank passwords to your accounts. This can be
useful if you only have one computer and you trust
everyone who has access to it or you have several
computers but you do not need to exchange information
between them. Surprisingly, blank passwords are more
secure than weak ones because your user accounts cannot
be externally accessed without ﬁrst creating a password
but they are not generally recommended as a security
measure. This particularly applies to laptops which
should always have strong passwords assigned to them.
Protecting your passwords
Passwords are as important as any other personal
information you have and protecting them should
always be of paramount importance. Listed below are a
number of common sense approaches you can employ to
ensure passwords remain protected at all times.
Always keep passwords to yourself
Never reveal your passwords to anyone because this will
jeopardise the information that they have been created to
protect. This particularly applies to children who may
inadvertently pass them on to their friends or unscrupu-
lous individuals. The only exception to this would be the
necessity to access non-sensitive shared ﬁles in a corporate
environment or shared accounts with a spouse or partner
who you trust.
Never respond to unsolicited password requests
Any correspondence that you receive to verify your
password will invariably be a scam, so never reply

72 / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDEN TITY
under any circumstances. Genuine companies will never
request information in this way. If you have any doubts
then always raise your concerns with the company
directly. This should always be on a publicly advertised
number and not through any details contained within the
correspondence, because these will undoubtedly be false.
Regularly change your passwords
Never become complacent about your passwords and
assume that they will always be secure. The stronger your
passwords are then the greater the interval between
changing them. In general terms, a strong password of
eight characters or less should be updated on a weekly
basis, whereas a password of 14 characters or more
should be updated annually.
Disable auto complete
Your web browser has a handy function called auto
complete that can be used to complete web page addresses,
forms and usernames and passwords on forms. Although
this can be useful for commonly used ﬁelds such as your
name, address, telephone number and email address, it can
also present a security risk. This particularly applies if your
computer is used or accessed by other users because they
will be able to use your details automatically without having
to know your exact details. From a security point of view it
is advisable to disable this feature, for further information,
see page 74, Internet Security.
Never use a public or networked computer to access password-
protected data
Public or networked computers should always be avoided
to access any sensitive data that requires your password.

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTE R SE CURE / 73
This is because fraudsters can easily install key logging
programs that can remotely recall your log-in details and
passwords. Password-sensitive information should only be
accessed through your own protected personal computer
that is as secure as possible. Your passwords are as
valuable as the data that they protect and fraudsters will
pay to access this information.
Storing your passwords
With the necessity to have so many diﬀerent passwords,
remembering all of them can prove diﬃcult. Therefore, it
is probably necessary to store them safely and securely for
retrieval at a later date. There are diﬀerent ways to do this
(as listed below), but deciding which is best for you will be
depend on how comfortable you are with how they are
stored.
Install a password management program on yourcomputer
Programs such as RoboForm (www.roboform.com),
Comodo i-Vault (www.comodo.com) and Access Man-
ager (www.accessmanager.co.uk) are available to
download for free, whereas programs such as Norton
Password Manager (www.symantec.com), My Security
Vault Pro (www.whitecanyon.com) and SplashID Pass-
word Safe (www.splashdata.com) can be purchased from
most computer retailers. These programs create a digital
vault on your computer to store passwords that can only
be opened with a master password.
Installapassword management program onyourUSB £ash drive
This works in the same way as the above systems but your
passwords are stored on a portable device that can be
carried with you at all times.

74 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTI TY
Register your passwords with aweb-based provider
Providers such as Password Manager Pro (http://manage
engine.adventnet.com) and Passlet (www.passlet.com)
oﬀer web-based password registration services. These
work in a similar way to storing your passwords on your
computer but these companies will have more secure
security systems.
Write them down on a piece of paper
This controversial method is the simplest and easiest way to
store your passwords and, contrary to public opinion,
providing these are kept in a safe place, is no less secure than
electronically storing them on your computer or with a web-
based provider. This system cannot be compromised over
the internet so the potential for theft is limited to the
number of people who have access to where they are kept.
Stolen passwords
Regardless of which method you use, no single password
storage system is completely secure but by creating strong
passwords that are changed regularly then the possibility
of your password being stolen is greatly reduced.
However, if any of your passwords are stolen then you
need to be aware of this as soon as it happens. This can
only be achieved by regularly checking the information
that they protect and immediately contacting the relevant
organisation if there is any suspicious activity on any of
your accounts.
INTERNET SECURITY
Despite the many beneﬁts that the internet has to oﬀer
there are also many threats that you need to be aware of.
Criminals and fraudsters are constantly trying to ﬁnd

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTE R SE CURE / 75
ways to steal your money, your identity or the contents of
your computer. Fortunately, it is relatively easy to protect
yourself and your computer when you are online. In order
to access the internet, you will need a browser which
comes pre-installed with every commercially bought
computer system.
Popular browsers include Microsoft Internet Explorer,
Mozilla Firefox and Opera. Whichever you use, it is
always important to upgrade to the latest version because
this will provide the best level of protection. You can ﬁnd
out which version you are running by clicking the Help
button on your browser’s toolbar and selecting About.
Some browsers can be conﬁgured to automatically
upgrade to the latest version whereas others need to be
manually updated. Upgrades should always be down-
loaded directly from the browser’s main website and not
from a third-party website because you can never be too
sure exactly what you are downloading. Internet browsers
have a number of built-in security features but you may
need to alter their default settings to maximise your
protection.
Anti-phishing protection
Phishing occurs when you are asked to conﬁrm your
username, log-in, bank or credit card details at what
appears to be a genuine ﬁnancial website. However, these
websites have been created by fraudsters to acquire your
personal details and steal your money. Anti-phishing
ﬁlters cross-reference the website you are visiting against a
list of suspected sites and trigger an alert if the site is on
the list. Some browsers have an anti-phishing risk-rating

76 / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDEN TITY
bar that gradually changes from green to red depending
on the phishing risk associated with the website. Websites
that generate a predominately red bar should always be
avoided.
Dealing with cookies
Cookies are small ﬁles that some websites create on your
computer with details about how you use their site. Some
browsers allow you to control how each cookie is dealt
with. Others only allow you to reject or accept all cookies
or to accept cookies from websites that you have
previously visited. The various privacy settings include:
X Block all cookies
This setting will block all cookies from the website you
are visiting and will also prevent existing cookies on
your computer from being read by the original website
that created them.
X High
All cookies that do not have a compact privacy policy
and all cookies that use personally identiﬁable
information without your explicit consent will be
blocked.
X Medium
This setting will block third-party cookies that do not
have a compact privacy policy and third-party cookies
that use personally identiﬁable information without
your explicit consent. In addition, ﬁrst-party cookies
that use personally identiﬁable information without
your implicit consent will be restricted.

K EEP ING Y OUR COMP UT ER SECURE / 77
X Low
Third-party cookies that do not have a compact
privacy policy and third-party cookies that use
personally identiﬁable information without your impli-
cit consent will be restricted.
X Accept all cookies
This setting will permit all cookies to be saved on your
computer and permit existing cookies to be read by the
website that created them.
Avoid auto complete
Most browsers give you the option to automatically
complete entries on websites from previously entered
information. This includes search boxes, the address bar,
usernames, passwords and all kinds of other personal
information. Although this saves time and removes the
necessity to constantly re-type the same information, it
can present a huge security risk. This is because if your
computer is used by somebody else then they can see what
you have searched for and which websites you have
visited. They could also access your accounts without
needing to know your precise log-in details.
Fortunately, this information can be cleared from your
internet history by selecting the Clear function from the
internet Options or Properties menu of your browser. You
can also choose to disable auto complete partially or
completely. This can be useful if you want to save your
search history but not your usernames and passwords.
The conﬁguration options you are usually given include
the following:

78 / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDEN TITY
X Web addresses
When this option is enabled you will be able to retrieve
the full website address by entering just the ﬁrst few
letters into your address bar.
X Forms
This option will retrieve any previously entered
information that has been entered into a form such
as your name, address and telephone number.
X Usernames and passwords
If this option is enabled, all of your usernames and
passwords will be stored on your computer. This
option is not recommended because, even if you are
the only person who can access your computer, it could
be stolen and thieves will be able to access your private
websites.
Disabling JavaScript
JavaScript is a type of computer programming language
that web developers use to make their websites more
interactive. Most of these programs are perfectly harmless
but some malicious websites can use JavaScript to gain
access to your computer. This is why it is important to
only visit trusted sites and to use your browser to identify
potentially fraudulent sites. Some browsers allow you to
disable JavaScript and other plug-ins, such as ActiveX,
that some websites use to enhance their graphics.
Alternatively, you could use a browser such as Firefox
or Opera that does not support ActiveX.
Website restrictions
Most browsers can be conﬁgured to control how a

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTE R SE CURE / 79
computer responds to certain websites. For example,
access can be restricted to websites with known security
issues and, conversely, access can be authorised to genuine
websites that you trust not to damage your computer. This
security feature gives you more control over how you use
the internet and the websites that you visit.
Anti-spyware protection
When enabled, spyware ﬁlters can be conﬁgured to warn
you when a website attempts to download, install or run
software. For more information about what spyware is
and how to deal with it, see page 87, Spyware.
Pop-up windows
These are the small annoying boxes that sometimes appear
when you log-on to certain websites. Although they are
often advertisements or links to other websites they can also
be used to steal information, take control of your home
page and install spyware or adware. Not all pop-ups are
harmful, some contain important information that you may
need to respond to. For example, before your computer will
download a ﬁle or install new software a pop-up window
will often appear prompting you for permission to continue.
Therefore, it is important to manage how your computer
deals with these by conﬁguring your pop-up preferences.
The range of options you will be given usually include
allowing all pop-ups, blocking all pop-ups or only allowing
pop-ups on trusted sites.
FIREWALLS
The internet is essentially a network of connected
computers which means that, when connected, any

80 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
computer can potentially ﬁnd and connect to any other
computer. This can prove disastrous, particularly if a
hacker gains access to your computer and all the ﬁles that
it contains. With access to your computer a hacker can see
which ﬁles you open, which passwords you use, which
bank accounts you have and which credit cards you use.
With this information, a hacker can transfer money from
your accounts, steal your identity or use your computer to
send spam and other malicious emails that appear to
come from you.
However, by installing a ﬁrewall you can partially protect
your computer from hackers and some viruses. Firewalls
work as a barrier between your computer and the millions
of computers that collectively comprise the internet.
There is a commonly-held belief that if you have a
ﬁrewall then you are fully protected from online threats
but this is simply not true. Firewalls will not protect you
from spam, spyware and the majority of viruses. They also
oﬀer limited or no protection if:
X your ﬁrewall has been disabled or switched oﬀ
X permission has been granted for other computers to
access your computer
X a virus has created a back door into your computer
that bypasses the ﬁrewall
X a hacker has acquired the password to your ﬁrewall.
Firewalls are an important part of computer security but
they do not oﬀer complete security as a standalone
product. They are only eﬀective if they are used in

KE EPIN G YOUR COMPUTE R SECURE / 81
conjunction with other protective programs such as anti-
virus software. For further information, see page 84,
Types of anti-virus software.
Types of firewall
When considering which type of ﬁrewall is best suited to
your needs, it is important to recognise the strengths and
weaknesses of the options open to you. There are three
main types of ﬁrewall to choose from:
X a desktop ﬁrewall
X a commercial ﬁrewall
X a hardware ﬁrewall.
Desktop ¢rewalls
These are also known as software ﬁrewalls and are
installed on each computer that is able to connect to the
internet. They are designed to monitor and, if necessary,
block or restrict the ﬂow of internet traﬃc between your
computer and the internet. Desktop ﬁrewalls need to be
conﬁgured to work with your computer by learning which
programs are used to connect to the internet. When the
ﬁrewall is switched on, a pop-up warning will appear
when a new program attempts to connect to the internet
for the ﬁrst time. How you respond to these messages will
determine how your ﬁrewall is conﬁgured. Therefore, it is
important to only permit legitimate programs to connect.
If you are unsure about the program then always decline
permission until you can verify the origin.
Most computers come with a pre-installed ﬁrewall as part
of the initial software package that will provide a certain
amount of protection. However, for a more comprehensive

82 / P RO TECT I NG YO UR I D E NTI T Y
ﬁrewall package you will need to upgrade to a commercial
desktop ﬁrewall or a hardware ﬁrewall.
Commercial ¢rewalls
Commercial ﬁrewalls work in a similar way to desktop
ﬁrewalls in that they are individually installed on each
computer that can access the internet. They monitor
applications that connect to the internet in order to
prevent Trojans, keyloggers, back doors and other
malware from entering your computer. The main beneﬁt
of commercial ﬁrewalls is that they can be regularly
updated to provide greater protection against new online
threats. They can also be individually conﬁgured which
will allow greater control and ﬂexibility over how the
ﬁrewall works. Commercial ﬁrewalls are available as
either a standalone product or, more commonly, as part
of a larger security suite. Standalone programs that can
be downloaded for free include:
Comodo Firewall Pro
www.personalﬁrewall.comodo.com
PC Tools Firewall Plus
www.pctools.com
ZoneAlarm
www.zonealarm.com
Alternatively, the following security suites include a
ﬁrewall as an integral part of the program:
Kaspersky Internet Security
www.kaspersky.com
McAfee Internet Security Suite
www.mcafee.co.uk
Norton Internet Security
www.symantec.com
Hardware ¢rewalls
Whereas desktop and commercial ﬁrewalls need to be
installed on each computer with access to the internet, a

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 83
hardware ﬁrewall allows a number of computers to be
protected through a shared internet connection. This is
generally how most business networks operate but even a
small home network can be set up in this way. Most
internet routers have a hardware ﬁrewall device built into
them but they can sometimes prove more diﬃcult to set up
than desktop or commercial ﬁrewalls. However, most
suppliers provide telephone support and, in some cases,
they can arrange for an engineer to call and install the
router for you. This will usually incur an additional
charge but it could be worth the expense, particularly if
you are unfamiliar with how to conﬁgure a ﬁrewall.
VIRUSES
Computer viruses work in many diﬀerent ways, some are
designed to cause maximum damage by wiping your hard
drive or installing oﬀensive material and some will even
lock you out of your computer. Anti-virus software is one
of the most important protective programs that can be
installed on your computer. It works by constantly
scanning for viruses that can inﬁltrate and infect your
computer. These include incoming emails with infected
attachments, viruses released when documents are opened
and viruses that attack over the internet.
However, the most dangerous type of virus is those that
bury themselves deep within your computer and remain
undetected. These can create a back door for hackers to
access your system, automatically copy and send sensitive
data or record your internet activity including your
computer keystrokes. With this information hackers can
discover your passwords, steal your identity and make

84 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
purchases in your name. Anti-virus programs are just one
type of security measure but as a single product they will
not completely protect you from hackers, most spyware,
spam and any virus for which it does not have a signature.
Therefore, they are best used in conjunction with other
protective programs such as ﬁrewalls, anti-spyware and
anti-spam ﬁltering.
Types of anti-virus software
As with ﬁrewalls, there are a number of options open to
you when choosing which type of anti-virus software is
best suited to your needs. For example, they are available
as either standalone products or as part of a larger
security suite that can either be downloaded for free or
purchased. The main diﬀerence is that whereas standalone
programs will only scan for viruses, security suites also
include additional protective programs such as ﬁrewalls,
anti-spyware and anti-spam ﬁltering.
The main beneﬁts of a security suite are that they are
relatively easy to use, all of the programs are designed to
work with each other and they can all be accessed through
a central interface. However, although this is a cost-eﬃcient
way of buying a comprehensive range of protective
programs, it is worth considering just how eﬀective these
additional programs are. Security suites usually have a
very good anti-virus program but sometimes the other
programs are not as good as those individually available
from other suppliers. A security suite is ideal for those new
to computer security but as you become more familiar with
the programs on oﬀer you may choose to buy other
programs from individual suppliers.

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 85
How they work
Whenever new viruses are released, they are analysed by
security ﬁrms who develop a counter-program to render
them ineﬀective before assigning a unique anti-virus
signature to them. These signatures are used by anti-virus
programs to identify and block new viruses before they
can penetrate your computer. In order to be eﬀective, it is
important that your anti-virus software is kept up to date,
otherwise it will not be able to detect new threats as they
become available. Most programs can be set to auto-
matically check for updates whilst others provide pop-up
reminders.
Getting anti-virus software
When you have decided which type of anti-virus software is
best for you, the next step is to decide whether to buy or
download the programs you need for free. If you choose to
buy, most manufacturers will include an initial one-year
subscription within the purchase price. This means that you
will be able to regularly download the latest virus signatures
and security updates to ensure that your computer is fully
protected. At the end of the year you can either renew your
subscription or buy a diﬀerent product.
Alternatively, a variety of programs are available to
download for free. However, these are either trial versions
of full programs or they are similar to commercial
products but they have limited functionality. Trial
versions will usually have some of their features disabled
and will only work for a short period of time before you
will need to purchase a licence to continue using them.
Similarly, free programs are often basic versions of their
commercial counterparts and their technical support is

86 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
either very limited or non-existent. The best solution is to
buy a commercial product with full technical support
because these manufacturers have the ﬁnancial resources
to research and further develop their products.
General anti-virus advice
After you have installed an anti-virus program it doesn’t
mean you can become complacent and let your software
do all the work. There are many preventive actions that
still need to be taken to help your software help you, these
include the following.
X Never open email attachments from an unknown source
Your anti-virus program should have identiﬁed and
quarantined the attachment as a potential threat but it
always pays to exercise extreme caution when dealing
with email attachments.
X Regularly run a full system virus scan
Some websites oﬀer free online anti-virus scans. These
are useful to identify potential threats but they are not
as comprehensive as an installed anti-virus program
and should not be relied upon to protect your
computer. In fact, some programs will only identify
viruses without removing potential threats until you
have purchased the full version.
X Enable macro protection
Most oﬃce applications oﬀer this option which should
always be switched on because viruses can often be
concealed in macros that are activated with email
attachments.

KEEP ING YOUR COMP UTER SECURE / 87
X Use the pre-installed anti-virus trial program
Most computers come with an anti-virus program pre-
installed. This will usually be a fully functional trial
version but at the end of the trial period you will need
to pay a subscription in order to stay protected or buy
another anti-virus program.
X Never install more that one anti-virus program at a time
Anti-virus programs can conﬂict with one another and
not work properly, which will leave your computer
vulnerable to attack.
SPYWARE
Spyware programs are very similar to viruses from the
perspective that they are installed without your knowledge
or your permission. They are often embedded within other
programs and applications such as internet downloads,
peer-to-peer ﬁle sharing and email attachments, which
make them extremely diﬃcult but not impossible to
remove. Some spyware can be identiﬁed, quarantined and
destroyed with a good anti-virus package but the majority
will remain undetected unless you use a dedicated anti-
spyware program.
Adware spyware
Not all spyware programs are the same, they come in a
variety of diﬀerent formats with a variety of diﬀerent
objectives. At the lower end of the spyware scale are
adware programs, which create pop-up adverts to direct
you to speciﬁc websites. These are often gambling or
pornographic websites which can be extremely oﬀensive
particularly if accidentally viewed by young children.
Some adverts are created within the code of the spyware

88 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
but others will download speciﬁc advertisements from the
internet. Other uses for adware include installing new
desktop icons, creating new browser menus and toolbar
buttons, changing your homepage and changing your
internet search engine.
This means that when you click on either a new icon or a
new toolbar button or follow a link from your new search
engine it is highly likely that your browsing habits are
being externally monitored. This data will then be used to
generate further advertisements speciﬁcally targeted
towards your personal interests. Adware can also be
used to restrict access to speciﬁc websites, persuade you to
disable your existing anti-virus or anti-spyware programs
and deny access to subsequent updates.
Surveillance spyware
At the other end of the scale is surveillance spyware
which, as the name implies, is designed to remain
undetected on your computer. These stealth programs
are the most dangerous and intrusive types of spyware
because they can be used to secretly acquire your personal,
security and identity information. They work by covertly
scanning your computer for your personal information
such as passwords and credit card details and then upload
this data to criminals. This is achieved by recording your
keystrokes and capturing screen shots of websites you
have visited that clearly contain your personal data.
Avoiding spyware
An unprotected computer can be infected with a number
of diﬀerent spyware programs all running at the same

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 89
time. This can result in your computer becoming slow and
unreliable by crashing on a regular basis. To reduce the
possibility of inadvertently installing spyware there are a
number of preventative steps you can take, as follows.
X Only buy and install genuine software from reputable
suppliers
Never install counterfeit software and always avoid
downloading programs over peer-to-peer ﬁle sharing
networks.
X Only download free software from websites that operate
a strict no-spyware policy
In reality these websites will probably have a
disclaimer to indemnify themselves against spyware
accidentally being downloaded but at least they are
making a concerted eﬀort to try to eradicate spyware
from their programs.
X Always monitor the installation process when down-
loading free software
This will help to ensure that you not installing
additional spyware programs. The permission to
install these is often contained within the licence
agreement that you must agree to before the installa-
tion process can begin. So always read the licence
carefully and never simply click on the I Agree button.
X Never click on an advertisement oﬀering a free spyware
scan
These advertisements often contain spyware and the
scan will always ‘ﬁnd’ spyware on your computer that
can only be deleted if you buy their spyware removal
program.

Anti-spyware programs
Anti-spyware programs work in a similar way to anti-
virus programs by scanning for known spyware signa-
tures and preventing new spyware infections. The
majority of commercial Internet Security Suites including
Kaspersky, McAfee and Norton have anti-spyware
programs contained within them.
Kaspersky Internet Security
www.kaspersky.com
McAfee Internet Security Suite
www.mcafee.co.uk
Norton Internet Security
www.symantec.com
In addition to these, a number of standalone programs
are also available that can be bought or downloaded for
free, these include:
Ad-Aware
www.lavasoftusa.com
Spyware Doctor
www.pctools.com
Spyware Terminator
www.spywareterminator.com
Alternatively, the following programs can also be
purchased:
NoAdware
www.noadware.net
Webroot Spy Sweeper
www.digitaldriver.com
XoftSpySE
www.paretologic.com
SPAM
Spam is the name given to unsolicited emails that regularly
ﬁll up your inbox. It is estimated that up to 90% of the
billions of emails sent each day are sent by spammers and
are usually advertisements for cheap medicines, enlarge-
90 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y

KE EPIN G YOUR COMPUTE R SECURE / 91
ment surgery, pornographic websites, money-making
schemes, gambling websites or counterfeit software.
Fortunately, most people are aware of the unbelievable
claims made by some spam mail and know not to respond.
However, because millions of emails can be sent at the touch
of a button for next to no cost, spammers only need a very
small percentage of people to reply to make them proﬁtable.
The golden rules when dealing with spam are to never
respond, never buy from spam advertisements and never be
tempted to make charitable donations because your money
will go directly to the spammer. If you do want to donate to
charity then always contact the charity through an
advertised number or by typing their web address directly
into your internet browser.
Reducing spam
It is unlikely that spam will ever be totally eliminated but
with careful forethought and planning you can actively
reduce the amount of spam you receive. The ﬁrst step is to
create a main email address that is diﬃcult for spammers
or automated software programs to guess. This should be
a long combination of letters, numbers and punctuation
marks that should only be given to people you know. For
all other email correspondence, consider setting up a
disposable email address that can be easily discarded
when the spam becomes too great.
Your email address is an important part of your identity
and should be treated just like any other piece of personal
information. You would probably think twice about
giving your home address to complete strangers so
remember to exercise the same caution with your email

92 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENT ITY
address. Always think carefully before passing it on to
anyone and protect it wherever possible. When choosing
an email provider, look for one that oﬀers email ﬁltering
as standard. Email ﬁltering is used to automatically
identify and sort potential spam by scanning your inbox
for key words such as advertisement, extra income, order
now or cards accepted.
If your email provider does not oﬀer email ﬁltering then
either switch to a company that does or consider using a
separate ﬁlter program. Programs such as McAfee Spam
Killer (www.spamkiller.com) and Ella for Spam Control
(www.openﬁeldsoftware.com) work very well. As an extra
precautionary measure, regularly check the status of your
email ﬁlters because some computer viruses have been
known to disable them. This can be done by clicking the
Options button and looking for Spam Protection or Junk
E-Mail Protection.
In addition to sending advertisements, spam can also be
used to perpetuate internet fraud through phishing, see
page 114, Types of Internet Fraud. Phishing involves
setting up a website that appears to look like a genuine
online business such as a bank or a shop. Visitors are
encouraged to conﬁrm their personal details after
receiving an email warning them to act immediately but
the information is captured by fraudsters.
Some spammers have been known to oﬀer spam opt-out
services that work in a similar way to the Mail Preference
Service (MPS) or Telephone Preference Service (TPS).
This is freely available from the Email Preference Service
(eMPS) and anyone trying to sell you this service is either

K EEP ING Y OUR COMP UT ER SECURE / 93
trying to get your money, your personal details or both.
For more information contact Email Preference Service
(eMPS) at www.dmachoice.org/EMPS/
Dealing with spam
If you receive a just few unwanted emails a day and you do
not have an email ﬁlter then you may choose to manually
sort your inbox. This is usually just a case of scanning
through the sender’s address and seeing if there is a name
you do not recognise. This does not necessarily mean that
it is spam, just that you need to exercise caution when
dealing with it. When sorting your inbox, remember never
to open an unsolicited email or click on a link because you
can never be sure where it may take you. This is
particularly important when dealing with attachments
because they might contain a virus or spyware.
The performance of your email ﬁlter can be greatly
improved if you train it to identify spam emails that were
missed. To do this, never click on Remove or Delete
because your ﬁlter will just treat the email the same way
next time. Instead, select the email and click on the Spam
button, the ﬁlter will then add the sender’s details to its
Blocked list. Conversely, you can also train your ﬁlter to
identify genuine emails that were originally identiﬁed as
spam by simply selecting the email and clicking on the
Not Spam button, the ﬁlter will then add the sender’s
details to its Safe Senders list. On occasion, some email
ﬁlters can accidentally ﬁlter genuine emails so it is
important to regularly check your junk folders.

94 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
How spammers get your email address
Spam emails are sent randomly to millions of email
addresses on a daily basis and spammers use a variety of
diﬀerent methods to get them. These include:
X Using search tools to ﬁnd addresses embedded within
published web pages
These are similar to those used by search engines and if
your email address is listed on a public website you will
probably be inundated with spam because it will be
found easily and exploited by spammers.
X Running automated software programs
These systematically work through all variations of
letters, numbers and punctuation marks to try to guess
your email address. These programs begin with names
and common words so try to avoid using them. Instead
chose an obscure combination of letters, numbers and
punctuation marks and remember that the longer the
address the more diﬃcult it is for spammers to guess.
X Buying email address lists from other spammers or
crooked website owners
This is why it is a good idea to use a disposable address
when registering for services or buying from websites.
X Setting up a fake spam email blocking service
This a free service so the spammer is either trying to
get money or your personal details.
COMPUTER NETWORKING
There was a time when computer networks were only used
by businesses or technically minded people. The average

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 95
family did not want, did not need or could not aﬀord
more than one computer, so home networks were
considered a luxury. In recent years the cost of
computing has been dramatically reduced, which has
resulted in more computers being sold than ever before.
This has meant that computers have become a large part
of everyday life and are now being used for everything
from shopping and banking to music, games, videos,
instant messaging and school work. With so many
diﬀerent functions, people are ﬁnding that one computer
can no longer accommodate their needs so most homes
have two or more computers. Therefore, creating a
secure home network has become a necessity rather than
a luxury.
Creating a secure network
A network enables two or more computers to share ﬁles,
documents, printers, scanners, CD/DVD burners, music,
games, videos and the internet. The two most popular
ways to do this are through a WiFi (wireless) or an
Ethernet (wired) connection and there are many advan-
tages and disadvantages to each. Although WiFi networks
are ﬂexible and relatively inexpensive to set up they are
slower and less secure. Conversely, Ethernet networks are
faster and more secure but each computer needs to be
connected with individual leads which can be both
restrictive and unsightly.
Both types of network require a router to connect all the
computers. A router is used to direct, exchange and share
information and, if it is connected to a modem, then the
network can also be used to share an internet connection.

96 / P ROTEC TING YOUR IDE NTIT Y
Any network that connects to the internet will require a
ﬁrewall (see page 79, Firewalls) to protect computers from
hackers, viruses, spyware and other online threats. Some
routers include a hardware ﬁrewall as part of the
installation package whereas others require a separate
software ﬁrewall. Whichever method you use, it is
important that your ﬁrewall is always switched on and is
always kept up to date.
Configuring a secure network
In its simplest form, conﬁguring a secure network
involves encrypting information and controlling who
can access it. This can be achieved by physically
connecting leads between each computer or by installing
a wireless network. To avoid trailing unsightly leads most
people choose to install a WiFi network. Although these
are convenient, they are also a potential security risk
because they can be easily accessed unless they are
protected.
Ethernet (wired) networks
These types of network, can be inexpensive to install if you
have only two computers and they are relatively close
together because you will only need a Network Interface
Card (NIC) in each computer and a cable to connect
them. For larger networks you will also need an Ethernet
router and a separate cable to connect each device.
Ethernet cabling is quite expensive so if your computers
are in diﬀerent parts of the house then a large wired
network can be costly to install. To avoid unsightly leads,
Ethernet cables can be installed in the walls but this is
more commonly found in newly-built houses. However,

KEEP ING YOUR COMP UTER SECURE / 97
with the ability to move data faster and more securely
than a wireless network, this can be a worthwhile expense
particularly if you regularly transfer a lot of ﬁles.
WiFi (wireless) networks
This is the simplest and least expensive way to connect
your computers and devices. They are ﬂexible and free
from wires but they are also slower and less secure than
wired networks so you will need to ensure they are fully
protected. WiFi networks use radio waves instead of wires
to transmit and receive data which is very similar to the
technology found in televisions, cordless phones, radios,
mobile phones and walkie-talkies. These networks use
802.11 networking standards and transmit data at
frequencies of 2.4 GHz or 5GHz:
To build a WiFi network you will need a wireless router
and a wireless adapter for each computer and device
connected to your network. Many new computers have
wireless adapters built into them but, for others, they can
be connected to a USB port, PC card slot or PCI slot. The
average wireless router has an approximate range of 100
feet (30.5 metres) but doors and walls can reduce the
strength of the signal. Depending on the shape and size of
your house you may also need to buy a signal repeater or
range extender to increase the strength and range of your
network.
Network standard
Frequency (GHz)
Speed (megabits
per second)
802.11a
5
54
802.11b
2.4
11
802.11g
2.4
54

98 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Protecting your wireless network
An unprotected network is a huge security risk because
any computer within range that has a wireless adapter can
potentially connect to it. This means that fraudsters and
criminals can access your computer from a distance
without your knowledge or permission. They can also use
your internet connection to download or send material
which could get you into trouble because it can be traced
back to your computer. Therefore, it is important to
conﬁgure your network to reduce the possibility of access
by unauthorised users. This can be achieved by:
X encrypting your network and controlling who has
access
X using access points
X adjusting your privacy settings
X using a ﬁrewall.
Encrypting your network and controlling access
Data encryption is an essential part of network security
but when wireless network equipment is ﬁrst installed the
encryption settings will not be activated. This is to ensure
that your network is easy to set up. Most equipment will
give you the option to use an installation wizard which is
highly recommended because it will lead you through the
entire process and explain your various options along the
way. You can also refer to the set up instructions that
came with your equipment which will either be a printed
booklet or included on your installation CD.
Your wireless network equipment will have a variety of
security options but the ﬁrst step is to choose which type
of encryption is best suited to your needs. There are

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTER SE CURE / 99
currently three types of encryption methods to choose
between but which ones are available will depend on your
equipment and your operating system.
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP)
This is usually found on older network cards and access
points and was originally developed to provide a similar
level of protection to a wired network. WEP networks use
either 64-bit or 128-bit encryption but they are generally
considered the weakest type of security because they use a
numerical password which is relatively easy to crack.
Hackers can capture and sample network traﬃc which
they can use to acquire your password and access your
system.
WiFi Protected Access (WPA,WPA-PSKandWPA2)
WPA is the newest and strongest type of encryption that
uses a Temporal Key Integrity Protocol (TKIP) to
regularly update and change your encryption key. This
means that even if hackers capture and sample your
network traﬃc, the information is useless because your
encryption key is constantly changing. WPA-PSK is the
next best type of encryption, which is supported by most
routers. Pre-Shared Key (PSK) authentication works by
sharing the same password to securely exchange informa-
tion between systems. WPA2 oﬀers the highest level of
security and introduces the new Advanced Encryption
Standard (AES) which is considered fully secure but is
only found on the latest hardware.
Media Access Control (MAC) address ¢ltering
Unlike WEP or WPA, this type of authentication does not
rely on a password to verify users. Instead, it uses the

100 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY
unique 12-digit MAC address that can be found on all
network equipment. This means that your network can be
accessed only by machines with a speciﬁc MAC address
that you have added and approved.
Passphrase technology
As an additional level of security most routers support
passphrase technology to generate an encryption key. This
allows you to create a random string of characters from a
sequence of words or text that are used to control access to
your network, see page 68, Creating strong passwords.
Using an Access Point network
When installing your network you will be asked to choose
a network type, which will either be a Computer-to-
Computer (Ad Hoc) or an Access Point (Infrastructure).
Computer-to-Computer networks, which are also known
as peer-to-peer, are less secure than Access Point net-
works because they exchange data and manage themselves
without using a central access point. This means that your
computer becomes both a server and a client whereby
other computers can access your computer and you can
access other computers. Computer-to-Computer net-
works are typically used to share music, video, software
and ﬁles over the internet.
Access Point networks are more secure than Computer-
to-Computer networks because they create an infrastruc-
ture of authorised computers that manage and share
information through routers and ﬁrewalls. This gives you
more control over your network by restricting access to
only recognised and trusted computers. This is obviously

K EEPI NG YOUR COMPUT ER SECURE / 101
good from a security perspective.
Adjusting your privacy settings
During the installation process you will also be given the
option to change the name of your Service Set Identiﬁer
(SSID). This is simply the name assigned to your network
and the default setting will usually be the manufacturer’s
name. The SSID should be changed to something obscure
and the Broadcast SSID option should be switched oﬀ.
This will make it more diﬃcult for hackers to ﬁnd and
attempt to access your network.
Using a firewall
In addition to the ﬁrewall installed on your router, it is
advisable to protect each networked computer with a
desktop ﬁrewall. This will act as a secondary line of
defence and will further strengthen the security of your
network. For further information, see page 79, Firewalls.
One last word
An important point to remember is that your network
protection is only as strong as the password that has been
used to create it. So always use a strong password and
always ensure that your security settings are set to the
highest level. For further information, see page 67, Using
Passwords.
UPGRADING AND UPDATING
The electronics industry is constantly evolving to meet
changing market trends and the computer hardware
sector is no exception. As soon as a product becomes
available it is not long before it is superseded by

102 / PROTEC TING YOUR I DE NTIT Y
something new and improved. Computer software takes a
very long time to develop and during this period the
industry and the market will change. Some companies
address this by issuing interim updates to their existing
software, whereas others will release a completely new
and updated version.
Regularly upgrading and updating your software is
advantageous because you will be able beneﬁt from the
improvements made to the product. These may include
ﬁxing bugs, adding extra features, improving performance
and protection against some viruses. When you ﬁrst install
new software, it is important to register your product with
the company and, in fact, some programs will not work
until they are registered. As a newly-registered user you
may be entitled to download a future release for free or
you may be oﬀered special rates to buy later upgrades.
Installing patches and updates
Commercial software companies spend huge sums of
money developing their products to ensure they work
perfectly. Software is only released when manufacturers
and developers are conﬁdent that their products are free
from bugs but hackers endeavour to uncover these. Bugs
can be exploited by hackers to create a back door into
your computer. This is achieved by creating and releasing
viruses that speciﬁcally attack systems that use a
particular type of software.
When a bug is detected, software companies work hard to
solve the problem by developing and issuing update
patches. Providing you are using genuine software then
these can be downloaded and installed directly from the

KE EPIN G YOUR COMPUTE R SECURE / 103
company’s website. Although update patches are
designed to improve the performance of the software
and address any security issues they should not be treated
as a security solution in their own right. Update patches
are only eﬀective if they are used in conjunction with
ﬁrewall, anti-virus and anti-spyware programs. As new
versions of software programs become available then
these patches become incorporated into the new release.
Updating your operating system
At the heart of every computer is the operating system
which is the part that makes everything else work. The
most popular systems are Windows, Mac and Linux and
the latest version of each will obviously be the most up to
date and the most secure. Operating systems are not
released as often as other types of software but
manufacturers will frequently release patches and
updates. Keeping up to date with these can be diﬃcult
but some systems will allow you to automatically down-
load and install updates as soon as they become available.
The best way to do this is to visit the download section of
the manufacturer’s website and follow the update
instructions. Before downloading any updates always
check that your anti-virus program is up to date and fully
enabled.
PEER-TO-PEER (P2P) FILE SHARING
Peer-to-peer (P2P) ﬁle sharing has been a popular
online activity since 1999 when Napster was ﬁrst
released. Napster allowed users to freely share MP3
music ﬁles over the internet but due to copyright laws,
the website was initially ordered to close. It has since

104 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y
been re-launched oﬀering a legitimate pay-for-down-
load service. There are now a number of other P2P
programs that can be used to share videos, images,
documents and software ﬁles, these include:
Bearshare
www.bearshare.com
BitTorrent
www.bittorrent.com
Gnutella
www.gnutella.com
iMesh
www.imesh.com
Kazaa
www.kaza.com
Limewire
www.limewire.com
Morpheus
http://morpheus.com
Napster
www.napster.co.uk
Shareaza
www.shareaza.com
File-sharing programs need be treated with caution
because they present a variety of security and legal
issues that you need to be aware of.
Security issues
From a security perspective these programs are vulner-
able to hackers, viruses, adware and spyware. This is
because in order to share ﬁles, your ﬁrewall needs to be
conﬁgured to permit your P2P program to access the
internet. Hackers can exploit these programs to directly
access your computer or they can use a virus to create a
back door into your system. Adware and spyware
programs can often be installed with the main ﬁle-sharing
program but, fortunately, most P2P programs now claim
to be free from adware and spyware and some even allow
you to safely scan your downloaded ﬁles for viruses.

KE EPIN G YOUR COMPUTE R SECURE / 105
Legal issues
The legal concerns of ﬁle-sharing programs relate to the
exchange of copyrighted material without the owner’s
permission. Downloading software, music and videos for
free can seem very tempting but this activity is illegal
because royalties are not paid to the copyright owners.
Record companies and artists have taken legal action
against those who regularly download their material and
many users have been prosecuted and substantially ﬁned.
In turn, this has led to the development of programs to
conceal your IP address and prevent your personal details
being collected without your permission, these include:
No-IP Plus
www.no-ip.com
PeerGuardian
http://phoenixlabs.org/pg2/
Private Proxy
www.privacyview.com
Sharing files
Sharing ﬁles is a potentially risky activity that can be
exploited by criminals to access your computer and get
your personal information. However, there are a few
protective measures you can implement to reduce the
possibility of your personal information being stolen.
X Keep your protection software up to date
Always ensure that your anti-spyware, anti-adware
and anti-virus software is up to date and fully
functional before installing a P2P program or
exchanging any ﬁles.
X Choose a recognised ﬁle sharing company which has
fully developed their program
These are the companies who have released multiple

106 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY
versions of their software to improve, update and
eliminate any problems that earlier versions may have
had. In addition, consider paying for a premium
version that does not have any of the adware that is
sometimes installed with free versions.
X Only use trusted websites to download ﬁle sharing
programs
The best programs are those that are free from adware
and spyware, that check for viruses and also oﬀer a no-
spyware guarantee.
X Always disable the feature that allows users to browse
your ﬁles directly
This is a large security risk because hackers can exploit
this feature to access your system directly.
Downloading files
One of the main problems with using P2P programs is
that you can never be too sure exactly what you are
downloading. Users can save ﬁles with any name they
choose which means that viruses or oﬀensive material can
be innocently disguised as the latest single or movie
trailer. Providing your anti-virus program is kept up to
date, any viruses should be detected and quarantined
before they can do any damage. Oﬀensive material is
more diﬃcult to detect because unless it contains a virus
then you will not know there is a problem until it is
viewed.
When software is downloaded, any executable (.exe) ﬁles
must be treated with extreme caution because they may
contain a virus or spyware that is activated when the ﬁle is

K EEPI NG YOUR COMPUT ER SECURE / 107
opened. To reduce this risk, never click on Run when
downloading a ﬁle because this will bypass your anti-virus
software. Instead, select Save because at least your anti-
virus software will be able to detect any potential
problems. As an extra precautionary measure, only
download software directly from the manufacturer or
from trusted download websites instead of from P2P
programs. The following sites are very useful.
www.computeractive.co.uk
www.download.com
www.pcworld.com
www.tucows.com
www.zdnet.com
Similarly, music ﬁles can also be safely downloaded from
paid-for sites such as:
www.7digital.com
www.hmvdigital.com
www.napster.co.uk
www.tescodownloads.com
www.apple.com/itunes
ERASING YOUR HARD DRIVE
The more often you use your computer the more personal
and sensitive data it will contain. This can be a problem if
you want to sell, donate, trade-in or dispose of your
computer because your personal information can be
retrieved easily and used by thieves, criminals and
fraudsters. Many people think that simply deleting ﬁles
or reformatting their hard drive is suﬃcient to destroy the

data it contains and render it illegible but this is not the
case.
When computer ﬁles are deleted they are not completely
removed from the hard drive. Instead, only the ﬁrst part
of the ﬁle name is removed and the ﬁle becomes hidden.
The information contained within the ﬁle will remain
intact until it is overwritten. This means that your data
can be easily retrieved with one of the many data-recovery
tools that are freely available. These programs are ideal if
your computer crashes and you need to recover and
restore your lost ﬁles but they can also be used by
criminals to uncover your personal information.
One rather drastic solution is to remove your hard drive
and destroy it with a hammer, or by burning or drilling
holes through it. You could also use a process called
‘degaussing’ which uses a strong magnetic ﬁeld to remove
the information safely. This is a relatively expensive
process and is usually only used by companies and
government organisations to destroy highly sensitive data.
Completely destroying a hard drive seems such a waste
when it could be donated to charity. Nevertheless, it is
important to ensure that your personal information is not
recoverable. This can be done by using a specialised
utility program to erase the information from your drive.
Data-wiping programs
Data-wiping programs, which are also known as ﬁle
shredders, are not designed to wipe your drive in the
traditional sense by removing your data. Instead, they
overwrite your information with a combination of zeros
and random number patterns, which renders your data
unreadable even with sophisticated data restoration
108 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y

KE EPIN G YOUR COMPUTE R SECURE / 109
programs. A quick internet search will reveal that many
data removal programs are available, these include:
BCWipe
www.jetico.com
Blancco Data Cleaner
www.blancco.com
Darik’s Boot and Nuke
http://dban.sourceforge.net
Ontrack Data Eraser
www.ontrack.com
Eraser
www.heidi.ie
Eraseyourharddrive.com
www.eraseyourharddrive.com
KillDisk
www.killdisk.com
Norton Wipe
www.symantec.com
R-Wipe & Clean
www.r-wipe.com
ShredIt
www.mireth.com
Secure-Delete
www.secure-delete.net
Some of these programs are available as a free or trial
download while others are only available to buy. The free
and trial versions will have limited functionality whereas
the bought programs will have a wider range of features.
Using data-wiping programs
When wiping your drive it is important to wipe the entire
drive and not just the ﬁles that you consider are sensitive.
This is because when ﬁles and documents are created,
some systems automatically save back-up copies to
temporary folders or unused parts of your drive. These
ﬁles can be easily recovered with data-recovery programs
or even simple MS-DOS commands such as ‘undelete’, so
it is important to ensure that they are no longer accessible.
After using a shredder for the ﬁrst time, check how secure
the program is by using a data-recovery tool to try to
restore any ﬁles that have been shredded.

110 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Choosing a file shredder
When choosing a ﬁle shredder, look for a program with
the ﬂexibility to shred speciﬁc ﬁles and folders such as the
recycle bin and temporary ﬁles in addition to an entire
hard drive. Other useful features include:
X Safe place folder
A secure folder will be created for any ﬁles and folders
that you do not want to accidentally shred. For
security reasons, it is advisable to avoid using this
for sensitive documents because this obviously defeats
the purpose of the shredder.
X Shred all free space
This will clean up your computing history, including
internet activity, cookies, Instant Messenger chat
history and other temporary internet ﬁles.
X Shred system ﬁles
With this feature, temporary system ﬁles, old deleted
ﬁles and temporary program ﬁles including automa-
tically saved previous ﬁle versions will be shredded.
X Numbers of passes
Some shredders oﬀer multiple wipe options to over-
write information but there is some debate whether
this is necessary. Although it may be possible to
recover information that has been overwritten a
number of times, the equipment required is extremely
expensive and not very common. For most systems one
wipe will be suﬃcient but if your data is particularly
sensitive then more than one pass is a worthwhile
feature.

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTE R SE CURE / 111
X Military and government approved security standards
These can include the UK Government Infosec
Standard 5 (1 or 3 pass options), the United States
Department of Defence 52202.22-M (7 passes) or the
Gutmann Algorithm (35 passes). Some programs will
also generate a security certiﬁcate at the end of the
process stating that your computer has been wiped to a
particular standard.
TOP TEN TIPS TO KEEP YOUR COMPUTER SECURE
 Always keep your operating system updated by downloading
the latest security patches directly from the manufacturer’s
website.
 Install and use a comprehensive internet security suite that
includes a firewall, anti-virus, anti-spyware, spam protection
and online identity theft blocking and ensure that it is always
kept up to date. Run regular system scans to search for and
remove spyware and viruses.
 Set your internet browser settings to the highest security
protection level and always use a firewall to protect yourself
and your computer from online threats.
 Create, protect and store, strong non-dictionary passwords
that are difficult to crack. The strongest passwords are those
that use the entire keyboard to create a random string of
upper and lower case letters, numbers, keyboard symbols and
punctuation marks.
 Password protect your system and screen saver to prevent
unauthorised users from accessing your computer.
 Ensure your wireless network is as secure as possible by
password protecting your router and setting your network to
the highest encryption level that your equipment will support.

112 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
 Only download and install programs from trusted websites
and always save and scan downloads for viruses before they
are opened and run.
 Never open an email or attachment from an unknown source.
Only download or read emails from trustworthy sources that
you recognise and always ensure that attachments are scanned
for viruses before they are opened.
 Always use a spam filter to protect your computer from
unsolicited and unwanted spam emails.
 Turn off file sharing to prevent strangers from accessing your
computer and always disconnect from the internet when you
are not online.
VICTIMS’ STORIES
Online identity theft
When Elliott’s bank statement arrived hewas shocked to
discover that huge sums of moneyhad beentransferred
fromhis bank accountthrough a series of online
transactions.Somebodyhad discovered his username and
password and had e¡ectivelystolen hisidentity. One ofthe
advantages with online banking is that after an online account
is opened, the account holdercan manage their account
without ever needing to contactthe bank.This can also be a
disadvantage because, unless theyareinformed otherwise,
the bank has no reasonto suspectthat an account is being
accessed byanyone other thanthe account holder.Thisis
whyit isimportantto guard your username and password,
use a strong password that isregularlychanged and never
accessyour accountfrom a public computer.

KEE PING YOUR COMPUTE R SE CURE / 113
Elliott immediatelycontacted his bank and arranged for his
accountto be temporarilysuspended untilthe matter was
fullyresolved.The bankconducted athoroughinvestigation
butthis took a numberof weeks to complete.During this
time hewas unable to access his account butfortunatelyhe
was able to borrow money fromhis familyand friends.The
bank f|nallyrefunded all ofthe money that had been stolen
butthewhole situation has made himmore cautious when
banking online.
Financial identity fraud
Ben did not notice that his wallet had been stolen untilhe
returned home fromwork.By this time his wife had already
received atelephone call allegedly fromthe taxo⁄ce,
claiming thattheyhad a rebate for him and theyneeded to
conf|rmhis address.She naivelygave themtheir address and
even corrected themwhentheygot Ben’s mother’s maiden
namewrong.Ben’s walletcontained his drivinglicence
together with everycredit and debitcard that he owned.He
contacted his bankbut it was toolate, the criminals had
used his debitcard and drivinglicence to assume hisidentity
and steal »4,500 over the counter fromhis bank.Theyalso
used his creditcards to buy »2,600 of electrical equipment
and »1,280 of jewellery.
All of Ben’s money was eventuallyreturned but he nolonger
uses his mother’s maiden name as a means of security.He
alsoleaves his drivinglicence at home and onlycarries one
credit and debitcardin his wallet, the others areleft safely
at home for emergency use only.

4
Usingthe Internet Safely
In recent years the growth of the internet has been
phenomenal and as the cost of computing continues to
decrease this trend looks set to continue. The internet has
become such a large and important part of everyday life
that it can sometimes be diﬃcult to remember what life
was like without it. For the majority of people, it has
become an invaluable tool for shopping, banking,
communicating and generally making life a little easier.
Unfortunately, it has also created new opportunities for
criminals and fraudsters to take advantage of unsuspect-
ing users. Fortunately, there are a number of ways to
reduce these risks provided that you are aware of the
variety of methods that criminals and fraudsters use. This
chapter will oﬀer help and advice about how to identify
potential threats and scams and how to shop, bank,
communicate and download safely.
TYPES OF INTERNET FRAUD
There are so many diﬀerent types of internet fraud that to
list and fully explain all of them would probably require the
publication of another book. However, the majority of
frauds are based on similar principles and practices so this
book will highlight the most common types which include:
114

USI NG T HE INTER NET SAFELY / 115
X spoof email and phishing scams
X advance fee and 419 fraud
X pharming
X lottery fraud
X online auction fraud
X fake online shop fraud.
The golden rule with any fraud is that if it looks too good
to be true, then it probably is. Experienced criminals and
fraudsters have spent many years perfecting their style
and technique to ﬁnd out what works and what does not.
Any unsolicited opportunity to make money should
always be regarded as a fraud because genuine opportu-
nities do not need to be marketed in this way.
Nevertheless, many unsuspecting people are regularly
cheated out of their money and possessions which can
lead to all kinds of other problems. The fortunate part of
these scams is that, in order to work, they require action
on your part to reply and divulge your details, so do not
reply.
Spoof email and phishing scams
This type of fraud uses spoof email and phishing scams to
try to obtain your personal security information. This is a
three-step process whereby fraudsters ﬁrst send millions
of random and unsolicited emails that appear to be from
genuine online companies such as banks and shops.
Fraudsters play the law of averages and trust that by
sending so many emails they will eventually reach
potential victims who have dealings with the company
being targeted.

116 / PROTEC TING YOUR I DE NTIT Y
The exact content of the email will vary between
fraudsters but the overall message will be the same. The
email will claim that the company needs to conﬁrm or
update your personal details because they are making
technical improvements to their systems. They will usually
encourage you to reply immediately by claiming that you
will no longer be able to access your account if you do not
update your details. The second step of the process
involves you clicking on the link provided by the email.
This will take you to a security log-in page that appears to
look genuine but has in fact been set up by the fraudster.
The moment you enter your personal details then step
three is complete; you have given the fraudster all they
need to steal your money or your identity. This is an
example of a typical phishing email:
Dear Any National Bank customer,
Any National Bank Customer Service requests you to
complete our Online Banking Customer Form.
This procedure is obligatory for all internet banking users
of Any National Bank and you will be unable to access
your account until the form has been completed.
Please click the hyperlink below to access Online Banking
Customer Form.
http://update-749365.anynationalbank.com/
userdatadirectory/start.aspx
Please do not respond to this email.
Copyright 20XX. Any National Bank plc. All Rights
Reserved.

U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 117
Be suspicious
Whenever you receive an email asking for any personal
details, always be suspicious and remember that a genuine
company will never ask for information in this way. Your
bank might ask you to conﬁrm particular characters from
your password but never the entire password. If you do
receive a suspicious looking email or you are unsure if it is
genuine then always contact the sending company ﬁrst
before divulging any personal details. Also be wary of
links contained in emails because you never know where
they will take you. A security log-in page can appear to
look genuine at ﬁrst but unless the http changes to https in
the Internet address bar and a locked padlock or
unbroken chain can be seen inside your web browser
then do not proceed.
Reporting email scams
There are so many diﬀerent types of email scams that
keeping up with them all can be quite diﬃcult. To help
with this, organisations including Bank Safe Online and
Miller Smiles have created a large archive of these emails
and actively encourage users to forward others to them.
To do this, simply create a new email message, drag and
drop the original scam email into the new email as a ﬁle
attachment and send it to:
Bank Safe Online
www.banksafeonline.org.uk
Email: reports@banksafeonline.org.uk
Miller Smiles
www.millersmiles.co.uk
Email: spoof@millersmiles.co.uk
Further advice and information about identifying and
dealing with these scams can be obtained from:

118 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY
Anti-Phishing Working Group
www.antiphishing.org
Fraud Watch International
www.fraudwatchinternational.com
Get Safe Online
www.getsafeonline.org.uk
Spamfo
www.spamfo.co.uk
Advance fee and 419 frauds
These are a type of spam that uses phishing as a means to
contact millions of potential victims. Although these
scams are all executed slightly diﬀerently, their underlying
principles are the same. They work by notifying you that
you have won a lottery, inherited some money or your
bank account is needed to transfer huge sums of money
from a foreign country. You will usually be asked to
provide your bank details, conﬁrm your identity with a
passport or driving licence and pay an advance fee to
cover taxes, transfer fees and other similar non-existent
charges. When the transaction is complete the advance fee
you have paid will go directly to the fraudster and you will
never hear from them again.
The 419 frauds are a little more complicated but they
work in a similar way. They are named after the section of
the Nigerian Criminal Code where the majority of these
frauds originate. The email will claim to be from a high-
ranking foreign government or bank oﬃcial who needs
your bank account to transfer a huge sum of money from
their country. In exchange for your assistance you will be
able to keep a proportion of the money which is usually
about a third. The ‘oﬃcial’ will explain how they are able
to access surplus or unclaimed funds from over-invoiced
projects, completed contracts or from a previous political

U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 119
regime. You will probably be informed that you have been
recommended by a business associate because of your
integrity and at this point the importance of secrecy will
be stressed because the money would be seized if corrupt
government oﬃcials knew of its existence.
As the fraud progresses you will be asked to pay a variety
of advance fees. These will usually start comparatively
small against the money you have been promised but they
will gradually increase as the money is about to be
transferred. A variety of reasons will be given for these
including bribing government oﬃcials, legal expenses,
customs clearance, local taxes and bank charges. Fraud-
sters have become highly experienced at executing this
type of fraud and will often assure potential victims with
oﬃcial looking documents or they will operate an
untraceable satellite phone that will appear to be
answered by a government department. An example of a
typical advance fee fraud email is shown on page 120.
Pharming
Pharming is another form of fraud that involves
redirecting internet traﬃc but unlike phishing no emails
are used. Instead, criminals gain access to a genuine
company’s website and reprogram their internet address
to an identical cloned site that they have set up. This
means that even though the correct address has been
typed into your web browser you are automatically
directed to the fraudster’s website without even realising.
When you attempt to log-in at this site your personal
details and password will be captured and used by
fraudsters to access your account. Although this type of

Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (NNPC)
NNPC Towers
Central Area
Abuja
Nigeria
FROM THE DESK OF MR COLE JOSEPH
47 HILTON AVENUE
VICTORIA ISLAND
LAGOS, NIGERIA
Dear Friend,
I am a director in the foreign affairs department of the Nigerian National
Petroleum Corporation (NNPC). I got your email during a personal research
on the internet and wish to use this opportunity to notify you of the existence
of a certain amount we wish to transfer overseas for the purpose of
investments and importation of goods from your country.
In May 20XX, a contract of 66 million United States dollars ($66,000,000)
was awarded to a foreign company by my ministry. The contract was supply,
erection and system optimisation of super polyore 200,000-bpsd, system
optimisation of 280,000-monax axial plants and the computerisation of
conveyor belt for Kaduna refinery. With only the consent of the head of the
contract evaluation department, I over invoiced the contract value by thirty-
four million United States dollars ($34,000,000).
The contract has been completed long ago and the foreign company fully
paid off. But in the office files and paper work, the company is still owed
USD34M representing the over invoiced amount. Because this amount is
derived from the award and execution of a foreign contract, there is no way
the money can be paid locally. That is why I contacted you so that we can do
the project together for our mutual benefit. We have concluded every
necessary arrangement to transfer this amount to a foreign account as the
final phase payment for the said contract. What we need is your bank account
into which we can deposit the money and after we shall come over there to
share the money with you.
We sincerely need an honest person to work with and have agreed to share
the money in the following percentages, 70% will be for us who will effect
the transfer and 30% will be for you whose account is used to secure the
funds. There is no risk involvement because applications will be made to the
concerned Federal ministries and with official approvals given by the Federal
government before the Central Bank of Nigeria will be officially empowered
to wire the funds to your account by telegraphic transfer.
If you are interested, send your reply through my direct and private email
address (xxxxxxxxxx@xxxxx.xxx) indicating your full names or company name
and address and your direct telephone and fax numbers for effective
communication that this transaction needs. Do not reply through the Nigerian
National Petroleum Corporation email address because it belongs to the
senior staffs for public use. I will also need the name and address of the bank
you will like us to deposit the money, the telephone and fax numbers of the
bank, your account number etc. Everything has been arranged and I will send
more information about the business transaction to you as soon as I hear
from you. For obvious reasons, please keep the proposal top secret and
highly confidential.
Kind regards,
Cole
120

U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 121
fraud is technically possible, the good news is that to date
there have not been any reported cases.
Lottery fraud
There are numerous variations of these frauds but they all
follow a similar pattern. In the ﬁrst instance, millions of
people are notiﬁed that they have won an overseas lottery.
This originally happened by post but phishing is now
more commonly used. To attract your attention, the ﬁrst
email will probably ask you to respond within a short
period of time and will initially refrain from mentioning
that a small fee will be required to release your winnings.
This fee will often be disguised as a charge to cover
processing, handling, postage, registration, insurance,
bank charges or other similar costs.
You will also be advised to reply to a claims agent who can
be contacted on a premium rate phone line, which is likely
to be part of the scam, or through an untraceable email
address. When contact is made, you will be asked to divulge
as much personal information as possible and you may even
be required to conﬁrm your identity with a driving licence
or passport. At this stage, the fraudster will have acquired
suﬃcient information to steal or clone your identity.
The next step will be an email from the claims agent with
three collection options which all require an advance fee
payment.
1. Your winnings, less a handling fee, can be transferred
directly to your bank account
This will probably be the ﬁrst time that an advance fee
payment will be mentioned.

2. To avoid paying a handling fee, you can choose to open
an online account at a speciﬁed bank
This will invariably be a fake bank that will require an
initial deposit to open the account. Note that the
handling fee has been replaced by a deposit which is
eﬀectively the same.
3. You can also choose to collect your winnings personally
This will invariably involve travelling to a foreign
country which, in recent years, has often been
Amsterdam. You will be required to pay a release
fee and your winnings will be paid with counterfeit
currency.
To help create the illusion that you have actually won
some money and to persuade you to respond, the
fraudster may even send you a cheque that will allegedly
clear as soon as your personal details have been
conﬁrmed. Unfortunately, this cheque will either be
counterfeit or stolen and will deﬁnitely be refused by
the bank. As the fraud is played out your personal details
will either be sold to other fraudsters or your bank
account will be cleared of funds. An example of a typical
lottery fraud email is shown opposite.
Online auction fraud
This type of fraud involves high priced goods such as
laptops, mobile phones, digital cameras, laser printers,
computer scanners, televisions, video games consoles or
digital video cameras being oﬀered at very low prices.
There are two main ways that the scam works: you either
pay for goods that never arrive or you pay for brand new
122 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

NATIONAL EURO LOTTERY
BIJLMERDREEF 657
1102 BS AMSTERDAM
THE NETHERLANDS
FROM:
THE PROMOTIONAL SECRETARY
INTERNATIONAL PROMOTIONS/PRIZE AWARD DEPARTMENT
ATTENTION
After a successful completion of the 2nd category draws of NATIONAL EURO
LOTTERY, held on 24th November 20xx, we are pleased to inform you of the official
announcement today, that you have emerged one of the winners of the NATIONAL
EURO LOTTERY INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS, which is part of our promotional draws.
Participants were selected through a computer ballot system drawn from 25,000
names/email addresses of individuals and companies from Africa, America, Asia,
Australia, Canada, Europe, Middle East, and New Zealand as part of our International
Promotions Program.
You are attached to ticket number N.E.L. 714-5-9827, drew the lucky numbers N.E.L
.03- 15- 23- 25- 35- 40 and consequently won in the 2nd Category.
You have therefore been awarded a lump sum pay out of US$1,000,000.00 (one
million United States dollars) which is the winning payout for 2nd category winners.
This is from the total prize money of US$5,700,000.00 shared among the three
international winners in the 2nd category.
CONGRATULATIONS!
Your fund is now deposited with a financial institution with REFERENCE NUMBER:
N.E.L A718-3 and BATCH NUMBER: 224-DA, insured on your name. To avoid mix up
of numbers and names, we request that you keep this award strictly from public notice
until the entire process of transferring your claim has been completed, and your funds
remitted to your account. This is part of our security protocol to avoid double claiming
or unscrupulous acts by participants of this program.
We also wish to bring to your notice our end of year (20xx) high stakes where you
stand a chance of winning up to US$1.3 billion; we hope that with a part of your prize
you will participate.
Please contact your claims agent immediately, to begin your claims process;
Mr Xxxxxxx Xxxx
FOREIGN SERVICE MANAGER,
NATIONAL EURO LOTTERY
EMAIL: xxxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxx.xxx
PHONE: xxx xxx xxx xxx
For due processing and remittance of your prize money to a designated account of
your choice. Remember, all winnings must be claimed not later than 20th Dec 20xx.
NOTE:
To avoid unnecessary delays and complications, please remember to quote your
reference and batch numbers provided above, in your correspondence with your
claims agent.
Congratulations once again from all our staff and thank you for being part of our
promotions program.
Yours sincerely,
Xxxxxx Xxxxxx
PROMOTIONAL SECRETARY
123

goods but only receive second-hand or similar goods of a
lower value. The fraudster will either advertise the item
using a genuine auction account with good feedback that
they have stolen or they will make direct contact by email
after you have bid for a similar item.
To take advantage of these prices, which can be as low as
a third of their full retail price, you will be asked to
contact the seller away from the auction company. This
will usually be through a free disposable email account
that the fraudster will discard soon afterwards. The
fraudster will try to be as persuasive as possible to gain
your conﬁdence and convince you to buy from them. They
will stress the importance of their honesty and may even
provide a shipping number for the goods. Unfortunately,
this will either be a false number, an empty box or goods
of far less value than those you have paid for.
Whenever you deal with sellers in this way, it is important
to remember that you are no longer protected by the
auction company when things go wrong. When contact is
made they will usually explain how they can only accept
payment through Western Union because of problems
they have experienced with other money transfer compa-
nies. Western Union have unfortunately become
synonymous with online auction fraud but it must be
stressed that there is nothing wrong with Western Union
as a money transfer provider. In fact they oﬀer a very
good service. The problem is that their service is not
intended for online purchases from unknown online
sellers and this is categorically stated in their terms and
conditions.
124 / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDE NTITY

Fake online shop fraud
This involves setting up a fake online shop oﬀering
popular high priced goods at incredibly low prices. These
will usually be electronic goods including computers,
digital cameras, televisions, mobile phones, games con-
soles and digital video cameras that fraudsters know will
attract plenty of potential customers. The fraud works by
the fraudsters claiming that they are regrettably unable to
accept traditional methods of payment such as credit or
debit cards, postal orders, cheques or bank transfers.
Instead they will insist that payment is only made through
untraceable companies such as Western Union or Money-
gram. The buyer pays for goods that never arrive and
because of the way that payment is made they are unable
to recover their money.
USING ONLINE USERNAMES AND
PASSWORDS
There was a time when online usernames and passwords
were only required to access secure websites but they are
now being increasingly used for other websites. For
example, whenever you buy from an online retailer you
will usually be asked to set up a customer account
complete with a username and password. To do this, some
companies will only require your email address whereas
others may also request your home address or other
personal information. The purpose of these customer
accounts is twofold. Firstly, the online company can
create a database of interested customers whom they can
contact with special oﬀers or new products providing the
customer has not declined to receive direct mailings.
Secondly, the customer is able to reorder from the site
without having to re-enter all of their personal details.
US ING T HE INTE RNET SAFE LY / 125

Providing that you are satisﬁed with their Privacy Policy
(see page 137, Using Secure Websites), this is a perfectly
acceptable form of marketing. Some companies will not
allow access to their website until your details have been
registered. The company will then use your details to keep
you informed of promotional oﬀers or new products.
Under the terms of the Data Protection Act you should
always be given the opportunity to decline receiving
marketing information in this way.
Choosing a password
The more often you access websites that require pass-
words and usernames the more information you will have
to remember. This might tempt you to register the same
log-in details with a number of diﬀerent websites but from
a security point of view this should always be avoided. If a
fraudster discovers your log-in details to one account then
they can potentially access all of your accounts. Whenever
you are online always keep your passwords and PINs safe.
This is particularly important if you are accessing the
internet in a public place where people can see what you
are typing. For further information, see page 67, Using
Passwords.
SHOPPING ONLINE
The phenomenal growth of the internet has seen millions
of new companies opening for business. With compara-
tively low overheads and the potential to attract
customers from all over the world, internet companies
can become very successful very quickly. Companies such
as Amazon, Ebay, Play.com, CD Wow and Firebox have
all shown that competitive prices and good customer
service make for a winning combination.
126 / P R O TECT I N G Y O U R I D E N TIT Y

However, it’s not just new companies that are doing well,
the majority of high street retailers have embraced the
internet by setting up online versions of their stores.
Whereas the internet used to oﬀer a competitive alter-
native to high street shopping, many companies have
realised that it can also be used as an extension to their
traditional business. But with so many diﬀerent compa-
nies to choose from it can often be diﬃcult to decide
which ones are the best. A well-designed website can
easily create the impression of a large, established
company but the reality can sometimes be quite diﬀerent.
A website should never be judged solely by its look. So,
how do you know which sites to trust?
Using trustworthy websites
A good place to start is with large reputable high street
names that you recognise such as Argos, Boots, Comet,
Currys, Dixons, HMV, PC World, Waterstones, Wool-
worths or WH Smith. These companies will often sell
goods at Internet Exclusive prices which are considerably
cheaper than those available in their stores. However, not
all internet companies have a high street presence but they
can still oﬀer the same standards of customer service. The
key is to check that the website and the retailer are
genuine by looking for their physical address and
telephone number. Websites that do not provide any
contact details or only use a PO Box address or a mobile
telephone number should generally be avoided.
In the interest of good customer relations, genuine
companies will prominently display their contact details
and actively encourage feedback from their online visitors.
U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 127

In addition, personal recommendations, magazine
reviews and independent comparison websites are also
good ways to ﬁnd out about reputable companies, these
sites include:
www.comparebuyandsave.com
www.compareprices.co.uk
www.dooyoo.co.uk
www.kelkoo.co.uk
www.moneysupermarket.com
www.pricechecker.co.uk
www.pricerunner.co.uk
www.shopsafe.co.uk
www.shopzilla.co.uk
While visiting websites, take care when typing the
company name into your browser’s address bar because
fraudsters have been known to set up websites with
similarly spelt names to attract some internet traﬃc.
These fraudulent sites will resemble genuine websites but
any information submitted to them will be used by the
fraudster to steal from you.
Using credit cards
If you frequently use the internet to shop online then you
might want to consider opening a separate, internet-only
credit card account. Credit cards oﬀer a variety of
additional beneﬁts that are not available when you pay
by cash or cheque. These include:
X Purchase insurance – some cards will insure your
purchases for up to 90 days against lost, stolen or
faulty goods.
128 / P R O TECT I N G Y O U R I D E N TIT Y

X Identity theft assistance – if your card and personal
details are used to fraudulently buy goods or services
then the card company will help to resolve the
situation.
X Free insurance – if you pay for a holiday or buy airline
tickets with your card then most companies will
include free travel insurance with your purchase but
always check the terms and conditions of the policy to
ensure they meet your requirements.
X Loss protection – if your card becomes lost or stolen
then you will not be liable for any purchases provided
that you immediately notify your card provider.
Using a single internet-only card will also allow you to
easily keep track of your online purchases. Whenever you
receive a statement, always check it thoroughly and
immediately report any unauthorised transactions to
your card company. Although statements are usually
sent on a monthly basis, practically all card companies
now allow cardholders to access their account online. This
means that you can regularly check your account to
ensure that your card has not been fraudulently used.
Sign up for extra credit card security
Credit card companies have taken a proactive approach to
internet fraud by developing additional security measures
to protect you when shopping online. Both MasterCard
and Visa have developed secure online password pro-
tected identity checking systems that cardholders can sign
up for. The MasterCard SecureCode and Veriﬁed by Visa
systems work by enabling you to register an additional
password to your card. This password will then be
US ING T HE INTE RNET SAFE LY / 129

required by participating websites when making a
purchase with your card.
This means that even if your card is lost or stolen it cannot
be used without knowing your password. You will often
be given the opportunity to sign up for these schemes
when you reach the payment section at participating sites.
Alternatively, you can either contact the companies direct
or visit Shop Safe Online which provides information
about registering and using the systems.
MasterCard SecureCode
www.mastercard.com
Veriﬁed by Visa
www.visaeurope.com
Shop Safe Online
www.shopsafeonline.org.uk
Print your order
Whenever you buy online always print a copy of your
order. Most retailers will automatically send a receipt
together with a copy of your order to your designated
email address, but it is also worth printing your order
directly from the screen when the transaction is complete.
You should also print copies of the retailer’s terms and
conditions, their delivery conditions and their returns
policy. These will prove extremely useful in the event of
any problems arising with your purchase. This is
particularly important when dealing with international
companies because the more information you have, the
greater your chance of resolving any issues. In some cases,
your bank or building society may be able to intervene on
your behalf but they can only do this if they have access to
all the relevant information.
130 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

Using online auctions
Online auctions can be a great way to get a bargain and
save a lot of money, or sell goods and make money, but
they can also be used by fraudsters to scam unsuspecting
users. However, if you are careful and you follow the rules
then they can also be a lot of fun. Online auctions work in
a similar way to traditional auctions whereby a seller
oﬀers an item for sale and then buyers bid against each
other until the auction closes and the highest bidder wins.
Most auctions often start with a comparatively low
opening price to entice buyers to start bidding. Some
popular online auction websites include:
Auction Auto Trader
www.auctionautotrader.com
Amazon Auctions
http://s1.amazon.co.uk
Ebay
www.ebay.co.uk
CQout
www.cqout.com
QXL
www.qxl.co.uk
Virgin Wines Auctions
www.virginwines.com
Alternatively, a comprehensive list of other online
auctions can be obtained from:
Auction Lot Watch
www.auctionlotwatch.co.uk
Auctions usually last between one and ten days but some
auction companies oﬀer longer periods. Sometimes the
seller will set an undisclosed reserve price that the item
must reach before it can be sold. If there is not a reserve
price then the item will be sold to the highest bidder at the
close of the auction. If online auctions are new to you,
then it is worth reading through the getting started guides
provided by the auction company. These will give you a
U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S AF E L Y / 131

good understanding about how the system works, what
you can and cannot sell, what the rules and regulations
are and what the company can and cannot do if
something goes wrong.
Getting started
Before you can start buying or selling at an auction you
will need to open an account with the auction company.
This will involve creating a log-in name and setting a
password. You will also be asked to conﬁrm your identity,
which is usually done by registering a credit or debit card
with the company. This is a perfectly legitimate process
and the company will never charge anything to your
account without your permission. To help protect your
identity, your log-in name should be diﬀerent from your
email address and as always, your password should be a
combination of numbers and letters in both upper and
lower case. (For further information, see page 67, Using
Passwords.) Once you have opened an account you can
buy or sell as many items as you want.
Trading safely
Although the vast majority of auctions abide by the rules
and operate without problem, there will always be a small
percentage that are not quite what they seem. Auction
companies are keen to protect their users and will
endeavour to remove any potentially fraudulent or illegal
auctions before their users can be taken advantage of.
Nevertheless, some auctions inevitably slip through the
net but there are a number of preventive steps you can
take to help ensure that you are not the victim of a scam.
132 / P R O TECT I N G Y O U R I D E N TIT Y

As a buyer, make sure that you only buy from reputable
sellers by looking through their proﬁle, checking their
rating and examining their transaction history. This will
give you a good idea about the type of seller you are
dealing with. For example, sellers with lots of negative
feedback should always be avoided but sellers with a low
rating are not necessarily bad, they are perhaps just new
to selling.
You could also question the seller by email and gauge
their response. Prompt, courteous replies naturally create
a far better impression than slow or oﬀensive ones. Useful
questions include conﬁrmation of postage costs, delivery
times and acceptable methods of payment. The seller’s
location is also important because overseas sellers can be
diﬃcult to chase if something goes wrong. Similarly, if the
seller is a business then try to conﬁrm that they are
genuine by telephoning or visiting them. As a potential
buyer it is your responsibility to validate the integrity of
the seller by exercising caution and using your judgement.
When you are selling goods always be as truthful as
possible and always include a genuine photograph. These
can usually be uploaded for free and will enable potential
bidders to see exactly what they are buying. As a seller,
never be tempted to accept a low price or close an auction
early, because the best bids often come just as the auction
is about to ﬁnish. After the auction ends you will need to
exchange a few personal details with the buyer or seller
such as a delivery address. Always be wary when sharing
personal information and never give out more informa-
tion that you need to.
US ING T HE INTE RNET SAFE LY / 133

Using PayPal
PayPal is an electronic payment service that is widely
recognised as a safe and immediate way to exchange
money. You do not need to have a PayPal account to pay
with PayPal for an auction but you will need an account to
accept PayPal payments. Opening an account is a free and
relatively simple process, which involves conﬁrming your
identity with a credit or debit card and assigning a bank
account to receive payments. When a buyer uses PayPal to
pay for an auction, the total purchase price is paid to
PayPal which then credits the buyer’s account less a small
processing fee. As soon as the transaction is complete,
both the buyer and the seller are notiﬁed. The seller is
then able to send the goods safe in the knowledge that
payment has been received. If there is a problem with the
auction such as the goods not arriving or not being as
described then, after investigation, PayPal are usually able
to reimburse the buyer in full.
Common online auction scams
Always exercise caution if you see a price that appears too
good to be true because it probably is. Sometimes a seller
will appear to be oﬀering a genuine product at a great
price but after you have paid your money, the goods will
either never arrive or will turn out to be counterfeit.
Conversely, a buyer might try to persuade you to send oﬀ
an item before they have paid for it by promising to pay a
higher price when they receive it. This will be a scam and
you will never see your money, so always ensure that you
receive payment before sending anything oﬀ.
As with banks and other ﬁnancial institutions, auction
companies are frequently targeted by fraudsters with
134 / PROTEC TING YOUR I DE NTIT Y

phishing emails. If you ever receive an email asking you to
click on a link to update your personal details then do not
respond. These emails are sent in their millions to
persuade unsuspecting users to disclose passwords and
other security information which the fraudster uses to
compromise your account. If you think that your account
has been fraudulently used, then immediately report this
to the auction company.
Resolving problems
If you experience any problems when buying or selling at
an auction then report these to the auction company.
They will usually ask to see copies of all correspondence
that has been exchanged so always keep these safe. In
some cases, a breakdown in communication can occur
when emails get blocked by spam ﬁlters so remember to
check your spam folder regularly. Whenever possible, the
auction company will endeavour to resolve any genuine
problems on your behalf.
BANKING ONLINE
With the opportunity to access your account at any time
of the day or night, online banking has become an
extremely popular way to organise your ﬁnances and help
make life a little easier. Millions of people regularly bank
online and as the cost of computing continues to become
less expensive, millions more will follow. Despite these
huge numbers, the risk of becoming a victim to banking
fraud is extremely low. Banks need to ensure that their
systems are completely secure so they are constantly
developing new ways to protect themselves from hackers,
which has meant that their systems are incredibly diﬃcult
to access.
U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 135

Therefore, criminals will use any means of deception in
an attempt to get information directly from you that can
be used to access your account. The most common way to
do this is through phishing which involves sending
millions of random emails that appear to be from genuine
banks or organisations. The emails usually claim that it is
necessary to update your personal security information by
following a link that they helpfully provide. Unfortu-
nately, this only leads to fake websites that the fraudsters
have set up to capture your personal details. For further
information, see page 114, Types of Internet Fraud.
Trojans are another method that criminals can use to
access your computer and personal details. They are types
of computer viruses that, once installed, quietly run in the
background so that you are unaware they are even there.
Some Trojans delete and scramble ﬁles while others can
create a log of your keystrokes that criminals can use to
see your passwords and other personal information. To
reduce the possibility of accidentally allowing a Trojan to
install itself on your computer, ensure that your system
has up-to-date anti-virus software and a ﬁrewall installed.
For more information see Chapter 3, Keeping Your
Computer Secure.
Banking safely
The ﬁrst rule of online banking is to ensure that you only
ever contact your bank directly. Never, under any
circumstances, follow a link from an email or another
website. Although many trusted companies send genuine
links in this way, fraudsters can easily create genuine-
looking websites that can be used to capture your log-in
136 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

details. Although these sites are generally closed down
relatively quickly, fraudsters can get thousands of account
details in the short time they are accessible. It is worth
remembering that your bank will never ask for informa-
tion in this way, so never disclose any personal security
details to anyone you do not trust. If you do need to
update your details then this should be done by directly
entering their internet address into your browser to access
your account.
In order to access your bank account, you will be required
to set up a password and PIN. Sometimes your bank
might provide an initial password and PIN that can be
changed after you log-in. With so many diﬀerent pass-
words to remember it can be tempting to use the same
passwords for all of your accounts. This should be
avoided because if a fraudster discovers your password
they will be able to access all of your accounts. For more
information about creating, storing and protecting pass-
words, see page 67, Using Passwords. Further advice and
guidance about online banking fraud protection is
available from the security section of your bank’s website
and also from Bank Safe Online at www.banksafeon
line.org.uk
USING SECURE WEBSITES
Shopping and banking from a computer can sometimes
create a false sense of security but you still need to remain
vigilant. The ﬁrst step is to ensure that you only use
websites that have a secure server connection. These are
used to encrypt your personal information before it is sent
online, which means that it cannot be intercepted and
U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 137

read by fraudsters. Banks and ﬁnancial companies always
use secure servers but this does not apply to all online
retailers. Websites that do not have a secure server will
usually allow customers to pay over the telephone or to
send payment by post. While the majority of these will be
genuine companies oﬀering genuine goods or services,
always exercise caution when dealing with these compa-
nies. There are two ways to tell if a website is secure.
1. Check the security icon on your computer screen
Depending on your browser this will either be a locked
padlock or an unbroken key. If you are using Internet
Explorer 7 or Firefox 2 then the locked padlock will
usually be found at the top of the screen. Either of
these icons mean that the website is secure but if you
have followed a link from another source, then always
re-type the company name directly into the address
bar. Fraudsters have been known to set up fake
websites with a genuine-looking security icon pasted
onto the page.
2. Check that a secure server is being used
Look at the http at the beginning of the company’s
internet address, this will automatically change to
https when a secure connection is used to make a
purchase. In some internet browsers, the address bar
may also change to green which means that the
website has an additional level of security.
138 / PROT ECTIN G YOUR IDENT ITY

Logging out
When you have ﬁnished using a secure server it is
important that you log out from the website because if
you do not then it is possible that your ﬁnancial details
may be read by others. This is particularly important if
you are using a public or work computer that other people
have access to. In most cases, secure servers will not allow
users to revisit pages by simply clicking on the back
button without resending the information. Sometimes,
however, the page can remain in the computer’s memory
and can still be accessed through the history tab.
Privacy policies
As an additional security measure and particularly before
using a new or unknown website, always check the
company’s privacy policy to see how your personal
information will be secured, handled and stored. The
privacy policy should also provide details about how to
contact the company and how personal information can
be sent without using the internet.
The majority of companies share customer information
with other organisations but under the terms of the Data
Protection Act, you must always be given the opportunity
to decline sharing your details. When submitting your
personal details, most websites will provide a tick box for
you to agree or disagree for your information to be
shared. The golden rule to remember is that if you have
any concerns or reservations about submitting your
personal information then do not send it.
U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 139

TOP TEN TIPS FOR USING THE INTERNET SAFELY
 Never click on links contained in unsolicited emails because you
cannot guarantee exactly where these will take you.
 Only use a computer that you know is secure and never use a
public computer to access any personal, confidential or
sensitive data.
 Beware of phishing and other online threats and always remain
vigilant against them.
 Only shop at secure and trusted websites by looking for the
security icon which will either be a locked padlock or an
unbroken key. Also check that the beginning of the company’s
Internet address changes from http to https which means that
the connection is encrypted and secure. In some Internet
browsers, the address bar may also change to green which
means that the website has an additional level of security.
 Check that the website operates a privacy policy that you are
comfortable with, print the policy and also print their terms
and conditions together with a copy of any orders that you
make.
 Never disclose personal information in chat rooms, forums or
any social networking sites because these details can be
fraudulently used against you.
 Consider using an internet-only credit card for online
purchases. This will make checking your internet purchases
easier and will reduce the chance of your card details being
stolen.
 Sign up for MasterCard SecureCode or Verified by Visa to
protect your online purchases with an additional password
during the checkout process.
 Disable the auto complete function and uncheck the
Remember My Details box.
 Always use a disposable email address when surfing the
internet and choose an obscure name that will be difficult for
spammers to guess.

VICTIMS’ STORIES
Online auction identity fraud
Eventhough Kellyhad never boughtor sold goods at an
online auction, her identityhad stillbeen used to
fraudulentlyselljewellery.Theidentity theftonlycame to
light when Kellyreceived athreateningletter from an
Americanlaw f|rminstructing her to refund theirclient
»450 for a necklace that had been bought in good faith but
wasin factcounterfeit.The client had appointed thelaw f|rm
afterclaiming to have contacted Kellyon numerous occasions
and demandingafullrefund but without success.Theletter
referred to specif|c emails andletters that were alleged to
have been exchanged between Kellyand theirclient.
Kellycontacted thelaw f|rmbutthey were reluctantto
believe that shewas not involved with sellingcounterfeit
jewellery.She also contacted the auction company but
because she did not have an account withthemthey were
not veryhelpful.Eventually, shewas able to prove that she
was elsewherewhen some ofthe correspondencewas
exchanged and thelaw f|rm accepted that she hadnothing to
dowiththejewellery.The matter is now being dealt with by
the online auction company who have since closed the
account and apologised for theinconvenience caused.
Financial identity fraud (bin raiding)
When Lewisripped up and threwawayhis old bank
statements, itdid notoccur to himthattheycould be used to
stealhis money butthat is exactly what happened.Three
weekslater he discovered that »7,000 had beentransferred
fromhis account aftercriminalsinitiallycontacted his bank
U S I N G T H E I N T E R N E T S A F E L Y / 141

and arranged for his mailingaddress to be changed.They
also arranged for a new debitcard and PIN number to be
senttothe newaddress sotheycould withdraw money from
cash machines.Fortunately,Lewis noticed thewithdrawals
andimmediatelyreportedittothe bank whichinvestigated
andreturned his moneyafter threeweeks.
Three monthslater Lewis was contacted byanother bank
who hadreceived an applicationto open an online account in
his name. Althoughthe applicationwasrefused because a
di¡erent address was onthe form, this shows thatonce
criminals have got someone’s bankdetails they willcontinue
using themuntiltheyhave fullyexhausted everyavenue.
Lewis now uses a shredder for anyletters, statements and
documents that have his name and address on.He also
monitors his accounts on a daily basis andregularlychecks
his credit reportto seeif any unknown searches have been
made.
142 / PR OT ECTI NG YOUR IDEN TITY

5
IdentifyingifYou Are aVictim
As identity fraud continues to increase, it is more
important than ever to remain vigilant and to be able to
identify immediately if you become, or are at risk of
becoming, a victim. This can be a diﬃcult task because,
by their very nature, identity fraudsters need to remain
undetected for as long as possible. However, there are a
variety of circumstances and situations which could
increase the chance of your becoming a victim. These
include:
X lost or stolen personal documents
X the disappearance of mail
X irregular and unauthorised transactions
X if your credit rating has been reduced.
LOST OR STOLEN PERSONAL DOCUMENTS
If any of your personal documents become lost or stolen
then you are more susceptible to identity fraud. As
discussed in Keeping Your Personal Documents Secure,
see page 44, these documents include your passport, birth
certiﬁcate, driving licence, marriage certiﬁcate, share
certiﬁcates, vehicle registration document, insurance
documents and utility bills. A fraudster only needs a
few details from some of these documents to assume your
identity and steal from you, so it is important to ensure
143

they are always kept safe and secure. The best way to do
this is to use a combination of a secure cabinet, a lockable
drawer and a home safe to store them and never to carry
more personal documents than are absolutely necessary.
DISAPPEARANCE OF MAIL
If you suspect that your post has been compromised in any
way, then you must report this to Royal Mail Customer
Care on 0845 774 0740. They will be able to advise you if a
mail redirection has been set up on your address without
your knowledge. You will also be able to report the theft
or loss of mail but before you can do this you need to be
sure that your post has been sent. For example, bank
statements, credit card statements and utility bills are
routinely sent on speciﬁc dates but do you know when
these are due? It is a good idea to keep a separate note of
when these are expected so that you will immediately be
aware of any problems.
If you share a communal letterbox, then the possibility of
post becoming lost or stolen is greatly increased. To
reduce this, there are a few preventive measures you can
take. For example, try to collect your mail as soon after it
has been delivered as possible. In most cases this will not
always possible, so it may be worth installing a separate
lockable letterbox to safely secure your post. These are
relatively inexpensive but are worth every penny for the
peace of mind they provide. Alternatively, consider
renting a PO Box or arranging to have your post held
at your local delivery oﬃce for you to collect. For further
information, contact the Royal Mail Sales Centre on 0845
795 0950.
144 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY

I D E N T I F Y I N G I F YO U AR E A V I C T I M / 145
IRREGULAR AND UNAUTHORISED
TRANSACTIONS
As previously discussed, identity fraud victims will often
remain unaware that they have been targeted until they
receive a bill, invoice or receipt for goods or services that
they have not purchased. Therefore, it is important to
regularly check your bank or credit card statements for
any irregular and unauthorised transactions that you do
not recognise. Fortunately, the advent of online access to
bank and credit card accounts means that these can be
checked on a daily basis without the need to wait for a
monthly statement to arrive. This also means that you can
identify and potentially rectify any problems before they
become serious issues that may aﬀect your identity or your
credit rating.
YOUR CREDIT RATING HAS BEEN REDUCED
Your credit rating is one of the most important pieces of
personal information you have because without it you will
be unable to get credit cards, loans or mortgages. When
your identity has been compromised, fraudsters will often
use your personal details to apply for credit that they have
no intention of repaying. This will obviously aﬀect your
credit rating but in most cases you will not realise this has
happened until you receive letters from solicitors or debt
collectors for debts that are not yours. Alternatively, you
may also be refused credit despite having a good credit
rating. The best way to check this is to obtain a copy of
your credit report.
Obtaining your credit report
Your credit report contains a detailed account of your

146 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY
credit history including your repayments and previous
credit applications. They also include any searches made
by credit reference agencies to determine your credit
rating, which can be useful if you do not recognise their
origin. Your credit report can be obtained from one the
three main credit reference agencies:
Callcredit
One Park Lane, Leeds, LS3 1EP
Automated Helpline: 0870 060 1414
Tel: 0113 244 1555
Fax: 0113 234 0050
www.callcredit.co.uk
Equifax
Credit File Advice Centre, PO Box 1140, Bradford, BD1
5US
Tel: 0870 010 0583
www.equifax.co.uk
Experian
Consumer Help Service, PO Box 9000, Nottingham,
NG80 7WP
Tel: 0870 241 6212
www.experian.co.uk
There will be a nominal charge for your report, usually
about £2, but you will be able to see immediately if your
identity has been fraudulently used to set up any loans or
credit accounts. When you receive your report, carefully
review the contents and immediately close any
unauthorised accounts. You will also be able to stop

IDEN TIFYING IF YOU ARE A VICTIM / 147
any pending applications, rectify your credit report and
prevent fraudsters from continuing to use your identity.
Depending on the nature of the entry to be rectiﬁed, this
can be an arduous and time-consuming process but at
least with your report as a starting point, you can contact
the relevant companies to rectify your ﬁle. If you do need
to make any changes, then make sure that you keep
accurate and detailed records of all correspondence that
is exchanged. This will help to resolve any issues that may
occur at a later date.
In addition to supplying your credit ﬁle, these agencies
also oﬀer a range of subscription services that will
monitor your report and contact you if there are any
changes. Some services permit unlimited access to your
report and will also send regular identity theft news
together with advice and tips about how to protect
yourself. For further information see:
MyCallcredit E-Alerts
www.mycallcredit.com
Equifax Credit Watch
www.equifax.co.uk
Experian CreditExpert
www.experian.co.uk
TOP TEN TIPS TOIDENTIFY IF YOUARE AVICTIM
 Invoices, receipts or statements are personally addressed to
you for goods or services that you did not order or request.
 You receive letters from solicitors or debt recovery agencies
for debts that are not yours.
 Confirmation letters are sent from companies referring to
goods, services or accounts that you have not applied for.

148 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY
 Review your credit report from one of the three credit
reference agencies, Callcredit, Equifax or Experian, notify them
of any new accounts or searches that you do not recognise
and immediately close any compromised accounts.
 Carefully check your bank and card statements for any unusual
or irregular transactions that you do not recognise and
immediately report these to the respective company or
organisation concerned.
 Important identity related post such as utility bills, bank
statements, passports or driving licences have been lost or
stolen.
 You are refused credit despite having a good credit rating or
you apply for state benefits and are told that you are already
claiming.
 Your post does not arrive. If this happens, contact Royal Mail
to find out if a redirection notice has been issued against your
address without your knowledge or permission.
 You suspect that your rubbish has been stolen or tampered
with.
 Prepare an action plan of who to contact if your identity
becomes compromised and keep this together with a list of
emergency contact numbers.
VICTIMS’ STORIES
CV identity fraud
When Joshua’s car was brokeninto he noticed that besides
hisradio,CDs and an expensive coat, the thieves alsotook a
copyof his CV.He reported the thefttothe police butdid
not mentionthe CV because he thought it wasjust a piece
of paper.Two monthslater, one ofthe referees fromhis CV

IDENT IFYING IF Y OU ARE A VICTIM / 149
received a letter from a largeinsurance companyrequesting
a reference for Joshua.Fortunately, the referee knew that
Joshua had not applied for a job atthe companyand declined
the request.
The thief had used Joshua’s CV to fraudulentlyapply for a
job andif he had been successfulthen he could have used
payslips to apply forcreditorcould have stolen customer
accountdetails.Joshua has since applied for a copyof his
credit reference f|le andregularlychecks this to seeif any
credit applications have been madein his name.
Postal identity fraud
When Daniel and Laura moved to another partofthe
country theyarranged to have their post redirected,
notif|ed thelocal authority thatthey would not beliable for
counciltax and had their namesremoved fromthe electoral
roll. Atf|rst everythingappeared to be f|ne but almost as
soon as the redirection ended the frauds began.The f|rst
instancewas when Laura received atelephone call fromher
previous neighbour who had accepted a mail orderdelivery
in her name.Laura knew that she hadnotordered the
goods so she contacted the companyand subsequently
stopped a second order frombeing despatched.To prove she
hadmoved,Laura had to send the companya copyof her
birth certif|cate together with a letter fromher solicitor.
Laurawas advised to contact a credit reference agency,
order a copyof hercredit report and check for anything
that she did not recognise.She noticed another mail order
account with anothercompany who regularlysent her
brochures eventhough she hadneverordered anything

fromthem.The credit reference agencyremoved the
fraudulent accounts and added a password-protected notice
to her f|le.Nowcompanies can onlysearch Laura’s f|leif she
authorises themwith her password.Laura has since
registered withthe mailpreference service to stop any
direct mailbeing delivered to her previous addressin her
name.
150 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY

6
Reporting Identity Fraud
If you have, or suspect you may have, become a victim of
identity fraud then it is important to act quickly to reduce
the extent of the fraud. The ﬁrst thing to remember is not
to panic but to systematically contact each ﬁnancial,
utility and identity-related company that you deal with.
This is why it is a good idea to keep a list of emergency
contact numbers safely locked away for quick reference.
The order in which you contact these companies will
depend on the type of fraud that you have suﬀered. If you
have Identity Fraud Insurance (see page 54, Identity
Fraud Protection Services), then contact your insurance
provider ﬁrst. They will immediately assign an identity
fraud expert who will help you to resolve the situation.
CONTACTING THE POLICE
Following discussions between the ﬁnancial industry and
the Association of Chief Police Oﬃcers (ACPO), the
Home Oﬃce has introduced a new reporting procedure
for identity fraud involving online banking, cheques and
credit or debit cards. With eﬀect from 1 April 2007, it has
been mutually agreed that in the ﬁrst instance these types
of frauds should be reported to the ﬁnancial organisa-
tions involved and not directly to the police. The reason
for this is to simplify the initial investigation and
151

reporting process by reducing the level of bureaucracy
involved in the recording of fraud. Under this new
procedure, ﬁnancial organisations are responsible for
undertaking further investigation and, if necessary,
reporting the fraud to the police on your behalf.
However, if your personal documents, credit cards or
other identity-related items have been stolen, report the
theft to the police and request a crime reference number.
This number may be necessary to convince companies
that your details have been fraudulently used to open
accounts or apply for credit and other services in your
name.
CONTACTING OTHER ORGANISATIONS
Regardless of which identity-related fraud you have been
a victim of, as a precautionary measure it is advisable to
notify every company and organisation that you have an
account with. These include:
X Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA)
X Identity and Passport Service (IPS)
X banks and building societies
X credit card companies
X utility providers (gas, electric, water, telephone)
X insurance companies
X Royal Mail.
Where possible you should cancel or freeze as many
accounts as possible until the situation is fully resolved. If
your credit or debit cards are protected (see page 35,
Using Credit and Debit Cards Safely) then notify your
152 / PR OT ECTI NG YOUR IDEN TITY

REPORT ING IDENTI TY FRAUD / 153
insurance provider as soon as possible. They will arrange
to cancel your cards and order replacements with new
account numbers.
KEEPING ACCURATE RECORDS
Reclaiming your identity and restoring your ﬁnancial
status can be a lengthy, time-consuming and emotionally
draining experience. To help make this process a little less
stressful it is important to keep detailed and accurate
records. One of the best ways to do this is to create a
comprehensive diary containing a full account of every-
thing you did and everyone you wrote or spoke to. These
records will be particularly useful to support your case if
legal action is taken because you will be expected to prove
that you are not responsible or liable for any accounts that
have been fraudulently set up in your name. You will also
need to prove what you have done to sort the problem out
and how much time and money it has cost, because you
may be able to recover these expenses.
When communicating with companies and organisations
it is important to create a veriﬁable paper trail that can
categorically prove what was said to whom and when.
Emails are useful for this but they can be easily altered so
they are not always relied upon in a court of law.
Similarly, proving what was said in a telephone conversa-
tion can also be diﬃcult. The most reliable way to
exchange and conﬁrm information is by letter, which
should be sent by registered mail and copies should
always be kept. In circumstances when an email or
telephone call has been used to relay important informa-
tion, ask the person concerned to conﬁrm what they have

154 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY
said by letter. If this is not possible, then write to them
and conﬁrm your understanding of what was discussed
and agreed.
PROTECTIVE REGISTRATION FROM CIFAS
The Credit Industry Fraud Advisory Scheme (CIFAS) is
a not-for-proﬁt organisation who are dedicated to the
prevention of ﬁnancial crime. CIFAS do not provide a
credit reference service but their information is used by
fraud prevention agencies and credit reference agencies
when fraudulent activity is suspected. They also exchange
information about innocent fraud victims. So if your
personal identiﬁcation documents are stolen or if your
identity has been fraudulently used then your personal
details can be registered with the CIFAS Protective
Registration service.
This service is provided by Equifax who will, for a
nominal fee, assign a ‘Category 0’ against your name and
address in their database which means that when CIFAS
members conduct a credit search, they will see ‘CIFAS –
Do Not Reject – Refer For Validation’ on your credit
reference ﬁle. They will then need to contact Equifax to
ascertain the reason for the entry and will request that
further and more thorough identity checks are conducted
before approval is granted.
Unless you write to Equifax to extend or cancel the
service, Protective Registration will remain on your ﬁle
for at least a year from the date of the most recent
fraudulent activity. During this time you may ﬁnd it takes
longer for companies to process your credit applications

but this is good because it proves that the service is
working. This service can also be used by a relative or
executor of a deceased person if there is reason to believe
that their identity could by used by a criminal. When you
apply to Equifax for the CIFAS Protective Registration
service you will be asked to provide the following details:
X your full name
X your date of birth
X your full address and postcode
X the names and dates of birth of anyone else living at
your address
X your home and work telephone numbers
X a crime reference number if applicable
X details about why you want a Protective Registration
X a copy of the death certiﬁcate if you are applying to
protect the identity of a deceased person.
For further information, contact:
CIFAS Protective Registration Service
PO Box 1141, Bradford, BD1 5UR
Tel: 0870 010 2091
Email: protective.registrationuk@equifax.com
Equifax
Credit File Advice Centre, PO Box 1140, Bradford, BD1
5US
Tel: 0870 010 0583
www.equifax.co.uk
REPORT ING IDENTI TY FRAUD / 155

This page intentionally left blank 

Jargon Buster
419 Scam A type of advance fee fraud that originates
from West Africa and is named after the section of the
Nigerian legal code that relates to the crime.
802.11 A standard for wireless networks that ensures
compatibility between diﬀerent manufacturers.
Access point A wireless hub that links together diﬀerent
802.11 network cards to create an infrastructure
wireless network.
Ad-hoc network A wireless network that connects com-
puters on a peer-to-peer basis instead of routing traﬃc
through a central access point.
Advance fee fraud Victims pay an upfront fee with the
hope of receiving a large sum of money later.
Adware A type of spyware that causes unwanted adverts
to be displayed on a computer.
Anti-virus software Software designed to detect and
prevent known viruses.
Attachments Files, programs or documents that are
attached to an email.
Back door A software loophole used by hackers to access
a computer.
Bin raiding When criminals raid rubbish bins to gather
personal information.
Biometric veriﬁcation The use of ﬁngerprints and irises as
a means of identity authentication.
157

BIOS and Boot Passwords Passwords that prevent
unauthorised users from starting a computer.
Boot The process of starting up or resetting a computer.
Browser A program used to access the internet.
Card identity theft When criminals use someone’s identity
to successfully apply for new credit cards or take over
their existing accounts.
Card-not-present (CNP) fraud This occurs when a card is
not required at the point of sale to complete a
purchase such as through mail order, over the
telephone or online.
Card trapping devices These thin devices are inserted into
the card slot of cash machines to trap credit and debit
cards.
Chat rooms Online discussion groups where users can chat
in real time.
Cookie A small computer program used to record and
relay information to the originating website about the
user.
Corporate identity crime This describes the three main
types of corporate identity related crimes which are
corporate identity theft, creating a false corporate
identity and committing corporate identity fraud.
Corporate identity theft When a genuine business is cloned
and its name and credit accounts are used to
fraudulently obtain goods, services and money which
is known as corporate identity fraud.
Counterfeit and cloned card fraud This occurs when data
from the magnetic strip of a genuine card is
electronically copied (skimmed) onto a new fake
blank card without the cardholder’s knowledge.
158 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y

JARGON BUSTER / 159
Cracker A hacker who uses their skills for malicious
purposes.
Cracking The act of uncovering passwords.
Data Protection Act This Act sets the legal framework for
dealing with private information and data in the UK.
Decryption Converting encrypted data back into its
original form.
Desktop ﬁrewall An individual ﬁrewall that works on a
speciﬁc computer.
Download Transferring a ﬁle from one computer to
another.
Email attachment See Attachments.
Email ﬁlter Software that scans and ﬁlters incoming
emails.
Encryption Converting data into an unreadable form.
False corporate identity This is created when ﬁctitious
details are used to set up and register a business that
does not exist.
False identity theft This is an identity that has never
existed before, it can be created when a completely
new identity is produced from counterfeit documents
or when genuine documents are altered to create a
ﬁctitious identity.
File sharing Exchanging ﬁles over the internet with other
users.
Fingerprint recognition See biometric veriﬁcation.
Firewall This prevents unauthorised access to a computer
or network.
Freeloading When unauthorised users use your wireless
connection to access the internet.
Hacker Someone who uses their technical expertise to
break into computer systems.

160 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y
Hardware ﬁrewall Operates as a standalone device instead
of using a software program on a computer.
Identity crime Describes the three main types of identity
related crime that are committed against private
individuals, identity theft, creating a false identity
and committing identity fraud.
Identity fraud Describes crimes committed whereby a
false or existing identity is used to fraudulently obtain
goods or services.
Identity theft Occurs when criminals acquire enough of
someone’s personal details to either assume their
entire identity or to create a new and ﬁctitious identity
based on their details.
Javascript A type of programming language used to make
web pages more interactive.
Key logger A computer program or device used to record
a user’s keystrokes to capture their personal details.
Lost or stolen card fraud When a criminal poses as
someone else to obtain goods and services with a lost
or stolen card.
MAC ﬁltering Uses the unique ID (MAC) address of a
network card to permit access to a computer network.
Macro A small program that automates repetitive tasks.
Macro virus A virus that is released when a macro is
enabled.
MasterCard SecureCode An online security system that
enables an additional password to be assigned to a
credit card, which will be required by participating
websites when making a purchase.
Network A series of computers that are connected to one
another.

J AR GON BUST ER / 161
Padlock A symbol in a web browser window to indicate
that an encrypted connection is being used to
communicate with a website and that the site has a
valid security certiﬁcate.
Patch A software update to improve the performance of a
program.
Peer-to-peer (P2P) A network to share and exchange ﬁles
in which each computer can be both a server and a
client.
Pharming When the DNS software of a website is altered
so that users are redirected to a fake website even
though they have entered the correct internet address
in their browser.
Phishing Email recipients are encouraged to visit and
enter usernames, passwords and other personal details
at a fraudulent website.
Pop-up A small window that opens over a web page to
display advertisements.
Postal interception card fraud Occurs when a new card is
stolen in transit before the card company has been
able to deliver it.
Root kit A set of tools and programs used by hackers to
gain access to a computer and control it.
Router A device that controls the exchange of information
within a network.
Server A computer that provides a service to other
computers and programs over a network.
Shoulder surﬁng The use of observation techniques to see
your PIN, password or other personal details.
Skimming Swiping the magnetic strip of a credit or debit
card through a machine to capture the account
information.

162 / PR OT ECTI NG YOUR IDEN TITY
Smurﬁng Processing multiple ﬁnancial transactions that
are just below the threshold level to be reported to the
authorities.
Social engineering A collection of techniques used by
fraudsters to persuade people to divulge personal and
conﬁdential information.
Software ﬁrewall Runs on a computer as a program, as
opposed to a hardware ﬁrewall that is a separate
standalone device.
Spam Unsolicited junk emails.
Spoof email Fraudulent emails that appear to come from
one user but have been sent by another.
Spyware Unwanted software programs that covertly
monitor a user’s activity, scan for personal informa-
tion or enable outsiders to remotely control a
computer.
SSID The Service Set Identiﬁer is the name given to a
wireless network that enables other users to ﬁnd it.
Strong passwords These use the entire keyboard to create
a random string of upper and lower case letters,
numbers, keyboard symbols and punctuation marks.
Trojan horse A computer program that appears to
perform one function but in reality performs another
such as releasing a virus or installing a back door
program for hackers.
Veriﬁed by Visa An online security system that enables an
additional password to be assigned to a credit card,
which will be required by participating websites when
making a purchase.
Virus Malicious programs that are designed to replicate
themselves and spread from computer to computer by
infecting other ﬁles, see Trojan horse and Spyware.

JARGON BUSTER / 163
Virus signature A ﬁngerprint that is used by anti-virus
software to identify and detect an infection.
WEP Wired Equivalent Privacy is a type of wireless
encryption that is usually found on older network
cards. WEP is generally considered the weakest type
of security because it uses numerical passwords which
are relatively easy to crack.

This page intentionally left blank 

Useful Addresses
Banking advice
APACS (The UK Payments Association), Mercury
House, Triton Court, 14 Finsbury Square, London,
EC2A 1LQ. Tel: 020 7711. 6200. Fax: 020 7256 5527.
Email: corpcomms@apas.org.uk www.apacs.org.uk
Bank Safe Online, c/o APACS, Mercury House, Triton
Court, 14 Finsbury Square, London, EC2A 1LQ.
www.banksafeonline.org.uk
British Bankers’ Association (BBA), Pinners Hall, 105–
108 Old Broad Street, London, EC2N 1EX.
Email: info@bba.org.uk www.bba.org.uk
Financial Services Authority (FSA), 25 The North
Colonnade, Canary Wharf, London, E14 5HS.
www.fsa.gov.uk
Credit reports and reference agencies
Callcredit Limited, One Park Lane, Leeds, LS3 1EP.
Automated Helpline: 0870 060 1414. Tel: 0113 244
1555. Fax: 0113 234 0050. www.callcredit.co.uk
www.mycallcredit.com
Check My File, Credit Reporting Agency Limited, 13
High Cross, Truro, TR1 2AJ. Tel: 0800 612 0421.
Fax: 0870 094 0069. www.checkmyﬁle.com
Equifax, Credit File Advice Centre, PO Box 1140,
Bradford, BD1 5US. Tel: 0870 010 0583.
www.equifax.co.uk
165

Experian, Consumer Help Service, PO Box 9000,
Nottingham, NG80 7WP. Tel: 0870 241 6212.
www.experian.co.uk
Card protection services
Card Protection Plan (CPP), Holgate Park, York, YO26
4GA. Tel: 0870 600 3022 (Card Protection). Tel: 0870
121 9187 (Identity Protection). www.cpp.co.uk
Sentinel Card Protection, FREEPOST PT391, Ports-
mouth, PO3 5BR. Tel: 0800 414 717.
www.sentinelcardprotection.com
Identity fraud protection advice
CardWatch, c/o APACS, Mercury House, Triton Court,
14 Finsbury Square, London, EC2A 1LQ.
www.cardwatch.org.uk
CIFAS (Credit Industry Fraud Advisory Scheme), 4th
Floor, Central House, 14 Upper Woburn Place,
London, WC1H 0NN. www.cifas.org.uk
CIFAS Protective Registration Service (provided by
Equifax). Tel: 0870 010 2091.
Email: protective.registrationuk@equifax.com
Reporting identity fraud
City of London Police Fraud Desk. Tel: 020 7601 6999.
Email: frauddesk@cityoflondon.pnn.police.uk
Crimestoppers, Apollo House, 66A London Road,
Morden, Surrey, SM4 5BE. Tel: 0800 555 111.
www.crimestoppers-uk.org
Government agencies and departments
Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency, DVLA, Swansea,
SA6 7JL. Tel: 0870 240 0009. www.dvla.gov.uk
166 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENTIT Y

Identity and Passport Service (IPS). Tel: 0870 521 0410.
www.passport.gov.uk
The Information Commissioner’s Oﬃce (ICO), Wycliﬀe
House, Water Lane, Wilmslow, Cheshire, SK9 5AF.
Tel: 0845 630 6060 or 01625 545745. Fax: 01625
524510. Email: mail@ico.gsi.gove.uk www.ico.gov.uk
Reducing sales and marketing information
The Bereavement Register, Freepost, SEA8240, Seven-
oaks, TN13 1YR. Tel: 0870 600 7222. Fax: 0870 400
5644. Email: help@the-bereavement-register.com
www.the-bereavement-register.org.uk
Deceased Preference Service (DPS), Windhill Manor,
Leeds Road, Shipley, BD18 1BP. Tel: 0800 068 4433.
www.deceasedpreferenceservice.co.uk
Email Preference Service (eMPS) www.dmachoice.org/
EMPS/
Fax Preference Service (FPS), 3rd Floor, DMA House, 70
Margaret Street, London, W1W 8SS. FPS Registra-
tion Line: 0845 070 0702. Tel: 0845 703 4599. Fax: 020
7323 4226. Email: fps@dma.org.uk
www.fpsonline.org.uk
Mail Preference Service (MPS), FREEPOST 29
LON20771, London, W1E 0ZT. MPS Registration
Line: 0845 703 4599. Tel: 0845 703 4599. Fax: 020 7323
4226. Email: mps@dma.org.uk
www.mpsonline.org.uk
Telephone Preference Service (TPS), 3rd Floor, DMA
House, 70 Margaret Street, London, W1W 8SS. TPS
Registration Line: 0845 070 0707. Tel: 0845 703 4599.
Fax: 020 7323 4226. Email: tps@dma.org.uk
www.tpsonline.org.uk
U S E F U L A D DR ES S E S / 167

Identity fraud protection services
Formations House, 29 Harley Street, London, W1G 9QR.
Tel: 0207 016 2727. Fax: 020 7637 0419.
Email: info@formationshouse.com
www.formationshouse.com
Identitycare. Tel: 0870 606 4050 www.identitycare.co.uk
ID Theft Protect, PO Box 879, Peterborough, PE1 9BU.
Tel: 0870 766 9234. www.id-protect.co.uk
Protect My Company, Matthew House, Matthew Street,
Dunstable, LU6 1SD. Tel: 0845 400 0777.
Email: Admin@ProtectMyCompany.co.uk
www.protectmycompany.co.uk
Royal Mail Customer Enquiry, Customer Services, Free-
post, RM1 1AA. Tel: 0845 774 0740.
www.royalmail.com
Online shopping
Shopsafe, c/o Edward Robertson, 1 Bongate, Darlington,
DL3 7JA. Tel: 01325 489 3000.
Email: info@shopsafe.co.uk www.shopsafe.co.uk
168 / P ROTECT ING Y OUR IDEN TITY

Useful Identify Fraud
ProtectionWebsites
Advice UK – www.adviceuk.org.uk
A network of advice providing organisations.
Advicenow – www.advicenow.org.uk
Advicenow is an independent, not-for-proﬁt website
providing accurate, up-to-date information on rights
and legal issues.
Anti-Phishing Working Group – www.antiphishing.org
Cross-industry global group supporting those tackling
phishing and pharming by providing advice on anti-
phishing controls and information on current trends.
APACS – www.apacs.org.uk
Association for Payment Clearing Services (APACS),
is the UK trade association for the banking industry
that provides a forum for its members to come
together on non-competitive issues relating to the
payments industry. They also work with police,
retailers, cardholders and organisations to ﬁght
payment card fraud.
Association of Chief Police Oﬃcers (ACPO) –
www.acpo.police.uk
ACPO works in equal and active partnership with
Government and the Association of Police Authorities
169

to lead and coordinate the direction and development
of the police service in England, Wales and Northern
Ireland.
Bank Safe Online – www.banksafeonline.org.uk
Bank Safe Online is run by APACS on behalf of its
member banks to help online banking customers stay
safe online.
British Bankers’ Association – www.bba.org.uk
The British Bankers’ Association is the leading trade
association in the UK ﬁnancial services industry. Its
220 members, banks and other ﬁnancial services ﬁrms,
fund its not-for-proﬁt activities.
Card Watch – www.cardwatch.org.uk
Card Watch raises awareness about all types of plastic
card fraud in the UK and provides information to
prevent fraudulent use of credit cards, debit cards,
cheque guarantee cards and charge cards.
Check My File – www.checkmyﬁle.com
Check My File can provide your credit score, credit
rating and neighbourhood data for free, plus online
credit reports, expert credit ﬁle analysis and monitor-
ing, vehicle checks and pension checks.
Citizens Advice – www.adviceguide.org.uk
An online version of the Citizens Advice Bureau
providing independent advice on your rights.
Consumer Direct – www.consumerdirect.gov.uk
A government funded telephone and online advice
service operated by the Oﬃce of Fair Trading (OFT)
providing clear, practical advice on a wide range of
consumer issues. The advice is free and you can call
0845 404 0506 as many times as you need to.
170 / P ROTECT ING YOUR IDE NTITY

Dedicated Cheque and Plastic Crime Unit (DCPCU) –
www.dcpcu.org.uk
The DCPCU is sponsored by APACS on behalf of the
banking industry. It comprises a group of specialist
police oﬃcers and civilian staﬀto tackle the organised
gangs responsible for much of the UK’s card and
cheque fraud.
Get Safe Online – www.getsafeonline.org.uk
Protect yourself from identity thieves, viruses, phish-
ing and other internet threats with expert advice from
the British Government, the Serious and Organised
Crime Agency and industry specialists will help you
guard against online dangers.
HM Revenue & Customs – www.hmrc.gov.uk
HMRC is responsible for collecting the bulk of tax
revenue, as well as paying Tax Credits and Child
Beneﬁts, and strengthening the UK’s frontiers.
Home Oﬃce – www.homeoﬃce.gov.uk
Provides advice and information about the work of
the Home Oﬃce and also provides links to other
government departments.
Home Oﬃce Identity Fraud Steering Committee –
www.identitytheft.org.uk
A collaboration between UK ﬁnancial bodies, govern-
ment and the police to combat the threat of identity
theft.
How To Wipe Your Hard Drive –
www.howtowipeyourdrive.com
Useful advice about safely removing data from your
Windows, Macintosh or Unix hard drive.
Identity and Passport Service – www.ips.gov.uk
The oﬃcial website for the Home Oﬃce department
USEFUL IDENT ITY FRAUD P ROTECT ION WE BSITE S / 171

responsible for issuing UK passports and ID cards.
Foreign and Commonwealth Oﬃce – www.fco.gov.uk
British government department responsible for over-
seas relations and foreign aﬀairs through its head-
quarters in London and its Embassies, High
Commissions and Consulates throughout the world.
Financial Service Authority (FSA) – www.fsa.gov.uk
Regulator of all providers of ﬁnancial services in the
UK, the Bank of England retains responsibility for
systemic risk.
Fraud Watch International –
www.fraudwatchinternational.com
Combines anti-phishing education, monitoring and
detection services and preventative software solutions
to consumers and corporate clients.
Microsoft Security At Home –
www.microsoft.com/security/protect
Useful help and advice to protect your computer,
yourself and your family from online threats and
inappropriate content and contact.
Miller Smiles – www.millersmiles.co.uk
A large archive of spoof email and phishing scams.
Oﬃce of Fair Trading (OFT) – www.oft.gov.uk
The OFT enforces UK consumer protection law and
competition law, reviews proposed mergers and
conducts market studies.
Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA) –
www.soca.gov.uk
Non-geographic police unit responsible for under-
taking pro-active operations against serious and
organised crime.
172 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENT ITY

Spamfo – www.spamfo.co.uk
Organised collection of news, reviews and links about
unsolicited bulk email (spam).
Shop Safe Online – www.shopsafeonline.org.uk
Provides information about registering and using
MasterCard SecureCode and Veriﬁed by Visa.
Shopsafe UK – www.shopsafe.co.uk
A UK online shopping directory listing secure UK
online shops so you can shop on the internet with
conﬁdence. The site also includes special oﬀers, gift
ideas and safe shopping advice.
Stay Safe Online – www.staysafeonline.info
Provides free and non-technical cyber security and
safety resources to the public, so consumers, small
businesses and educators have the know-how to avoid
cyber crime.
Trading Standards Central –
www.tradingstandards.gov.uk
A one-stop shop for consumer protection information
in the UK. The site is supported and maintained by
the Trading Standards Institute (TSI).
U SEF U L I DEN T I T Y F R AUD P ROT E C T I ON W E B S I T E S / 173

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
advance Fee and 419
frauds, 115, 118–19,
121, 156
adware, 79, 87–8, 104,
105–6, 156
anti–virus, 81, 83–8, 90,
103, 105–7, 111, 136,
156, 162
Association for Payment
Clearing Services
(APACS), 22, 24–5, 39,
44, 163–4, 167–9
Association of Chief
Police Oﬃcers (ACPO),
151, 167
Bebo, 33
bereavement register, 6,
165
bin raiding, 49, 141, 156
Callcredit, 57, 146
card identity theft, 39–40,
61, 157
card trapping, 42–4, 157
card watch, 25, 44, 168
Card-Not-Present (CNP)
Fraud, 39–40, 157
cash machine fraud, 36,
41–2
Chip and PIN, 23, 35, 40–
2, 51
CIFAS, 22, 24, 54, 56, 59,
63, 154–5, 164
CIFAS Protective
Registration, 54, 56,
59, 62–3, 154–5, 164
companies house, 7–11, 28
computer networks, 94,
100
cookies, 76–7, 110
corporate identity
crime, 7, 157
fraud, 7–8, 27 157
theft, 7–8, 20, 157
credit cards, 1, 3–5, 8, 13,
20, 25, 27, 40, 44, 51,
62, 80, 113, 128, 145,
175

152, 157, 168
Criminal Justice Act 2003,
16
Data Protection Act, 126,
139, 158
Deceased Preference
Service, 6, 165
Dedicated Cheque and
Plastic Crime Unit
(DCPCU), 23, 25, 44,
169
Driver and Vehicle
Licensing Agency
(DVLA), 5, 18, 21–4,
152, 164
Email Preference Service
(eMPS), 31–2, 61, 92–
3, 165
Equifax, 24, 58–9, 146–8,
154–5, 163–4
Experian, 24, 58–9, 146–8,
164
Facebook, 33
fake online shop fraud,
115, 125
false corporate identity, 7–
8, 157–8
false identity theft, 3, 158
Fax Preference Service
(FPS), 31–2, 61, 165
ﬁle shredders, 108–9
ﬁrewall, 64, 79–84, 96, 98,
100–1, 103–4, 111, 136,
158–9, 161
Fraud Act 2006, 19
Fraud Reduction Work
Programme, 15
Friends Reunited, 33
Garlik DataPatrol, 54, 56,
60
Home Oﬃce Identity
Fraud Steering
Committee, 2, 15, 23,
169
Home Oﬃce Immigration
and Nationality
Directorate, 17
Identity and Passport
Service (IPS), 17, 21,
152, 165
identity cards, 15–18
Identity Cards Act 2006,
16
identity cards programme,
15
identity crime, 1–3, 7, 157,
159
identity fraud, 1–3, 7–8,
176 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENT ITY

13–15, 22, 24, 26–7,
45, 54–7, 62–3, 113,
141, 143, 145, 148–9,
151, 157, 159, 164,
166–7
identity fraud forum, 15
identity fraud insurance,
54, 56, 151
identity theft, 1–3, 7–8, 13,
20, 23–4, 39–40, 56–7,
59, 61, 111–12, 129,
141, 147, 157–9, 167
identity veriﬁcation
service, 17, 19
impersonation of the
deceased, 4, 15, 22, 27
JavaScript, 78, 159
Mail Preference Service
(MPS), 6, 31–2, 61, 92,
165
malware, 82
MasterCard SecureCode,
23, 26, 36, 44, 129–30,
140, 159, 171
MySpace, 33
National Identity Fraud
Prevention Week, 24
National Identity Register,
17–19
online auction fraud, 115,
122, 124
passphrases, 69, 100
passwords, 9, 28, 30, 33,
35, 52, 64–74, 77–9,
80, 83, 88, 99, 100–1,
111–12, 117, 119, 125–
6, 129–30, 132, 135–7,
140, 150, 157–62
PayPal, 134
peer–to–peer (P2P) File
Sharing, 103
pharming, 24, 115, 119,
160, 167
phishing, 20–1, 24–6, 75–
6, 92, 115–16, 118–19,
121, 135–6, 140, 160,
167, 169–70
Police and Justice Act
2006, 4, 22
postal interception card
fraud, 41, 160
Protective Registration see
CIFAS
Royal Mail, 5, 24, 41, 47–
8, 50, 61–2, 144, 148,
152, 166
Saga Zone, 33
secure network, 64, 94, 96
INDEX / 177

shop safe online, 26, 44,
130, 171
shoulder surﬁng, 36, 42,
160
shredder, 36, 51–4, 60,
108–10, 142
skimming, 35, 39, 40–4,
160
smurﬁng,14, 161
social networking, 33, 140
spam, 26, 29–30, 64, 80,
84, 90–4, 111, 112,
118, 135, 140, 161, 171
spyware, 64, 79–80, 84,
87–90, 92, 96, 103–6,
111, 156, 161
Telephone Preference
Service (TPS), 92, 165
Trojans, 82, 136, 161
UK Visa Service, 17
Veriﬁed by Visa, 23, 26,
36, 44, 129–30, 140,
161
Viruses, 25, 64, 80–1, 83–
8, 90, 92–3, 96, 102–7,
111–12, 136, 156, 159,
161–2, 169
WiFi, 95–7, 99
178 / PROTE CTING YOUR IDENT ITY

7 Ways for Anyone to Boost their Income
How making a few simple changes can signiﬁcantly reduce your
outgoings and gain extra income
Anthony Vice
The chances are that you are paying too much interest on your
mortgage, or paying the wrong amount of tax, or too much
insurance – if so, you need this book. In it, Anthony Vice
outlines simple but eﬀective ways to make you better oﬀ. They
don’t involve any drastic changes to your lifestyle – just some
painless alterations in procedure that will signiﬁcantly reduce
your outgoings – so that you keep more of your income to save
or spend on the things you really want. Anthony’s advice is for
all age groups – and the sooner you start, the more you’ll save.
ISBN 978-1-84528-239-4
How To Save Inheritance Tax
Understand how inheritance tax works – and pass on more of your
hard-earned wealth to those you love
Gordon Bowley LLB
Although inheritance tax is a technical and increasingly
complex subject, this book is intended to give the non-lawyer
a thorough, working understanding of the tax. It points out
steps that can be taken to ensure that hard-earned wealth can
be passed to those they care for, rather than leaving it for the
state to dissipate. This book will enable readers to assess their
particular situation and discover where it might be considerably
improved and talk with advisers intelligently; judge their worth;
and evaluate their advice.
ISBN 978-1-84528-260-8

How To Pay Less for More
The Consumer’s Guide to Negotiating the Best Deals – Whatever
You’re Buying
‘This book could save you thousands!’
Marc Lockley
This book will give you the skills to negotiate better deals in
every area of your life. Marc Lockley, Negotiation Coach,
teaches the basic negotiation skills and applies them to
common situations that we all experience, either at home or
in the workplace: buying a car, buying or selling a house,
booking a holiday, planning a wedding or party, buying
electrical goods, buying and ﬁtting kitchens and bathrooms,
complaining eﬀectively and negotiating a pay rise or ﬂexible
hours. Marc estimates that by using the skills he teaches he
saves himself thousands of pounds each year and has a higher
standard of living than he might otherwise expect.
ISBN 978-1-84528-237-0
How To Get Good Care Services
for yourself or your relatives
Clare Kirkman
Care services are expanding and more organisations are
opening, providing a better range of choice. Greater competi-
tion is pushing up standards of service and bringing better
value for money. The tighter regulation of care services and
improved quality control methods are increasing the power of
consumers. As a modern consumer of care services you must
take control of the process, whether the care is for you or for a
loved one. This book explains where you can ﬁnd care services
and how to recognise quality care when you ﬁnd it. It explains
what you can expect in terms of the standard of care and
service; and what you can do if you don’t get it.
ISBN 978-1-84528-243-1

How to feed your whole family a healthy, balanced
diet, with very little money and hardly any time, even if
you have a tiny kitchen, only three saucepans (one with
an ill-ﬁtting lid) and no fancy gadgets – unless you
count the garlic crusher .. .
Simple, wholesome and nutritious recipes for family meals
Gill Holcombe
This book provides simple, wholesome and nutritious recipes
for family meals; quick lunches, tasty puddings and cakes – and
you don’t have to spend hours slaving over a hot stove, or spend
a fortune at the supermarket. There are menu plans, recipes,
shortcuts and dozens of ideas for every meal, together with
tried and tested tips to help you save your valuable time and
money. Gill Holcombe is passionate about feeding her kids
good food. She grew up before the culture of convenience food
took hold – and knows how to cook. Having brought up three
children on her own for over ten years, she says the proof of the
pudding is in the eating, and has three ﬁt, healthy teenagers
with loads of energy – and no ﬁllings in their teeth.
ISBN 978-1-905862-15-3
The Parent’s Guide to Childcare
How to choose the right childcare for you and your child
Allison Lee
This book looks at the most popular types of childcare
available and weighs up the advantages and disadvantages of
each to help you to decide which service suits you best. It will
help you to decide what kind of childcare you require; ensure
that the relationship between the child and the carer and you
and the carer work well; know what to expect from your
childminder in terms of play and educational activities; know
what to do when either your child or the carer is ill; understand
the childcare contract and know what to do when things go
wrong.
ISBN 978-1-84528-220-2

This page intentionally left blank 

How To Books are available through all good bookshops, or
you can order direct from us through Grantham Book Services.
Tel: +44 (0)1476 541080
Fax: +44 (0)1476 541061
Email: orders@gbs.tbs-ltd.co.uk
Or via our website
www.howtobooks.co.uk
To order via any of these methods please quote the title(s) of
the book(s) and your credit card number together with its
expiry date.
For further information about our books and catalogue, please
contact:
How To Books
Spring Hill House
Spring Hill Road
Begbroke
Oxford
OX5 1RX
Visit our web site at
www.howtobooks.co.uk
Or you can contact us by email at info@howtobooks.co.uk

