Protecting 
Your Mobile 
AppIP 
O REILLY' 
Richard Stim 

Protecting Your Mobile App IP: The Mini Missing Manual 
by Richard Stim 
Copyright © 2011 O'Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, 
Sebastopol, CA 95472. 
O'Reilly Media books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales 
promotional use. Online editions are also available for most titles: safari. 
oreilly.com. For more information, contact our corporate/institutional 
sales department: 800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com. 
December 2010: First Edition. 
The Missing Manual is a registered trademark of O'Reilly Media, Inc. The 
Missing Manual logo, and "The book that should have been in the box" 
are trademarks of O'Reilly Media, Inc. Many of the designations used by 
manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as 
trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book, and O'Reilly 
Media is aware of a trademark claim, the designations are capitalized. 
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, 
the publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, 
or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained in it. 
ISBN:9781449393670 

Contents 
Introduction 
Chapter i: Trade Secrets and Nondisclosure Agreements. 
Trade Secrets: An Overview 
Protecting Your Secrets 
Limitations of NDAs 
10 
Nondisclosure Agreements 
12 
Standard NDAs 
13 
Beta Tester Nondisclosure Agreement 
21 
Chapter 2: Copyrighting Your App 
27 
Registering Your Copyright 
31 
Form CO: Your Ticket to Copyright Registration 
33 
Deposit Materials 
46 
After You Mail Your Application 
49 
Infringement: What You Can Do About It 
51 
Self-Help Remedies 
54 
Chapter 3: Names and Trademarks 
61 
Trademark Basics 
62 
Choosing and Registering Your Trademark 
67 
Trademark Searching 
68 
The Benefits of Registration 
71 
The Federal Registration Process: TEAS 
72 
Applicant Information 
73 
Mark Information 
74 
Goods and/or Services Information 
75 
Specimen and Dates of Use 
77 

Declaration 
78 
Completing the Process 
78 
After Filing 
78 
Contacting the USPTO 
80 
Staying out of Trouble 
81 
Infringement 
81 
Trademark Dilution 
82 
Chapter 4: Using Other People's Work 
83 
Fair Use Explained 
84 
The Public Domain: Free Stuff 
86 
Getting Permission 
87 
The Five Steps for Getting Permission 
88 
Three Ways to Get the Rights 
90 
Copyright Assignments 
91 
Contenl/Permission Licenses 
92 
Personal Releases 
96 
Filling Out a Personal Release 
101 
Using Someone Else's Trademark 
101 
Colophon 
105 

Introduction 
his Mini Missing Manual explains four cost-effective ways to 
protect applications you develop for mobile devices. The info 
provided here won't stop people from doing nasty stuff like 
misappropriating your secrets, stealing your name, and copying 
your code. But, if any of those things happen, it'll give you the legal 
ammunition you need to recover your losses and, in some cases, 
get money to pay attorney fees. In short, if someone takes your 
work and then tries to bully you because they can afford an ex-
pensive lawyer, the methods explained here will help you even the 
playing field. Equally important, taking these steps will reinforce 
your legal rights in the event that another company wants to ac-
quire your apps. There's one chapter for each of the four methods: 
• Trade secret protection. This kind of protection is helpful 
when you haven't made your app available to the public and 
you want to show it to others—investors, beta testers, or con-
tractors, for example. Chapter 1 explains what trade secrets are 
and how you can protect them. It also includes two standard 
nondisclosure agreements and explains of how to fill them out. 

• Copyright protection. Copyright is an effective means of 
protecting your whole app as well as individual parts of it 
such as the underlying code, appearance, and in some cases, 
the collection of data within your app. Chapter 2 covers basic 
copyright principles and shows you how to file a copyright 
application for your app. 
• Trademark protection. Trademark law protects your app's 
name, slogan, or logo. Chapter 3 explains trademarks and 
shows you how to file an application for trademark registration 
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 
• Permissions. Most apps consist of some material from an-
other source, like photos, data, video, or audio clips. Chapter 
4 tells you how and when to get permission to reuse material, 
explains fair use and the public domain, and includes sample 
release forms (with info on how to fill them out). 
Note: You'll see the term "intellectual property" pop up through-
out this Mini Missing Manual. It refers to laws related to copy-
rights, trademarks, patents, and trade secrets-in short, all the 
laws that protect the intangible ideas that spring from your mind 
that you express in creative and (hopefully) moneymaking ways. 
Why not hire a lawyer? 
If you can afford to hire a lawyer to take the steps suggested here, 
great. Unfortunately, most developers don't earn enough to pay a 
lawyer's hefty legal fees. (The typical hourly rate for an intellectual 
property attorney is about 30 times the cost of this manual.) Hap-
pily, most of the tasks described here aren't that tough. For exam-
ple, you should be able to prepare a nondisclosure agreement and 
register a copyright without having to visit a law firm. 
Even if you do delegate tasks to a lawyer, you're better off under-
standing the basic principles of intellectual property law so you're 
not completely at the mercy of your lawyer—an unfortunate fate 
that has felled many a software startup. Success and longevity in 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

3 
the mobile app business are based on a lot of variables, one of 
which is knowing your legal rights. If you don't understand the 
basic rules of protecting your apps, then you might end up scram-
bling to retrieve rights that you've inadvertently signed over to 
others. 
Note: The information provided here is to help you cope with 
basic legal needs. You should consult with an attorney if you 
want professional assurance that this information is appropriate 
to your particular needs. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
What About Patents? 
I've heard that patents are the best way to protect ideas. How come 
you don't cover them in this guide? 
Patent protection isn't covered here for a few reasons. Patent law-
meaning utility patents, the most common form of patent protection-
only protects new inventions that aren't obvious to others in the field. 
Although many patents have been granted for software and methods 
of doing business, the tide seems to be turning away from software 
protection. In other words, ifs becoming more difficult to acquire pat-
ent protection for software, and harder to defend those patents. Patent 
protection also isn't discussed here because: 
• Most apps probably aren't patentable. 
• Getting a patent takes approximately 2 years and you can't go after 
infringers until after you've obtained the patent. 
• Obtaining a patent is expensive: It generally entails about $5,000 
to $10,000 in attorney fees. 
That said, if you believe that you've created a novel way of accomplish-
ing a process using a mobile or handheld device, you should consult 
a patent attorney or patent agent. Keep in mind that you have 1 year 
from the first time you publicly sell or publish info about your app 
(whichever comes first) to file for your patent. 
INTRODUCTION 

Tip: Your humble author started www.dearrichblog.com, a blog 
that addresses common questions asked by developers, artists, 
and other content producers. There, you can look for answers 
to questions or ask your own. For example, the site includes 
several entries on copyrighting apps. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

CHAPTER 1 
Trade Secrets and 
Nondisclosure 
Agreements 
T
he lucky developers who tested prototype ¡Pads before they 
were released to the public also had to perform one not-
so-fun chore: reading through Apple's hefty nondisclosure 
agreement (often called an NDA). Among other things, the agree-
ment required developers to keep the device isolated in a room 
with blacked-out windows, tethered to a fixed object, and under 
lock and key (and of course, no tweeting about it). Apple's secrecy 
requirements might seem a bit draconian, but the company's 
covert strategy is an important part of its marketing plan; it's the 
reason there's so much excitement whenever Apple unveils a new 
product. 
The whole point of NDAs is to protect trade secrets, which you'll 
learn about in a sec. You probably won't need Apple's level of 
secrecy when developing a mobile app, but you should require 
some confidentiality to protect your business secrets. This chapter 
explains what you need to know about trade secrets and includes 
sample NDAs you can use when working with outside folks. 

Trade Secrets: An Overview 
Trade secrets include any confidential information that gives you 
an advantage over other developers, such as an idea for an An-
droid app, a unique method of converting a PDF to html, or a col-
lection of data about bankruptcy laws for use in a legal app. 
Your trade secrets will likely include unpublished computer code, 
design specifications, business plans, and pricing and marketing 
strategies. In order for your info to qualify as a trade secret, it has to 
satisfy these three criteria: 
• It can't be generally known or ascertainable through legal 
methods. Once something is general knowledge or can be 
learned by others in the business, it can't be protected by a 
nondisclosure agreement (with a few exceptions, explained 
below). The legal term for this is "readily ascertainable/' mean-
ing that the info can be obtained legally—for example, you can 
find it through an online database or at a library. (On the other 
hand, if someone obtains your secrets illegally—for example, 
they hack their way through your company's firewall—then 
you can go after them in court, even without an NDA.) 
• It has to provide a competitive advantage or have econom-
ic value. For most trade secrets, this requirement is easy to 
fulfill. If you can show that folks can derive benefits from using 
the info, that you invested time and money in developing the 
info, or that you've received business or licensing offers for us-
ing it, you've got yourself a trade secret. 
• It needs to be the subject of reasonable efforts to maintain 
secrecy.These efforts usually include logical security proce-
dures—like locking offices, monitoring visitors, and labeling 
confidential information—and NDAs, which you'll learn all 
about later in this chapter. If you don't make any effort to 
keep the info secret, then it can't be considered a trade secret. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

m
For example, there was a case involving a blood bank that 
claimed its list of donors was a trade secret, but since the bank 
posted the list online where competitors could find it, a court 
ruled that this info wasn't a trade secret (see http://tinyurl. 
com/22joz5s if you want the gory details). 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Publicly Known Info and Databases as Trade Secrets 
Can information that's publicly known ever be considered a trade 
secret? What about databases? 
Yes, info thafs public knowledge can be a trade secret //you've com-
piled or assembled it in a unique way. For example, in one case, a 
court ruled that a combination of generic, public-domain computer 
programs linked together in a unique way not generally known out-
side the banking industry constituted a trade secret (see http://tinyurl. 
com/2frc37x). 
Databases—organized collections of information, usually in digital for-
mat—are often protected as trade secrets. For example, in the 1994 
case One Stop Deli, Inc. v. Franco's, Inc., a court ruled that a database 
used for inventorying and determining cost economies on wholesale 
sandwich production for fast-food restaurants was a protectable trade 
secret. But if you have a collection of data that's readily ascertainable— 
for example, a list of dead celebrities or valuable baseball cards—a 
court isn't going to grant you trade secret protection. 
Databases may also be protected under copyright law if the method of 
compiling or arranging the data is sufficiently creative. Ifs often hard 
to tell whether a database meets the modicum of creativity standard 
(see http://tinyurl.com/28y8ta8) required by the U.S. Supreme Court. 
Collections of raw data such as parts lists usually don't constitute suf-
ficient creativity, and neither do street directories or genealogies. In 
short, the fact that it took a lot of hard work to compile the info doesn't 
guarantee you copyright protection. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

Protecting Your Secrets 
Trade secret protection is based on the simple notion that keeping 
information close to the chest can provide a competitive advan-
tage in the marketplace. But simply saying that data or know-how 
is a trade secret doesn't make it so; you have to actively do things 
that show your desire to keep the info secret. 
Some companies go to extreme lengths to keep their trade se-
crets...well, secret. For instance, only two Coca-Cola employees 
ever know the trade secret Coke formula at the same time. Their 
identities are never disclosed to the public, and they aren't allowed 
to fly on the same airplane. 
Fortunately, such extraordinary secrecy measures are seldom 
necessary. You don't have to turn your office into an armed camp 
to protect your secrets, but you do need to take reasonable pre-
cautions to keep them hidden from prying eyes. Here's a list of the 
minimum safeguards a small mobile app business (like a start-up) 
should enact to protect its trade secrets. Follow these guidelines 
and, if you ever need to file a lawsuit to prevent someone from us-
ing or disclosing information in violation of an NDA, a judge would 
likely conclude that you took reasonable precautions to prevent 
the public or competitors from learning about your secrets: 
• Use nondisclosure agreements. If you're giving someone 
confidential info, have them sign a nondisclosure agreement. 
This is the single most important thing you can do to protect 
your trade secrets because it gives you a legal document to fall 
back on and shows that you take secrecy seriously. For exam-
ple, in 1984,two computer consultants were sued for reverse-
engineering the interface of a system for storing hospital data 
(Technicon Data Systems Corp. v. Curtis 1000, Inc.). As you'll 
learn in the next section, reverse-engineering itself isn't illegal. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

9 
The problem was that the consultants had signed an N DA say-
ing they wouldn't reverse-engineer the interface, so the court 
ruled that they couldn't use the trade secrets they'd obtained 
that way. 
• Maintain physical security. Employees and ex-employees 
are the most likely people to give away trade secrets to 
competitors, so it's important to make sure that former em-
ployees turn in their keys so they can't get into your offices 
anymore. And at a minimum, make it a policy that all your 
employees have to keep sensitive documents filed away 
when unattended, and that they have to lock things like file 
cabinets and desk drawers. 
• Monitor computer security. Make sure you take the typical 
precautions: firewalls, access procedures, and encryption. 
• Label information confidential. Clearly mark documents 
(both hard copies and electronic versions), software, and other 
materials containing trade secrets as "confidential." 
Tip: Don't go overboard and mark everything in sight confi-
dential. If virtually everything, including public information, is 
labeled that way, a court may conclude that nothing was really 
confidential. 
As your company grows and you develop increasingly valuable 
trade secrets, you'll want to consider taking additional security pre-
cautions such as limiting employee access to trade secrets, beef-
ing up physical and digital security, restricting copying, shredding 
documents, keeping close tabs on who visits your workspace, and 
creating policies related to hiring and laying off employees. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

10 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Email Disclaimers 
Is it worth putting a statement at the end of all my emails saying that 
the material in them is confidential? 
Sure, feel free to use these statements (known as disclaimers)-but 
don't count on them to protect anything. 
Although there aren't any court cases related to them, the general con-
sensus is that email disclaimers don't create a legally binding arrange-
ment because the other party doesn't have to agree to the terms. 
If you accidentally send something confidential, a court will be more 
concerned with the contents of the email, the choice of recipient (es-
pecially your relationship with the recipient), and the circumstances of 
the transmission than with whether you included a disclaimer. Also, 
the fact that most disclaimers appear at the end of email messages 
works against enforcing them because disclaimers have to be promi-
nent (at the top of the email, say) to have any effect. So why bother 
including one? It's mostly a matter of wishful thinking: You can hope 
that stating that an email is confidential will make the recipient (and 
perhaps even a judge) believe it's confidential. 
Bottom line: The best protection for your secrets is to obtain a signed 
NDA and to label information "confidential." Don't count on email dis-
claimers to protect you. If you're especially concerned about the wrong 
person reading your secrets, don't send them in email. 
Limitations of NDAs 
You'll learn the nitty-gritty details of NDAs in a moment, but it's 
important to know that there are some situations where even a 
signed NDA won't let you stop someone from disclosing or us-
ing your secret business info. A court won't enforce your NDA (or 
protect the information you consider a trade secret) if any of these 
situations apply: 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

11 
• You didn't use reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy. See 
"Protecting Your Secrets"for suggested security measures. 
• The info is generally known or easy to ascertain. This relates 
that "readily ascertainable" aspect discussed in "Publicly Known 
Info and Databases as Trade Secrets" 
• The trade secret is learned through independent discovery. 
Anyone who creates the same secret info independently— 
even if it's identical to your trade secret—is free to use and 
disclose that information. 
• The information is lawfully acquired through reverse 
engineering. It's perfectly legal to disassemble and examine 
products that are available to the public. If someone learns one 
of your trade secrets this way, he can use it freely, and once the 
info becomes publicly known, you lose your ability to protect it 
as a trade secret. 
Note: To help prove that a trade secret was independently 
developed, software companies with big bucks use clean room 
techniques, which involve doing things like isolating engineers 
or designers and filtering the information they receive. These 
isolated folks usually have a specific goal (like creating an app 
that uses GPS software to coordinate blood donors, for exam-
ple) and, to accomplish that task, they're presented with publicly 
available materials, tools, and documents. The development 
team's progress is then carefully monitored and documented, 
and a technical expert or legal monitor reviews any requests for 
further information that the team makes. That way, the company 
has records to show that trade secrets were developed indepen-
dently so they can refute any claims that the work was copied. 
Of course, this is only feasible for big companies that can afford 
to pay for these extreme measures. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Customer Lists 
Can a customer or client list be a trade secret? 
Customer lists are tough to protect as trade secrets. A list that's easy to 
get or requires little effort to assemble usually can't be protected. For 
example, in one case (<http://tinyurl.com/29zlax6), an insurance com-
pany that sold life insurance to the owners of car dealerships claimed 
that someone had stolen its customer list of car dealerships, and that 
the list was a trade secret. A court wouldn't protect the customer list as 
a trade secret because it was easy to get that info simply by looking in a 
phonebook (and because the person accused of stealing it had helped 
compile it in the first place). 
A list is more likely to be protected if it's more specialized than that and 
has been used for a long time, or if it includes detailed info like cus-
tomers' special needs or confidential pricing information. In one case, 
a court protected an employment agency's client directory because the 
list also included stuff like the volume of the customer's business, spe-
cific customer requirements, key managerial customer contacts, and 
billing rates. 
So, the short answer is "It depends." The more detailed and specialized 
the information in your customer or client list, the better your chances 
that a court will agree if s a trade secret. 
Nondisclosure Agreemenb 
You've already heard a lot about NDAs in this chapter, but you 
haven't actually seen one—until now. Yes, the long wait is finally 
over. Well, okay, so NDAs aren't all that exciting, but you'll sure 
be glad you have one in place if a disgruntled former employee 
decides to post your trade secrets on her blog. 
This section includes an example of a standard NDAas well as an 
NDA specifically for beta testers, which is a little more complicated. 
After each NDA you'll find a detailed explanation of how to fill it 
out. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

13 
Standard NDAs 
When you're developing an app, you should get signed NDAs from 
people you disclose confidential information to, like investors, 
clients, customers, contractors, potential business partners, and 
licensees. If you use this standard agreement and someone steals 
(or"misappropriates") your secrets, the agreement allows you to 
go to court and ask for certain legal remedies—ways to correct 
the problem, prevent further disclosure, and compensate you for 
financial losses resulting from the info not being secret anymore. 
Note: You don't need to get signed NDAs from people who work 
at your company, since all states have laws forbidding employ-
ees from disclosing confidential company info. However, some 
companies prefer not to rely solely on state laws, so they men-
tion employees' NDA obligations-like maintaining confidential-
ity and not disclosing secrets-in their employee handbooks. 
Alternatively some companies make employees sign employ-
ment agreements that contain NDAs (or, depending on the 
state, a noncompetition agreement that includes stuff about 
nondisclosure). Employees typically sign these agreements be-
fore they start working for the company. But if the agreement is 
signed after that (or after the person leaves the company), most 
states require companies to give employees some additional 
benefit or compensation for entering into such an agreement. 
A nondisclosure agreement should define the trade secrets you 
want to protect, exclude what's not protected, establish a duty 
to keep the confidential information secret, and state the length 
of time the agreement will be in force. Here's an example (don't 
worry—there's an explanation of what it all means later in this 
chapter): 
Note: You can view (and copy) the basic NDA explained below 
at www.ndasforfree.com/NDAS/GetBasic.html. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

Nondisclosure Agreement 
This Nondisclosure Agreement (the"Agreement") is entered 
into by and between 
[insert 
your name, the type of business (sole proprietorship, partner-
ship, corporation, or LLC), and address] ("Disclosing Party"), and 
[insert name, business form, and 
address of other person or company with whom you are ex-
changing information] ("Receiving Party") for the purpose of pre-
venting the unauthorized disclosure of Confidential Information 
as defined below. The parties agree to enter into a confidential 
relationship with respect to the disclosure of certain proprietary 
and confidential information ("Confidential Information"). 
1. Definition of Confidential Information. For purposes of this 
Agreement, "Confidential Information" shall include all infor-
mation or material that has or could have commercial value 
or other utility in the business in which Disclosing Party is en-
gaged. If Confidential Information is in written or digital form, 
the Disclosing Party shall label or stamp the materials with the 
word "Confidential"or some similar warning. If Confidential 
Information is transmitted orally, the Disclosing Party shall 
promptly provide a writing indicating that such oral commu-
nication constituted Confidential Information. 
2. Exclusions from Confidential Information. Receiving 
Party's obligations under this Agreement do not extend to 
information that is: (a) publicly known at the time of disclo-
sure or subsequently becomes publicly known through no 
fault of the Receiving Party; (b) discovered or created by the 
Receiving Party before disclosure by Disclosing Party; (c) 
learned by the Receiving Party through legitimate means 
other than from the Disclosing Party or Disclosing Party's 
representatives; or (d) is disclosed by Receiving Party with 
Disclosing Party's prior written approval. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

3. Obligations of Receiving Party. Receiving Party shall 
hold and maintain the Confidential Information in strictest 
confidence for the sole and exclusive benefit of the Disclos-
ing Party. Receiving Party shall carefully restrict access to 
Confidential Information to employees, contractors, and 
third parties as is reasonably required and shall require those 
persons to sign nondisclosure restrictions at least as protec-
tive as those in this Agreement. Receiving Party shall not use 
any Confidential Information, without prior written approval 
of Disclosing Party, for Receiving Party's own benefit, or 
publish, copy, or otherwise disclose to others, or permit the 
use by others for their benefit or to the detriment of Disclos-
ing Party. Receiving Party shall return to Disclosing Party any 
and all records, notes, and other written, printed, or tangible 
materials in its possession pertaining to Confidential Infor-
mation immediately if Disclosing Party requests it in writing. 
4. Time Periods. The nondisclosure provisions of this Agree-
ment shall survive the termination of this Agreement and 
Receiving Party's duty to hold Confidential Information 
in confidence shall remain in effect until the Confidential 
Information no longer qualifies as a trade secret or until Dis-
closing Party sends Receiving Party written notice releasing 
Receiving Party from this Agreement, whichever occurs first. 
5. Relationships. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall 
be deemed to constitute either party a partner, joint ven-
turer, or employee of the other party for any purpose. 
6. Severability. If a court finds any provision of this Agreement 
invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this Agreement 
shall be interpreted so as best to effect the intent of the 
parties. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

7. Integration.This Agreement expresses the complete under-
standing of the parties with respect to the subject matter 
and supersedes all prior proposals, agreements, represen-
tations, and understandings. This Agreement may not be 
amended except in a writing signed by both parties. 
8. Waiver.The failure to exercise any right provided in this 
Agreement shall not be a waiver of prior or subsequent 
rights. 
This Agreement and each party's obligations shall be binding on 
the representatives, assigns, and successors of such party. Each 
party has signed this Agreement through its authorized repre-
sentative. 
Disclosing Party 
Date: 
By: 
Receiving Party 
Date: 
By: 
Whew—that's a lot of legalese! The following sections explain 
what the heck does it all mean and how do you fill it in. 
Who's Disclosing? Who's Receiving? 
In the sample agreement above, the Disclosing Party is you, the 
person disclosing secrets. The Receiving Party is the person or 
company you're giving that information to and who's obligated to 
keep it secret. (The terms are capitalized to indicate that they're 
defined in the agreement.) 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

17 
The sample agreement is a "one-way"agreement—that is, only one 
party is disclosing secrets. If both sides are disclosing secrets to 
each other, you need to tweak the agreement to make it a mu-
tual NDA. To do that, replace the first paragraph in the agreement 
above with this: 
This Nondisclosure agreement (the "Agreement") is entered into 
by and between 
[insert your name, business form, and 
address] and 
[insert name, business form, and address 
of other person or company with whom you are exchanging 
information] collectively referred to as the "parties" for the 
purpose of preventing the unauthorized disclosure of Confidential 
Information as defined below. The parties agree to enter into a 
confidential relationship with respect to the disclosure by one or 
each (the"Disclosing Party") to the other (the"Receiving Party") of 
certain proprietary and confidential information (the"Confidential 
Information"). 
Clause 1: Defining the trade secrets 
This is the most important part of an NDA because it explains what 
you're protecting. Every nondisclosure agreement defines its trade 
secrets, often referred to as "Confidential Information." If your defi-
nition doesn't specify what you're protecting then, alas, they won't 
be protected by the agreement. 
In the sample agreement above, this clause explains how you'll let 
the other party know what's confidential. It says that, if you give 
them written materials or software, you'll clearly mark it"Confi-
dential." And if you tell them trade secrets orally, the last sentence 
of Clause 1 states that you'll give them written confirmation that 
you disclosed a trade secret—an email or text message will suffice. 
(You must send this confirmation ASAP, ideally the same day you 
make the disclosure.) 
Another common approach is to specifically list the confidential 
information without actually including the secrets in the NDA. 
For example, you could replace the text of Clause 1 in the sample 
agreement above with this: 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

Definition of Confidential Information. For purposes of this 
Agreement "Confidential Information" shall include the 40 pages 
of documentation and accompanying software code furnished 
to you on January 31st and tentatively titled the "Water Skiing 
Application." 
Clause 2: Excluding information that isn't confidential 
This clause—you guessed it—explains what isn't top secret. As 
mentioned earlier in this chapter, you can't prohibit someone from 
disclosing information that's publicly known, legitimately acquired 
from another source, or that that person developed before meet-
ing you. (That's what parts a-c of Clause 2 mean, respectively.) 
Similarly, the receiving party can disclose your secret if you give 
them permission to (part d). All these exceptions exist with or 
without an NDA, but they're commonly included to make it clear to 
everyone that such info isn't considered a trade secret. 
Clause J; Duty to keep information secret 
This clause is the heart of the NDA—it establishes a confidential 
relationship between the parties. It explains that the receiving 
party has to keep the information confidential and limit its use. In 
some cases, you may want to impose additional requirements, like 
prohibiting the other party from reverse-engineering, decompil-
ing, or disassembling the software to keep them from learning 
more about the trade secrets. You may also want to require them 
to return all trade secret materials that you furnished under the 
agreement. To include these types of requirements, simply add 
them into the appropriate section. You can see an example of how 
this is done in Sections 3 and 6 of the beta tester agreement dis-
cussed later in this chapter. 
Clause 4: Duration of the agreement 
How long should an NDA apply? That's probably something you'll 
have to negotiate before you specify it in this clause. As the disclos-
ing party, you'll likely want a long timeframe, whereas the receiv-
ing party will want a short one. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

19 
In the sample agreement above, the NDA applies until the confi-
dential info becomes public knowledge or you send the receiving 
party a letter saying that they're no longer bound by the agree-
ment. But you have other options the time frame, including a fixed 
period or a fixed period with some exceptions. Examples of both 
are shown below and if you decide to go with one of these options 
instead, then simply replace the text of Clause 4 (from 'The nondis-
closure provisions" to "whichever occurs first") with one of these: 
• Fixed time period:This Agreement and Receiving Party's duty 
to hold Disclosing Party's Confidential Information in confi-
dence shall remain in effect until 
. 
• Fixed time period with exceptions: This Agreement and Re-
ceiving Party's duty to hold Disclosing Party's Confidential In-
formation in confidence shall remain in effect until 
or until one of the following occurs: 
— (a) the Disclosing Party sends the Receiving Party written 
notice releasing it from this Agreement, or 
— (b) the information disclosed under this Agreement ceases 
to be a trade secret. 
If the NDA is for one of your employees or a contractor, you might 
want to make the term unlimited or have it end only when the 
trade secret becomes public knowledge. Five years is a common 
length for NDAs that involve business negotiations and product 
submissions, although many companies insist on 2 or 3 years 
instead. Your best bet is to get as long a timeframe as possible, 
preferably unlimited. But keep in mind that some businesses want 
a fixed period of time and some courts, when interpreting NDAs, 
require that the time period be reasonable. Determining "reason-
ableness" is subjective and depends on the confidential material 
and the nature of the industry. For example, some trade secrets 
within the software or tech industries may be short-lived. Other 
trade secrets—like the Coca-Cola formula—have been kept confi-
dential for over a century. If it's likely that others will stumble upon 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

the same secret or innovation or that it'll be reverse-engineered 
within a few years, then a 2- or 3-year period is probably fine. Once 
the time period is over, the disclosing party is free to reveal your 
secrets. 
Clauses 5-8: Boilerplate provisions and signatures 
The sample NDA above includes four miscellaneous provisions 
(sections)—Relationships, Severability, Waiver, and Integration. You 
don't have to include these provisions, but they can be helpful if 
there's a dispute over things like whether a certain provision is en-
forceable, whether a modification to the agreement was properly 
made, or whether you waived certain obligations, so you're better 
off leaving them in. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
One NDA or Many? 
If several people at a single company will be checking out my projects, 
can I use one NDA for all of'em or do I need a separate NDA for each 
person? 
When you're disclosing information to a company and you're con-
cerned it getting disseminated within that company, you have two 
choices: You can have everyone who'll have access to your trade se-
crets sign your company's standard NDA (like the one shown above, 
for example) or have an executive or officer of the company sign it. 
Clause 3 of the above agreement includes a requirement that all the 
company's employees and contractors who learn the trade secrets be 
bound by similar agreements. 
If you go the first route (many NDAs), you can sue each individual 
in the event of a breach. This option is better suited for NDAs that 
you send to small entities such as sole proprietorships or partnerships 
where each person can be individually liable. The second option is 
better if you're working with a business that operates as a corporation 
or LLC. In that case, you sue the company for breaking its promise not 
to disclose; you can't sue the person who actually disclosed the info. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

21 
Beta Tester Nondisclosure Agreement 
If you give beta versions of your app to outside testers, here's the 
kind of NDA you should have them sign. 
Beta Tester Nondisclosure Agreement 
This is an agreement, effective 
("Effective Date"), be-
tween 
("Company") and 
('Tester"), 
in which Tester agrees to test a mobile app program known as 
(the"Software") and keep Company aware 
of the test results. 
1. Company's Obligations. Company shall provide Tester with 
a copy of Software and any necessary documentation and 
instruct Tester on how to use it and what test data is desired 
by Company. Upon satisfactory completion of the testing, 
Company shall 
. 
2. Tester's Obligations.Tester shall test Software under 
normally expected operating conditions in Tester's environ-
ment during the test period.Tester shall gather and report 
test data as agreed upon with Company.Tester shall allow 
Company access to Software during normal working hours 
for inspection, modifications, and maintenance. 
3. Software a Trade Secret. Software is proprietary to, and a 
valuable trade secret of, Company. It is entrusted to Tester 
only for the purpose set forth in this Agreement. Tester shall 
maintain Software in the strictest confidence.Tester will not, 
without Company's prior written consent: 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

— disclose any information about Software, its design and 
performance specifications, its code, and the existence 
of the beta test and its results to anyone other than Tes-
ter's employees who are performing the testing and who 
shall be subject to nondisclosure restrictions at least as 
protective as those set forth in this Agreement; 
— copy any portion of Software or documentation, except 
to the extent necessary to perform beta testing; or 
— reverse engineer, decompile, or disassemble Software or 
any portion of it. 
4. Security Precautions. Tester shall take reasonable security 
precautions to prevent Software from being seen by unau-
thorized individuals whether stored on Tester's hard drive 
or on physical copies such as CD-ROMs, diskettes, or other 
media. Tester shall lock all copies of Software and associated 
documentation in a desk or file cabinet when not in use. 
5. Term of Agreement. The test period shall last from 
until 
.This Agreement shall terminate 
at the end of the test period or when Company asks Tester 
to return Software, whichever occurs first.The restrictions 
and obligations contained in Clauses 4, 7,8,9, and 10 shall 
survive the expiration, termination, or cancellation of this 
Agreement, and shall continue to bind Tester, its successors, 
heirs, and assigns. 
6. Return of Software and Materials. Upon the conclusion 
of the testing period orat Company's request, Tester shall 
within 10 days return the original and all copies of Software 
and all related materials to Company and delete all portions 
of Software from computer memory. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

23 
7. Disclaimer of Warranty. Software is a test product and its 
accuracy and reliability are not guaranteed. Tester shall not 
rely exclusively on Software for any reason. Tester waives any 
and all claimsTester may have against Company arising out 
of the performance or nonperformance of Software. 
SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED AS IS, AND COMPANY DISCLAIMS 
ANY AND ALL REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY 
KIND, WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, WITH RESPECTTO IT, 
INCLUDING ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABIL-
ITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
8. Limitation of Liability. Company shall not be responsible 
for any loss or damage to Tester or any third parties caused 
by Software. COMPANY SHALL NOT BE LIABLE FOR ANY DI-
RECT, INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL 
DAMAGE, WHETHER BASED ON CONTRACT ORTORT OR ANY 
OTHER LEGAL THEORY, ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF SOFT-
WARE OR ANY PERFORMANCE OFTHIS AGREEMENT. 
9. No Rights Granted. This Agreement does not constitute a 
grant or an intention or commitment to grant any right, title, 
or interest in Software or Company's trade secrets to Tester. 
Tester may not sell or transfer any portion of Software to 
any third party or use Software in any manner to produce, 
market, or support its own products. Tester shall not identify 
Software as coming from any source other than Company. 
10. No Assignments. This Agreement is personal to Tester. Tes-
ter shall not assign or otherwise transfer any rights or obliga-
tions under this Agreement. 
11. Relationships. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall 
be deemed to constitute either party a partner, joint ven-
turer, or employee of the other party for any purpose. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

24 
12. Severability. If a court finds any provision of this Agreement 
invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this Agreement 
shall be interpreted so as best to effect the intent of the 
parties. 
13. Integration. This Agreement expresses the complete under-
standing of the parties with respect to the subject matter 
and supersedes all prior proposals, agreements, represen-
tations, and understandings. This Agreement may not be 
amended except in a writing signed by both parties. 
14. Waiver. The failure to exercise any right provided in this 
Agreement shall not be a waiver of prior or subsequent 
rights. 
Company 
Date: 
By: 
Tester 
Date: 
By: 
Happily, you can pretty much use this NDAas is—just fill in the 
blanks and you're all set. Here's what all the clauses mean and how 
to fill ¡tout: 
Intro paragraph. Fill in the date. Next, put your name in the 
"Company" blank and the name of the individual or company that's 
beta-testing yourapp in the "Tester" blank. Then put the name of 
the app being tested in the "Software" blank. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

25 
Clause 1: Company's Obligations. The first sentence of this clause 
is pretty straightforward—it says you'll give the tester a copy of 
your app and tell them how you'd like them to test it. The wording 
you enter in the second sentence is up to you.Typically, beta tes-
ters get a free copy of the finished version of software as payment; 
this is where you'd note that. If you're going to pay the tester for his 
services, mention that here. 
Clause 2: Tester's Obligations.This paragraph describes what 
tester is expected to do: gather and report test data. You can leave 
this section as is. 
Clause 3: Software a Trade Secret. This clause makes clear to the 
tester that the app is a trade secret and explains what they can't do 
with it: They're not allowed to tell people about it, copy it (except 
as necessary to test it), or reverse-engineer or disassemble it to see 
how it works. 
Clause 4: Security Precautions. This clause requires the tester to 
take reasonable precautions to make sure the app isn't seen by 
unauthorized people. No need to add anything here. 
Clause 5: Term of Agreement. Fill in dates for the testing time-
frame here. This clause also states that certain parts of this agree-
ment will still be in effect even after the ending date listed here. 
The sample agreement above specifies that the tester's obligation 
to secure the software, as well as the warranty disclaimer, limita-
tion of liability, prohibition of assignment and "no-rights" provision 
(in other words, Clauses 4, 7,8,9, and 10) will apply after the end of 
the testing period. However, you can customize this clause by add-
ing or deleting clause numbers as appropriate. 
Clause 6: Return of Software and Materials. This clause simply 
says that the tester has to return the app when the testing is done 
and delete it from any computers where they've installed it. 
TRADE SECRETS AND NONDISCLOSURE AGREEMENTS 

Clause 7: Disclaimer of Warranty. This part explains that you're 
providing the app to the tester "as is."That means that you're not 
guaranteeing that the app will work and the tester can't sue you if 
the app doesn't do what it was supposed to. 
Note: In case you're wondering, yes, the last parts of Clauses 7 
and 8 do have to be in all caps. Why? Because some courts have 
indicated that disclaimers of warranties and limitations of liabil-
ity are only effective if they're "prominently displayed" within the 
agreement and printing them in all caps satisfies those courts. 
Clause 8: Limitation of Liability. This clause states that you're 
providing the app for evaluation purposes only, and that you're not 
liable for any damages the app causes—for example, if it mucks up 
the tester's ¡Phone. 
Clause 9: No Rights Granted. This clause makes it absolutely clear 
that the app belongs to you and that you're not giving the tester 
any ownership rights ¡n it, and that the tester can't sell or transfer 
the app to anyone. 
Clause 10: No Assignments. The point of this clause is to specify 
that the tester has to do the testing himself—he can't have anyone 
else to do it for him. 
Clauses 11-14: Boilerplate Provisions and Signatures. These 
last four provisions—Relationships, Severability, Waiver, and 
Integration—aren't essential, but it's a good idea to leave'em in 
because they can help courts interpret the agreement and un-
derstand the relationship between the parties. For example, the 
integration provision (Clause 13) makes it clear that this is the final 
and complete confidentiality agreement between the parties. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

CHAPTER 2 
Copyrighting Your App 
O
n July 11,2008, two apps launched at Apple's new App 
Store. One was ¡Beer by Hottrix, a small app development 
company; the app used a clever accelerometer-powered 
feature to make a virtual glass of beer empty as you tilted your 
¡Phone. The other was ¡Pint by Coors, an app that.. .well, did ex-
actly the same thing.The main difference was that ¡Beer cost $3 
and ¡Pint was free. Hottrix believed that it had been ripped off—it 
claimed that Coors had seen a video about ¡Beer in 2007 (a year 
before the App Store opened), and that Coors developed ¡Pint 
only after Hottrix rejected Coors'2007 request to license ¡Beer.The 
two companies negotiated but couldn't work out a deal. Hottrix 
complained to Apple, which removed ¡Pint from the App Store. 
As a result, ¡Beer quickly became one of the bestselling paid apps. 
Hottrix then sued Coors for copyright infringement. 
Can a company copyright the idea of a tilting beer glass? Nope: 
Copyright doesn't protect ideas, methods, or processes. But it does 
protect artwork, software code, text, and other similar content. If 
Coors's developers had created a substantially similar app—and 
Hottrix's attorneys maintained that they did—then the small app 
developer may have had a solid claim against the beer behemoth. 

Although the case has dropped out of the news—perhaps because 
of a settlement—one thing is clear: Hottrix's copyright claim seems 
to have been enough to convince Apple to remove the Coors app 
from its App Store. 
So how can copyright law help if you end up in legal battles over 
apps you create? Consider what copyright does: It gives the creator 
of an app the right to stop others from copying, distributing, or 
making variations of that app (though as you probably know, there 
are many exceptions to this rule, some of which are covered in this 
chapter). In other words, if you own a copyright on something, you 
can stop unauthorized uses of that thing (called infringements in 
legalese). If you can prove that you've been damaged financially 
by the infringement, a court may award you a payment. If you win 
your battle, you can also force the infringer to stop making copies 
of your app and destroy the ones they've already made. 
What many developers find hard to believe is that, under copyright 
law, you're automatically granted copyright once you finish the 
work. That's right: You don't have to file an application and register 
with the U.S. Copyright Office to get a copyright. Once you finish 
a working version—even an incomplete, pre-alpha version—you 
have a copyright on your app, with two exceptions: 
• Your app doesn't meet copyright standards.This chapter 
explains these standards in detail, but as a general rule, if you 
didn't copy your app from someplace else and it has some 
original aspects to it, you can claim a copyright on it. 
• Someone hired you to create the work and it was a work 
made for hire. A work made for hire is created either by: 
—An employee who develops the app during the course of 
employment (in which case, the employer almost always 
owns the app) or 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

29 
—An independent contractor who was commissioned to 
create the app and signed a written work-made-for-hire 
agreement, and the app can be categorized as one of the 
following: 
—A contribution to a collective work 
— Part of a motion picture or other audiovisual work 
—A supplementary work (meaning a work prepared for 
publication as a supplement to a work for the purpose 
of introducing, concluding, illustrating, explaining, 
revising, commenting upon, or assisting in the use of 
the main work) 
—An instructional text used in teaching—provided it's 
designed for use in day-to-day teaching, not simply a 
how-to book 
—A translation 
—A test and test-answer materials 
Note: Alas, there isn't enough room in this Mini Missing Manual 
to get into an in-depth discussion of work-made-for-hire issues. 
If you suspect your app is a work made for hire, check out www. 
copyright.gov/circs/circ09.pdf for more info. 
Okay, so you get copyright automatically. But what does that 
mean exactly and how do you prove it if there's a dispute? To win 
in a copyright lawsuit, you need to prove three things: that you 
have a copyright on your app, that someone copied your app, and 
that the other person's app is substantially similar to yours. So, for 
example, if someone can prove that they created an app that, by 
sheer coincidence, is similar to yours but that they never copied 
your app, then they didn't infringe your copyright. As you can see, 
the decision comes down to evidence—for example, being able to 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

prove when you created your app and that the infringer had access 
to it. (By the way, you don't have to jump through so many hoops if 
the infringing app is an exact copy; in that case, a court will pre-
sume someone copied your work.) 
So how do you prove you have a copyright? The U.S. has a system 
for registering works. Registering something with the U.S. Copy-
right Office doesn't prove you have copyright over that work, but 
if you register it within 5 years of its publication, it creates a legal 
presumption that you're the owner and that the facts in your copy-
right application are true. That means that, if there's a dispute over 
who owns the app, a court will presume you own it and the other 
side will have to prove that you're not the owner. 
Registering your copyright also gives you a few more legal rights 
than if you don't bother registering it and just rely on the auto-
matic copyright (discussed above), but for the most part, you get 
the most important rights even if you don't register. There is, how-
ever, one really good reason to register your copyright: If you end 
up in a dispute, you'll need a registration to file a federal lawsuit. 
Note: it's a common fallacy that mailing a copy of the source 
code to yourself provides some form of legal protection or proof 
of creation. It doesn't. After all, you could send a blank envelope 
to yourself and place the code in it years later. If you're con-
cerned about proving the date of creation, do what inventors do: 
have two witnesses sign and date a printed copy of the code. 
One thing to remember is that, for the most part, you have to 
enforce your own copyright—the government won't do it for you 
(the same goes for all intellectual property claims). In other words, 
your copyright only has value if you're willing to enforce it and can 
afford to do so. Unfortunately, the chase can be expensive (intel-
lectual property lawyers can be pricey) and the outcome often 
depends on which party has more money. That's another reason 
to register: If you have your registration in place within 3 months 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

31 
after you publish of the app or prior to an infringement of the app, 
a judge might make the other side pay your attorney fees (more on 
this in the next section). 
Note: Alas, there isn't enough room in this Mini Missing Manual 
to get into an in-depth discussion of work-made-for-hire issues. 
If you suspect your app is a work made for hire, check out www. 
copyright.gov/drcs/circ09.pdf for more info. 
Registering Your Copyright 
As you just learned, you don't have to do anything to gain copyright 
over an app you developed—you get it automatically. However, it 
may be worth the time and effort of registering your copyright with 
the U.S. Copyright Office. (Registering is the process by which the 
Copyright Office reviews your application and issues your certificate 
of registration.) Why? Registration may help you resolve copyright 
disputes more quickly. It also lets potential infringers know you're se-
rious (it may even frighten them away), and—because you might be 
awarded attorney fees and statutory damages in court (more on this 
in a moment)—it may help you attract a lawyer to take your case. 
Here are some other benefits of registering: 
• If you register your app within 5 years of when you released it 
to the public, the government (meaning the courts) will pre-
sume you own the copyright for that app. 
• If you register your app prior to an infringement or within 3 
months of when it was first available to the public, you may be 
entitled to special payments known as "statutory damages"and 
to attorney fees from the person you sued. For example, say you 
mailed in you copyright application on June 1 and then discov-
ered an infringement on September 1 (3 months later). Because 
you registered before discovering the infringement, you can seek 
statutory damages and attorneys fees. If, on the other hand, you 
had filed your application after September 1, you wouldn't be 
able to sue for either of those things. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

• With a few exceptions, you can only file a copyright infringe-
ment lawsuit if you've registered your mobile app first. 
The fee to register is currently only $50 (less if you file electroni-
cally), which is a real bargain considering how useful it can be if 
you need it.The standard registration process takes approximately 
6 months, though you can expedite things for an added fee, which 
can shorten the duration to within 5 working days. (You can't 
expedite a copyright registration purely for convenience. It's only 
allowed in urgent cases—like when someone has ripped off your 
app and you need to file a lawsuit quickly.The Note on page 45 has 
more details.) After the Copyright Office reviews and approves all 
your application materials, they'll send you a Certificate of Regis-
tration, which you should keep in a safe place. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
The Waiting Game 
Should I wait until after I receive a Certificate of Registration to start 
selling my app? 
Nope. As mentioned earlier in this chapter, your app is protected under 
copyright law as soon as you finish it. However, you may want to wait 
until after you've filed a registration application to start selling. Thafs 
because, regardless of how long it takes to process the application and 
receive your certificate, your copyright registration is effective as of the 
date the Copyright Office receives your application (assuming ifs all 
in order). So you can rest assured that you'll have all your legal rights 
(discussed above) if someone infringes on your app, even though you 
haven't received your Certificate of Registration quite yet. 
Keep in mind that even if you post screenshots of your app on Twit-
ter, Dribbble, or Flickr before the app is finished and before you file 
your application, you can still take advantage of the copyright benefits 
discussed above as long as you register your app within 3 months of 
when it was first available to the public. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

33 
Tip: The U.S. Copyright Office's website, www.copyright.gov, is 
your one-stop source for all things copyright. You can download 
copyright application forms or copyright circulars (special publi-
cations that explain copyright laws and rules in plain language) 
You can also write to them via snail mail at Copyright Office, 
Library of Congress, Washington, DC 20559-6000. 
Form CO: Your Ticket to Copyright Registration 
The all-purpose Form CO is probably your best choice for register-
ing your app. You can download this relatively simple form from 
the Copyright Office's website: www.copyright.gov/forms/formco2d. 
pdf.The following sections explain how to complete Form CO. You 
have to fill in all the items marked with an asterisk (*). 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Does One Form Fit All Apps? 
I'm trying to register an app with the U.S. Copyright Office. My app 
includes music; photos, text graphics, sounds, and code. Is there a way 
to register all that stuff in the app in one application? 
Happily, the answer is yes. 
One thing that's kind of tricky about registering an app that includes 
lots of different types of content is choosing a copyright category. Line 
1A of Form CO doesn't include a "Software" option, so most software 
programs are registered as "literary works"—the most appropriate of 
the limited options, since source code is written in letters and numer-
als. However, if your app is primarily pictures, choose "Visual arts work" 
instead. And if it's a graphics-heavy product like a game, choose "Per-
forming arts work." Don't worry if your app seems to straddle two cat-
egories—just pick the one that seems best to you. 
You also need to figure out which elements of the app are original (cre-
ated entirely by you) and which aren't. For example, if you contributed 
some text and software code but you licensed the rest, then you can 
only claim copyright (and seek registration) for what you created. You 
indicate that in line 2H of Form CO. Then, in line 4A, you list the items 
you aren't claiming copyright for. The following sections have the details. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

Tip: After you fill it in and print out Form CO, don't alter it by 
hand. Why? Because the information used by the Copyright Of-
fice is encoded in the form's barcodes, which change depending 
on what you fill in. So if you want to register a series of similar 
works, keep the form open after you print it, and then make the 
necessary changes and print the new version. 
Section 1: Work Being Registered 
This section is where you fill in basic info about your app. As explained 
in the box"Does One Form Fit All Apps?" this form isn't tailored for 
software, so you kind of have to shoehorn in your app's vital stats. 
Note: On Form CO, "author" refers to the person or company 
that developed the mobile app, and the mobile app being regis-
tered is called "the work." 
• 1 A*: Type of work being registered. As mentioned above, 
you can use Form CO for all types of apps. Check the appropri-
ate box for the type of work (see the box "Does One Form Fit 
All Apps?"for help figuring out which one to choose). Every 
app contains more than one type of work—for example, yours 
might contain a visual work (images), a text work (software 
code and text), and maybe even a performing arts work (music 
or videos)—so just choose the type that's most predominant 
in your app. If you're not sure how to characterize your code, 
"Literary work" is your best bet. 
• 1B*: Title of work. Type in the name of your app as it's of-
fered for sale—for example, the title it's listed under at the App 
Store. If it doesn't have an official name, enter a descriptive 
phrase (such as "Random monkey noise generator") or write in 
"untitled."Capitalize each word and don't use quotation marks, 
like this:Tarot Clock Lite V1.2. If you want to include additional 
title(s)—for example, you're registering three separate apps 
that are collectively sold as one app—click the "Click here to 
create additional space to add an additional title" button. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

35 
• 1C: Serial issue. You can leave this field blank. It's designed for 
works that will be released in successive parts, like a magazine. 
Note: If you're selling an app that incorporates serialized re-
leases-your app lets people receive an issue of your magazine 
every month, say-you should consider submitting two copyright 
applications: one for the operating program (the app itself) and a 
separate application for the serialized publication. (In case you're 
wondering, a series of versions of an app-1.0, 2.0, and so on-
doesn't constitute a serial publication.) For help preparing serial 
applications, head to www.copyright.gov/circs/circ62.pdf. 
• 1D: Previous or alternative title. If you've publicly referred to 
your mobile app by any name other than what you entered in 
field 1B, enter that title here. 
• 1E*: Year of completion.Type in the year when you finished 
creating your app; the date you stood back and said, "Hallelu-
jah—I'm done!"The date you enter here can't be later than the 
year of first publication that you enter in field 1F. 
• 1F: Date of publication. Enter the date when you first publicly 
announced the app, using mm/dd/yyyy format. (See the box 
"When is a Mobile App Published?"for more on what "publica-
tion" means in this context.) If you don't know the exact date, get 
as close as reasonably possible. Don't enter a date in the future. 
If you have published your app yet, just leave this line blank. 
• 1G: ISBN. You can leave this blank—it applies only to books. 
(ISBN stands for"international standard book number".) 
• 1H: Nation of publication. Type in the name of the country 
where you first published your app. If you published it simul-
taneously in the U.S. and another country, you can just list the 
United States. Leave this line blank if you haven't published 
your app yet. 
• 11: Published as a contribution in a larger work entitled. 
If this app is as part of a larger work—for example, it's one 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

mobile app from a collection of related apps, say—enter the 
title of the larger work. 
• 1 J: If line 1 i above names a serial issue. You can leave this 
field blank. 
• 1K: If work was preregistered. You can ignore this field, too, 
as it's unlikely that you've preregistered. (Preregistration is a 
process where the owner of an unpublished software program 
can file a notice stating that they intend to publish the work 
later; it's typically used when a copyright owner needs to sue 
for infringement while they're still preparing a product for 
commercial release.) You can learn more about preregistration 
at www.copyright.gov/prereg. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
When is a Mobile App Published? 
How do I know when my mobile application has been published? Is it 
when Apple offers it for sale? 
In the world of copyright, the word "publication" has a broader mean-
ing than you might expect. A work is considered to be published under 
copyright law if you sell, distribute, or offer to sell or distribute copies 
of your mobile app to the public. So as soon as the app is available for 
people to buy at the App Store, you've published it. Displaying it for 
sale at a trade show is also considered publication, provided that the 
point of your trade show display is to make a deal with a wholesaler, 
distributor, or someone else who wants to sell your app. 
Section 2: Author Information 
This section is where you tell the Copyright Office about the app's 
author—the person or company that created the app. Happily, it's 
pretty straightforward. 
• 2A or 2B*: Personal name/Organization name. Complete 
one of these fields, but not both. If you created the app your-
self, enter your name in the "Personal name"fields, unless you 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

37 
wish to be anonymous or pseudonymous, (more on that in a 
moment). If you're filling this out for someone else who 
created the app, put that person's name in 2A instead. If a com-
pany is claiming ownership—either because it purchased the 
rights to the app or the app was created under a work-made-
for-hire arrangement (see page 28)—then list the company's 
name in field 2B. 
Tip: If other people contributed some copyrightable content to 
your app and they intended that all of the work be merged into 
the app, then you need to list these people on your copyright 
application, too. (You don't need to list people or businesses 
from whom you obtained permission to use content. You'll list 
that kind of content later, in item 4A.) In legal-speak, these folks 
are called "co-authors." They include people who worked with 
you and made significant contributions to the visuals, text, or 
code used in the app you're registering. If you have co-authors, 
scroll down to the top of page 3 of Form CO and click the "Click 
here to create space to add an additional author" button. Then 
add information about the other author(s). (Note that the but-
ton that7s supposed to let you add authors can be a bit buggy; 
specifically, the extra field(s) may not appear. If you run into this 
problem, you can either file electronically using the eCO system 
[see the box "Applying Online"] or file a paper Form TX [www. 
copyright.gov/forms/formtxd.pdf\). 
Bear in mind that whatever you enter in line 2A or 2B will 
become part of the Copyright Office's online public records, 
and you can't remove this information later. So how can you 
protect your privacy? By publishing your app anonymously 
or under a pseudonym. If you decide to go this route, type 
"anonymous" or "pseudonymous" in the First Name field, and 
then fill out field 2G appropriately (see below). 
• 2C: Doing business as. You can leave this field blank unless 
you're doing business under a fictitious business name—like 
Jo Smith doing business as Appenstance, for example. In that 
case, enter "Appenstance" in this field. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

• 2D and 2E: Year of birth and Year of death. Enter the year 
the author was born and (if applicable) died. These fields are 
optional but can come in handy as a way to identify you if you 
have the same name as another person who has registered 
a copyright—for example, if your name is Stephen King. Just 
like fields 2A and 2B, whatever date(s) you type in here will be 
part of the Copyright Office's online public records, so if you're 
squeamish about sharing personal info with the universe, leave 
these fields blank. 
• 2F*: Citizenship/Domicile. You have to enter information 
about the author's citizenship here. If the person who cre-
ated the app is a U.S. citizen, check the Citizenship and United 
States boxes. If the author is a citizen of some other country, 
check the Citizenship and Other boxes on the first line of this 
item, and then select the name of the country in the top drop-
down menu. If you'd rather list the nation where the author is 
domiciled (resides permanently), check the Domicile box and 
the other appropriate box. For example, if you're a Canadian 
citizen but you live in the U.S., you can either list either"Citizen-
ship: Canadian"or"Domicile: U.S.A."(but not both). 
• 2G: Author's contribution. Turn on the "Made for hire" check-
box here if the author's contribution qualifies as a work made 
for hire (explained above; if you need more info, check out 
www.copyright.gov/circs/circ09.pdf). As mentioned above, you 
can keep your identity private by registering your app anony-
mously or under a pseudonym. An app is anonymous if the 
creators aren't identified in the published copies of the work, 
and it's pseudonymous if the creator is identified under a ficti-
tious name (pen name). You should only check the Anonymous 
or Pseudonymous box here if that's the way you distribute your 
app—that is, you deliberately avoid using your legal name. 
If that is the case, check the appropriate box (Anonymous or 
Pseudonymous), and don't forget to fill out field 2A appropri-
ately (see above). If you use a pen name, type it in the "Pseud-
onym is"field. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

39 
• 2H*:This author created. Check the appropriate box(es) to 
indicate what the author listed in field 2A or 2B contributed to 
this mobile app. You can check as many as apply—for example, 
Computer program, Music, 2-diminsional artwork, Motion 
picture/audiovisual, and Photography. If the person's contribu-
tion doesn't really fall into any of the categories listed, check 
the Other box and then fill in a brief, specific description. The 
Copyright Office recommends avoiding terms like "idea,""con-
cept,""title,"or"name." Instead, go with things like "computer 
program code,""screen displays,""program text," "sub rout in es," 
or "entire work." 
Note: If you intend to claim copyright on the screen displays-
that is, you own the copyright for the app's visual imagery, not 
just its code-you have to list them as part of your authorship. 
Section 3: Copyright Claimant Information 
This section is where you identify the copyright owners and, if 
necessary, how they acquired that ownership. The copyright claim-
ant is, as the name suggests, the person or business that's claiming 
copyright ownership. The claimant can be one of three things: 
• The author of the work. This category includes the owner of 
a work made for hire. So if you hired someone to create the 
app for you under a work-made-for-hire arrangement (page 28), 
you're considered the author. 
• A person or business who acquired all the rights to the 
mobile app before the copyright application was filed.This 
kind of arrangement is usually created by a written agreement 
called an assignment (see the description of field 3E for more 
about assignments). 
• A person or company that the copyright owner authorized 
to act as the claimant. For example, a book author could au-
thorize her agent to act as the copyright claimant. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

Here's how to fill out this section: 
• 3A or 3B*: Personal name/Organization Name. As with 
fields 2A and 2B, fill in one or the other of these items, but not 
both. Enter the name of the person or organization that owns 
the copyright—either the developer who created it or—if 
the original copyright owner transferred the copyright—the 
person or company that now owns the copyright (more on 
transferring copyrights in a moment). What you enter here may 
be the same as what you put in line 2A or 2B. 
• 3C: Doing business as. You can leave this blank unless you've 
transferred ownership of the app to a company that uses a DBA. 
• 3D*: Address, Email, and Phone. Here's where you list the 
claimant's mailing and email addresses and phone number. 
You have to enter a street address and city, and this postal ad-
dress will become part of the Copyright Office's online public 
records. If you decide to enter an email address and phone 
number (they're optional), they won't appear in the public 
records unless you also include them in "Section 5: Rights and 
Permissions". 
• 3E: Copyright ownership acquired by. If the claimant is the 
same as the author of the app listed in line 2A or 2B, skip this 
line. You only have to fill this in if the claimant isn't an author 
but has obtained copyright ownership from the author or 
another owner. In that case, check the appropriate box to indi-
cate how the claimant acquired the copyright. 
The "Written agreement" checkbox refers to assignments or 
by other contracts. An assignment is an agreement in which 
someone sells (or"assigns") all of his rights in the app to 
someone else. In other words, the seller gives up all claim to 
copyright ownership. It's also possible to transfer copyright via 
another type of agreement—for example, as part of the sale 
of a business. In that case, list that agreement (for example, 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

"Contract for sale of XYZ Company"). Or maybe you acquired 
the rights because the app was subject to a loan agreement. 
That's right—copyrighted materials are often used as collat-
eral for loans; when the copyright owner defaults on the loan, 
the lender can foreclose on the copyright ownership just like 
when a bank forecloses on a home. By the way, if you acquired 
ownership by an assignment or other type of contract, you 
should make sure that the Copyright Office has a record of 
that document. To learn more about how to do that, check out 
www.copyright.gov/circs/circ 12.pdf. 
Check the"Will or inheritance" box only if the original copy-
right holder is deceased. If neither of those situations apply, 
check the Other box and enter a brief statement explaining 
how the copyright was transferred. 
Section 4: Limitation of Copyright Claim 
If your app is 100% original—you didn't use anyone else's images 
or code, or example—then you can skip this section. But if, like 
many apps, your app was derived from some other source (or sev-
eral sources), then you need to need to complete this section. This 
is where you specify that the work contains or is based on material 
that was previously registered or published, material that's in the 
public domain, or material that isn't owned by the person or orga-
nization listed in Section 3.The purpose of Section 4 is to exclude 
that material from the claim and identify the new material you're 
registering. Don't worry: It's not as confusing as it sounds. 
• 4A: Material excluded from this claim. Here's where you in-
dicate which parts of your app aren't your original creation. For 
example, if you were registering an app that contains a public 
domain image of Sigmund Freud, you'd check the Other box 
and enter"public domain image of Sigmund Freud"in the text 
field. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

If you're registering the first published version of an app that's 
identical to a previously registered unpublished version (more 
on previous registrations in a sec), check the Other box and 
type in "First publication of work registered as unpublished"; if 
you go this route, you don't need to fill in item 4C. 
• 4B: Previous registration. If someone has already registered 
large portions of your app—for example, say and author has 
given you permission to include material from a book that he 
wrote and registered—or if you registered an earlier version of 
your app, then enter the registration number and the year the 
work was registered.The registration number is on the Certifi-
cate of Registration, or you can search for it at www.copyright. 
gov/records. 
Note: If you regularly create new versions of your app, you can 
file new copyright applications for each one. Just make sure to 
indicate the previous two versions in item 4B. You're probably 
best off only bothering with submitting applications for major 
revisions, so if version 2 isn't much different from version 3, you 
can skip applying. 
• 4C: New material included in this claim. Check the ap-
propriate box(es) to identify the material you're claiming in 
this registration.The point of this item is to indicate what you 
contributed to the app, since you should only fill in this section 
if the app also contains material by someone else.Typically, 
you can simply enter the same thing here that you put in the 
"Continuation of Author Information" line in item 2H. However, 
if this is a new version of your app, instead of re-entering the 
information from 2H, you might type in "revised computer 
program,""editorial revisions,'or "revisions and additional text 
of computer program." 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

43 
Why would anyone registering an app check the Compilation 
box? Well, you might use it if you created an app titled "10 Best 
Music App Tools/'in which you assembled, selected, or orga-
nized the preexisting apps into one jumbo app without chang-
ing any of them. Your goal in that case is to protect the collec-
tion, not the individual apps within it. In other words, you're 
trying to copyright the manner in which you arranged or 
selected the apps, not the apps themselves. However, if you've 
created several different apps, then you don't want to check 
this box because you aim is to protect the individual apps. 
If none of the checkboxes applies, check the Other box and 
enter a brief description of the new material you're registering. 
Section 5: Rights and Permissions 
If someone wants to contact you about your app—a developer 
wants to license the rights for a similar but derivative app, say, or 
someone wants to nominate you for the Nobel prize—they need 
to know how to get in touch with you. Section 5 is where you 
provide your contact info so folks can do that. If the information 
in Section 3 (see above) is the same as what you'd enter here, then 
just check the box at the beginning of this section. If you want to 
provide different contact info here, fill in the appropriate fields. 
This section is optional, so you can skip it if you want. One factor 
that might help you decide whether to fill it in is the fact that all 
the information you enter in this section—including name, postal 
address, email address, and phone number—will be posted online 
in the Copyright Office's public records. 
Section 6*: Correspondence Contact 
You have to fill in this section, which lets the Copyright Office 
know who they should contact with any questions about this ap-
plication. If it's the same person as the one listed in Section 3 or 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

5, simply check the first or second box, respectively. Surprisingly, 
whatever you enter in this section won't appear in online public 
records. 
Section 7; Mail Certificate To 
This required section tells the Copyright Office who they should 
mail the registration certificate to. If this is the same as the person 
(or organization) in Section 3, check the first box. If it's the same as 
the person in Section 5, check the second box. And if it's the same 
as the person in Section 6, check the third box. If you want it sent 
somewhere totally different, fill in the appropriate fields. As with 
Section 6. the info you provide here won't end up online. 
Section 8: Certification 
Congratulations—you're almost finished! Just a few more items to 
go, and they're easy to fill in. 
• 8A*: Handwritten signature. After you print out the completed 
application, be sure to sign it here. 
• 8B*: Printed name. Type in the name of the person who will 
sign the form. 
• 8C*: Date signed. If you're going to sign the form the same 
day that you print it, then turn on the "Today's date" radio 
button. If not, select "Write date by hand" and then be sure to 
write in the date when you sign the application. 
Note: If you entered a date in item 1F, make sure the date in 
item 8C isn't earlier than the one in 1F. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

45 
• 8D: Deposit account. Leave this line blank unless you have 
a Copyright Office deposit account.That's an account where 
you've deposited at least $450; the Copyright Office then de-
ducts from it each time you file a copyright application. It's not 
worth setting one of these up unless you registering several 
copyrights a year. In that case, Circular 5 (www.copyright.gov/ 
circs/circ05.pdf) explains how to create such an account 
• 8E: Applicant's internal tracking number. If you have an 
tracking number you want associated with this application, 
enter it here. 
That's it. That wasn't too bad, now was it? 
Once you complete the form, print it and sign it (and write in the 
date, if needed). Now you just need to write a check for the appli-
cation fee ($50, payable to the Register of Copyrights) and gather 
up your deposit materials, which are explained in the following 
section. When you have everything together, put it all in the same 
envelope or package and mail it to: 
Library of Congress 
Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue, SE 
Washington, DC 20559-6233 
Note: As mentioned earlier, you can expedite your filing—but if II 
cost ya: For an expedited handling fee of $810 ($760 plus the 
$50 filing fee), the Copyright Office will process an application 
within 5 working days. But this service is only allowed in urgent 
cases, like when you're dealing with a lawsuit related to your 
app, a pending customs matter, or a looming contractual or 
publishing deadline. You can request it by following the instruc-
tions in Copyright Circular 10 (www.copyright.gov/circs/circ10. 
pdf). 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

46 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Applying Online 
Can I file a copyright application online instead of printing it out and 
snail-mailing it? 
Yes, the Copyright Office has an online filing system it calls eCO. One 
benefit of going this route is that ifs cheaper than applying by mail 
($35 instead of $50). To apply online, you: 
• Answer the application questions on the Copyright Office's web-
site (to get started, head to www.copyright.gov/eco/notice.html) 
• Pay the fee by credit or debit card, electronic check, or by setting 
up a deposit account 
• Upload or mail copies of your deposit materials (explained in a 
sec) 
To apply online, all you have to do is create a user account and pass-
word. And ifs nice to know that the eCO system includes a "Save for 
Later" feature so you don't have to complete your application all in one 
sitting. 
Tip: The information in this chapter about filling out the mail-
in form should give you the guidance you need to fill out the 
online application. But if you need more help, the Copyright 
Office has done a nice job of explaining the eCO process and 
making it user-friendly with a tutorial (www.copyright.gov/eco/ 
eco-tutorial.pps) and FAQs (www.copyright.gov/eco/faq.html). 
And once you start your online application, you'll see that it's 
peppered with helpful drop-down menus and links that provide 
pop-up explanations for each step the process. 
Deposit Materials 
The final piece of your copyright application is what's called your 
deposit—a nonreturnable copy of the work you're registering. If 
you were registering a novel, for example, you'd simply mail in a 
copy of the manuscript. But since you're registering an app, the is-
sue of what to send in as a deposit is a little more complicated. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

47 
Mobile app developers should submit their code and several im-
ages of the mobile app's screens (screenshots). You should include 
screenshots as part of your deposit materials even if you speci-
fied in item4A of your application that you don't claim copyright 
ownership of the graphics because someone else claims copyright 
to the imagery.This section explains exactly what you need to 
submit. 
The Code 
The Copyright Office wants a hard-copy printout of all or part of 
your code. You've got four ways to do this. You can send in a print-
out of you: 
• Source code. Include the first 25 and last 25 pages of source 
code, together with the page containing the copyright notice, 
if any. (If you're writing in a scripted language, that scripted 
language is considered source code.) If you're not sure where 
the program begins and ends, make your best guess. If the 
program has under 50 pages of source code, include it all. 
• Source code with portions containing any trade secrets 
blacked out so no one can read them. If you want to hide 
your trade secrets, you can provide the first and last 25 pages 
of source (with trade secrets blacked out), or the first and last 
10 pages (with no trade secrets blacked out), or—for pro-
grams whose source code fills 50 pages or less—all the source 
code with trade secret portions blacked out. You also need to 
include a cover letter explaining that there are trade secrets in 
the code. 
• Object code with trade secrets included.The Copyright 
Office prefers that you submit source code, but if you want to 
deposit object code, you have to include a letter stating that 
the object code contains original authorship.The program will 
then be registered under the Rule of Doubt, a state of registra-
tion in which the Copyright Office is basically saying,"We can't 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

read or understand object code so we're taking the applicant's 
word that this is copyrightable." If there's a battle over the 
copyright, the you'll have to jump through a few more hoops 
in court. If you decide to go this route, provide the first 25 and 
last 25 pages of object code plus any 10 or more consecutive 
pages of source code with no blacked-out portions. 
Most people choose the first option, and that's what the Copyright 
Office prefers. Why are there so many options? Because some 
developers worry about revealing their trade secrets if they submit 
their entire source code, so they prefer to either black out secrets 
or file the object code instead (that's the binary file—or, in Java, 
the byte code—for an app). 
The Screenshots 
If you specifically claimed the visual aspects of your app—that is, 
in Section 2H, you checked 2-diminsional artwork, Motion picture/ 
audiovisual, or Photography—then you have to provide screen-
shots. Images ofyourapp's key screens will suffice. But even if you 
didn't check those 2H categories, it's still a good idea to furnish 
some screenshots with your deposit materials. 
Your goal when choosing the shots is to document screens that 
are most likely to be copied by an infringer. That way, if you're 
engaged in an infringement battle, you can point to the deposit 
materials and say, "See, he copied this image1.).There's no limit on 
the number of screenshots you can deposit, so submit as many as 
you like. 
To submit screenshots with your application, use a printout, pho-
tograph, or drawing of the screens. These reproductions should 
be no smaller than 3"x3" and no larger than 9"x12". The Copyright 
Office will also accept a manual accompanying the program if it 
contains clear reproductions of the screens. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

49 
If you're registering a game or an application that includes moving 
imagery (audiovisual materials), you can submit a CD-ROM or DVD 
of the audiovisual material. If you checked "Motion picture/audio-
visual" in Section 2H you, have to provide this material along with 
your code. 
Tip: The deposit requirements are pretty complex. For more on 
what to submit as your deposit, check out Circular 61 (www. 
copyright.gov/circs/circ61 .pdf), which is specifically about regis-
tering computer programs. 
After You Mail Your Application 
The Copyright Office handles more than half a million applications 
a year, so be prepared to wait. It can take 6 to 8 months (or more) 
for them to process your application. That's not as bad as it sounds, 
though, because—as you learned earlier—your registration is 
effective on the date the Copyright Office receives your applica-
tion (assuming you filled out the forms properly), not the date 
you actually receive your registration certificate. (And don't forget 
about the copyright protection you have automatically as soon as 
you finish your app—see page 28.) 
How will you know when the Copyright Office receives your ap-
plication? They'll cash your check! And because the registration is 
effective as of the date the Copyright Office receives your appli-
cation, once they cash your check, you should feel comfortable 
knowing that you've done everything possible under to protect for 
your app. 
If 6 months pass after they cash your check and you haven't heard 
anything or you don't hear anything for a while and you're con-
cerned, write them and include a copy of the canceled check with 
your letter (that'll help them trace your application). 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

50 
Note: If you want to find out about the status of your application 
within 16 weeks of when the Copyright Office received it, you'll 
have to pay a fee. Call (202) 707-3000 to ask about this. 
The Copyright Office will eventually respond to your application in 
one of three ways: 
• If you did everything right, you'll receive a registration certifi-
cate with the official Copyright Office seal, registration date, 
and number stamped on it. Be sure to keep it for your records. 
• If you made a minor mistake—for example, you failed fill in 
a required field, or you didn't properly describe your author-
ship—the Copyright Office will contact you and explain how to 
fix it. 
• If your application is rejected, you'll get a letter explaining why. 
(No, you won't get your deposit fee back.) If you want to appeal 
the Copyright Office's decision, you can send a request to: 
Chief, Receiving and Processing Division 
Copyright Office 
P.O. Box 71380 
Washington, DC 20024-1380 
Appeals are beyond the scope of this manual, but you can 
learn more about the process at http://asmp.org/tutorials/if-
you-are-turned-down.html. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

51 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Posting a Copyright Notice on Your Work 
Should I include a copyright notice in my app? If so, where do I put it? 
While you don't technically have to include a notice in your app to 
receive legal copyright protection, it's a good idea to include a basic 
notice (like "Copyright © 2010 Bobby Jones") in each copy of your mo-
bile app. Why? The notice tells anyone who sees the work that you're 
claiming copyright and makes it clear when the work was first pub-
lished. That might keep easily dissuaded pirates from copying your app, 
and it can help you prove that any copyright infringement was willful 
(meaning the person knew they were doing something they weren't 
allowed to do), which might help you recover more damages if you 
end up in court. 
The year listed in your copyright notice should be the year of first pub-
lication. If you created a version 2 with additional material, then the 
notice should include the date that version is first published. Or, you 
can list a range of years to include all versions, like "Copyright © 2009-
2011," or "Copyright © 2009, 2011," for example. 
As far as where to put the notice, there are no fixed rules for apps. 
You can put it on the opening splash screen, include it as a footer on 
certain screens, or make it part of an Information page. You should 
also probably include it on your website if you're offering the app as a 
download. (Apple includes it as part of the metadata on your page in 
the App Store). If there's any print material that goes along with your 
app—like an overview PDF—include the notice on the cover or on an 
inside page of that document. 
Infringement: What You Can Do About It 
The sad fact is that there are a lot of sleazy characters out there. If 
you're unlucky, one of them might decide to steal parts of your app 
and claim it as his own. The whole point of registering your copy-
right is to protect you in case that happens. The technical term for 
this kind of app-swiping is infringement. 
How can you be sure that someone has infringed on your copy-
right? The answer depends on three factors: 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

• Is your work protected by copyright? In order for you to 
copyright an app, you have to create it independently (in other 
words, you can't steal parts of it from anyone else), it has to 
show some creativity, and has to be fixed in some way (for 
example, saved to a hard drive). 
Remember that copyright doesn't protect ideas, so you can't 
stop someone from coming up with an idea similar to yours. 
So if your app teaches people Karate moves, that doesn't mean 
no one else can create an app that explains the same thing, 
just that they can't express that information in substantially 
the same way you do. But if the other app has audio, visuals, or 
text that's really similar to your app, you may have a legitimate 
infringement claim. 
• Did the infringer copy the work? If the person won't admit 
that they copied your app, you need to show two things: 
— The infringer had access to your work. Sometimes this 
is easy to prove—for example, if you sent the other party a 
linkto your app and you have a copy of the email. In other 
cases, you may need to use a legal process known as dis-
covery to obtain records to prove your claim, like download 
records from Apple. 
Note: If someone else's app is exactly the same as yours, a court 
will presume that the infringer had access to your work-how 
else could they create an identical copy? 
—The two works are really similar. The stronger the simi-
larity, the greater the chance that a court will find that the 
person infringed on your copyright. Some courts use a 
two-step process to decide whether there's a substantial 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

53 
similarity between the two works. First, they identify the 
aspects of the works that are subject to copyright pro-
tection (in other words, they filter out the unprotectable 
parts, like stuff that's in the public domain).Then the court 
compares all the other aspects to see how alike they are. If 
they're suspiciously similar, the court then decides whether 
the person actually infringed on the original app devel-
oper's copyright. 
• Is there any reason to excuse the infringement? Whether 
your lawsuit will be successful (meaning the court will agree 
that the person infringed on your copyright and award you 
damages) depends on whether the alleged infringer can raise 
one or more legal defenses to the charge. Common defenses 
in copyright infringement cases are: 
—too much time has elapsed between the infringing act 
and the lawsuit (this is sometimes referred to as either "the 
statute of limitations defense"or"estoppel,"which roughly 
means that the defendant figured that, because the 
copyright owner didn't do anything for a long time after 
the infringement, it was okay with the copyright owner to 
infringe) 
—the infringement is allowed under fair use (see http://fai-
ruse.stanford.edu/index.html for more info) 
—the original work isn't protected under copyright law and 
therefore anyone can copy it without infringing 
—the infringing work was independently created (that is, it 
wasn't copied from the original) 
—the copyright owner authorized the use in a license 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

If someone infringes your copyright, you can file a lawsuit in 
federal court asking the court to issue orders (restraining orders 
and injunctions) to prevent further violations, award monetary 
damages (if appropriate), and—in some circumstances—award 
attorney fees. For 99.5 percent of the population, filing a copyright 
lawsuit is well beyond the boundaries of legal self-help; in other 
words, you'll need an attorney. 
Tip: If you're really worried about being sued for copyright in-
fringement, it might be a good idea to register your unpublished 
work with the Copyright Office while you're still developing it. 
(Yep, the Copyright Office lets you register unpublished works.) 
The advantage of going this route is that you deposit a copy of 
the software with the Copyright Office as part of the registration 
process, and they keep it on file. This registered copy can serve 
as proof that you didn't copy it from anyone: If you deposited 
your app before the work you are alleged to have copied was 
created, then you couldn't have copied it. 
Self-Help Remedies 
If you suspect someone of copying your app, you should discuss 
your problem with a copyright attorney, even if you plan to try to 
settle or compromise with the infringer without going to court. A 
preliminary conference with an attorney shouldn't be expensive. 
However, whether you see an attorney or not, here are some pre-
liminary things you can safely do on your own: 
1. Make a common-sense assessment of how big the problem 
is. Who is the infringer? How much infringement is occurring? 
If the person has sold 10 copies of a copycat app and then re-
moved it from the App Store, it's probably not worth worrying 
about. But if the person has sold 5,000 copies and counting, 
that could be a different story. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

55 
2. Make sure your copyright records are complete in case you 
need to get a lawyer involved to stop the infringer. Hope-
fully, you've registered your copyright and have retained cop-
ies of all the documents you filed and of your correspondence 
with the Copyright Office. You should also keep copies of all 
copyright transfers you've made, if any. 
3. Consider sending the alleged infringer a cease and desist 
letter. Such a letter serves several functions: 
— It lets the infringer know that you believe she is infringing 
your copyright. 
— It gives you evidence of when you discovered the infringe-
ment, which can be useful if you end up taking your case 
to court. 
— It gives the infringer a chance to explain her conduct and 
offer a compromise before you spend lots of money on a 
lawsuit. Even if you're sure you're right, it doesn't hurt to lis-
ten to the other person's story. And by giving the infringer 
a chance to respond, you may find out a lot about how she 
plans to defend herself in court. 
A typical cease and desist letter: 
• explains who you are, including your business address and 
telephone number, or—if you want to protect your privacy— 
some other way to contact you, like at a P.O. Box 
• includes the name of your work, the date you first published it 
(see the info in "1F: Date of publication"), and, if you've regis-
tered your work, the copyright registration certificate number 
• describes the nature of the activity you believe to be an in-
fringement of your copyright 
• demands that the infringer stop that activity, and 
• asks the person to respond within a stated period of time (typi-
cally two weeks) 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

While you can threaten legal action in your cease and desist letter, 
you're probably better off not doing that at this stage. Such threats 
usually just make people paranoid, defensive, and unwilling to co-
operate. In addition, if you include the threat of a lawsuit, the other 
side can initiate a preemptory legal action in which it asks a local 
cou rt to sort out the dispute; the person can't do this if you don't 
threaten legal action. 
Also, if you act as if your lawsuit is only hours away, the answer 
to your letter is likely to come from the infringer's lawyer. Once 
two lawyers are involved, the chances of any sort of compromise 
is pretty low, since lawyers usually get paid more to fight than to 
compromise. 
When you draft your letter, remember that you may end up want-
ing to use it in court. So avoid being cute, nasty, tentative, or overly 
dramatic. Once you've written the letter, be sure to send it by certi-
fied mail or some other method that gives you proof that the other 
person received it. 
What you do next depends on the response you receive (if you 
receive one), as well as the nature of the infringement. Common 
out-of-court resolutions to infringements include: 
• the infringer paying you to compensate you for any actual 
damages you suffered as a result of the infringement (and any 
profits the infringer made from the infringement that aren't 
taken into account in computing the actual damages) 
• the two of you reaching an agreement—usually in the form of 
a license—that makes the infringement legal and that stipu-
lates that you'll get paid a certain fee for all future copies of the 
other person's work, and 
• getting the infringer to agree to stop distributing the infring-
ing work. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

57 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
The DMCA and You 
What's the DMCA and what do I need to know about it before I post 
my apps? 
In 1998, Congress passed the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 
a complex bit of legislation related to copyright protection in the Inter-
net Age. If you want to read the whole thing (and you don't), you can 
find it here: http://tinyurl.com/me2a. Happily, you only need to know 
about two aspects of this law. 
First, it forbids developers from circumventing copy-protection 
schemes and other technological measures designed to prevent ac-
cess to program code. The DMCA also makes an exception for some 
reverse engineering. If you've lawfully obtained the right to use a copy 
of a computer program, you can circumvent copy-protection measures 
to gain access to the code // you do it to identify and analyze, "those 
elements of the program that are necessary to achieve interoperability 
of an independently created computer program with other programs." 
In other words, you can check out a program's code if you paid for a 
copy of the program and you're working on your own program or app 
that will work with that program. Moreover, programmers can develop 
tools to permit such reverse engineering and share the info they learn 
from doing reverse engineering with others, as long as these activities 
don't constitute copyright infringement (for example, you can't copy 
copyrighted code). 
Second, the DMCA gives copyright owners a very powerful self-help 
process to fight online infringement: If you believe your copyrighted 
material has been unlawfully stored in an Internet Service Provider's 
system (or that the ISP's system contains links or other locators to a 
site that contains infringing material), you can send a notice to the ISP 
letting it know about the infringement and asking the ISP to take down 
the material. 
Why should the ISP comply? The DMCA creates "safe harbors," which 
make it so that ISPs can't be sued for monetary damages if their cus-
tomers commit copyright infringements. However, to obtain safe-
harbor protection for storage of—or links to—infringing material, ISPs 
have to comply with the DMCA's notice and take-down procedure, ex-
plained at http://tinyurl.com/htu2e). So, any ISP that gets such a no-
tice has a strong incentive to remove or disable access to the material, 
because doing so means it can't get sued for the alleged infringement. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 

What should you do if someone accuses you of copyright infringe-
ment? First, see how serious the claim is. If it's minor—for example, 
a photographer claims you used one of her pictures in your app 
without permission—then the two of you can usually come to 
some kind of compromise quickly. This kind of thing happens all 
the time, and in such instances you probably don't need to in-
volve a lawyer (who'll probably charge you at least $200 per hour). 
Simply have the copyright owner sign a letter releasing you from 
liability in return for your payment. 
On the other hand, if you receive a letter from a copyright owner 
or owner's attorney alleging a substantial claim—for example, that 
your app is an unauthorized derivative work and its sale should be 
halted immediately—it's probably time to find a copyright lawyer. 
If, even worse, you're served with a court complaint (a document 
initiating a lawsuit), you need to act quickly because you may have 
as little as 20 days to file an answer (response) in court. (If you don't 
respond in time, a judgment can be entered against you.) 
Even if the case is serious, don't despair: Some infringement suits 
are resolved quickly and—assuming you have the money to 
fight—many infringement cases are won by the alleged infringer. 
Bottom line: If you receive a cease and desist letter accusing you of 
infringement; you probably should see an attorney. 
If the other party is trying to sue you for a substantial amount, 
you should only decide whether to settle the case or fight it out 
in court after consulting with an attorney. In making this decision, 
you need to carefully weigh the following factors: 
• How likely it is that the copyright owner will prevail. 
• How much you'd owe the copyright owner if you lost. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

59 
• The costs of contesting the case, not only in terms of money, 
but also time, embarrassment, and bad publicity. 
• How much the copyright owner may be willing to settle for. 
Typically, a copyright owner who sues you for infringement will 
seek a preliminary injunction (a court order) soon after the law-
suit is filed that prohibits you from continuing the infringing 
activity.Then the court will hold a hearing where the judge will 
decide whether the copyright owner would likely prevail at trial 
and whether the owner would be irreparably harmed if the judge 
doesn't issue an injunction. Most of the time, infringement cases 
are settled based on the outcome of this hearing. If the copyright 
owner gets an injunction, the alleged infringer will usually agree 
to settle the case on terms favorable to the owner. If the judge 
doesn't issue an injunction, the copyright owner may continue to 
fight, drop the case entirely, or accept a relatively small settlement. 
Keep in mind that, if the copyright owner does have a valid claim 
(in other words, you really did violate her copyright), paying an at-
torney to fight a losing battle will only compound your problems. If 
the copyright owner is able to obtain a preliminary injunction from 
a federal judge, she probably has a valid claim. In that case, your 
best bet is to tell your attorney to settle out of court and pay the 
copyright owner for damages. 
COPYRIGHTING YOUR APP 


CHAPTER 3 
Names and Trademarks 
W
hen Apple debuted the ¡Phone in 2007, everyone was 
impressed. Well, not everyone:The lawyers at Cisco 
Systems weren't thrilled.They acknowledged that it 
was a "cool phone," but they also pointed out that they owned the 
registered trademark,"¡Phone"—they'd owned it since 2000 when 
they had acquired another company. (A trademark is any name, 
logo, symbol, or device that identifies one company's products and 
services and distinguishes them from others—like Google, O'Reilly, 
and Amazon, for example.) 
Why would Apple debut a product with a name that was regis-
tered to a competitor? The answer is that, in the rarified world 
where companies like Apple and Cisco play, trademark disputes 
are as common as flashlight apps. They have huge legal depart-
ments to sort out such cases. 
Unless you've got a team of attorneys on call, you can't operate 
with similar disregard for trademark rights. If you do, you may have 
your app pulled by Apple or find your mailbox packed with cease 
and desist letters. Your goal should be to avoid infringing on some-
one else's mark and to be prepared to pursue others who tread on 

yours. This chapter gives you advice on choosing a trademark in 
the first place, then walks you through the process of registering 
your mark so you can get maximum legal protection. Finally, you'll 
learn a little about trademark infringement so you can avoid end-
ing up in a legal battle. 
Note: When a trademark is used to identify services instead of 
goods-like ¡Tunes U, which offers educational services-it's 
sometimes referred to as a service mark. Unless specifically 
distinguished, both trademarks and service marks are referred to 
as "trademarks" throughout this Mini Missing Manual. 
Trademark Basics 
Here are some important trademark principles to help you get 
started: 
• First user gets the trademark. As a general rule, if you're the 
first to use a trademark in commerce—meaning you're the first 
to sell an app under a certain name—you acquire the rights 
to it (and can stop other app makers from using a substan-
tially similar trademark). However, simply being the first to use 
a mark may not get you all the protection you need. Other 
factors that influence trademark rights are the geographical 
extent of your use, whether the mark is weak or strong, wheth-
er someone with related products or services—for example, 
a computer hardware manufacturer or website developer—is 
using a similar name, and whether you've abandoned your 
right to use the mark. (There's more on these factors later in 
this chapter.) 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

63 
• Rights are limited to your goods and services.This is a cor-
nerstone of trademark law: You can only stop others from us-
ing a similar mark on goods or services with which the mark is 
used, intended to be used, or likely to be used. So if you create 
the mark"Good to Gopher"for a game involving gophers, you 
won't be able to stop a company that adopts the name for pest 
extermination, because consumers aren't likely to be confused 
by the two distinct and noncompeting uses. 
• Creating a trademark doesn't create rights. You don't get 
trademark rights merely because you create a trademark—by 
designing a logo or coining a slogan, say.To acquire rights, you 
have to actually use the trademark in commerce (as explained 
above). You can reserve trademark rights—by filing an ITU 
application as described below—but these rights won't vest 
unless you eventually use the mark in commerce. 
• Distinctive trademarks are easier to protect. Trademark 
protection is based around a "strength" classification system. 
Strong trademarks—such as Scrabble, Doodle Jump, or Pando-
ra—are distinctive and you can immediately stop others from 
using similar ones. Weak trademarks, on the other hand, are 
not distinctive because they merely describe some aspect of 
the app—for example Alarm Clock Pro and ¡Fitness—and you 
can't register them on the Principal Register (which is the best 
form of U.S. trademark protection—see the Note below) until 
you can show the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) 
that consumers associate the name with your app. This is 
usually proven by extensive advertising and sales. (Trademark 
experts refer to this "strengthening" as secondary meaning.) 
For example, the weak descriptive term "Windows" became a 
strong trademark after Microsoft spent several billion dollars 
associating the term with its company. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

64 
Note: The USPTO keeps two lists of all the trademarks it has 
registered-the Principal Register and the Supplemental Register. 
Of the two lists, the Principal Register is by far the more impor-
tant. Trademarks on this list have much more protection than 
those on the Supplemental Register-which is primarily for weak 
or descriptive marks that haven't acquired secondary meaning. 
People almost always file applications for the Principal Register. 
If the mark isn't deemed worthy of that register (because it's 
too weak), then the trademark examining attorney often recom-
mends filing on the Supplemental Register instead (there's no 
additional fee). 
Why bother with the Supplemental Register? One reason is that 
anyone doing a standard trademark search will discover the reg-
istration and most likely will decide to use a different mark. Also, 
placement on the Supplemental Register entitles the mark's 
owner to use the ® symbol (see "Symbols indicating a trade-
mark"). And finally, if the mark continues in use and remains 
on the Supplemental Register for 5 years, it's easier to apply to 
have the mark placed on the Principal Register (because it will 
have acquired distinctiveness through continued use over time). 
So, the Supplemental Register gives you some benefits, so it's a 
sensible alternative if the USPTO refuses to put your mark on the 
Principal Register because it's not distinctive enough. 
There's no foolproof test for choosing a mark or determining 
whether a mark is strong or weak. But if your mark is weak or 
descriptive, be prepared to explain to the USPTO why consum-
ers associate the term with your goods and why you deserve to 
register it (as explained in the next few paragraphs). Generally, 
a mark is strong if it's either so unique or clever that it's classi-
fied as "inherently distinctive"—like "Tetris,"for example, which 
is immediately distinctive—or if it becomes distinctive through 
sales and advertising—like Glow Hockey or eTrade. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

65 
• No trademark protection if... In some situations, the intended 
trademark can't be registered, and the owner has no right to 
stop others from using a similar mark. The most common rea-
sons for this include: 
— Nonuse (also known as abandonment), which occurs if 
you stop using a trademark and it appears as if you won't 
resume using it, 
— Using a generic term. This means attempting to use the 
name of a class of goods. For example, you use the term 
"Software"as the sole name for your mobile app. In that 
case, the name won't be protected because it's a generic 
term. (Someone could, however, use generic terms in 
conjunction with other terms—like Software Lingerie, for 
example—and not be generic.) 
• Symbols indicating a trademark.Typically, the symbols 
orSM are used along with trademarks—as in Tetris®.The ® 
symbol indicates that a trademark has been registered with 
the USPTO, which you'll learn more about in a few pages. It's 
illegal to use the ® symbol if the trademark in question hasn't 
been registered with the USPTO. You're not legally required 
to use the ® symbol, but not using it may limit the amount of 
damages that you can recover if you sue someone for infring-
ing on your trademark. If you haven't registered the trademark, 
you can use the ™ symbol instead. Similarly, the ** symbol is 
for service marks that haven't been registered. The ™ andSM 
symbols don't have any legal significance other than indicating 
that the owner is claiming trademark rights which may or may 
not hold up in court. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

66 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Domain Names and Trademarks 
What if somebody is using my trademark as a domain name? 
If you have a registered trademark and someone is holding the do-
main name hostage—meaning they registered it in bad faith in order to 
cause you problems (and jack up the price of getting it)—then federal 
law and international arbitration rules can help you. For more informa-
tion check out www.icann.org/en/udrp. 
However, not all uses of domain names by others are in bad faith. 
Trademark owners often vie for the same domain name. For example 
the Apple computer company and the Apple music label (the Beatles' 
record company) may both have a legitimate claim to apple.com, but 
the computer maker apparently acquired it first. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Trade Names vs. Trade Marks 
I registered my mobile app businessrs name as the name of my cor-
poration with my secretary of state. Does that make it a trademark? 
No, registering your business name (also referred to as your trade 
name) with your state's secretary of state doesn't give you any trade-
mark rights. State registration is done primarily to guarantee that each 
corporation or LLC has ifs own name for state regulation purposes, 
and to help the public identify corporate owners for purposes of law-
suits and taxes. 
You'll only acquire trademark rights if you use the trade name in con-
nection with the sale of your products or services—for example, Apple 
is both a trade name and is used as a trademark on hardware and 
software products. 
Bottom line: If you don't use your trade name to sell products or ser-
vices, then it won't function as a trademark 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

67 
Tip: Be careful about using your surname as a trademark. There 
are some advantages to using your own name-you have less 
chance of infringing on someone else's trademark and you may 
have an easier time preserving your rights to a domain name. 
But you may be surprised to learn that it's often difficult to regis-
ter trademarks that use a family name, because the USPTO often 
considers family names to be weak trademarks. That's because a 
family name that's perceived primarily as a person's name is de-
scriptive (meaning weak), and therefore can't be registered on 
the USPTO's Principal Register unless the trademark owner can 
demonstrate secondary meaning-like Newman's Own or Dell, 
where consumers associate the name with certain products. 
Choosing and Registering Your Trademark 
As a general rule, an excellent app that consumers want will sell 
regardless of its name. Occasionally, the name of an app may draw 
attention—like the short-lived I Am Rich app (a $999 ¡Phone app 
that did nothing)—or may create some consumer demand (as ¡n 
the case of apps such as Nude It and SexlQ). While you're allowed 
to come up with creative names, here are some rules that may help 
you come up with a successful trademark: 
• Sometimes the obvious choice is the best choice. Even 
though descriptive marks may be harder to register or enforce 
(see the Note on page 64), that might not matter for your app 
when you consider its short lifespan and the need for instant 
customer recognition of its capabilities. For example, the 
purposes and capabilities of iVideoCamera, Spin Art, and CNN 
Mobile are all clear, making them logical choices. 
• Pick a name that distinguishes you. You don't need to be 
clever, just distinctive. The point is to create a name that dif-
ferentiates you from competitors. For example, Street Lingo 
is distinctive enough from its urban dictionary competitor, 
Slango, to avoid a trademark dispute. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

• Avoid a name that's similar to competitors'This is the 
flipside of the previous point: Choosing a name similar to a 
competitor's may trigger a dispute—and if the competitor 
has been using the name longer than you have, you'll lose the 
battle. A similar name is one that is likely to confuse consum-
ers—for example, a game that's similar toTetris and called 
Tris could easily confuse folks looking forTetris (this actually 
happened—see"lnfringement"for details). Determining the 
degree of similarity is part science and part witchcraft, and 
sometimes depends on the sophistication of the consumers. If 
you're not sure whether a name you've chosen is too similar to 
someone else's, put yourself in the competitor's shoes and look 
at the choice from their perspective. Would you feel ripped off? 
Trademark Searching 
Typically, a company with a new product hires a trademark search 
company to report on whether its new product name is likely to 
infringe. But that's probably overkill for most app developers. Most 
likely, a search of the app stores and the software categories at 
online retailers such as Amazon should give you a general idea 
whether your name is likely to be confused with another product. 
You need to consider all software products because that's the 
class within which you might register (see "Mark Information") and 
because a trademark owner acquires rights not just for its goods 
but also for goods and services that it is reasonably likely to offer. 
For example, it might be expected that an online game would be 
ported to the iPhone.Therefore, even if that game isn't yet avail-
able as an ¡Phone app, you'd run into problems if you named your 
app the same thing as the game. Similarly, if your app is geared 
to a specific field or industry, you'd need to check out that field to 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

be sure you're not in conflict with anyone else's products. If you're 
offering tide tables in app called Tidey Up, say, you wouldn't want 
to use that name if there was already a publisher by that name 
that prints tide tables, since it is not unlikely that the publisher will 
expand into the app world. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Using Other Companies' Names in Yours 
Is it okay to use the name of an app company like Pre, iPhone, or An-
droid in the name of an app? For example, if I'm creating an app for 
the Palm Pre, can I call it Pre Video? Or if I'm working on something for 
the iPhone, can I call it iPhone Video? 
Before you incorporate another company's name into your app, review 
the company's trademark rules. (There's usually a link to these guide-
lines on the Legal Notices or About Us page of the company's website.) 
In the case of Palm for example, they don't want you to merge "Pre" 
with your trademark, and prefer instead that you tie your app to the 
phone's operating system, not its name (since the company expects 
other phones to use the OS other than just the Pre). For example, Palm 
recommends 'Video for webOS." 
Similar rules would apply for Apple as well. You can probably get away 
with "Video for ¡Phone" or "Video: ¡Phone Edition," but not with ¡Phone 
Video. Apparently, the same rules apply to the ¡Pad, too, as Apple has 
rejected apps with titles such as "PartyPad - Marble Mixer" but accept-
ed "Scrabble for ¡Pad." In addition, when you use another company's 
trademark, the guidelines for using it usually require that you include 
a statement disclaiming rights to the other company's trademark, like 
"¡Phone and Apple are trademarks of Apple, Inc." (Even if it's not re-
quired, ifs a good idea to include a phrase like this). You can put the 
statement on any screen in your app (ifs usually on the screen that 
contains your copyright notice), and you should include it whenever 
you advertise your app. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

Finally, your search should locate substantially similar variations 
on the mark. For example, if a mobile app developer is using the 
named Birdman for a collection of bird calls and birding photos for 
bird watchers, he would need to search for that name as well as 
soundalikes ("Byrd"), plurals ("Bird Men"), gender variations ("Bird 
Women" or "Bird Boy") and perhaps foreign translations. 
If you search around and find that someone else is already using 
the mark you want—or a substantially similar mark—it's time to 
rethink your choice. Frustrating though this is, it's better than clos-
ing your eyes to the competition and hoping for the best. Failure 
to search—or to act on what you discovered in a search—can have 
expensive consequences. If you rush to market, blind to the fact 
that a similar trademark is already being used by a competitor, the 
competitor may obtain a court order preventing you from using 
the trademark, and you may have to pay monetary damages and 
attorney fees. 
The cheapest way to search is to start with an online search using 
Google, and then searching the USPTO's database (on www.uspto. 
gov, clickTrademarks, and then click Search Marks). If this prelimi-
nary search turns up similar marks (which lawyers call potential 
conflicts), you can then drop the names you were considering that 
might conflict and either choose new names or narrow down your 
list of potential choices before paying for to a professional search 
report. If your preliminary search doesn't turn up any similar marks, 
you can hire a professional search firm to prepare a complete 
report.The complete report usually includes registered U.S. and 
international trademarks and unregistered (known as"common 
law") trademarks. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

71 
These searches are expensive (often $300-$500), and they're 
sometimes difficult to decipher, so you can probably skip the pro-
fessional search unless you're entering into a licensing or distribu-
tion agreement (in which you have to promise that your trademark 
doesn't infringe), you have to answer to shareholders or other 
investors, or your apps are becoming successful and you need the 
peace of mind that comes with knowing you aren't infringing any 
existing marks. 
Tip; Two companies that perform professional trademark search-
es are Thomson Compumark (ihttp://compumark.thomson. 
com/jsp/index.jsp) and Trademark Research Corporation, (www. 
cch-trc.com). Thomson Compumark has been around longer 
and has a more established reputation among attorneys, but the 
results from both companies are usually similar. 
The Benefits of Registration 
As mentioned earlier, you can acquire trademark rights without 
filing a federal or state trademark registration (under what are 
known as common law principles). A federal registration will run 
you $300-$400, which might not be worth it if your trademark 
is unlikely to run into any problems. However, you may want to 
register the name of your most popular app if you plan on building 
a brand—that is, issuing a series of apps under that name—or if 
you want to protect the name of your company. Federal registra-
tion—that is, registering your trademark on what's referred to as 
the Principal Register—is the best way to protect your rights, and it 
provides the following benefits: 
• Only the owner of a federally registered mark may use the sym-
bol ® in conjunction with goods or services. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

• The filing date of your trademark application gives you na-
tionwide priority as of that date.That gives you the right to 
stop others from using a similar name on similar products or 
services anywhere in the U.S. (unless someone has been using 
that mark before you). 
• The owner of a registered mark may, under some circumstances, 
recover lost profits, damages, and costs in a federal trademark 
infringement lawsuit. 
• The owner of a registered mark can deposita copy of the regis-
tration with U.S. Customs in order to stop others from import-
ing goods that use an infringing mark. 
• After 5 years of continuous use, a federally registered mark, 
with some exceptions, can't be challenged as being improperly 
issued or invalid. 
• A federal registration will make it easier to file a trademark ap-
plication in certain foreign countries. 
If these benefits are important to your mobile app business, and if 
you believe your trademark adds substantial value to your busi-
ness, then you'll want to register with the USPTO as described in 
the following sections. 
The Federal Registration Process: TEAS 
The United States Patent and Trademark Office handles federal 
trademark registrations. Before you begin your federal application, 
you'll need to figure out on what basis you are filing. Most federal 
trademark applications are based on either actual use in commerce 
oran applicant's intention to use the trademark in commerce (re-
ferred to as an intent-to-use or ITU application). 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

73 
The preferred (and cheapest) method of preparing the federal 
trademark application is to use the onlineTrademark Electronic 
Application System (TEAS) on the USPTO's website (www.uspto. 
gov). Registration takes approximately 1 year and the fee ranges 
from $275-$375 per class of goods. The fee is $275 if you register 
using TEAS Plus (the simplest system), $325 if you use TEAS (for 
more complex registrations), and $375 ifyoufilea paper applica-
tion. (For info about paper applications, check www.uspto.gov/ 
trademarks/process/appcontent.jsp.)TEAS is an interactive system 
in which you're asked a series of questions. If you don't answer a 
question or you leave out an essential element, TEAS asks you to 
correct the error. Your best bet is to start with the TEAS Plus, as it's 
the simplest and least expensive way to file. To get started, head to 
www.uspto.gov/teas/teasplus.htm, where you can choose between 
the TEAS form and the TEAS Plus form. In the next few sections, 
you'll find explanations of the key elements of the application 
process. Although there are differences between the three types of 
applications, all of them require the elements described below. 
Applicant Information 
IntheTEAS system, the applicant can bean individual, a partner-
ship, a corporation, an association (such as a union, social club, or 
cooperative), or a joint ownership by some combination of any 
these forms. If you're filling out the application on behalf of a part-
nership, include the names and citizenship of the general partners 
and the country where the partnership is based. If you're repre-
senting a corporation, list the name and state or country under 
which it's incorporated. 
You have to list your own citizenship and a mailing address. If 
you're doing business under a fictitious name (a DBA), check the 
appropriate box and list it, especially if it's included on any of the 
materials you're submitting with the application. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

Mark Information 
If the trademark you're registering is a word or group of words, 
identifying it to the USPTO is straightforward: You just type in the 
trademark, like //JustJewels,/or//iQuarium./, But if the trademark is 
a stylized presentation of the word, a graphic symbol, a logo, a 
design, or anything else you're trying to register—for example, a 
sound, color or smell (yes, smells have been registered as trade-
marks), you need to provide a statement that clearly identifies the 
mark. As a general rule, you'll get the broadest protection for your 
name by registering it as a word trademark. 
If you're using the TEAS system, simply type in the word trademark. 
(If you're registering a word trademark, you'll get the broadest pro-
tection if you register it without any specific formatting. That way, 
you'll be able to use the trademark in various fonts, rather than 
being restricted to the exact way you registered it with the USPTO.) 
If you're registering a stylized mark—attach a black-and-white 
rendition of the mark (in either JPG or GIF format), and then type 
a written description into theTEAS application where it says says, 
"Enter description of the mark, below." 
Note: Before pressing "Continue" on the form, you'll see a 
checkbox you can turn on if you wish to make an "additional 
statement." The most common such statement is a disclaimer. 
Many trademarks include words or phrases that, by themselves, 
can't be protected under trademark law because granting one 
person an exclusive right to use such a term would decimate 
the English language. So the USPTO usually requires applicants 
to disclaim certain portions of trademarks. For example, if you 
wanted to register the trademark "The Lucky App," you'd have 
to disclaim "App," since if s a generic term that everyone has the 
right to use. By doing that, you're making it clear that, apart from 
using "App" as a part of your trademark, you're not claiming any 
exclusive right to use the word "app." In general, it's best not to 
include a disclaimer during your initial filing. If your trademark 
examiner (see page 76) wants you to disclaim something, you can 
always do so later without being penalized. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

75 
Goods and/or Services Information 
The next step in the registration process is to identify your class of 
goods. Most likely, your app will fall into International Class 009, 
which includes all computer programs and software. 
Your app may also fit into two categories. For example might be 
registered in class 009 for software and Class 028 for "games and 
playthings."ln general, you're best off starting with one class and 
expanding to others later. 
Note: The USPTO uses the International Schedule of Classes of 
Goods and Services, a system recognized by most countries for 
categorizing goods and services. This helps the USPTO trade-
mark examiners search their database to determine whether 
other products like yours are already using a similar mark. You 
can register your work in many classes, but bear in mind that 
each class registration costs $275 or $325 (depending on 
whether you use TEAS Plus or TEAS). 
To identify the class for your goods, the TEAS Plus form lets you 
search the USPTO's goods and services manual at http://tinyurl. 
com/jy9kx. From the Choose Field drop-down list, pick Class, and 
then type in a description of your app—"Accounting software,"for 
example—into the Enter Search Terms field. The search results will 
tell you which class to use. 
Another way to figure out which class your app falls into is to check 
the Trademark Manual of Examining Procedure (TMEP) (http://tess2. 
uspto.gov/tmdb/tmep) and the Acceptable Identification of Goods 
and Services Manual (http://tess2.uspto.gov/netahtml/tidm.html), 
which lists appropriate choices of identification of goods and ser-
vices in alphabetical order and by class. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

Along with the class, you need to provide a description of your 
app. For example, if you're selling an app that creates wireframes 
to make web pages appear in an easier-to-see format, your de-
scription would be, "Software for cellular telephones that provides 
access to web-based applications and services through a portal 
interface." Or if you've created a game, you might write, "Electronic 
game software for cellular telephones; computer game programs; 
downloadable electronic games via the internet and wireless 
devices." In most cases, the description is automatically inserted 
by the TEAS system when you choose the proper class. In other 
cases—for example, if your product or service doesn't fall neatly 
within a suggested description—you'll need to do a little more 
work to provide an accurate description. 
The goal here is to be specific without being too broad. You can 
get an idea of some typical descriptions by using the Acceptable 
Identification of Goods and Services Manual (http://tinyurl.com/ 
jy9kx). Choose "Description"from the drop-down menu and then 
type in a word or two related to your app. For example, if you type 
in "mobile application,"the manual offers descriptions such as: 
"Computer application software for {specify items, e.g., mobile 
phones, portable media players, handheld computers}, namely, 
software for {specify the function of the programs, e.g., use in data-
base management, use in electronic storage of data, etc.}."You can 
then use that description as the basis of yours, and simply tweak it 
as appropriate. 
If the USPTO's trademark examining attorney—the person who 
reviews your application—disagrees with your description, he'll re-
vise it with you so that it's appropriate. This type of back and forth 
is pretty common and, according to a USPTO survey, the appli-
cant's identification of goods and services was questioned in more 
than fifty percent of trademark applications. So, don't be surprised 
if you hear form the examiner on this issue. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

77 
After you've selected your class and description, you'll be asked the 
filing basis for your application. If you've already used the mark in 
connection with the sale of the mobile app, then you would select 
Section 1A ("Actually using mark in commerce") under "Use in 
Commerce." If you haven't yet used the mark in commerce but you 
intend to, then choose Section 1B ("No use of mark yet, intending 
to use"). This makes your application a ITU application, explained in 
"The Federal Registration Process:TEAS". 
Specimen and Dates of Use 
If you're filing basis is Section 1A ("Actually using mark in com-
merce"—see above), you'll need to enclose a specimen—that is, 
a JPG showing the trademark being used on your mobile app. (In 
the case of ITU applications (see "The Federal Registration Pro-
cess: TEAS"), you'll have to file the specimen later, together with 
an "Amendment to Allege Use"document, which you can fill out 
here: http://eteas.uspto.gov/aou.) The online form lets you upload 
your specimen. For mobile apps, you should furnish a screenshot 
of a web page—for example, the product page at the Apple App 
Store—that shows the trademark in connection with you app and 
shows a way for users to download or buy the app. You'll need to 
describe the specimen, too; for example, "A screenshot of the prod-
uct page for the ¡Clock app at the Apple App Store." 
You'll also need to provide the date (or your best guess as to the 
date) you first sold apps using the trademark, anywhere in the 
world. You'll also need to list the date when you first sold your app 
in U.S. commerce. Usually, that means a sale to someone outside 
your state (for example, through a website or when you traveled to 
a software tradeshow). 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

Declaration 
You have to provide a signed declaration, a sworn statement, or 
other verification that the facts in your application. Fortunately, you 
don't have to go out and hire an attorney to help you with this.The 
TEAS application provides an all-purpose declaration that you can 
use for both ITU applications (see "The Federal Registration Process: 
TEAS") and for applications for trademarks that are already in use. 
All you have to do is confirm your acceptance of the declaration and 
follow the instructions for providing your digital signature. 
Completing the Process 
The last step in the registration process is paying the fees, authoriz-
ing your electronic signature, and validating the application. After 
you click"Pay/Submit"and your info get submitted to the USPTO, 
you'll see an onscreen confirmation. 
Later, you'll receive email acknowledging your application. Hold on 
to that email, because it's the only proof you'll have that the USPTO 
got your application. It's also proof of your filing date and contains 
the serial number they assigned to your application. 
After Filing 
Your confirmation email explains that you shouldn't expect to hear 
anything about your application for about 3 months. If you haven't 
heard anything in 3 and a half months, it's a good idea check on 
the status of you r application. You have two ways to do this: 
• Check TARR. The Trademark Applications and Registrations 
Retrieval system's webpage (http://tarr.uspto.gov) lets you find 
out about pending trademark application. All you do is enter 
your serial number (the one in your confirmation email) and 
it'll give you a status report. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

79 
• Call the trademark office. If you want additional info or 
would prefertalking to a real, live person, call theTrademark 
Assistance Center at (800) 786-9199 Monday through Friday 
between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. eastern time. 
You'll likely receive some kind of communication from the USPTO 
within 3 to 6 months. If there's a problem with your application, 
you'll receive what's called an action letter.This is a letter from the 
trademark examining attorney who has been assigned to review 
your application explaining what the problems are. Most problems 
can be resolved by simply calling your examiner. 
When the examiner approves your application, you'll receive a 
Notice of Publication in the mail. Your trademark will then be 
published online in the USPTO's Official Gazette (www.uspto.gov/ 
news/og/trademark_og/index.jsp). During the 30 days after your 
trademark is published, anyone can oppose your registration For 
example, if you apply to register YankeeApps, the New York Yan-
kees could file an opposition. Only 3% of all published marks are 
opposed, so it's unlikely you'll run into trouble. Just keep this in 
mind if you know another company might object once they learn 
of your application. 
Once your trademark has made it through the 30-day publication 
period, assuming you filed on an actual use basis (see "The Federal 
Registration Process: TEAS"), you'll receive a Certificate of Registra-
tion. Keep in mind that the USPTO sometimes takes a long time to 
move applications through this long process, so it may take a year 
or more to process your application. Be patient. 
If you filed on an intent-to-use basis instead, your trademark won't 
be placed on the USPTO's Principal Register until you file your 
Amendment to Allege Use document, which tells the USPTO the 
date you started using the mark and completes your registration. 
You'll also need to provide a specimen showing how you're using 
the mark. (See "Specimen and Dates of Use"for the details.) 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

Contacting the USPTO 
Chances are good that you'll be in touch with the USPTO after you 
file your application. Few applications sail through without any 
glitches, so you need to be diligent to keep your application mov-
ing through the process. 
If you're waiting for the USPTO to do something and it's been more 
than 6 months since you heard from them, check the TARR system 
or call the USPTO, as described above (see "After Filing"). If you 
discover a problem, bring it to the USPTO's attention. 
If a USPTO examining attorney contacts you and you fail to re-
spond in a timely manner, your application may be considered 
abandoned, meaning your application is officially dead. If that 
happens, the only way to revive it is to petition the Commissioner 
for Trademarks (which you can do online at www.uspto.gov/teas/ 
eTEASpageG.htm) within 60 days of the date of abandonment. 
If the examiner wants you to change your application (for example, 
by suggesting a different description of services or goods), con-
sider the examiner's suggestions, and if you are okay with them, 
let the examiner know you accept them. If you're not okay with 
them, then you two can discuss the matter and perhaps achieve a 
compromise. 
Tip: In general, the USPTO trademark examining attorneys are 
friendly and amenable to working with non-attorneys. So if your 
examining attorney objects to some aspect of your application, 
don't be afraid to call and discuss any questions with her. Just 
remember that they're government employees with intense 
workloads so be prepared, efficient, and have your paperwork in 
front of you when you call. And don't be argumentative-it won't 
get you anywhere. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

81 
An examiner with a brief question might call you and then issue 
and mail you an examiner's amendment (a form where the exam-
iner handwrites a record of the phone conversation or meeting 
with you). Read the amendment carefully to make sure it matches 
your understanding of the conversation. If you disagree, or don't 
understand the amendment, first call the examiner. If that doesn't 
straighten everything out, write the examiner a letter with your 
concerns. If you're interested in reading more about the types of 
disputes that arise between examiners and applicants, check out 
theTTABlog at http://thettablog.blogspot.com. 
Staying out of Trouble 
You've probably read about companies that have had to stop using 
names, logos, or other trademarks because a competitor believes 
the mark infringes on theirs. If you receive a warning like this (tech-
nically called a cease and desist letter), consult with an intellectual 
property attorney. 
Below is some information that can help you avoid trademark 
troubles in the first place—and, if you do run into a problem, it 
may help you decide how to respond. 
Infringement 
Trademark infringement occurs when one company uses another 
company's trademark (or a substantially similar mark) in a man-
ner that is likely to confuse consumers into believing that there's 
some connection, affiliation, or sponsorship between the two 
companies. This usually occurs when a trademark is used on similar 
goods. For example, in 2008, an iPhone developer released an 
arcade game with similarities toTetris called Tris. Fifteen days later, 
he pulled it from Apple's App Store after theTetris Company, which 
licenses the famous game, complained to Apple about the game. 
NAMES AND TRADEMARKS 

When determining how likely it is that consumers will get con-
fused, courts usually use several factors that may vary slightly 
depending on where you are.The important issues are usually the 
strength of the senior user's mark (the senior user is the one who 
first used the mark), the similarity of the marks and products, the 
sophistication of the buyers, and evidence of actual confusion. If 
you're interested reading more about trademark disputes, check 
out Trademark: Legal Care For Your Business and Product Name 
(Nolo) or read The Trademark Blog (http://www.schwimmerlegal. 
com),the leading blog on the subject, 
Trademark Dilution 
Sometimes, even if there's little likelihood of customer confusion, 
a company with a famous trademark can stop another company 
from using its famous trademark in a manner that blurs the two 
companies in customers' minds.This is referred to as trademark 
dilution, and occurs when the integrity of a famous trademark is 
"muddied"by an unwanted or insulting commercial association. 
For example, if you create an app that produces farting sounds 
and call it Wal-Fart, you will most certainly hear from Wal-Mart's 
attorneys because your use creates an association that dilutes their 
famous mark. 
Altering a trademark in a comparative advertisement can also be 
considered dilution. For example, in a TV ad, an equipment manu-
facturer animated the John Deere "deer" logo and appeared to 
make it run from the competition, and the courts ruled that this 
muddied the John Deere brand. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

CHAPTER 4 
Using Other People's 
Work 
Y
ou may have seen the photo: a solitary figure seated in 
front of a thousand TV monitors. The picture is by Louis P. 
Psihoyos, a National Geographic photographer, who earns 
his living from the sale and license of stock photography. Psihoyos 
was upset to learn that an iPhone app, i.TV, used his copyrighted 
photograph (known as "1000 TVs") without his permission, so he 
sued the makers of the app and Apple, claiming that Apple was 
equally responsible for the infringement. His lawyers claimed that, 
"Apple failed to take steps to ensure that third-party application 
developers weren't infringing copyrights. Apple was aware that 
i.TV was making questionable uses of Mr. Psihoyos'famous and 
iconic photograph, and didn't prevent the developer from plac-
ing the photograph in the infringing application."This case hadn't 
been decided by the time this Mini Missing Manual was published, 
but regardless of the outcome, the message is clear: Using other 
people's material without authorization will get your app dumped 
from the App Store (at least until you remove the unauthorized 
material) and it won't endear you to Apple, either. 

It's one thing to swipe someone else's photo an use it on your web-
site. In that case, you can pull it quickly if you get caught and—un-
less you took it from a major stock-photo vendor like Getty Im-
ages—probably get away with a slap on the wrist. But things are a 
little more complicated with mobile apps because you're making 
and distributing a copy of the other person's work each time your 
app is downloaded. While you can pull your app and swap out the 
infringing material, there's no way to recall all the existing copies 
that folks have downloaded. So if someone goes after you for an 
infringement, that person can have your app removed and take 
you to court for damages based on the number of copies you sold 
or distributed. Worse, if you created the app for a third party, you'll 
really be in hot water if their app is off the market because of a 
copyright infringement—especially if, as is sometimes the case, 
you promised to create an app that doesn't infringe. 
In this chapter, you'll learn about some of the issues that arise 
when you want to use other people's copyrighted work in your 
app. One of the main things to take away from this chapter is 
that—thanks to companies such as ¡Stockphoto.com—it's now 
easy and relatively inexpensive to obtain high quality music, sound 
effects, and photos at very reasonable license fees. So you should 
have no trouble building an app that won't infringe on anyone 
else's work—especially after reading this chapter. 
Fair Use Explained 
Under a legal doctrine known as fair use, there are times when 
you have the right to discuss, criticize, or poke fun at copyrighted 
works without seeking permission from the copyright owner. 
In general, fair use permits you to copy small portions of a work 
for "transformative" purposes such as parody, scholarship, or 
commentary. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

85 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
How Much Can I Use Without Permission? 
I want to use the theme song from a TV Show in my app. Can I do that 
without infringing? Is that a fair use? 
Unfortunately, there's no sure-fire way to guarantee that your use is a 
fair use. As you'll learn in the following pages, you can only get a de-
finitive fair use determination from a judge—and who wants to go to 
court over an app? 
If you're thinking about using someone else's content in your app, ask 
yourself three questions: 
• How likely is fit that the copyright owner will find out about 
your use? This is usually the key issue. The more successful your 
app is, the more likely that a copyright owner will learn of your use 
and take action. 
• How likely is fit that they'll care? This issue often hinges on 
whether the copyright owner feels that they're either losing money 
or that their customers will be confused or upset by your use. 
• If they do care, how far will they take it? The answer to this one 
is often complex and depends on the owner's financial power, ac-
cess to lawyers, and demeanor. 
The bottom line is that, if you can acquire the material legitimately, 
then do so—it could save you a lot of hassle. 
The difficulty of applying fair use is that the standard is often 
subjective, so you can't guarantee that your use is a fair use until a 
judge says so at the end of a lawsuit—and at that point you may 
be bankrupt from legal fees. In addition, website owners and app 
store retailers like Apple are rarely interested in the fine points of 
fair use; they simply remove the work if someone claims it's in-
fringing. Even if you can later convince them to reinstate your app, 
you'll have lost weeks (if not months) of sales. 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

The upshot is this: Tread carefully in the realm of fair use. If you'd 
like to see some examples of fair use cases and discussion, two 
helpful websites are the Stanford Fair Use site (to which your 
humble author has contributed some content) at http://fairuse. 
stanford.edu and the Center for Social Media's site at www.center-
forsocialmedia.org/resources/fair_use/. 
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION 
Can You Copy Code? 
I want to copy some code from an existing app and I don't want to ask 
for permission. How much can I copy? 
There's no way to tell how much is too much. Swiping code is difficult 
to justify as fair use, since that doctrine requires a transformative use 
of the borrowed material. Copying only a small portion of a program's 
code could constitute copyright infringement, particularly if ifs a highly 
creative or important example of the programmer's art. 
For example, people have been successfully sued for copyright in-
fringement for copying as little as 14 lines of source code out of a 
total of 186,000. However, there are instances where copying a small 
amount of code—like a particular routine or subroutine-may not con-
stitute infringement. That might be the case if the portion of code is not 
likely to be protected under copyright law—if ifs a commonly re-used, 
minimally creative routine, a standard programming technique, or cod-
ing for elements dictated by manufacturing standards or design specs, 
for instance—or if a court considers it too small to bother with (in legal 
terms, de minimus). 
Of course, it's always difficult to predict what7s acceptable and the final 
decision is often in the hands of a judge who knows little about pro-
gramming or code. 
The Public Domain: Free Stuff 
You don't need permission to reproduce public domain mate-
rial in your mobile app—that is, anything that was published in 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

87 
the United States before 1923, or any copyrighted work that was 
published before 1964 and whose copyright hasn't been renewed 
(only about 11 percent of copyrights issued before 1964 have been 
renewed). It also includes any material produced by U.S. govern-
ment employees. 
Determining whether a work is in the public domain requires 
research. The U.S. Copyright Office doesn't maintain a list of public 
domain works. You can pay companies to perform searches and 
give you public domain reports, but that gets expensive. If you're 
interested in pursuing public domain works, check out the best 
book on the subject, The Public Domain: How to Find & Use Copy-
right-Free Writings, Music; Art & More by Stephen Fishman (Nolo). 
Your trusty search engine will also uncover many good online 
resources for public domain works. 
Getting Permission 
If you use a copyrighted work in your app without permission, the 
consequences can be expensive and—more importantly—can 
result in Apple or some other app store owner pulling your work 
under the provisions of the DMCA (see the box "The DMCA and 
You") or some other basis for claiming infringement. The typical 
approach is for the retailer/distributor to pull the app first and ask 
questions later. 
This isn't to say that if you use something without permission 
you'll always suffer consequences. The risk of a dispute—whether 
it's with Apple or with a copyright holder—depends not just on 
your particular use, but also on other factors such as the likelihood 
that the use will be spotted, whether you are a "worthy" target for 
litigation, whether permission is really needed, and whether the 
other side is inclined to sue. So you may get away scot-free—but is 
it worth the risk? 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

Tip: If you're not already familiar with royalty-free providers 
such as istockphoto.com, check them out for reasonably priced 
photos, video, and audio. Review the licenses at such sites to be 
sure they cover using the material in your app. 
The Five Steps for Getting Permission 
Taking a conservative approach to using material created by others 
is the best way to protect your mobile app business. Unless you're 
certain that the material is in the public domain or that your use is 
legally excusable, you should seek permission. (If you aren't sure, 
you'll have to either do your own risk analysis or get advice from 
an attorney who knows copyright or media law.) As a general rule, 
it's wise to assume that all materials are protected by copyright law 
unless you have conclusive information to the contrary. 
What does it take to acquire permission? You have to complete the 
following steps: 
1. Determine whether you can use the work without asking 
for permission. You don't always need permission because 
copyright law doesn't protect all materials. For example, works 
published in the United States before 1923 are in the public 
domain and free to use. However, a work isn't in the public 
domain simply because someone has posted it on the Internet 
(a popular myth) or because it doesn't sport a copyright notice 
(another fallacy). 
2. Figure out who owns the work you want to use. Often, you 
can locate the owner just by looking at the copyright notice 
on the work. But sometimes you'll need to do more detailed 
research, like searching the U.S. Copyright Office's records (see 
"Trademark Searching"). 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

89 
3. Identify what rights you need. The next section shows you 
a sample permission agreement, which is the legal document 
you need to use to get legal permission to use someone else's 
work. Most permission agreements are nonexclusive, meaning 
that others can use the material in the same way you plan to. 
An exclusive permission agreement, on the other hand, means 
you are the only one who has the right to use the work as de-
scribed in the agreement. For example, the National Enquirer 
could obtain the exclusive right to reproduce images from 
Taylor Swift's wedding, say. 
The length of time you can use the work is often referred to as 
the term. (If agreement doesn't specify a term, you can use the 
material for as long as you want or until the copyright owner 
revokes the permission.) Your rights may also be limited to a 
certain geographic region (called the territory). See "Content/ 
Permission Licenses"for more on these agreements. 
4. Contact the owner and ask for permission. The biggest issue 
that arises at this point is whether the copyright owner will 
want you to pay him for using his content. If you're only using a 
small portion of the work or if the owner is eager for exposure, 
he might not ask for payment. Or an owner may agree to sus-
pend payment until your app becomes profitable, or condition 
payment on other factors. 
5. Formalize the arrangement. The last step is coming to a 
formal arrangement. Oral permission agreements are legally 
enforceable, and even if you don't have explicit oral agreement, 
you may still have a right to use a work if permission can be im-
plied from the way the parties have behaved. For example, say 
you ask for permission to use a photo and the photographer 
agrees as long as you give her $100, which you pay by PayPal. 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

A permission agreement can be implied from the fact that 
photographer emailed you the image and accepted payment 
by PayPal. 
That said, relying on an oral or implied agreement isn't always 
a good idea. For instance, you and the rights owner may have 
misunderstood each other or remembered the terms of your 
agreement differently, which could land you in hot water. For 
that reason, written agreements are preferable. Such an agree-
ment doesn't need to be formal or written in legalese. A simple 
statement of permission signed by the person granting per-
mission and detailing the use is usually suitable. See "Content/ 
Permission Licenses"for an example. 
Three Ways to Get the Rights 
There are three common ways to get the rights to use copyrighted 
material in your app: 
• Work made for hire. If you hire someone to create content for 
you (known as a commissioned work) you can acquire rights 
to it as a work made for hire. If the person who produced the 
work is an employee of yours, you automatically own all rights 
to work he creates on your behalf, and you don't need to seek 
permission. If the person isn't an employee, she's considered 
an independent contractor, and your ownership of her work 
isn't automatic. To guarantee your ownership of an indepen-
dent contractor's work, you should use a work-made-for-hire 
agreement. See http://www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/ar-
ticle-29913.htmlfor more on such agreements. 
• Assignment. If the work already exists and you want to buy all 
rights to it, you can use a simple assignment like the one in the 
next section below. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

• License/permission agreement. If you want only limited 
rights to use copyrighted material, go with a license/ 
permission agreement (see "Content/Permission Licenses"). 
Copyright Assignments 
An assignment is a permanent transfer of all rights. You can use an 
assignment when you want to acquire all rights to a copyrighted 
work such as a photo or a video. (As mentioned above, you'd usu-
ally use an assignment to acquire rights to an existing work. If 
you're commissioning the work, a work-made-for-hire agreement 
[see"Three Ways to Get the Rights"] is more appropriate.) Here's a 
simple assignment you could use in straightforward cases where 
you're acquiring all rights to a work. 
Assignee's successors and assigns, all my right, title, and interest 
in the copyright to the Work and all renewals and extensions of 
the copyright that may be secured under the laws of the United 
States of America and any other countries, as such may now 
or later be in effect. I agree to cooperate with Assignee and to ex-
ecute and deliver all papers as may be necessary to vest all rights 
to the Work. 
Signature of assignor(s) 
Basic Copyright Assignment 
_("Assignor"), am owner of the work entitled 
(the"Work") and described as follows: 
In consideration of $ 
paid by 
and other valuable consideration, 
("Assignee"), I assign to Assignee and 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

92 
Note: The term "valuable consideration" refers to the benefit-
financial or otherwise-that the assignor gets or expects to get 
from the deal. In this case, the assignor gets money, and per-
haps more-like the prestige associated with having the assignee 
reproduce the work. In any case, using this term is one of those 
"legalese" requirements thafs important in contracts like this 
where only one party signs. 
The term "successors and assigns," refers to people or entities 
that step into another party's shoes. By definition, a successor is 
someone who succeeds to a status or position-for example, by 
inheritance or by purchasing a company. An assign is someone 
who has acquired the position as a result of an assignment-for 
example, if a contract is assigned (or transferred) to another 
company. The terms, although distinguishable, almost always 
appear together and some people consider them synonymous. 
You may need other permissions besides the ones mentioned in 
this example. For instance, you may need permission to reproduce 
a trademark if your use is commercial and likely to confuse con-
sumers or tarnish the trademark's reputation. Or you may need 
permission if you're using a real person's image or name and are 
implying a commercial connection between that individual and 
your product; for example, if you want to include a celebrity's im-
age as a splash screen for your app. In that case, you'll need to get 
that person to sign a model release like the one shown later in this 
chapter (see "Personal Releases"). 
Content/Permission Licenses 
You've already learned about work-made-for-hire agreements 
and assignments.The other popular way to acquire rights to use 
someone else's content in your app is an agreement known as ei-
ther a permission agreement or a content license. These agreements 
do basically the same thing; the distinction is that permission 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

93 
agreements are usually less formal and are used for smaller bits of 
content—like a photo or a single article—while content licenses 
are used for longer works or collections of works. (For more about 
content licenses, goto www.patentcopyrighttrademarkblog.com/ 
ContentLicenseExplanations.pdf.) Here's an example of a basic per-
mission agreement. 
Basic Permission Letter Agreement 
From: 
("Licensee") 
To: 
("Licensor"): 
I am writing to you to request permission to use the following 
material: 
(the "Selection") 
Licensee Publication Information 
The Selection will be reproduced, displayed and distributed as 
follows: 
• in Licensee's mobile app (including all subsequent versions, 
derivatives, and editions) tentatively titled 
(the "Work") 
• at Licensee's website promoting the Work 
• other: 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

Fee 
Licensee shall pay a fee of $ 
to Licensor 
at the following address: 
upon publication of the Work 
or within 6 months of executing this agreement whichever is 
earlier. 
Credit 
A standard credit line including your company name will appear 
in the Work's credit. If you have a special credit line you would 
prefer, indicate it here: 
Samples 
Upon publication, Licensee shall furnish 
copies of the 
screens incorporating the Work to Licensor. 
Signed by Licensee: 
Name: 
Title: 
Address: 
Date: 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

95 
Licensor's Approval of Request 
I warrant that I am the owner of all legal rights for the Selec-
tion and have the right to grant the permission to republish the 
materials as specified above. I grant to Licensee and Licensee's 
successors and assigns, the nonexclusive worldwide right to 
republish the Selection in all editions of the Work. 
Permission granted by: 
Signed by Licenson 
Name: 
Title: 
Address: 
Date: 
Completing this permission agreement is fairly straightforward. 
You're the licensee and the person who owns the rights is the 
licensor. You can modify this sample in various ways—for example, 
by limiting the time for use, or by adding a statement giving you 
the right to make changes to the content if those changes are ap-
proved by the licensor (in case you want the right to crop a photo 
or shorten an article, say). You can add these requirements using 
plain English. 
Tip: Before you send a permission letter off to a copyright 
owner, write down all the possible ways you may use the mate-
rial you're licensing and make sure they are included in the 
letter, since if s often difficult to go back and ask for permission 
a second time. For example, you may need rights for all foreign 
translations and derivative rights, and you may want these rights 
for all media, not just in apps. 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

Personal Releases 
If you're using a person's image in your work, you should prob-
ably get him to sign a personal release. (Personal releases are often 
referred to as model releases, but the term "model"can be used to 
refer to anyone, not just professional models.) These releases ad-
dresses certain rights that overlap with copyright—though tech-
nically, they're actually a separate area of law known as "right of 
publicity"—and they're included here because you may betaking 
photos of people for, or using model images in, your app. The same 
may be true if you're using a person's name, particularly in the title 
of your app—for example, the actor Johnny Depp could stop your 
use if you titled your app, "Johnny Depp's Pirate App." 
Whether you need to have someone sign a release depends on 
why you want to use that person's name or image. If it's for com-
mercial purposes—like using a person's photo for an app that's 
helping sell a company's products or services, such as an app for 
American Express, Nike, or Netflix—you need to obtain a release. 
But if you're going to use the name or image for informational 
purposes such as a science app or even a pop-quiz app, you prob-
ably don't need permission. But beware: The line between infor-
mational and commercial use is very fuzzy—like the line between 
documentary films and fictional feature films—which is why most 
lawyers recommend getting a release whenever you're in doubt. 
Even if a release isn't required, you should be careful that your use 
doesn't defame (make untrue statements that damage the person's 
reputation) or invade the person's privacy (that is, you intrude 
where the person has an expectation of privacy—for example, 
post pictures taken with a hidden camera). 
There are two kinds of personal releases: blanket and limited. A 
blanket release lets you use photos of the person signing the re-
lease in any way; it's the best route if you want unlimited rights to 
use the image. If, on the other hand, the model is only consenting 
to a specific use—for example, in ads for your mobile app—then 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

97 
go with a limited release that specifies the particular ways you're 
allowed to use the person's image and name. Watch out: If you use 
those things in some other way, the person can sue you for breach 
of the agreement. For example, a model that had signed a release 
limiting use of her image to a museum brochure sued when the 
photo appeared on a Miami transit card. 
Tip: Personal releases don't usually include many of the le-
gal provisions found in other agreements in this Mini Missing 
Manual. Instead, releases are often "stripped down" to help 
avoid lengthy discussions or negotiations. So keep your releases 
short and simple. 
The Unlimited Personal Release Agreement is a blanket release. 
It permits you to use the model's image and name in all forms of 
media throughout the world, forever. (For details on the provisions 
in the agreement, see "Filling Out a Personal Release".) 
Unlimited Personal Release Agreement 
Grant 
For consideration which I acknowledge, I irrevocably grant to 
("Company") and Company's sucessors and as-
signs the right to use my image and name in all forms and media 
including composite or modified representations for all pur-
poses, including advertising, trade, or any commercial purpose 
throughout the world and in perpetuity. I waive the right to 
inspect or approve versions of my image used for publication or 
the written copy that may be used in connection with the 
images. 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

Release 
I release Company and Company's successors and assigns and 
successors from any claims that may arise regarding the use 
of my image, including any claims of defamation, invasion of 
privacy, or infringement of moral rights, rights of publicity, or 
copyright. Company is permitted, although not obligated, to 
include my name as a credit in connection with the image. 
Company is not obligated to utilize any of the rights granted in 
this Agreement. 
I have read and understood this agreement and I am over the 
age of 18.This Agreement expresses the complete understand-
ing of the parties. 
Name: 
Date: 
Signature: 
Address: 
Witness Signature: 
Parent/Guardian Consent (include if the person is under 18) 
I am the parent or guardian of the minor named above. I have 
the legal right to consent to and do consent to the terms and 
conditions of this release. 
Parent/Guardian Name: 
Date: 
Parent/Guardian Signature: 
Parent/Guardian Address: 
Witness Signature: 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

99 
If you need fewer rights to use the model's image, go with a limited 
agreement instead, which lets you use his name or image only for 
the purposes specified in the agreement. (The section "Filling Out a 
Personal Release"tells you how to fill out this agreement.) 
Limited Personal Release Agreement 
Grant 
For consideration that I acknowledge, I grant to 
("Company") and Company's successors and assigns the right 
to use my image for the following purposes: 
in the following territory 
for a period of 
year(s) (the'Term"). 
I grant the right to use my name and image for the purposes 
listed above in all forms and media, including composite or mod-
ified representations, and waive the right to inspect or approve 
versions of my image used for publication or the written copy 
that may be used in connection with the images. 
Payment (include if appropriate) 
For the rights granted during the Term, Company shall pay 
$ 
upon execution of this release. 
Renewal (include if appropriate) 
Company may renew this agreement under the same terms and 
conditions for 
year(s) provided that Licensee makes pay-
ment of $ 
at the time of renewal. 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

100 
Release 
I release Company and Company's successors and assigns from 
any claims that may arise regarding the use of my image, includ-
ing any claims of defamation, invasion of privacy, or infringe-
ment of moral rights, rights of publicity, or copyright. Company 
is permitted, although not obligated, to include my name as a 
credit in connection with the image. 
Name: 
Date: 
Signature: 
Address: 
Witness Signature: 
Parent/Guardian Consent [include if the person is under 18] 
I am the parent or guardian of the minor named above. I have 
the legal right to consent to and do consent to the terms and 
conditions of this release. 
Parent/Guardian Name: 
Date: 
Parent/Guardian Signature: 
Parent/Guardian Address: 
Witness Signature: 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

101 
Tilling Out a Personal Release 
The Grant paragraph in a personal release establishes the rights 
the model is granting.The unlimited agreement includes a blan-
ket grant that is broad and intended to encompass all potential 
uses, whether informational, commercial, or other. In the limited 
agreement, you have to list the specific ways you intend to use the 
image—for example, "for use on a mobile app program tentatively 
titled'Clock Around the Rock."'The limited release also has restric-
tions regarding where you can use the image and for how long. 
Simply type in the appropriate geographic region and term—for 
example, North America with a 2-year term. 
The limited release includes Payment and Renewal sections. If you 
want to include these in the unlimited version, simply copy and 
paste them. If your release includes a term, you might want to 
include the Renewal section in case you decide that you want to 
continue using the model's image after the term is up. 
The Release section is the person's promise not to sue you for legal 
claims such as libel and invasion of privacy. 
If the model is a minor, his parent or guardian should sign the 
Parent/Guardian Consent section. 
Since issues about release authenticity often crop up many years 
after a photo is taken, you should have a witness sign the agree-
ment to verify the model's signature (or his parent's signature). 
The witness should be an adult; an employee or assistant is a good 
candidate. 
Using Someone Else's Trademark 
So far, this chapter has been about using other people's content 
in your app. But what if you want to use someone else's trademark 
in connection with your app (including ads for it)? Here are some 
guidelines: 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

102 
• Informational uses. You don't need permission to use a trade-
mark in an "informational"or"editorial"way.These are uses that 
inform, educate, or express opinions protected under the First 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. For example, you can use 
a corporate logo without permission if your app provides infor-
mation about political contributions made by various corpora-
tions. However, you shouldn't use that logo in your ads, splash 
screens, or corporate materials—anything that implies that the 
corporation is associated with or endorses your app. 
• Comparative advertising. You're allowed to use a trademark 
when making accurate, comparative product statements in 
advertisements. However, since comparative advertisements 
tend to raise the hackles of trademark owners, it's a good idea 
to have a trademark or business law attorney knowledgeable 
review the ad before you run it. 
• Commercial uses. If you're going to use a trademark in your 
advertising, promotion, or marketing, you need permission 
(except in comparative ads, explained above). For example, it's 
not a great idea to have a model wear a T-shirt that says "Micro-
soft"on itinan online ad for yourapp. 
• Using trademarks in mobile app products. Proceed with 
caution if you're using trademarks as part of your mobile app's 
art. You may be able to argue that your use is informational 
(see above) and protected by the First Amendment. But this 
argument may be a loser if it looks like you're trying to mooch 
off the success of the trademark rather than comment on it. 
Note: If you're in the position of making a First-Amendment 
argument, that means that you've already triggered a company's 
ire, and you'll have to deal with the consequences. This isn't to 
discourage you from speaking out against corporate branding, 
just to alert you to the potential morass that awaits if you do. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

103 
• Parodies. A parody is when a trademark is imitated in a man-
ner that pokes fun at it. For example, you could sell an app 
named "Mutant of Omaha." Bear in mind that offensive paro-
dies are the ones most likely to trigger lawsuits. For instance, 
lawsuits were filed over lewd photos of the Pillsbury Doughboy 
and over nude Barbie doll imagery (entitled "Malted Barbie" 
and 'The Barbie Enchiladas") Although the artist in the case 
involving Barbie dolls eventually won his claim, it required 
substantial legal effort and expense. So weigh the legal conse-
quences carefully before creating a parody app. 
A trademark parody is less likely to run into problems if it 
doesn't compete with the trademarked goods and services 
and doesn't confuse consumers—that is, they get the joke and 
don't think the parody product comes from the same source as 
the trademarked goods. Also, keep in mind that not all humor-
ous uses are parodies. To avoid trouble, you should specifically 
poke fun at the trademark. 
• Trademark disclaimers. A disclaimer is a statement intended 
to minimize confusion in consumers'minds or deflect liabil-
ity. You might want to include such a statement if you're not 
sure whether you have the right to use a trademark, if you're 
required to use such a statement under a company's terms of 
use of their trademark (see the box "Using Other Companies' 
Names in Yours"), or you're involved in a trademark parody— 
for example, if you parodied Facebook, it would help to include 
a disclaimer such as "Facebook is a registered trademark of 
Facebook, Inc. Facebook is not associated with and does not 
endorse FunnyApps products and services."And remember 
that a disclaimer is only effective if it's prominently placed, 
permanently affixed, can be read and understood, and really 
minimizes confusion. A disclaimer, by itself, won't keep you 
from getting sued for trademark infringement. 
USING OTHER PEOPLE'S WORK 

104 
But, when properly done, a disclaimer can minimize confusion 
and prevent dilution. For example, if you create an app that 
lets people look up train arrivals in the City by the Bay, you 
might want to include a line like/This application is not associ-
ated with or endorsed by the San Francisco Municipal Railway" 
on your splash screen (or any screen that contains copyright or 
legal info) and on any product pages or web pages where you 
offer the app. 
PROTECTING YOUR MOBILE APP IP: THE MINI MISSING MANUAL 

Colophon 
Dawn Mann was the Editor for Protecting Your Mobile App IP: The 
Mini Missing Manual. Nellie McKesson was the Production Editor. 
Nellie McKesson designed the interior layout, based on a series de-
sign by Phil Simpson. The text font for the PDF version of this book 
is Myriad Pro; and the heading and note font is Adobe Formata. 
For best printing results of the PDF version of this book, use the 
following settings in the Adobe Reader Print dialog box: A Pages: 
ii—[last page number]; B: Page Scaling: Mulitple pages per sheet; 
C Pages per sheet: 2; D Page Order: Horizontal. 
Print 
Printer: 
Moa 
Phaser S500DT 
3
8 
0 
All 
O Current view 
O Current page 
ft Pages: 
Last Used Settings 
u! 
Copies & Pages 
Copies 
1 
M Collated 
C 
Reverie Pages 
Preview. Composite 
11-52 
Subset: [ All Pages in Range 
Comments and Forms: [ Document and Markups 
8.5 
B 
Page Scaling: [ Multiple pages per sheet 
vi 
C 
Pages per sheet:( 2 
3 
1 
[) 
Page Order: 
[ Horizontal 
• 
Print page border 
Q Auto-Rotate pages 
( 
Advanced... 
) 
( 
Printing Tips 
) 
1/29 (2) 
© 
( 
POP* ) 
( Preview ) 
( Supplies... ) 
_ Low 
( Cancel ) 
( 
Print 
) 

