
Protect Your
Privacy!
By
James Eldredge
About This Book:
 
Protect Your Privacy! is a short book designed to help the average computer user
stay safe and protect their privacy and their data in the modern age.
 
Inside this book, you’ll learn about common security misconceptions, discover
ways that attackers try to steal your data, learn how to protect your data in
multiple ways and discover advanced methods for keeping your private
information safe. Everything is in plain English and is easy for users of all
experience levels to understand (even complete beginners).
 
James Eldredge has worked in the computer field for thirteen years, working as a
system administrator, database engineer, programmer and much more. Through
his years of experience, James has cultivated a unique way of communicating
complex ideas and instructions to beginners and has used this skill to build up an
impressive number of clients who all rely on his expertise on a daily basis. His no-
nonsense, plain English and no-jargon approach has carried over into his books,
which are directed toward both the complete novice and moderately skilled user.
 
Want to get free books and awesome technology tips and tricks? Sign up for the
free AppSna.gr newsletter right here!
More Books from James Eldredge:
The Top Essential Windows 10 Tricks You MUST Know!
TV Without Cable: Your Complete Guide to Streaming TV &
Over-the-Air Free TV

© 2015, all rights reserved.
The author(s) and/or publisher(s) of this eBook are not, nor will they be, liable for any personal or property
injury, damage and/or liability, whether in the form of direct, indirect, consequential, special, exemplary or
other damages, arising out of your use of or reliance upon the contents of this eBook, or the acts or omissions
of the author(s) and/or publisher(s) in relation to this eBook.
You agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the author(s) and/or publisher(s) and their affiliates
from and against any and all claims, damages, costs and expenses, including attorneys’ fees, arising
from or related to your use of this eBook.



Table of Contents
I – The Importance of Data Privacy
II – Change Your Browsing Habits
Choosing the Right Browser
Browser Plugins
Advertisement Blocking (Firefox | Chrome)
Flash Blocker (Firefox | Chrome)
Ghostery (Firefox | Chrome)
A Word of Warning
III – Habits to Stay Safe Online
Email
Web Browsing
IV – Securing Your Operating System & Software
Update Your Operating System
Individual Software Updates
V – Password Safety
Choosing & Securing Your Passwords
Username Security
Two-Factor Authentication
VI – Data Backups
Protection Against Disasters
Local or Cloud Backups
Good Backup Strategies
Backup Software
VII – Advanced Data Protection Procedures
Encryption
VPNs
VIII – Wrapping it All Up


I – The Importance of Data Privacy
The Internet is, in my opinion, one of the most fundamentally important and game-
changing inventions in the history of man. In just a few decades we’ve managed
to collect together a huge portion of the world’s knowledge into a centralized
location that anyone can use. Websites like Wikipedia make it easy for anyone to
learn anything about everything. MIT’s open courses enable people around the
globe to receive a free college education. We can instantly communicate with
anyone we want, anywhere we want and at any time we want.
Of course, all of these positives have come at a tremendous cost. The modern
Internet is filled with companies whose only purpose is to get as much information
about you as possible. What do they want to do with this information? Sell it, of
course! Information is the new currency, and companies—both legally and illegally
—are trying to gather as much of it as possible.
Did you know that when you visit most websites, a piece of data (called a ‘cookie’)
is placed on your computer that tracks where you go online? These tracking
cookies come in many forms and from various companies, some which you’ve
heard of and some which you haven’t. This type of thing is perfectly legal, but it
can still be damaging to your privacy. Intrusive advertising can reveal information
about your private life that you don’t want others to know. Companies can sell
detailed records of where you go and what you purchase online to other
companies, or they can be compelled to hand it over to the government.
And what about the people who are illegally collecting information? Hackers,
malware authors and people who steal banking information, email addresses and
other personal information are all doing it to make money as well. There is an
entire underground industry that has sprung up around one goal: getting your
information and making money from it. Unfortunately, companies that legally
collect your information can be vulnerable to having that information stolen by
people engaged in illegal activities.
Whether your information is being gathered by companies like Facebook or
Google or by someone sitting in a dark room writing a virus to steal credit card
numbers, the bottom line is this: you need to secure yourself. There are a whole
range of ways you can do this, and the methods range from simple (using a
different browser) to the complex (encrypting the data on your hard disk so no one

but you can read it).
In this book I’ll be describing a multitude of ways that you can help to secure your
information and protect your privacy. Whether you choose to follow just a few of
these methods or all of them is up to you and your personal situation and opinion
on the matter of data privacy. Regardless of what you do, though, I urge you to
carefully consider what you read and what you decide to do. As the Internet
continues to change and evolve, the importance of data privacy and information
security will continue to grow, not lessen.


II – Change Your Browsing Habits

Choosing the Right Browser
When I’m browsing the web, I use two browsers: Firefox and Google Chrome. I
don’t use anything else, except in cases where the website I’m visiting (and these
are almost always government websites) won’t work in anything except for
Internet Explorer.
The reason I restrict myself to Firefox and Chrome is simple: they’re relatively
secure by themselves, and they support plugins, which can make them even more
secure. Internet Explorer doesn’t support plugins, and while other browsers might,
Chrome and Firefox have the biggest share of developers creating and updating
plugins for them. It just makes sense to use them.
While you don’t need to install both Firefox and Chrome to get started on the path
towards better browser security, each browser has its own advantages and
disadvantages. Chrome tends to work faster than Firefox in my experience,
though it tends to use up a lot of memory along the way. Firefox’s memory usage
has been lower than Chrome, but it’s a bit slower than Chrome and isn’t as flashy
or modern feeling.
You can install Firefox and Chrome from the links at the top of this section, and
you don’t need to worry about them interfering with each other or with any other
browsers on your computer. They may take a little bit of getting used to, but as
you’ll see, the security upgrades make them more than worth it.

Browser Plugins
Once you have Firefox and/or Chrome installed you’ll be ready to get started with
some browser plugins. These are little pieces of software that run inside the
browser and change how it interacts with the Internet. For example, some plugins
will prevent you from seeing advertisements on websites while other plugins will
change how the browser displays text on certain pages. I’ve outlined a few plugins
that you can install (along with installation links for both Chrome and Firefox) that
will help you stay more secure online.
Advertisement Blocking (Firefox | Chrome)
Installing one of the myriad of ad-blocking plugins is always first on my list
whenever I set up a new installation of Firefox or Chrome. The plugins that are
linked above are my personal favorites, but you can search around and find
different ones if you prefer.
The purpose of an ad-blocking plugin is simple: it keeps your browser from
displaying ads from a known list of advertising sources. This has a number of
positive effects. First, it reduces the load time of web pages, making them faster
and snappier. It also reduces the amount of data your browser uses, which is
critical for those who have small data plans. Ad blockers also reduce the risk of
your computer being subjected to a ‘hit-and-run’ virus, where an attacker places a
malicious advertisement on a webpage that forcers your browser to install it. This
type of attack has grown more common as Internet advertising has reached new
heights, and even hugely popular websites and ad services have not been
immune to this type of attack. Take a look at the following two images from a
popular news agency’s website to see the startling difference between the page
without and with an ad blocker in place.
Example of a page without an ad blocker

The exact same page, with an ad blocker
Ad blockers also help protect your privacy. How? Whenever ads load on a page,
they usually set a cookie on your computer. This cookie can track you across
multiple websites, and pass the information on what sites you’re visiting back to
the advertising company. This, in turn, can lead to a browsing experience that
borders on the creepy. There have been instances where I’ve browsed online with
my ad blocker disabled, and searched for a piece of software or a product I was
looking at. Immediately after doing so, all of the advertisements I saw were for
that product or competing products. This continued on for weeks after I had done
my original search, too! What’s worse is the data that is collected about your
search and browsing habits is routinely shared and sold between companies,
resulting in more comprehensive profiles being built, all behind the scenes where
you can’t see what’s going on.
That type of intrusion and tracking doesn’t sit well with me, which is why I don’t
like to browse the web without an ad blocker in place. 
Flash Blocker (Firefox | Chrome)
Flash is a technology that’s still widely used on the Internet despite the fact that
it’s woefully out of date. Flash is used for dynamic websites, videos, media
consumption and even online games. In fact, online games are one of the largest
places where Flash is used, because of how easy it is to develop games using
Flash.

Unfortunately, Flash has become a large target for virus and malware writers in
recent years. It’s gotten so bad that technology executives have encouraged
browser companies to ban Flash altogether. Due to how much Flash is integrated,
though, this is unlikely to happen for some time, but you still need a way to stay
protected when you’re interacting with websites that have Flash content on them.
Enter a Flash blocker plugin. This plugin, when enabled, will automatically block
any and all Flash content from being loaded in your browser. If you wish, you can
selectively allow some Flash content to be enabled, but you should only do this if
you trust it. Some examples of sites that still use flash are the streaming video site
Twitch and the video site Youtube, both of which use Flash but which also have
content that, for the most part, can be trusted.
Ghostery (Firefox | Chrome)
Ghostery is a plugin that fills in the gaps that ad-blocking and Flash-blocking
plugins leave open. Remember how I talked about how advertisements on pages
leave tracking cookies on your computer that follow you and record where you go
on the Internet? Well, unfortunately, companies that deliver banner and video ads
to your browser aren’t the only companies that perform this tracking. There are a
myriad of other tracking companies that exist solely to track and aggregate data
on individuals browsing the web. Ad blocking plugins may block some of them, but
not all of them.
A popular news website had 22 different trackers that Ghostery blocked!
That’s where plugins like Ghostery come in. Ghostery has a database of hundreds
upon hundreds of different companies that track you across the web. Anytime one
of those sites tries to load a tracking cookie on your computer, Ghostery will block
it and, as a bonus, alert you to the block. Smaller websites don’t implement
tracking technology as much as larger ones, but on larger websites you could
easily see a few dozen tracking cookies get blocked by Ghostery whenever you
visit a page.
Why, you might ask, would a website want to track you? It’s pretty simple: money.
Let’s use an example of a fictitious online retailer called ‘Gramazon’ as an
example. If Gramazon sells computers and computer parts, they will want to put
advertisements on their website for computer related accessories and ensure that
visitors to their site stick around to buy computers, right? If Gramazon starts

tracking its visitors, it can see things like what pages are the most popular, how
many people leave before buying an item and if there are any pages that cause a
large number of people to leave before buying something.
By using tracking technology, Gramazon can improve its website and make more
money by selling more products to more users. Tracking companies might provide
this type of service for free to Gramazon, but in exchange the tracking company
would get to keep a profile of all of Gramazon’s customers. This list could then be
used by the tracking company to deliver ads to Gramazon’s customers in the
future for things that the tracking company knows they might want to buy. The
result of this alliance is a win for both the store and for the tracking company, all
while leaving the customer’s privacy in shambles as a result.
A Word of Warning
As social media, tracking technologies and cookies become more and more
integrated into modern websites, more cases are cropping up where websites
don’t work as intended if you use blocking plugins to get rid of ads, protect
yourself from Flash vulnerabilities or block tracking websites. If you visit a site with
any blocking plugins enabled and the site doesn’t work like you’d expect, you
might want to go somewhere else. If you can’t or don’t want to (which I completely
understand; I do the same thing sometimes), then you can try disabling the
blocking plugins for the site or page that you’re on.
Most blocking plugins have an icon that they install in the upper right corner of
your browser. If you click that icon, you can usually find an option to disable
blocking on the page or website that you’re on, or to temporarily turn off the
blocking service altogether. Use caution when disabling blocking, though, as it’s a
key part of helping to protect yourself online, both against people who want to
collect information about you and against nefarious parties who want to infect your
computer with malicious software.


III – Habits to Stay Safe Online
If you’re browsing the web with a program like Firefox or Chrome and you’re using
blocking plugins, you’re already much safer online. However, there’s still a lot
more you should do to keep yourself and your data safe when you’re online.

Email
Free email services like Gmail and Hotmail have gotten quite good at filtering out
spam emails, but there are still some that slip through, especially if you use a
private email service that doesn’t have advanced spam filters on it. Whether it’s
spam or specially crafted emails from a malicious person who wants to get access
to your computer systems, you should remember one thing: use extreme caution
when clicking on any links or opening any attachments in emails that you receive.
If you receive a link or an attachment from someone you don’t know and aren’t
expecting, don’t click or open it. Just delete the email and keep on going. If you
receive an email or attachment from someone who you do know, you should
contact that person via a non-email method to ensure that they sent the email.
Now, I know what you’re thinking right now, ‘But James, that’s crazy! I can’t
contact everyone I know who sends me an email!’
I agree, it sounds very over-the-top, which is why it’s good to use some common
sense and moderation. If you receive a ZIP file from a friend who you haven’t
talked to in a long time, it’s a good idea to contact that person over the phone, by
text message or some other way and make sure they actually sent the email. I’ve
had more than a few emails sent to me from a person who I knew, but who never
actually sent the emails. Instead, their email accounts were hacked, and the
hackers sent emails to every person on their contact list. The emails included links
to malicious websites that, if visited, would try to install malicious software on your
computer.
If, on the other hand, you get a ZIP file from someone who you talk to on a regular
basis and you know that they occasionally send you attachments, it’s a little bit
different. That’s a situation where I would consider it perfectly fine to open the
attachment (after doing a quick virus scan on it first, of course!) and see what’s
inside.

Web Browsing
Blocking plugins are great, but they can’t protect you from everything. There are
some types of dangers that blocking plugins can’t block, and you need to be
aware of them if you ever encounter them.
Have you ever gotten a popup in your browser telling you that you need to install
some sort of update, usually for Flash or for some type of video player? These
popups occur a lot on older expired domains that have been snatched up by
authors of malicious software and they’re designed for one purpose: to install
adware or malware on your computer. If you click on the popup, your browser will
download an EXE file to your computer. If you run this EXE file… well, you’re in
trouble. Most of the time these files contain an advertising package that will
generate popup advertisements on your computer. Some, though, are more
malicious and will collect your personal data (passwords, emails, bank account
numbers and more) and send it off to someone in another country to use or sell.
Remember: don’t click on popups!
On a similar note, you should keep a close eye on the address (URL) bar of your
browser. That’s the bar at the top that tells you what page you’re on. It’s very
common for malicious people to purchase domains that are almost like popular
websites (like faecbook.com instead of facebook.com, for example). They then try
to trick users into clicking through to these fake websites, which are designed to
look like the real thing, except when you try to log in, your login credentials are
stolen and used for nefarious purposes. This is extremely common with websites
that deal with financial information, like banks or PayPal. Remember: always
check the URL bar and make sure you’re on the website you think you are before
you enter in any information.
Lastly, you have the ‘zero-day exploit.’ Unfortunately, there’s not much you can do
against this type of exploit. The zero-day exploit is a type of exploit, usually in the
web browser itself, or a piece of related software (Flash, Acrobat or your
computer’s very own operating system) that was discovered very recently and has
not yet been patched. Exploits like these can be used virtually anywhere, and
they’re nearly impossible to defend against until they’re patched. So how can you
avoid them? The best course of action is to ensure that you keep your operating
system and all related software patched and updated on a regular basis (we’ll talk
about this in the next chapter).
You can also practice caution when choosing what websites you go to. Just like in
the real world, there are portions of the web that are inherently more dangerous

than others. Websites that claim to offer free pirated software, TV shows or
movies are perfect targets for zero-day exploits, popup downloads and other
malicious attacks. Try to avoid websites that feel ‘off’ to you; remember: if
something sounds too good to be true, I can promise you that it most certainly is.


IV – Securing Your Operating System &
Software
A significant number of threats compromise systems due to a combination of
negligence and software that is not up to date. Now that we’ve talked about some
good habits to develop when using the web, let’s talk about the other side:
keeping your computer’s operating system and software up to date.

Update Your Operating System
Most readers of this book will undoubtedly be using either the Windows or Mac
operating systems. (If you’re using Linux, you likely already know how to update
your operating system, so we’re going to stick with covering Windows with a bit of
Mac as well.) Both of these operating systems have automatic update programs
built in which you should take full advantage of. Whenever your computer tells you
that an update is available, you should apply the update as soon as possible.
Updating the Mac OS X operating system can be done both manually and
automatically, and Apple has a great support article that details how both of these
actions can be performed. If you use a Mac, you should become familiar with how
to update the operating system through this article on Apple’s website.
Likewise, the Windows operating systems have manual and automatic update
support built in. If you’re using Windows 7, 8 or 10, you can check for updates and
turn automatic updating on by following Microsoft’s instructions at this support link.
While having automatic updates turned on can cause your computer to reboot at
inopportune times, I’m personally in favor of leaving it enabled. The inconvenience
of dealing with your computer rebooting on its own to apply updates is small
compared to having an operating system that is out of date and vulnerable to
attacks. My only caveat to this is if you’re very strict about checking for and
applying updates on your own. If you’re willing to stay on top of checking for and
installing updates at least once per week, then turning off automatic updates
should be fine.

Individual Software Updates
While following Apple and Microsoft’s update instructions will help keep your
computer’s operating system secure from malicious attacks, the operating system
is only one vector for attacks on your computer. Each piece of software that you
install introduces another potential vulnerability on your computer, particularly if
the software package interacts with the Internet in any shape or form. Web
browsers, email clients, accounting software and more are all potential ways for
attackers to break into your computer.
If you’ll recall the discussion in the last chapter about ‘zero-day’ vulnerabilities,
that discussion is applicable here. Zero-day vulnerabilities can be discovered in
operating systems, but they are most commonly discovered in other software
packages. Internet browser vulnerabilities are some of the most highly prized by
hackers, as they offer a direct way for malicious users to access the data on your
computer since virtually everyone who uses a computer uses an Internet browser
of some sort.
So what can you do? Keep your software up to date. Whenever a piece of
software prompts you that a security or other update is available, back up your
data and then upgrade the software. Running out-of-date software packages is
one of the top ways to have your information compromised on the Internet. All it
takes is one vulnerability in a program to be exploited and all of the data on your
computer is potentially compromised.
On the flipside it’s important to be mindful of the updates you apply. Some
updates, while well-meaning, may cause unexpected issues on your computer. I
had a problem like this just a few days ago when I went to upgrade my email
client to the latest version. After updating the client, I discovered that it no longer
functioned properly, so I had to revert back to the previous version. I feel
comfortable in doing this due to the fact that the latest version was more focused
on feature improvements instead of security fixes, but there may be cases where
you have to weigh functionality versus security.
In those cases, I recommend falling back on your common sense. If a software
upgrade is known to cause issues, hold back on applying the update, but pay
more attention to how you use the software. Use caution when accessing the
web, opening files or uploading data with the application. If you try your best to
stay safe when you use programs that access the Internet, you’ll usually be just
fine.



V – Password Safety
Passwords are often the only thing standing the between your data and the world
at large. They’re used for accessing your money, your computer, your tax records
and your medical information. For something so vitally important to virtually every
computer user, passwords are often the weak link when it comes to computer
security. Why is this, and why does password security seem to be so hard to carry
out properly? Let’s discuss how proper password safety can be both easy and
secure at the same time, if you know how to do it correctly.

Choosing & Securing Your Passwords
There have been mixed schools of thought about how to properly choose and
secure your passwords. Some people believe that you need to make up
passwords that are easy for you to remember, but hard for others to guess, and
just remember them in your head. While this is a valid approach, it becomes
cumbersome once you move beyond just a few passwords.
Why not use the same password for every website, you ask? Unfortunately, that’s
one of the worst possible things you can do. If your account password on one
website is compromised due to your computer being hacked or the website you
signed up with being hacked, you have a huge problem on your hands. Instead of
having to deal with just one account being compromised, all of your accounts on
every other website are potentially in trouble too. This is because hackers, upon
breaking in and stealing a list of passwords and usernames from one website, will
use those login details to try to get into many other sites on the web. If you use
the same password on every site, then you can quickly have more and more
accounts compromised.
So what’s the solution? Well, you can either keep potentially dozens or more
passwords memorized and try to recall them all when needed, or you can use a
simple piece of software to do it all for you: a password manager. A good
password manager is an invaluable piece of software, and one that you’ll want to
use for the rest of your life (or at least until passwords aren’t necessary anymore).
A password manager stores your account usernames and passwords in an
encrypted file. This encrypted file is then locked with a single master password
that you use to access it. Without the master password, the file is literally
impossible to open. This has the effect of storing all of your website, account and
other passwords in a safe and secure place that only you can access.
Let me tell you how I use my password manager of choice, KeePass. If you don’t
like KeePass, you can try Password Safe, but these are the only two password
managers I recommend. I highly recommend that you do NOT use a
password manager that stores passwords in the ‘cloud.’ I don’t care how
secure these services claim to be, or what type of encryption technology they use;
transmitting or storing your passwords on the Internet through a third party is, in
my opinion, a terrible idea. All it would take is for one of these high value (and
thusly, highly targeted) services to be compromised, and tens of thousands of
people’s passwords could become exposed, resulting in a huge amount of
privacy, data and monetary losses. This hasn’t happened on a large scale yet, but
I certainly don’t want to be someone who’s caught up in the very first instance; do
you?

Anyway, back to how I use KeePass. When I first set up my KeePass password
file, I thought up a password that is over 50 characters long. It’s a string of words,
numbers and symbols that I took a few days to memorize, and which forms a long
sentence that I can easily remember. This is the master password for my file.
Without it, no one can access the hundreds of passwords I have stored inside my
KeePass file.
With my KeePass file secured, I then face the question of what to do when I sign
up for a service. Well, the cool thing about a password manager like KeePass is
that it has a password generator built right in. So, whenever I sign up for a
service, I choose my username or email (more on securing this in the next
section), and then let my password manager randomly generate a password for
me. This means that I never actually know the password for any service I
sign up with, which is incredibly secure. Whenever I go to sign in to an
account on the web, I just copy and paste the password from KeePass (which
clears out the contents of my clipboard a few seconds later) and I’m logged in and
ready to go.
With a password manager, all of my accounts are secured with different, randomly
generated passwords that are very secure, and they’re protected in a file that
can’t be accessed without the master password, which only I know. This method
of password securing is one of—if not the—most secure ways to keep your online
accounts protected, secured and isolated from each other.
If you don’t use a password manager today, you should start doing so
immediately. I know, it may seem cumbersome at times, but what’s worse,
spending a few extra seconds to copy and paste a password from your password
manager, or potentially losing multiple accounts to hackers because you used the
same password in multiple places? The random password generation and
protected storage offered by password managers like KeePass and Password
Safe is invaluable, and in my opinion it is the best tool you can have in your
arsenal to defend your privacy online.

Username Security
We touched on this briefly in the last section, but it’s something important enough
to be discussed on its own. Remember how we talked about how important it is to
use a different password for each account you sign up for online? Well, the same
is true for the email address or username you use to sign up for online accounts
as well. Like using the same password, if you use the same username for every
account you sign up for, if one account is hacked, all of your other accounts are at
a much greater risk due to the fact that you used the same username across all of
the accounts. That type of link makes it trivial for hackers to run automated
software that tries to login to your accounts on other services, leading to potential
compromises. If your Twitter account is compromised, do you really want it to be
easy for hackers to log into your credit card or bank account? If you use the same
username and/or password on both accounts, that’s exactly what you’re doing,
making it easy for hackers to do what they do.
If you’re using a password manager to create different passwords for each
service, you’re doing great so far, but let’s take it to the next level and use different
usernames as well. For services that don’t use an email address as a username,
this is easy: just sign up with a different username on each service. Add numbers
or letters to the end of a username you like to make them slightly different. Or, if
you’re like me, come up with totally different username for each service.
When it comes to email-based, then it gets a bit trickier. Some email services, like
email, use a plus system that lets you create a new email address whenever you
want. It works like this: suppose your email address at Gmail is
myaccount@gmail.com. If you send an email to
myaccount+purple@gmail.com, that mail will go straight into your inbox.
Likewise, if you send an email to myaccount+gosportsteam@gmail.com, that
too will go straight into your inbox. Gmail has a special filter that is uses, where
anything after the “+” is essentially ignored.
How is this important? Well, for starters, it means you can easily ‘create’ a ‘new’
email address for every account you sign up with. If I sign up on Amazon, I could
sign up with myaccount+amazon@gmail.com. Then if I sign up for Facebook, I
could sign up with myaccount+facebook@gmail.com. Then I could sign up for
other sites, too, like myaccount+twitter@gmail.com,
myaccount+yahoo@gmail.com and on and on. All of those ‘new’ emails will all
go directly to my myaccount@gmail.com email address, but each one is
different (fulfilling our need to have a different username for each account we sign
up with).

There’s another bonus to this system beyond security that I absolutely adore:
spam filtering. Some services will sell your email address to spammers, and if you
use the exact same email for every service, it’s nigh-on impossible to determine
who actually sold your email. If you use the “+” system I’ve described, though,
then you can quickly figure out that it was abadcompany.com that’s spamming
you when you start receiving spam emails that are addressed to
myaccount+abadcompany@gmail.com in your inbox. You could then set up a
Gmail filter to automatically delete any emails sent to
myaccount+abadcompany@gmail.com and that source of spam would be cut
off, but all of your other account emails would keep coming through just fine.
Other email services may or may not include this type of aliasing, but Gmail does
it best. If you don’t have a Gmail account, they’re free, and I strongly recommend
that you sign up for one and use it for this type of thing. If you have a privately
hosted email service, you can also ask your administrator to set up a ‘catch-all’
email address, that will forward anything sent to your email domain directly to your
inbox. I use private email for most of my accounts, so whenever I sign up for an
account I use the format of websitename@mydomain.com for my accounts. I
can quickly filter, delete and organize all of my different Internet account emails
this way and cut down on the amount of spam and fluff that I get all at the same
time.

Two-Factor Authentication
Two-factor authentication is an advanced security technique that is incredibly
powerful in helping to protect users’ accounts from being individually
compromised. One-factor authentication typically relies upon something a person
knows, such as their username and password. Two-factor authentication relies
upon both something a user knows and something the users possesses. In two-
factor authentication, a user typically uses a username and password to begin
their login process, then inputs a security code provided to them by the website
they are logging in to.
For example, if you set up two-factor authentication in Gmail, you will no longer be
able to log in to your account with just your email address and password. Instead,
you’ll need your email and password along with a special code that will be sent to
you over the phone (voice call or text message). This helps to protect your
account by ensuring that even if someone obtains your password, they wouldn’t
be able to log into your account without also having access to your phone as well.
Two-factor authentication is available in many different areas, though it’s typically
only available from larger companies or websites that can afford the advanced
infrastructure required to support it. The website TwoFactorAuth.org has a list of
companies that support two-factor authentication, including what types they
support. Many companies offer two-factor authentication support through phone
calls, text messages or apps on your smartphone or tablet, while some offer
dedicated hardware tokens.
Two-factor authentication adds a layer of complexity to your Internet browsing that
may seem daunting, annoying or unnecessary. However, the level of security it
adds is incredible, especially for any websites or accounts that have interactions
with something valuable, such as sensitive data or money. I use two-factor
authentication for all of my email accounts that support it along with my bank, and
you should as well.


VI – Data Backups
At first glance, the idea of backing up your data may not sound like it’s related to
your privacy and security on the Internet. Properly done, however, data backups
are an essential part of ensuring your security and keeping your information safe.
They function as a partner to other data protection techniques, and are a crucial
part of any serious data security and privacy plan.

Protection Against Disasters
If you’re like an increasing number of people today, your entire life is contained in
your computer. Pictures, emails, documents, financial records and more are all
stored on our computers, and the amount of personal information we keep both in
our computers and with third-parties is only growing with each passing day. For
this reason it’s important to keep backups of your data on an external location
from your computer, such as an external drive or another computer. If something
tragic occurs and your computer’s hard disk is damaged or destroyed in a fire,
flood or even something as simple as a hardware failure, having a recent backup
of your data will allow you to quickly recover and get back to normal.

Local or Cloud Backups
Cloud backup services offer a lot of advantages over traditional local backups.
With traditional local backups, you can perform them manually by copying files
over to an external drive, or you can set up an automated piece of software that
backs up your data to an external drive or location. Cloud backups, on the other
hand, usually involved an automated process that backs up your data not to a
private computer, but to a server owned by the backup company. Your data is
compressed and stored online, ready for you to access and download whenever
you want, wherever you want.
If this sounds like a fantastic idea, then I completely agree with you! However,
there is a problem with these types of cloud backup solutions: privacy and
security. As we’ve learned over the years, no one is completely safe from having
their data compromised, including large companies. There have been a large
number of companies both big and small in the news because their data has been
compromised. Everything from customer lists to internal employee emails to
names, emails, social security numbers and more has been exposed by malicious
hackers.
For this reason, I prefer to manage my backups on my own instead of entrusting
my data to a third party. Of course there is some data that you have to trust to
some companies, but I take care of my computer backups myself. Using external
hard drives, manual backups and automated backup software, I can create
weekly backups of my data along with daily and hourly backups. With three
separate drives that I rotate through, I ensure that two of them are always at a
different location (one at my office and one in a bank safety deposit box, and both
are encrypted using the techniques described in chapter seven). That way, if
something were to happen to my computer, I would only lose a week’s worth of
data at worst, and in general I can expect to lose only a day or hour’s worth of
data. This method also ensures that I don’t have to worry about my data being
exposed should a cloud backup company be compromised.
But what about companies that encrypt your data before backing it up, you might
ask. If you’ve already read the next chapter, you’ll know what a great tool
encryption is. The problem I have with cloud backup companies, even those that
claim to encrypt your data before it’s stored on their servers, is that I have to trust
them with a huge portion of my life. I have to trust that their encryption methods
are secure, I have to trust that there are no flaws in their procedure and I have to
trust that they never get hacked and that the encryption scheme they use is never
hacked, either. For me, personally, that doesn’t sit well. I like to be in control of my
information and I like to take charge of my privacy and security.

If you wanted to make use of a cloud backup system, my advice would be to use
the encryption techniques from the next chapter to make encrypted folders that
you periodically back your data up into. Then, instead of uploading your individual
folders and files to a backup service, only upload your encrypted file containers.
That way, everything you upload and store with the third party was encrypted by
you, and you can therefore be confident that it’s safe.  

Good Backup Strategies
If you decide to implement a backup strategy, you should spend some time
thinking about what type of strategy to take. Some people prefer a monthly
strategy, where they back up their data once every month. Some prefer to make
weekly backups, some prefer daily backups and there are those that make
backups multiple times per day.
How often you back up your data will depend on two factors: how many changes
to your data occur in a given timeframe and how much data you’re willing to lose if
your computer were to go through a catastrophic event (theft, destruction,
hardware failure, etc.).
For the first factor, consider how much information you create and how much of
your current data you modify on a daily or weekly basis. If you only get a few
emails every day and create a new document every few days, hourly or even daily
backups are almost certainly too frequent to matter to you. If, however, you create
or edit many files every day, then daily or perhaps even hourly backups are the
way you should go.
Secondly, consider what you would do if your computer were to vanish right now,
and all you had left was your last backup. If that backup was made a month ago,
would you be comfortable with losing the last months’ worth of data? What if your
last backup was a week ago or yesterday? If your computer’s hard drive is
destroyed or stolen, the fact of the matter is that you will lose something. The
question then becomes how much are you comfortable with losing? Once you’ve
identified the answer to this question and the previous one you now know how
often your backups should be made.  
Don’t be afraid to back up different segments of your data in different frequencies.
If you have a chunk of data in a folder that doesn’t change often, consider backing
that folder up once per month. If you have another chunk that changes quite often,
perhaps an hourly backup would be best for that. I use this strategy to segregate
my backups into weekly, daily and hourly ones and it works very well.

Backup Software
Explaining the intricacies of setting up even one piece of backup software is
beyond the scope of this book, and an entire book could be written about each
different piece of backup software I’m going to suggest to you here. Some backup
software is more complicated to set up than others, but as long as the solution
you choose successfully creates backups of your data the way that you want,
that’s all that matters.
Acronis True Image is the non-cloud backup solution from Acronis. It supports
Windows XP, 7, 8 and 10, along with recent Mac OS X versions. It lets you back
up everything from individual files to your entire computer, all to an external hard
drive or network-attached storage device. Acronis is easy to use and simple to set
up, and guides you through the entire backup setup process.
My personal backup software choice is an open-source piece of software called
Areca, which runs on the Windows operating system. Areca is not simple to set
up, but it is powerful. You can schedule backups on the frequency that you want,
and you can back up files to hard disks, external hard drives or even remote
computers if you wish to make remote backups of your data. If you choose to go
with Areca, I suggest that you read through the tutorials for it to get a sense of
how to best operate the software.
Mac OS X has a built-in option called Time Machine that lets you make backups
of your data. Likewise, Windows Backup is a built-in option for Windows 7 and
above that will let you make backups of your data.


VII – Advanced Data Protection
Procedures
While what we’ve discussed so far in this book will help anyone become safer and
more secure both online and offline, there are many more advanced techniques
that you can take advantage of as well. These techniques may not be something
that casual users want to implement, but regardless of whether you do or not, it’s
good to familiarize yourself with them anyway. The more informed you are, the
better decisions you can make, and you’ll be aware of what risks you are and
aren’t taking.

Encryption
Simply put, encryption is the be-all and end-all security precaution. When
implemented properly, encrypted files cannot be accessed through any method
except through a password (called the encryption key) that unlocks the data.
Think of encryption as an unbreakable box with a lock on it. Anything you put in
that box will be completely secure and inaccessible to anyone except those who
have the key to the lock. You can encrypt virtually whatever data you want,
including your emails, your files and even the entire contents of your computer
hard disk.
There are a few reasons why more people don’t use encryption. One of the
largest reasons is that it’s somewhat inconvenient and uncomfortable to
implement and deal with on a daily basis. I keep my computers encrypted at the
disk-level, which means that I can’t even get my operating system to boot up until
the proper password is entered. This ensures that everything on my computer is
protected and kept safe from anyone who might, for example, break in and steal
my computer’s hard drive. Without the password, all of the data on the drive will
stay locked up forever and be inaccessible to the thief.
Another reason people don’t use encryption is because there are some groups
who strongly dislike encryption and what it represents. There are strong political
lobbies in various regions (including the USA, UK and beyond) that are fighting
strongly against allowing encryption to continue to be available to the general
public. The reason for this is simple: if everyone encrypted their data, then it
would be much more difficult for governments to spy on that data.
Encryption is also potentially dangerous, due to the fact that the encryption key is
the only way to access the data. If you forget the encryption key for something
you’ve encrypted, there’s no way to access that data. In fact, until huge advances
are made in computing technology, it would take longer than the life of the
universe to break encryption that is implemented today. If you decide to
implement encryption at any level, be aware of this fact, and know that if you
forget your encryption key, there’s nothing that anyone can do to break the
encryption.
Note that this discussion about ‘unbreakable’ encryption assumes that when you
encrypt something, you choose a complex password, like we discussed in an
earlier chapter when talking about password managers. If you use a simple
password, such as your name, a variation of the word ‘password’ or something

similar, then it’s possible to quickly brute force the password. This involves using a
piece of software to quickly try millions of combinations of different letters, words
and numbers to guess what weak passwords are being used to secure the
encrypted data. (Side note: this brute force method is also how many online
accounts are compromised, which is another great reason for why you should
always choose a strong password for your online accounts.)
There are several different encryption software packages, but before we go
through a short list, I want to reiterate the dangers of file encryption one last time.
If you encrypt your data improperly or you forget your encryption key, your
data will be lost forever. Make sure you have a full backup of your data
somewhere else before you encrypt files or your entire disk on your
computer. That way, if something goes wrong, you still have your data. After
you finish the encryption and are comfortable with it, you can delete this
backup, but until then I strongly recommend that you keep it.
Okay, with that disclaimer out of the way, here are my suggestions for encryption
software packages that you can try. My top pick and the one I use personally is
VeraCrypt, which is open source and came out of the TrueCrypt project. It
supports both full-disk and file container encryption, meaning that you can either
encrypt your entire computer, or you can create a virtual hard drive that acts as a
container to hold files. When the container is locked, it’s encrypted and appears
like a file on your computer. When unlocked, it appears as a hard disk on your
machine and can be accessed like one.
Bitlocker is another choice that is included with modern Windows operating
systems, and is baked into the Windows operating system itself. There is no small
amount of controversy regarding Bitlocker due to allegations that it’s not as secure
as other encryption software suites. In my personal opinion it’s a much better
solution than no encryption, at least for the average user who doesn’t want to
have to deal with the nitty gritty aspects of encryption and just wants their data to
be secured. 
Symantec also makes some pretty good encryption software, though it’s targeted
more towards businesses than individuals. Their software encryption suites don’t
just cover file and disk encryption, but also email encryption as well. If you work in
a business that deals with sensitive information, Symantec is a great place to
start.

VPNs
A VPN (Virtual Private Network) is a great tool for helping you to protect your
privacy on the web by hiding your IP address from websites that you visit and
other services you use. Here’s how.
When you connect to a website, the connection goes from your computer through
your ISP (Comcast, Time Warner, Verizon, etc.), through a few intermediate steps
until it reaches the website you want to reach. This is a direct connection to the
Internet, and is what most people have. It allows the website you’re connecting to
(along with every other location that your connection jumps through) to see your
personal IP address. If a website, service or other entity wants to track your
actions on the web, it’s very easy to do so by using this address.
If, however, you use a VPN, then the connection out to the web is much different.
Once your connection reaches your ISP, it routes to the VPN before traveling out
to the website that you want to visit. The website or service that you’re connecting
to sees the connection as coming from the VPN, not your personal computer, and
thus can’t associate the visit with your computer’s IP address. Many public VPN
services use what are called shared IP addresses, which means that everyone
who uses the VPN appears to be using the same IP address when they connect
out to the web. With so many different connections coming from the same IP it
becomes nearly impossible to track people as they browse across the web, since
all of the connections appear to be coming from the same location.
VPNs have another benefit related to where in the world you’re physically located.
Many services use geolocation (where you are in the world) to restrict what
content you can read, watch and listen to. Some videos on Youtube, for example,
can only be viewed by people inside the USA. These types of restrictions are
done in real time based on the IP address of the visitor, which can be used to tell
what country, state and city you’re in. Because a VPN effectively hides your home
IP and makes it appear as though you’re accessing the Internet from the IP
address of the VPN, you can access geography-restricted content by accessing
the content through a VPN that has an IP address in the appropriate country. For
example, if you live in Mexico and wanted to view a video that’s restricted to USA
residents, you could connect to a USA VPN and then view the video, because as
far as the video service is concerned, you are a USA resident due to your IP
address being that of the VPN.
My two favorite VPN providers that have IP addresses in multiple countries across
the world are SaferVPN and StrongVPN. I use both services and have had a great

experience with both, so it’s up to you to decide which one you want to use based
on what each service provides and the differently-priced packages they offer. If a
VPN sounds like something that would be useful to you, I would encourage you to
check out these and other VPN services on your own to see what they have to
offer.


VIII – Wrapping it All Up
We’ve covered a lot in this book, and I’m hopeful that it was both educational and
useful! We’ve talked about how to keep yourself and your data safe from all types
of attacks, as well as basic and advanced methods you can use to keep your data
safe, secure and protected. Armed with this new knowledge, you should feel
confident and well-equipped to start securing yourself when you go online. Don’t
forget, though, security is an ever-evolving art form. I encourage you to spend
some time every week reading about new security breaches that have taken
place, researching new browser plugins to further secure your data and putting
into practice what you’ve read in this book.  
If you enjoyed this book and found it helpful, please do consider leaving a review
for it at Amazon. Reviews are one of the best ways readers find new books, and
sharing your experience with other potential readers would be of great value to
me.
If you’d like to stay up to date with some great free tech books, I encourage you to
sign up for the AppSna.gr newsletter right here. I’ve partnered with them to offer
my books for free through their book giveaway program, so each time I write a
new book, review copies are randomly given out to dozens of folks who are
subscribed to the newsletter.

